
About This E-Book
EPUB is an open, industry-standard format for e-books. However, support for
EPUB and its many features varies across reading devices and applications. Use
your device or app settings to customize the presentation to your liking. Settings
that you can customize often include font, font size, single or double column,
landscape or portrait mode, and figures that you can click or tap to enlarge. For
additional information about the settings and features on your reading device or
app, visit the device manufacturer’s Web site.
Many titles include programming code or configuration examples. To optimize
the presentation of these elements, view the e-book in single-column, landscape
mode and adjust the font size to the smallest setting. In addition to presenting
code and configurations in the reflowable text format, we have included images
of the code that mimic the presentation found in the print book; therefore, where
the reflowable format may compromise the presentation of the code listing, you
will see a “Click here to view code image”
link. Click the link to view the print-fidelity code image. To return to the
previous page viewed, click the Back button on your device or app.

CompTIA® Network+
N10-007
Sixth Edition
Emmett Dulaney

CompTIA® 
Network+ 
N10-007 
Exam 
Cram
Copyright © 2018 by Pearson Education, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book shall be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher. No
patent liability is assumed with respect to the use of the information contained
herein. Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book,
the publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions. Nor is
any liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of the information
contained herein.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7897-5875-0
ISBN-10: 0-7897-5875-X
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017960636
Printed in the United States of America 01 18
Trademarks
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service
marks have been appropriately capitalized. Pearson IT Certification cannot attest
to the accuracy of this information. Use of a term in this book should not be
regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service mark.
CompTIA is a registered trademark of CompTIA, Inc.
Warning and Disclaimer Every effort has been made to make this
book as complete and as accurate as possible, but no warranty or
fitness is implied. The information provided is on an “as is” basis.
The author and the publisher shall have neither liability nor
responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss or
damages arising from the information contained in this book.
Special Sales
For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales
opportunities (which may include electronic versions; custom cover designs; and
content particular to your business, training goals, marketing focus, or branding

interests), 
please 
contact 
our 
corporate 
sales 
department 
at
corpsales@pearsoned.com or (800) 382-3419.
For 
government 
sales 
inquiries, 
please 
contact
governmentsales@pearsoned.com.
For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact intlcs@pearson.com.
Editor-in-Chief
Mark Taub
Product Line Manager
Brett Bartow
Acquisitions Editor
Michelle Newcomb
Development Editor
Ellie Bru
Managing Editor
Sandra Schroeder
Senior Project Editor
Tonya Simpson
Copy Editor
Barbara Hacha

Indexer
Erika Millen
Proofreader
Abigail Manheim
Technical Editor
Chris Crayton
Publishing Coordinator
Vanessa Evans
Cover Designer
Chuti Prasertsith
Compositor
codeMantra

Contents at a Glance
Introduction
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Networking Technologies
CHAPTER 2 Models, Ports, Protocols, and Networking Services
CHAPTER 3 Addressing, Routing, and Switching
CHAPTER 4 Network Components and Devices
CHAPTER 5 WAN Technologies
CHAPTER 6 Cabling Solutions
CHAPTER 7 Wireless Solutions
CHAPTER 8 Cloud Computing and Virtualization
CHAPTER 9 Network Operations
CHAPTER 10 Network Security
CHAPTER 11 Network Troubleshooting
Glossary
Index

Table of Contents
Introduction
CHAPTER 1:
Introduction to Networking Technologies
Wired and Wireless Network Topologies
Bus Topology
Ring Topology
Star Topology
Wired Mesh Topology
Wireless Topologies
Hybrid Topologies
Network Types
LANs
WLANs
WANs
MANs
CANs
SANs
PANs
IoT Technologies
Z-Wave
Ant+
Bluetooth
NFC
IR
RFID
802.11
The Magic Behind 802.11n and 802.11ac
A Summary of 802.11 Wireless Standards
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 2:
Models, Ports, Protocols, and Networking Services
The OSI Networking Model

The OSI Seven-Layer Model
Comparing OSI to the Four-Layer TCP/IP Model
Identifying the OSI Layers at Which Various Network Components
Operate
Ports and Protocols
Connection-Oriented Protocols Versus Connectionless Protocols
Internet Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol
User Datagram Protocol
File Transfer Protocol
Secure File Transfer Protocol
Trivial File Transfer Protocol
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
Post Office Protocol Version 3/Internet Message Access Protocol Version
4
Telnet
Secure Shell
Internet Control Message Protocol
Network Time Protocol
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
H.323
Simple Network Management Protocol
Session Initiation Protocol
Remote Desktop Protocol
Server Message Block
Understanding Port Functions
ARP and RARP
Network Services
Domain Name Service (DNS)
The DNS Namespace
Types of DNS Entries
DNS Records
DNS in a Practical Implementation
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
The DHCP Process
DHCP and DNS Suffixes

DHCP Relays and IP Helpers
IP Address Management
Network Time Protocol
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 3:
Addressing, Routing, and Switching
IP Addressing
IPv4
IP Address Classes
Subnet Mask Assignment
Subnetting
Identifying the Differences Between IPv4 Public and Private Networks
Classless Interdomain Routing
Default Gateways
Virtual IP
IPv4 Address Types
IPv6 Addressing
Comparing IPv4 and IPv6 Addressing
Assigning IP Addresses
Identifying MAC Addresses
NAT, PAT, SNAT, and DNAT
Managing TCP/IP Routing and Switching
The Default Gateway
Routing Tables
Static Routing
Switching Methods
Software-Defined Networking
Dynamic Routing
Network Traffic
Routing Metrics
Virtual Local-Area Networks
The Spanning Tree Protocol
Interface Configuration and Switch Management
Trunking
Port Mirroring
Port Authentication
Power over Ethernet

DMZ
MAC Address Table
Switch Management
Managed and Unmanaged
Quality of Service
Traffic Shaping
Access Control Lists
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 4:
Network Components and Devices
Common Network Devices
Firewall
Router
Switch
Hub
Bridge
Modems
Wireless Access Point
Media Converter
Wireless Range Extender
VoIP Endpoint
Network Devices Summary
Advanced Networking Devices
Multilayer Switch
Wireless Controller
Load Balancer
IDS/IPS
Proxy Server
VPN Concentrator
AAA/RADIUS Server
UTM Appliances and NGFW/Layer 7 Firewalls
VoIP PBX and Gateway
Content Filter
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 5:
WAN Technologies

WAN Technologies
Integrated Services Digital Network
Leased Lines
Fiber, SONET, and OCx Levels
Frame Relay
Asynchronous Transfer Mode
Copper Versus Fiber
Other WAN Technologies
Internet Access Technologies
DSL Internet Access
Cable Broadband
Broadband Security Considerations
Dial-up
The Public Switched Telephone Network
Satellite Internet Access
Wireless Internet Access
Termination Points
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 6:
Cabling Solutions
General Media Considerations
Broadband Versus Baseband Transmissions
Simplex, Half-Duplex, and Full-Duplex Modes
Data Transmission Rates
Types of Network Media
Types of Media Connectors
Media Couplers/Converters
568A and 568B Wiring Standards
Straight-Through Versus Crossover Cables
Rollover and Loopback Cables
Components of Wiring Distribution
Ethernet Deployment Standards
Troubleshooting Common Wired Connectivity Issues
Attenuation
Latency
Jitter
Crosstalk

EMI
Open/Short
Incorrect Pin-Out
Incorrect Cable Types
Bad Port
Transceiver Mismatch
TX/RX Reversed
Duplex/Speed Mismatch
Damaged Cables
Bent Pins
Bottlenecks
VLAN Mismatch
Network Connection LED Status Indicators
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 7:
Wireless Solutions
Understanding Wireless Basics
Wireless Channels and Frequencies
Cellular Access
Speed, Distance, and Bandwidth
Channel Bonding
MIMO/MU-MIMO/Unidirectional/Omnidirectional
Site Surveys
Establishing Communications Between Wireless Devices
Configuring the Wireless Connection
Troubleshooting Wireless Issues
Factors Affecting Wireless Signals
Troubleshooting AP Coverage
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 8:
Cloud Computing and Virtualization
Cloud Concepts
Software as a Service
Platform as a Service
Infrastructure as a Service
Other Types of Services

Private Cloud
Public Cloud
Hybrid Cloud
Connectivity Methods
Security Implications and Considerations
The Relationship Between Resources
Virtualization and Storage-Area Networks
Virtualization
Storage-Area Networks
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 9:
Network Operations
Documentation Management
Wiring and Port Locations
Physical and Logical Network Diagrams
Baselines
Policies, Procedures, Configurations, and Regulations
Labeling
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery
Backups
Backup Best Practices
Using Uninterruptible Power Supplies
Alternatives to UPS
Hot, Warm, and Cold Sites
High Availability and Recovery Concepts
Monitoring Network Performance
Common Reasons to Monitor Networks
SNMP Monitors
Packet Sniffers
Throughput Testing
Port Scanners
Vulnerability Scanners
Network Performance, Load, and Stress Testing
Tracking Event Logs
Remote Access
Remote File Access
VPNs

Site-to-Site and Client-to-Site
HTTPS/Management URL
Out-of-Band Management
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 10:
Network Security
Physical Security and Device Hardening
Adding Physical Security to the Mix
Two-Factor and Multifactor Authentication
Secured Versus Unsecured Protocols
Additional Device Hardening
Authentication and Access Controls
Mandatory Access Control
Discretionary Access Control
Rule-Based Access Control
Role-Based Access Control
RADIUS and TACACS+
Kerberos Authentication
Local Authentication
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
Using Certificates
Auditing and Logging
Multifactor Authentication Factors
Access Control
Securing Wireless Networks
WPA, WPA2, TKIP-RC4, and CCMP-AES
Wireless Authentication and Authorization
Shared, Preshared, and Open Keys
Common Networking Attacks
Denial-of-Service and Distributed Denial-of-Service Attacks
Other Common Attacks
Vulnerabilities and Prevention
Mitigation Techniques
Signature Management
Device Hardening
Change Native VLAN
Switch and Port Protection

Demilitarized Zones (Perimeter Network)
VLAN Network Segmentation
Privileged User Account
File Integrity Monitoring
Role Separation
Using ACLs to Restrict Access
Honeypots and Honeynets
Penetration Testing
What’s Next?
CHAPTER 11:
Network Troubleshooting
Troubleshooting Steps and Procedures
Identify the Problem
Establish a Theory of Probable Cause
Test the Theory to Determine Cause
Establish a Plan of Action
Implement the Solution or Escalate
Verify Full System Functionality
Document the Findings, Actions, and Outcomes
Hardware and Software Troubleshooting Tools
Wire Crimpers, Strippers, and Snips
Tone Generator and Probes
Loopback Adapter
Protocol Analyzer
Media/Cable Testers
TDR and OTDR
Multimeter
Spectrum Analyzer
Packet Sniffers
Port Scanner
Wi-Fi Analyzer
Bandwidth Speed Tester and Looking Glasses
Environmental Monitors
Command-Line Troubleshooting Tools
The Trace Route Utility (tracert/traceroute)
ping
ARP

The netstat Command
ipconfig
ifconfig
nslookup
dig
The tcpdump Command
The route Utility
nmap
Troubleshooting Common Network Service Issues
Common Problems to Be Aware Of
Hardware Failure
What’s Next?
Glossary
Index

About the Author
Emmett Dulaney (CompTIA Network+, Cloud+, Security+, A+, and others) is
the author of numerous books
on certifications and operating systems. He is a columnist for Certification
Magazine and a professor at a small university. He is also the author of CompTIA
A+ Complete Study Guide and CompTIA Security+ Study Guide.

Dedication
For Wolfgang
—Emmett Dulaney

Acknowledgments
An enormous amount of credit for this book goes to Christopher A. Crayton,
without whom this edition would be only a shadow of what it is. It was an honor
to work with him again, and I owe him enormous gratitude. Thanks are also due
to Mike Harwood, who wrote the first few editions, and to the team of talented
individuals at Pearson who work behind the scenes and make each title the best
it can be.
—Emmett Dulaney

About the Technical Editor
Chris Crayton (MCSE) is an author, technical consultant, and trainer. Formerly,
he worked as a computer technology and networking instructor, information
security director, network administrator, network engineer, and PC specialist.
Chris has authored several print and online books on PC repair, CompTIA A+,
CompTIA Security+, and Microsoft Windows.
He has also served as technical editor and content contributor on numerous
technical titles for several of the leading publishing companies. Chris holds
numerous industry certifications, has been recognized with many professional
teaching awards, and has served as a state-level SkillsUSA competition judge.

We Want to Hear from You!
As the reader of this book, you are our most important critic and commentator.
We value your opinion and want to know what we’re doing right, what we could
do better, what areas you’d like to see us publish in, and any other words of
wisdom you’re willing to pass our way.
We welcome your comments. You can email or write to let us know what you
did or didn’t like about this book—as well as what we can do to make our books
better.
Please note that we cannot help you with technical problems related to the topic
of this book.
When you write, please be sure to include this book’s title and author as well as
your name and email address. We will carefully review your comments and
share them with the author and editors who worked on the book.
Email: feedback@pearsonitcertification.com
Mail: Pearson IT Certification
ATTN: Reader Feedback
800 East 96th Street
Indianapolis, IN 46240 USA

Reader Services
Register your copy of CompTIA Network+ N10-007 Exam Cram at
www.pearsonitcertification.com for convenient access to downloads, updates,
and corrections as they become available.
To start the registration process, go to www.pearsonitcertification.com/register
and
log in or create an account*. Enter the product ISBN 9780789758750 and click
Submit. When the process is complete,
you will find any available bonus content under Registered Products.
*Be sure to check the box that you would like to hear from us to receive
exclusive
discounts on future editions of this product.


Introduction
Welcome to CompTIA Network+ N10-007 Exam Cram. This book is designed to
prepare you to take—and pass—the CompTIA Network+ exam. The Network+
exam has become the leading introductory-level network certification available
today. It is recognized by both employers and industry giants as providing
candidates with a solid foundation of networking concepts, terminology, and
skills. The Network+ exam covers a broad range of networking concepts to
prepare candidates for the technologies they are likely to work with in today’s
network environments.
About Network+ Exam Cram
Exam Crams are designed to give you the information you need to know to
prepare for a certification exam. They cut through the extra information,
focusing on the areas you need to get through the exam. With this in mind, the
elements within the Exam Cram titles are aimed at providing the exam
information you need in the most succinct and accessible manner.
In this light, this book is organized to closely follow the actual CompTIA
objectives for exam N10-007. As such, it is easy to find the information required
for each of the specified CompTIA Network+ objectives. The objective focus
design used by this Exam Cram is an important feature because the information
you need to know is easily identifiable and accessible. To see what we mean,
compare the CompTIA objectives to the book’s layout, and you can see that the
facts are right where you would expect them to be.
Within the chapters, potential exam hot spots are clearly highlighted with Exam
Alerts. They have been carefully placed to let you know that the surrounding
discussion is an important area for the exam. To further help you prepare for the
exam, a Cram Sheet is included that you can use in the final stages of test
preparation. Be sure to pay close attention to the bulleted points on the Cram
Sheet because they pinpoint the technologies and facts you probably will
encounter on the test.
Finally, great effort has gone into the questions that appear throughout the
chapter and the practice tests to ensure that they accurately represent the look

and feel of the ones you will see on the real Network+ exam. Be sure, before
taking the exam, that you are comfortable with both the format and content of
the questions provided in this book.
About the Network+ Exam
The Network+ (N10-007 Edition) exam is the newest iteration of several
versions of the exam. The new Network+ objectives are aimed toward those who
have at least 9 months of experience in network support or administration.
CompTIA believes that new Network+ candidates should have A+ certification
(or its equivalent), but it is not required, and this should not discourage those
who do not.
You will have a maximum of 90 minutes to answer the 90 questions on the
exam. The allotted time is quite generous, so when you finish, you probably will
have time to double-check a few of the answers you were unsure of.
By the time the dust settles, you need a minimum score of 720 to pass the
Network+ exam. This is on a scale of 100 to 900. For more information on the
specifics of the Network+ exam, refer to CompTIA’s main website at
http://certification.comptia.org/.
CompTIA Network+ Exam Topics
Table I-1 lists general exam topics (that is, objectives) and specific topics under
each general topic (that is, subobjectives) for the CompTIA Network+ N10-007
exam. This table also lists the chapter in which each exam topic is covered.
TABLE I-1 CompTIA Network+ Exam Topics
Chapter
N10-007 Exam
Objective
N10-007 Exam Subobjective
1 (Introduction to
Networking
Technologies)
1.0 Networking
Concepts
1.5 Compare and contrast the
characteristics of network topologies,
types and technologies.
2 (Models, Ports,
Protocols and
Networking
Services)
1.0 Networking
Concepts
1.1 Explain the purposes and uses of
ports and protocols.
1.2 Explain devices, applications,
protocols, and services at their

appropriate OSI layers.
1.8 Explain the functions of network
services.
3 (Addressing,
Routing, and
Switching)
1.0 Networking
Concepts
1.3 Explain the concepts and
characteristics of routing and switching.
1.4 Given a scenario, configure the
appropriate IP addressing components.
4 (Network
Components and
Devices)
2.0
Infrastructure
2.2 Given a scenario, determine the
appropriate placement of networking
devices on a network and
install/configure them.
2.3 Explain the purposes and use cases
for advanced network devices.
5 (WAN
Technologies)
2.0
Infrastructure
2.5 Compare and contrast WAN
technologies.
6 (Cabling
Solutions)
2.0
Infrastructure
5.0 Network
Troubleshooting
and Tools
2.1 Given a scenario, deploy the
appropriate cabling solution.
5.3 Given a scenario, troubleshoot
common wired connectivity and
performance issues.
7 (Wireless
Solutions)
1.0 Networking
Concepts
5.0 Network
Troubleshooting
and Tools
1.6 Given a scenario, implement the
appropriate wireless technologies and
configurations.
5.4 Given a scenario, troubleshoot
common wireless connectivity and
performance issues.
8 (Cloud
Computing and
Virtualization)
1.0 Networking
Concepts
2.0
Infrastructure
1.7 Summarize cloud concepts and their
purposes.
2.4 Explain the purposes of
virtualization and network storage
technologies.
9 (Network
Operations)
3.0 Network
Operations
3.1 Given a scenario, use appropriate
documentation and diagrams to manage
the network.

3.2 Compare and contrast business
continuity and disaster recovery
concepts.
3.3 Explain common scanning,
monitoring and patching processes and
summarize their expected outputs.
3.4 Given a scenario, use remote access
methods.
3.5 Identify policies and best practices.
10 (Network
Security)
4.0 Network
Security
4.1 Summarize the purposes of physical
security devices.
4.2 Explain authentication and access
controls.
4.3 Given a scenario, secure a basic
wireless network.
4.4 Summarize common networking
attacks.
4.5 Given a scenario, implement
network device hardening.
4.6 Explain common mitigation
techniques and their purposes.
11 (Network
Troubleshooting)
5.0 Network
Troubleshooting
and Tools
5.1 Explain the network troubleshooting
methodology.
5.2 Given a scenario, use the
appropriate tool.
5.5 Given a scenario, troubleshoot
common network service issues.
Booking and Taking the Network+ Certification
Exam
Unfortunately, testing is not free. You’re charged $320 for each test you take,
whether you pass or fail. In the United States and Canada, tests are administered
by Pearson VUE testing services. To access the VUE contact information and
book an exam, refer to the website at http://www.pearsonvue.com or call 1-877-

551-7587. When booking an exam, you need to provide the following
information:
 Your name as you would like it to appear on your certificate.
 Your Social Security or Social Insurance number.
 Contact phone numbers (to be called in case of a problem).
 Mailing address, which identifies the address to which you want your
certificate mailed.
 Exam number and title.
 Email address for contact purposes. This often is the fastest and most
effective means to contact you. Many clients require it for registration.
 Credit card information so that you can pay online. You can redeem
vouchers by calling the respective testing center.
What to Expect from the Exam
If you haven’t taken a certification test, the process can be a little unnerving.
Even if you’ve taken numerous tests, it is not much better. Mastering the inner
mental game often can be as much of a battle as knowing the material. Knowing
what to expect before heading in can make the process a little more comfortable.
Certification tests are administered on a computer system at a VUE authorized
testing center. The format of the exams is straightforward: Each question has
several possible answers to choose from. The questions in this book provide a
good example of the types of questions you can expect on the exam. If you are
comfortable with them, the test should hold few surprises. Many of the questions
vary in length. Some of them are longer scenario questions, whereas others are
short and to the point. Carefully read the questions; the longer questions often
have a key point that will lead you to the correct answer.
Most of the questions on the Network+ exam require you to choose a single
correct answer, but a few require multiple answers. When there are multiple
correct answers, a message at the bottom of the screen prompts you to “Choose
all that apply.” Be sure to read these messages.
A Few Exam-Day Details
It is recommended that you arrive at the examination room at least 15 minutes
early, although a few minutes earlier certainly would not hurt. This will give you

time to prepare and will give the test administrator time to answer any questions
you might have before the test begins. Many people suggest that you review the
most critical information about the test you’re taking just before the test. (Exam
Cram books provide a reference—the Cram Sheet, located inside the front of this
book—that lists the essential information from the book in distilled form.)
Arriving a few minutes early will give you some time to compose yourself and
mentally review this critical information.
You will be asked to provide two forms of ID, one of which must be a photo ID.
Both of the identifications you choose should have a signature. You also might
need to sign in when you arrive and sign out when you leave.
Be warned: The rules are clear about what you can and cannot take into the
examination room. Books, laptops, note sheets, and so on are not allowed in the
examination room. The test administrator will hold these items, to be returned
after you complete the exam. You might receive either a wipe board or a pen and
a single piece of paper for making notes during the exam. The test administrator
will ensure that no paper is removed from the examination room.
After the Test
Whether you want it or not, as soon as you finish your test, your score displays
on the computer screen. In addition to the results appearing on the computer
screen, a hard copy of the report prints for you. Like the onscreen report, the
hard copy displays the results of your exam and provides a summary of how you
did on each section and on each technology. If you were unsuccessful, this
summary can help you determine the areas you need to brush up on.
When you pass the Network+ exam, you will have earned the Network+
certification, and your certificate will be mailed to you within a few weeks.
Should you not receive your certificate and information packet within 5 weeks of
passing your exam, contact CompTIA at fulfillment@comptia.org, or call 1-630-
268-1818 and ask for the fulfillment department.
Last-Minute Exam Tips
Studying for a certification exam is no different than studying for any other
exam, but a few hints and tips can give you the edge on exam day:
 Read all the material: CompTIA has been known to include material not
expressly specified in the objectives. This book has included additional

information not reflected in the objectives to give you the best possible
preparation for the examination.
 Watch for the Exam Tips and Notes: The Network+ objectives include a
wide range of technologies. Exam Tips and Notes found throughout each
chapter are designed to pull out exam-related hot spots. These can be your
best friends when preparing for the exam.
 Use the questions to assess your knowledge: Don’t just read the chapter
content; use the exam questions to find out what you know and what you
don’t. If you struggle, study some more, review, and then assess your
knowledge again.
 Review the exam objectives: Develop your own questions and examples
for each topic listed. If you can develop and answer several questions for
each topic, you should not find it difficult to pass the exam.
Good luck!
Companion Website
Register this book to get access to the Pearson Test Prep practice test software
and other study materials plus additional bonus content. Check this site regularly
for new and updated postings written by the author that provide further insight
into the more troublesome topics on the exams. Be sure to check the box that
you would like to hear from us to receive updates and exclusive discounts on
future editions of this product or related products.
To access this companion website, follow these steps:
1. Go to www.pearsonITcertification.com/register and log in or create a new
account.
2. Enter the ISBN: 9780789758750.
3. Answer the challenge question as proof of purchase.
4. Click the Access Bonus Content link in the Registered Products section of
your account page, to be taken to the page where your downloadable content
is available.
Please note that many of our companion content files can be very large,
especially image and video files.

If you are unable to locate the files for this title by following the steps at left,
please visit www.pearsonITcertification.com/contact and select the Site
Problems/ Comments option. Our customer service representatives will assist
you.
Pearson Test Prep Practice Test Software
As noted previously, this book comes complete with the Pearson Test Prep
practice test software containing two full exams. These practice tests are
available to you either online or as an offline Windows application. To access the
practice exams that were developed with this book, please see the instructions in
the card inserted in the sleeve in the back of the book. This card includes a
unique access code that enables you to activate your exams in the Pearson Test
Prep practice test software.
Note
The cardboard sleeve in the back of this book includes a piece of paper. The
paper lists the activation code for the practice exams associated with this
book. Do not lose the activation code. On the opposite side of the paper from
the activation code is a unique, one-time-use coupon code for the purchase of
the Premium Edition eBook and Practice Test.
Accessing the Pearson Test Prep Software
Online
The online version of this software can be used on any device with a browser
and connectivity to the Internet, including desktop machines, tablets, and
smartphones. To start using your practice exams online, follow these steps:
1. Go to www.PearsonTestPrep.com.
2. Select Pearson IT Certification as your product group.
3. Enter your email/password for your account. If you don’t have an account
on PearsonITCertification.com, you will need to establish one by going to
PearsonITCertification.com/join.
4. In the My Products tab, click the Activate New Product button.

5. Enter the access code printed on the insert card in the back of your book to
activate your product.
6. The product will now be listed in your My Products page. Click the Exams
button to launch the exam settings screen and start your exam.
Accessing the Pearson Test Prep Software
Offline
If you want to study offline, you can download and install the Windows version
of the Pearson Test Prep software. There is a download link for this software on
the book’s companion website, or you can enter the following link in your
browser:
www.pearsonitcertification.com/content/downloads/pcpt/engine.zip.
To access the book’s companion website and the software, follow these steps:
1. Register your book by going to PearsonITCertification.com/register and
entering the ISBN: 9780789758750.
2. Respond to the challenge questions.
3. Go to your account page and select the Registered Products tab.
4. Click the Access Bonus Content link under the product listing.
5. Click the Install Pearson Test Prep Desktop Version link under the
Practice Exams section of the page to download the software.
6. After the software downloads, unzip all the files on your computer.
7. Double-click the application file to start the installation, and follow the
onscreen instructions to complete the registration.
8. When the installation is complete, launch the application and select the
Activate Exam button on the My Products tab.
9. Click the Activate a Product button in the Activate Product Wizard.
10. Enter the unique access code found on the card in the sleeve in the back of
your book, and click the Activate button.
11. Click Next and then Finish to download the exam data to your application.
12. You can now start using the practice exams by selecting the product and

clicking the Open Exam button to open the exam settings screen.
Note that the offline and online versions will synch together, so saved exams and
grade results recorded on one version will be available to you on the other as
well.
Customizing Your Exams
After you are in the exam settings screen, you can choose to take exams in one
of three modes:
 Study Mode
 Practice Exam Mode
 Flash Card Mode
Study Mode enables you to fully customize your exams and review answers as
you are taking the exam. This is typically the mode you would use first to assess
your knowledge and identify information gaps. Practice Exam Mode locks
certain customization options, because it is presenting a realistic exam
experience. Use this mode when you are preparing to test your exam readiness.
Flash Card Mode strips out the answers and presents you with only the question
stem. This mode is great for late-stage preparation when you really want to
challenge yourself to provide answers without the benefit of seeing multiple
choice options. This mode will not provide the detailed score reports that the
other two modes will, so it should not be used if you are trying to identify
knowledge gaps.
In addition to these three modes, you will be able to select the source of your
questions. You can choose to take exams that cover all the chapters, or you can
narrow your selection to a single chapter or the chapters that make up specific
parts in the book. All chapters are selected by default. If you want to narrow
your focus to individual chapters, first deselect all the chapters, then select only
those on which you want to focus in the Objectives area.
You can also select the exam banks on which to focus. Each exam bank comes
complete with a full exam of questions that cover topics in every chapter. The
two exams printed in the book are available to you as well as two additional
exams of unique questions. You can have the test engine serve up exams from all
four banks or just from one individual bank by selecting the desired banks in the
exam bank area.

You can make several other customizations to your exam from the exam settings
screen, such as the time of the exam, the number of questions, whether to
randomize questions and answers, whether to show the number of correct
answers for multiple answer questions, or whether to serve up only specific
types of questions. You can also create custom test banks by selecting only
questions that you have marked or questions on which you have added notes.
Updating Your Exams
If you are using the online version of the Pearson Test Prep software, you should
always have access to the latest version of the software as well as the exam data.
If you are using the Windows desktop version, every time you launch the
software, it will check to see if there are any updates to your exam data and
automatically download any changes that were made since the last time you used
the software. This requires that you are connected to the Internet at the time you
launch the software.
Sometimes, due to many factors, the exam data may not fully download when
you activate your exam. If you find that figures or exhibits are missing, you may
need to manually update your exams.
To update a particular exam you have already activated and downloaded, select
the Tools tab and then click the Update Products button. Again, this is an issue
only with the desktop Windows application.
If you want to check for updates to the Pearson Test Prep exam engine software,
Windows desktop version, select the Tools tab and click the Update
Application button. This will ensure that you are running the latest version of
the software engine.
Assessing Exam Readiness
Exam candidates never really know whether they are adequately prepared for the
exam until they have completed about 30 percent of the questions. At that point,
if you are not prepared, it is too late. The best way to determine your readiness is
to work through the “Do I Know This Already?” quizzes at the beginning of
each chapter and review the foundation and key topics presented in each chapter.
It is best to work your way through the entire book unless you can complete each
subject without having to do any research or look up any answers.

Premium Edition eBook and Practice Tests
This book also includes an exclusive offer for 70% off the Premium Edition
eBook and Practice Tests edition of this title. Please see the coupon code
included with the cardboard sleeve for information on how to purchase the
Premium Edition.

CHAPTER 1
Introduction 
to 
Networking
Technologies
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objective:
 Compare and contrast the characteristics of network topologies, types and
technologies.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objective 1.5. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
A variety of physical and logical network layouts are in use today. As a network
administrator, you might find yourself working on these different network
layouts or topologies. Therefore, you must understand how they are designed to
function.
This chapter reviews general network considerations, such as the various
topologies used on today’s networks, local-area networks (LANs), wide-area
networks (WANs), and some of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) standards.
Wired and Wireless Network Topologies
 Compare and contrast the characteristics of common network
topologies, types, and technologies.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. Which topology (star, bus, or ring) would utilize a switch?

2. With which topology does every node have a direct connection to every
other node?
Answers
1. Of the choices given, only a star topology would utilize a switch.
2. With a mesh topology, every node has a direct connection to every other
node.
A topology refers to a network’s physical and logical layout. A network’s
physical topology refers to the actual layout of the computer cables and other
network devices. A network’s logical topology refers to the way in which the
network appears to the devices that use it.
Several topologies are in use on networks today. Some of the more common
topologies are the bus, ring, star, mesh, and wireless. The following sections
provide an overview of each.
Bus Topology
A bus topology uses a trunk or backbone to connect all the computers on the
network, as shown in Figure 1.1. Systems connect to this backbone using T
connectors or taps (known as a vampire tap, if you must pierce the wire). To
avoid signal reflection, a physical bus topology requires that each end of the
physical bus be terminated, with one end also being grounded. Note that a hub or
switch is not needed in this installation.

FIGURE 1.1 Physical bus topology
ExamAlert
Loose or missing terminators from a bus network disrupt data
transmissions.
The most common implementation of a linear bus is the IEEE 802.3 Ethernet
standard. Table 1.1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the bus
topology.
TABLE 1.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Bus Topology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Compared to other
topologies, a bus is cheap
and easy to implement.
Network disruption might occur when computers
are added or removed.
Requires less cable than
other topologies.
Because all systems on the network connect to a
single backbone, a break in the cable prevents all
systems from accessing the network.
Does not use any
specialized network
equipment.
Difficult to troubleshoot.

Ring Topology
The ring topology is a logical ring, meaning that the data travels in a circular
fashion from one computer to another on the network. It is not a physical ring
topology. Figure 1.2 shows the logical layout of a ring topology. Note that a hub
or switch is not needed in this installation either.
FIGURE 1.2 Logical design of a ring topology
In a true ring topology, if a single computer or section of cable fails, the signal is
interrupted. The entire network becomes inaccessible. Network disruption can
also occur when computers are added to or removed from the network, making it
an impractical network design in environments where the network changes
often.
As just mentioned, if a single system on the ring fails, the whole network fails.
This is why ring networks can be set up in a fault-tolerant design, meaning that
they have a primary and secondary ring. If one ring fails, data can use the second
ring to reach its destination. Naturally, the addition of the second ring adds to the
cost of the network as well as the complexity.
Ring networks are most commonly wired in a star configuration. In a token ring
network, a multistation access unit (MSAU) is equivalent to a hub or switch on
an Ethernet network. The MSAU performs the token circulation internally. To
create the complete ring, the ring-in (RI) port on each MSAU is connected to the
ring-out (RO) port on another MSAU. The last MSAU in the ring is then
connected to the first to complete the ring. Table 1.2 summarizes the advantages

and disadvantages of the ring topology.
TABLE 1.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Ring Topology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cable faults are easily located, making
troubleshooting easier.
Expansion to the network can cause
network disruption.
Ring networks are moderately easy to
install.
A single break in the cable can
disrupt the entire network.
Star Topology
In the star topology, all computers and other network devices connect to a
central device called a hub or switch. Each connected device requires a single
cable to be connected to the hub or switch, creating a point-to-point connection
between the device and the hub or switch.
Using a separate cable to connect to the hub or switch allows the network to be
expanded without disruption. A break in any single cable does not cause the
entire network to fail. Figure 1.3 shows a star topology.
ExamAlert
Among the network topologies discussed in this chapter, the star topology
is the easiest to expand in terms of the number of devices connected to the
network.

FIGURE 1.3 Star topology
The star topology is the most widely implemented network design in use today,
but it is not without shortcomings. Because all devices connect to a centralized
hub or switch, this creates a single point of failure for the network. If the hub or
switch fails, any device connected to it cannot access the network. Because of
the number of cables required and the need for network devices, the cost of a star
network is often higher than other topologies. Table 1.3 summarizes the
advantages and disadvantages of the star topology.
TABLE 1.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Star Topology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Star networks are easily expanded
without disruption to the network.
Requires more cable than most of the
other topologies.
Cable failure affects only a single
user.
A central connecting device allows for
a single point of failure.
Easy to troubleshoot and implement.
Requires additional networking
equipment to create the network layout.
Wired Mesh Topology
The wired mesh topology incorporates a unique network design in which each
computer on the network connects to every other, creating a point-to-point
connection between every device on the network. The purpose of the mesh

design is to provide a high level of redundancy. If one network cable fails, the
data always has an alternative path to get to its destination; each node can act as
a relay.
The wiring for a mesh network can be complicated, as illustrated by Figure 1.4.
Furthermore, the cabling costs associated with the mesh topology can be high,
and troubleshooting a failed cable can be tricky. Because of this, the mesh
topology is not the first choice for many wired networks but is more popular
with servers/routers.
FIGURE 1.4 Mesh topology
A variation on a true mesh topology is the hybrid mesh. It creates a redundant
point-to-point network connection between only specific network devices (such
as the servers). The hybrid mesh is most often seen in WAN implementations but
can be used in any network.
Another way of describing the degree of mesh implementation is by labeling it
as either partial or full. If it is a true mesh network with connections between
each device, it can be labeled full mesh, and if it is less than that—a hybrid of
any sort—it is called a partial mesh network.
Table 1.4 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the mesh topology.
ExamAlert
Because of the redundant connections, the mesh topology offers better

fault tolerance than other topologies.
TABLE 1.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of the Mesh Topology
Advantages
Disadvantages
Provides redundant paths between LAN
topologies.
Requires more cable than the
other topologies.
The network can be expanded without
disruption to current users.
Complicated implementation.
Wireless Topologies
Wireless networks typically are implemented using one of three wireless
topologies:
 The infrastructure, or managed, wireless topology
 The ad hoc, or unmanaged, wireless topology
 The mesh wireless topology
The following sections describe these three wireless topologies in greater detail.
Infrastructure Wireless Topology
The infrastructure wireless topology is commonly used to extend a wired LAN
to include wireless devices. Wireless devices communicate with the wired LAN
through a base station known as an access point (AP) or wireless access point.
The AP forms a bridge between a wireless and wired LAN, and all transmissions
between wireless stations, or between a system and a wired network client, go
through the AP. APs are not mobile and have to stay connected to the wired
network; therefore, they become part of the wired network infrastructure (thus
the name). In infrastructure wireless networks, there might be several access
points providing wireless coverage for a large area or only a single access point
for a small area, such as a single home or small building.
Note
WAP or AP? Notice that although we call it a wireless access point, it is
commonly referred to as an AP. As you study for the exam, know that it can
be called either an AP or a WAP, and—just to make matters confusing—WAP

is also the acronym for the Wireless Application Protocol.
ExamAlert
The Network+ objectives require you to be familiar with wireless
topologies such as mesh, ad hoc, and infrastructure.
Ad Hoc Wireless Topology
In a wireless ad hoc topology, devices communicate directly among themselves
without using an access point. This peer-to-peer network design is commonly
used to connect a small number of computers or wireless devices. For example,
an ad hoc wireless network may be set up temporarily between laptops in a
boardroom or to connect systems in a home instead of using a wired solution.
The ad hoc wireless design provides a quick method to share files and resources
among a small number of systems. Connecting mobile devices together or to a
printer using Bluetooth is an example of an ad hoc network.
Figure 1.5 shows an ad hoc wireless network, and Figure 1.6 shows the
infrastructure network using the AP.
FIGURE 1.5 Ad hoc wireless topology

Tip
Ad Hoc Wireless Topology The ad hoc, or unmanaged, network design
does not use an AP. All wireless devices connect directly to each other.
Note
In an infrastructure wireless network, devices use a wireless AP to connect to
the network.
FIGURE 1.6 Infrastructure wireless topology
Wireless Mesh Topology
As discussed earlier, wired mesh networks are costly because of the cabling
required to interconnect all computer systems. Wireless mesh networks
obviously do not need cables running between systems, making wireless mesh
networks fairly common in the networking world. In the wireless mesh network,
as with the wired mesh, each network node is interconnected to other nodes on
the network. With a wired mesh, the wireless signal starts at a wireless base
station (access point) attached to a wired network. A wireless mesh network

extends the transmission distance by relaying the signal from one computer to
another. Unlike the wired mesh, in which a complex and expensive collection of
physical cables is required to create the mesh, the wireless mesh is inexpensive
to implement. Figure 1.7 shows a wireless mesh topology.
Note
Wireless Mesh A wireless mesh network is created through the connection
of wireless access points installed at each network user’s locale. Data signals
in a wireless mesh rely on all nodes to propagate signals. Wireless mesh
networks can be identified by the interconnecting signals between each node.
FIGURE 1.7 A wireless mesh topology
The wireless mesh network has several key advantages. Because a wireless mesh
network is interconnected with one or more nodes on the network, the data can
travel multiple paths to reach its destination. When a new node is added, it

provides new paths for other nodes, which in turn improves network
performance and decreases congestion. Advantages of the wireless mesh include
the following:
 Self-healing: Wireless mesh networks are known as self-healing, which
refers to the network’s ability to adapt to network failure and even function
should a node be moved from one location to another. Self-healing in a
wireless mesh environment is possible because of the interconnected
connections and because of the wireless media.
 Scalable: Wireless mesh networks are highly scalable. Using wireless, it is
possible to add new systems to the network without the need for expensive
cables.
 Reliability: Of all network topologies, the mesh network provides the
greatest reliability. The redundant number of paths for the data to travel
ensures that data can reach its destination.
 Cost: One disadvantage of the wired mesh is the cost associated with
running the cabling and the support costs of such a complex network.
Wireless mesh networks are essentially self-configuring and do not have
cabling requirements. Therefore, systems can be added, removed, and
relocated with little cost or disruption to the network.
Hybrid Topologies
As you might expect, topology designs are not black and white. Many of the
topologies found in large networking environments are a hybrid of physical
topologies. An example of a hybrid topology is the star bus—a combination of
the star topology and the bus topology. Figure 1.8 shows how this might look in
a network implementation.

FIGURE 1.8 A star bus topology
ExamAlert
Another meaning: The term hybrid topology also can refer to the
combination of wireless and wired networks. For the Network+ exam,
however, the term hybrid most likely refers to the combination of physical
networks.
Cram Quiz
1. You have been asked to install a network that will give the network users the
greatest amount of fault tolerance. Which of the following network
topologies would you choose?
 A. Star
 B. Ring
 C. Mesh
 D. Bus
2. Which of the following topologies allows for network expansion with the

least amount of disruption for the current network users?
 A. Bus
 B. Ring
 C. LAN
 D. Star
3. What topology is represented in the following figure?
 A. Star topology
 B. Star bus
 C. Ad hoc
 D. Infrastructure
4. Which network topology offers the greatest level of redundancy but has the
highest implementation cost?
 A. Wireless mesh
 B. Wired mesh
 C. Hybrid star

 D. Bus network
5. Which of the following statements are associated with a bus LAN network?
(Choose all correct answers.)
 A. A single cable break can cause complete network disruption.
 B. All devices connect to a central device.
 C. It uses a single backbone to connect all network devices.
 D. It uses a dual-ring configuration.
6. As a network administrator, you are called in to troubleshoot a problem on a
token ring network. The network uses two MSAUs connected using the ring-
in ports on both devices. All network cards are set at the same speed. What is
the likely cause of the problem?
 A. Bad network card
 B. Faulty cabling
 C. MSAU configuration
 D. Network card configuration
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. A mesh network uses a point-to-point connection to every device on the
network. This creates multiple points for the data to be transmitted around
the network and therefore creates a high degree of redundancy. The star,
ring, and bus topologies do not offer the greatest amount of fault tolerance.
2. D. On a star network, each network device uses a separate cable to make a
point-to-point connection to a centralized device, such as a hub or a switch.
With such a configuration, a new device can be added to the network by
attaching the new device to the hub or switch with its own cable. This
process does not disrupt the users who are currently on the network.
Answers A and B are incorrect because the addition of new network devices
on a ring or bus network can cause a disruption in the network and cause
network services to be unavailable during the installation of a new device.
3. D. The infrastructure wireless topology is commonly used to extend a wired
LAN to include wireless devices. Wireless devices communicate with the
wired LAN through a base station known as an access point (AP) or wireless

access point. The AP forms a bridge between a wireless and wired LAN, and
all transmissions between wireless stations or between a system and a wired
network client go through the AP.
4. B. The wired mesh topology requires each computer on the network to be
individually connected to every other device. This configuration provides
maximum reliability and redundancy for the network. However, it is very
costly to implement because of the multiple wiring requirements.
5. A, C. In a bus network, a single break in the network cable can disrupt all
the devices on that segment of the network, a significant shortcoming. A bus
network also uses a single cable as a backbone to which all networking
devices attach. A star network requires networked devices to connect to a
centralized device such as a hub, switch, or MSAU. Therefore, answer B is
incorrect. Answer D is also incorrect because it uses a dual-ring
configuration.
6. C. To create the complete ring, the ring-in (RI) port on each MSAU is
connected to the ring-out (RO) port on another MSAU. The last MSAU in
the ring is then connected to the first to complete the ring.
Network Types
 Compare and contrast the characteristics of network topologies, types
and technologies.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. True or false: The biggest difference between a LAN and a WAN is
usually the size of the network.
2. What network type is essentially a LAN created to share data among
devices associated with you?
3. In what networking type is consolidated, block-level data storage made
available to networked devices?

Answers
1. True. A WAN is a network that spans more than one geographic location,
often connecting separated LANs.
2. A personal-area network (PAN) is essentially a LAN created to share
data among devices associated with you.
3. A storage-area network (SAN) makes block-level data storage available
to devices on the network.
Networks are classified according to their geographic coverage and size. The
two most common network classifications are local-area networks (LANs) and
wide-area networks (WANs). Choosing between the two is often a matter of
understanding the requirements.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should be able to differentiate between the various
types of networks discussed here.
LANs
A local-area network (LAN) is a data network that is restricted to a single
geographic location and typically encompasses a relatively small area, such as an
office building or school. The function of the LAN is to interconnect workstation
computers for the purpose of sharing files and resources. Because of its localized
nature, the LAN typically is high speed and cheaper to set up than a WAN.
Figure 1.9 shows an example of a LAN.

FIGURE 1.9 A local-area network
WLANs
Instead of being wholly dependent on wiring for your local network, the wireless
LAN (WLAN) provides a flexible and secure data communications system that
augments an Ethernet LAN or, in some cases, replaces it altogether. Wireless
transmissions send and receive data using radio frequency (RF) signals, freeing
you from wired solutions, and are dependent on a hotspot. That hotspot can be in
a coffee shop, a train station, a restaurant, or almost any public place. Security
should be a prime concern of public hotspot users, and encryption should be
used everywhere possible.
In 
a 
common 
wireless 
implementation, 
a 
wireless 
transceiver
(transmitter/receiver), known as an access point, connects to the wired network
from a fixed location using standard cabling. The wireless access point receives
and then transmits data between the wireless LAN and the wired network
infrastructure.
Client systems communicate with a wireless access point using wireless LAN
adapters. Such adapters are built in to or can be added to laptops and other
mobile devices or desktop computers. Wireless LAN adapters provide the
communication point between the client system and the airwaves via an antenna.
WANs
A wide-area network (WAN) is a network that spans more than one geographic

location, often connecting separated LANs. WANs are slower than LANs and
often require additional and costly hardware, such as routers, dedicated leased
lines, and complicated implementation procedures. Figure 1.10 shows an
example of a WAN.
FIGURE 1.10 A wide-area network
MANs
Occasionally, a WAN will be called a metropolitan-area network (MAN) when it
is confined to a certain geographic area, such as a university campus or city. No
formal guidelines dictate the differences between a MAN and a WAN;
technically, a MAN is a WAN. Perhaps for this reason, the term MAN is used
less often than WAN. If any distinction exists, it is that a MAN is smaller than a
WAN. A MAN is almost always bigger than a LAN and usually is smaller than
or equal to a WAN. MANs utilize an Internet service provider (ISP) or
telecommunications (telco) provider.
CANs
When it comes to terminology and definitions, a computer network in a defined
area that links buildings and consists of multiple LANs within that limited
geographical area is usually called a Campus-Area Network (CAN). The CAN

may encompass the whole college campus, or a portion of it. It may also have
nothing to do with a college but consists of office buildings in an enterprise
“campus,” industrial complex, military base, or anywhere else. In reality, a CAN
is a WAN, but what makes it distinct is the confined geographic area it includes.
SANs
A storage-area network (SAN) consists of just what the name implies:
networked/shared storage devices. With clustered storage, you can use multiple
devices to increase performance. SANs are subsets of LANs and offer block-
level data storage that appears within the operating systems of the connected
devices as locally attached devices.
File systems built on top of SANs can provide file-level access, but the SAN
itself does not provide file abstraction, only block-level operations.
PANs
A personal-area network (PAN) is essentially a LAN created to share data among
devices associated with you. Wireless technologies have taken PAN further and
introduced a new term—wireless personal-area network (WPAN). WPAN refers
to the technologies involved in connecting devices in very close proximity to
exchange data or resources, usually through the use of Bluetooth, infrared, or
near-field communication (NFC). An example is connecting a laptop with a
smartphone to synchronize an address book. Because of their small size and the
nature of the data exchange, WPAN devices lend themselves well to ad hoc
wireless networking. Ad hoc wireless networks are those that have devices
connect to each other directly, not through a wireless access point.
Cram Quiz
1. When a WAN is confined to a certain geographic area, such as a city, it is
known as a:
 A. LAN
 B. MAN
 C. VAN
 D. VPN

2. Which of the following is a computer network in a defined area that links
buildings and consists of multiple LANs within that limited geographical
area?
 A. SAN
 B. PAN
 C. DAN
 D. CAN
3. Which of the following provides a flexible and secure data communications
system that augments an Ethernet LAN or, in some cases, replaces it
altogether?
 A. PHLAN
 B. MAN
 C. WLAN
 D. CRAN
Cram Quiz Answers
1. B. A WAN can be referred to as a metropolitan-area network (MAN) when
it is confined to a certain geographic area, such as a city.
2. D. A campus-area network (CAN) is a computer network in a defined area
that links buildings and consists of multiple LANs within that limited
geographical area.
3. C. A wireless LAN (WLAN) augments an Ethernet LAN or, in some cases,
replaces it altogether.
IoT Technologies
 Compare and contrast the characteristics of network topologies, types
and technologies.
CramSaver

If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What is the access method employed by the 802.11 wireless standards?
2. What technologies are considered the biggest developments for
802.11n/802.11ac and the keys to the newer speeds?
Answers
1. All the 802.11 wireless standards employ the CSMA/CA access method.
2. Multiple input, multiple output (MIMO) and multiuser MIMO (MU-
MIMO) antenna technologies are the biggest developments for
802.11n/802.11ac and the key to the new speeds.
In the IT world of today, one of the fastest growing areas is that of embedded
devices such as thermostats, water softeners, and other appliances. This
interconnection via the Internet of computing devices embedded in everyday
objects is known as the Internet of Things (IoT). The goal is to enable them to
send and receive data. To do this, technologies are needed that facilitate such
interaction. Those are discussed in the sections that follow.
ExamAlert
The seven items listed here constitute those associated with IoT beneath
the Network+ objective 1.5. You should make certain that you know them
as you study for the exam.
Z-Wave
When it comes to HVAC, automated window coverings, home cinema, and some
security system/home access controls, Z-Wave is a popular communications
protocol. Focused on the office/residential/automation market, it requires a Z-
Wave gateway (central control device), which acts as both the hub controller and
the portal (typically to the Internet). Up to 232 devices can be on a Z-Wave
network, and each new device has to be paired (or “included”) for it to be
recognized by the controller.

An estimated 50 million devices that are Z-Wave compliant have been shipped
since the standard was developed by the Danish company Zen-Sys. The standard
is now governed by the members of the Z-Wave Alliance. The frequency it uses
varies by country, but in the United States, the two frequencies are 908.4 and
916.
Each Z-Wave network is identified by a 32-bit Network ID (known as the Home
ID), and each device is identified by an 8-bit Node ID that must be unique within
the network.
Ant+
Although not open per se, the Z-Wave protocol is associated with many
companies. ANT+, on the other hand, is governed by Garmin through its ANT+
Alliance. Similar to Z-Wave, it is a wireless protocol but is often used to control
lighting systems, television sets, and other indoor entities, such as a line of
fitness monitoring equipment licensed by Garmin.
ANT+ operates in the 2.4 GHz range, and a typical ANT-enabled device
includes an application host MCU interfaced with an ANT module, chipset, or
chip. Communication utilizes bidirectional, serial messages across a channel.
Each channel has a master and at last one slave participant.
Bluetooth
When it comes to wireless standards for short distances, Bluetooth is the
industry leader. Using the 2.4 to 2.485 GHz band, the technology is popular for
personal-area networks (PANs) and is based on the IEEE 802.15.1 standard. The
IEEE no longer maintains the standard, and it is now managed by the Bluetooth
Special Interest Group (SIG).
There are 79 Bluetooth channels available, and each channel has a bandwidth of
1 MHz. Bluetooth is a packet-based protocol with a master-slave structure; one
master can communicate with up to seven slaves. A number of Bluetooth
“versions” or standards have been released since 1.0 first appeared. Some of the
main versions of Bluetooth evolution include v1.2, v2.0, v2.1, v3.0, v4.0, and
v4.1. As of this writing, the most recently announced was 5, and it is focused on
the Internet of Things (IoT). It provides double the speed (2 Mbps), fourfold the
range, and eightfold the data broadcasting capacity of transmissions compared to
Bluetooth 4.x.

ExamAlert
Up until the most recent version, the numbers have always included a
point and a decimal: 1.0, 1.2, and so on. With the latest, there is no point
or decimal. After much discussion, it was decided it was less confusing to
go with a whole number: Bluetooth 5.
NFC
Near field communication (NFC) is a technology that requires a user to bring the
client close to a wireless access point (AP) in order to verify—often through
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) or Wi-Fi—that the device is present. The
popularity of this has grown with phones being used as a part of payment
systems, and it can also be used between two phones to “bump” and send data
from one to another. Although there is no hardcoded standard defining “near,”
the industry tends to use 4cm (1.6 inches) as the distance.
IR
Infrared (IR) has been around for a long time; perhaps your first experience with
it was the TV remote. The commands entered into the remote-control travel over
an infrared light wave to the receiver on the TV. Infrared technology has
progressed, and today infrared development in networking is managed by the
Infrared Data Association (IrDA). However, its use in mobile devices and
peripherals has been displaced by more modern Wi-Fi and Bluetooth wireless
technologies that do not require a direct line-of-sight and offer less-restrictive
distance limitations.
Infrared wireless networking uses infrared beams to send data transmissions
between devices. Infrared wireless networking offers higher transmission rates,
reaching 10 Mbps to 16 Mbps.
As expected, infrared light beams cannot penetrate objects; therefore, the signal
is disrupted when something blocks the light. Infrared can be either a directed
(line-of-sight) or diffuse technology. A directed infrared system provides a
limited range of approximately 3 feet and typically is used for personal-area
networks. Diffused infrared can travel farther and is more difficult to block with
a signal object. Diffused infrared wireless LAN systems do not require line-of-
sight, but usable distance is limited to room distances.

Infrared provides a secure, low-cost, convenient cable-replacement technology.
It is well suited for many specific applications and environments. Some key
infrared points follow:
 It provides adequate speeds—up to 16 Mbps.
 Infrared devices use less power and therefore do not drain batteries as much.
 Infrared is a secure medium. Infrared signals typically are a direct-line
implementation in a short range and therefore do not travel far outside the
immediate connection. This eliminates the problem of eavesdropping or
signal tampering.
 Infrared is a proven technology. Infrared devices have been available for
some time and as such are a proven, nonproprietary technology with an
established user and support base.
 It has no RFI issues or signal conflicts.
 It replaces cables for many devices, such as keyboards, mice, and other
peripherals.
 It uses a dispersed mode or a direct line-of-sight transmission.
 Transmissions travel over short distances.
RFID
Although NFC is a newer standard, it is built on the older standards created for
RFID, which allows compatible hardware both to supply power to and
communicate with an otherwise unpowered and passive electronic tag using
radio waves. RFID is widely used for identification, authentication, and tracking
applications.
“Proximity reader” is a catchall term for any ID or card reader capable of
reading proximity cards. Proximity cards go by a number of different titles, but
they are just RFID cards that can be read when close to a reader and truly never
need to touch anything. The readers work with 13.56 MHz smart cards and 125
kHz proximity cards, and they can open turnstiles, gates, and any other physical
security safeguards after the signal is read.
802.11
802.11 represents the IEEE designation for wireless networking. Several
wireless networking specifications exist under the 802.11 banner. The Network+

objectives focus on 802.11a, 802.11b, 802.11g, 802.11n, and 802.11ac. All these
standards use the Ethernet protocol and the Carrier Sense Multiple
Access/Collision Detection (CSMA/CA) access method.
ExamAlert
The exam includes questions on the characteristics of the wireless
standards. Remember, 802.11 wireless standards use the CSMA/CA access
method.
The 802.11 wireless standards can differ in terms of speed, transmission ranges,
and frequency used, but in terms of actual implementation, they are similar. All
standards can use either an infrastructure or ad hoc network design, and each can
use the same security protocols:
 IEEE 802.11: There were two variations on the initial 802.11 wireless
standard. Both offered 1 or 2 Mbps transmission speeds and the same RF of
2.4 GHz. The difference between the two was in how data traveled through
the RF media. One used Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS), and
the other used Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS). The original
802.11 standards are far too slow for modern networking needs and are now
no longer deployed.
ExamAlert
With this iteration of the exam, CompTIA wants you to know the
acronyms FHSS and DSSS, but no longer tests on the intricacies of either
technology. In the interest of completeness, these technologies are
discussed in more detail at the end of this chapter to round out your
knowledge.
 IEEE 802.11a: In terms of speed, the 802.11a standard was far ahead of the
original 802.11 standards. 802.11a specified speeds of up to 54 Mbps in the 5
GHz band, but most commonly, communication takes place at 6 Mbps, 12
Mbps, or 24 Mbps. 802.11a is incompatible with the 802.11b and 802.11g
wireless standards.
 IEEE 802.11b: The 802.11b standard provides for a maximum transmission

speed of 11 Mbps. However, devices are designed to be backward
compatible with previous 802.11 standards that provided for speeds of 1, 2,
and 5.5 Mbps. 802.11b uses a 2.4 GHz RF range and is compatible with
802.11g.
 IEEE 802.11g: 802.11g offers wireless transmission over distances of 150
feet and speeds up to 54 Mbps compared with the 11 Mbps of the 802.11b
standard. Like 802.11b, 802.11g operates in the 2.4 GHz range and therefore
is compatible with it.
 IEEE 802.11n: One of the more common wireless standards today is
802.11n. The goal of the 802.11n standard was to significantly increase
throughput in both the 2.4 GHz and the 5 GHz frequency ranges. The
baseline goal of the standard was to reach speeds of 100 Mbps, but given the
right conditions, it is stated that the 802.11n speeds can reach a theoretical
600 Mbps. In practical operation, 802.11n speeds are much slower. Multiple
Input, Multiple Output (MIMO) was introduced with 802.11n.
 IEEE 802.11ac: The newest of the wireless standards listed in the Network+
objectives is 802.11ac, which became an approved standard in January of
2014 and can be thought of as an extension of 802.11n. Any device using
this standard must support all the mandatory modes of both 802.11n and
802.11a. The goal of the standard is 500 Mbps with one link and 1.3 Gbps
with multiple links. It has support for up to eight MIMO streams and
increased channel bonding, as well as support for up to four multiuser MIMO
(MU-MIMO) clients. 802.11ac is a 5 GHz-only technology and is available
with most wireless routers sold today.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to answer questions on the specific characteristics of wireless
standards. Performance-based questions might ask you to select or place
the appropriate standard or wireless configuration setting for a particular
scenario.
The Magic Behind 802.11n and 802.11ac
802.11n took the best from the 802.11 standards and mixed in some new features
to take wireless to the next level. First among these new technologies was
multiple input, multiple output (MIMO) antenna technology.

MIMO was unquestionably the biggest development for 802.11n and the key to
the new speeds. Essentially, MIMO uses multiplexing to increase the range and
speed of wireless networking. Multiplexing is a technique that combines
multiple signals for transmission over a single line or medium. MIMO enables
the transmission of multiple data streams traveling on different antennas in the
same channel at the same time. A receiver reconstructs the streams, which have
multiple antennas as well. By using multiple paths, MIMO provides a significant
capacity gain over conventional single-antenna systems, along with more
reliable communication.
While 802.11n can transmit more than one spatial stream at the same time, the
streams are directed to a single address (MIMO). 802.11ac allows for MU-
MIMO to let an AP send multiple frames to multiple clients at the exact same
time (thus allowing the AP to act like a switch instead of just a hub).
In addition to MIMO, 802.11n enabled channel bonding that essentially doubled
the data rate. What is channel bonding? The 802.11b and 802.11g wireless
standards use a single channel to send and receive information. With channel
bonding, you can use two channels at the same time. As you might guess, the
capability to use two channels at once increases performance. Bonding can help
increase wireless transmission rates from the 54 Mbps offered with the 802.11g
standards to a theoretical maximum of 600 Mbps with 802.11n. 802.11n uses the
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) transmission strategy—a
scheme used as a digital multicarrier modulation method in which a large
number of closely spaced orthogonal subcarrier signals are used to carry data on
several parallel data streams or channels. It is discussed in more detail shortly.
802.11ac extends this by increasing the maximum from 40 MHz to 80 MHz
(with hypothetical of 160 MHz). By doubling the channel bandwidth, twice as
much data can be carried in the same time.
Note
In wireless networking, a single channel is 20 MHz in width. When two
channels are bonded, they are a total of 40 MHz. 802.11n systems can use
either the 20 MHz channels or the 40 MHz channel. 802.11ac supports the 20
MHz, 40 MHz, 80 MHz, and 160 MHz channels.
Aggregation is the other big difference, allowing data to be packaged together to
increase speeds. 802.11n brought the technology to the mainstream, and

802.11ac simply builds on it.
A Summary of 802.11 Wireless Standards
Table 1.5 highlights the characteristics of the various 802.11 wireless standards.
TABLE 1.5 802.11 Wireless Standards
IEEE
Standard
Frequency/Medium
Speed
Topology
Transmission
Range
Acce
Meth
802.11
2.4 GHz
1 to 2
Mbps
Ad hoc/
infrastructure
20 feet
indoors
CSM
802.11a
5 GHz
Up to
54
Mbps
Ad hoc/
infrastructure
25 to 75 feet
indoors; range
can be
affected by
building
materials
CSM
802.11b
2.4 GHz
Up to
11
Mbps
Ad hoc/
infrastructure
Up to 150 feet
indoors; range
can be
affected by
building
materials
CSM
802.11g
2.4 GHz
Up to
54
Mbps
Ad hoc/
infrastructure
Up to 150 feet
indoors; range
can be
affected by
building
materials
CSM
802.11n
2.4 GHz/ 5 GHz
Up to
600
Mbps
Ad hoc/
infrastructure
175+ feet
indoors; range
can be
affected by
building
materials
CSM
802.11ac
5 GHz
Up to
Ad hoc/
115+ feet
CSM

1.3
Gbps
infrastructure
indoors; range
can be
affected by
building
materials
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should know the values in Table 1.5.
Spread spectrum refers to the manner in which data signals travel through a
radio frequency. With spread spectrum, data does not travel straight through a
single RF band; this type of transmission is known as narrowband transmission.
Spread spectrum, however, requires that data signals either alternate between
carrier frequencies or constantly change their data pattern. Although the shortest
distance between two points is a straight line (narrowband), spread spectrum is
designed to trade bandwidth efficiency for reliability, integrity, and security.
Spread-spectrum signal strategies use more bandwidth than in the case of
narrowband transmission, but the trade-off is a data signal that is clearer and
easier to detect. The two types of spread-spectrum radio are frequency hopping
and direct sequence.
Table 1.6 compares wireless standards and the spread spectrum used.
TABLE 1.6 Comparison of IEEE 802.11 Standards
IEEE Standard
RF Used
Spread Spectrum
Data Rate (in Mbps)
802.11
2.4 GHz
DSSS
1 or 2
802.11
2.4 GHz
FHSS
1 or 2
802.11a
5 GHz
OFDM
54
802.11b
2.4 GHz
DSSS
11
802.11g
2.4 GHz
DSSS
54
802.11n
2.4/5 GHz
OFDM
600 (theoretical)
802.11ac
5 GHz
OFDM
1300 (theoretical)

Frequency-Hopping Spread-Spectrum Technology
Frequency-hopping spread-spectrum (FHSS) requires the use of narrowband
signals that change frequencies in a predictable pattern. The term frequency
hopping refers to data signals hopping between narrow channels. For example,
consider the 2.4 GHz frequency band used by 802.11b/g. This range is divided
into 70 narrow channels of 1 MHz each. Somewhere between 20 and several
hundred milliseconds, the signal hops to a new channel following a
predetermined cyclical pattern.
Because data signals using FHSS switch between RF bands, they have a strong
resistance to interference and environmental factors. The FHSS signal strategy
makes it well suited for installations designed to cover a large geographic area
and where using directional antennas to minimize the influence of environmental
factors is not possible.
FHSS is not the preferred spread-spectrum technology for today’s wireless
standards. However, FHSS is used for some lesser-used standards and for
cellular deployments for fixed broadband wireless access (BWA), where the use
of DSSS (discussed next) is virtually impossible because of its limitations.
Direct-Sequence Spread-Spectrum (DSSS) Technology
With DSSS transmissions, the signal is spread over a full transmission frequency
spectrum. For every bit of data sent, a redundant bit pattern is also sent. This 32-
bit pattern is called a chip. These redundant bits of data provide both security
and delivery assurance. The reason transmissions are so safe and reliable is
because the system sends so many redundant copies of the data, and only a
single copy is required to have complete transmission of the data or information.
DSSS can minimize the effects of interference and background noise.
As for a comparison between the two, DSSS has the advantage of providing
better security and signal delivery than FHSS, but it is a sensitive technology,
affected by many environmental factors.
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing
Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) is a transmission technique
that transfers large amounts of data over 52 separate, evenly spaced frequencies.
OFDM splits the radio signal into these separate frequencies and simultaneously
transmits them to the receiver. Splitting the signal and transferring over different
frequencies reduces the amount of crosstalk interference. OFDM is associated

with IEEE 802.11a, 802.11g, 802.11n, and 802.11ac wireless standards as well
as 4G mobile phone standards.
A multiuser version of OFDM is orthogonal frequency-division multiple access
(OFDMA). It assigns subsets of subcarriers to individual users to allow for
simultaneous data transmission from multiples users, and it is considered
scalable.
Cram Quiz
1. You are installing a wireless network solution, and you require a standard
that can operate using either 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz frequencies. Which of the
following standards would you choose?
 A. 802.11a
 B. 802.11b
 C. 802.11g
 D. 802.11n
 E. 802.11ac
2. You are installing a wireless network solution that uses a feature known as
MU-MIMO. Which wireless networking standard are you using?
 A. 802.11a
 B. 802.11b
 C. 802.11n
 D. 802.11ac
Cram Quiz Answers
1. D. The IEEE standard 802.11n can use either the 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz radio
frequencies. 802.11a uses 5 GHz, and 802.11b and 802.11g use 2.4 GHz.
802.11ac operates at 5 GHz.
2. D. MU-MIMO is used by the 802.11ac standard and makes multiuser
MIMO possible (increasing the range and speed of wireless networking).
MIMO itself enables the transmission of multiple data streams traveling on
different antennas in the same channel at the same time.

What’s Next?
This chapter created a foundation upon which Chapter 2, “Models, Ports,
Protocols, and Networking Services,” builds. It examines the Open Systems
Interconnect (OSI) reference model—a conceptual model describing how
network architecture allows data to be passed between computer systems. It also
examines how common network devices relate to the model.

CHAPTER 2
Models, 
Ports, 
Protocols, 
and
Networking Services
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Explain the purposes and uses of ports and protocols.
 Explain devices, applications, protocols, and services at their appropriate
OSI layers.
 Explain the functions of network services.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 1.1, 1.2, and 1.8. For
more information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About
the Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
One of the most important networking concepts to understand is the Open
Systems Interconnect (OSI) reference model. This conceptual model, created by
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in 1978 and revised in
1984, describes a network architecture that enables data to be passed between
computer systems.
This chapter looks at the OSI and describes how it relates to real-world
networking. It also examines how common network devices relate to the OSI
model. Even though the OSI model is conceptual, an appreciation of its purpose
and function can help you better understand how protocol suites and network
architectures work in practical applications.
Note
The TCP/IP model, which performs the same functions as the OSI model,
except in four layers instead of seven, is no longer a Network+ objective.
Because this is the protocol suite predominantly in use today, it is still
important to know it to understand the underlying principles of networking.

The OSI Networking Model
 Explain devices, applications, protocols and services at their
appropriate OSI layers.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. Which layer of the OSI model converts data from the application layer
into a format that can be sent over the network?
2. True or false: Transport protocols, such as UDP, map to the transport
layer of the OSI model and are responsible for transporting data across
the network.
3. At what layer of the OSI model do FTP and TFTP map?
Answers
1. The presentation layer converts data from the application layer into a
format that can be sent over the network. It also converts data from the
session layer into a format the application layer can understand.
2. True. Transport protocols map to the transport layer of the OSI model
and are responsible for transporting data across the network. UDP is a
transport protocol.
3. FTP and TFTP map to the application layer of the OSI model.
For networking, two models commonly are referenced: the OSI model and the
TCP/IP model. Both offer a framework, theoretical and actual, for how
networking is implemented. Objective 1.2 of the Network+ exam focuses only
on the OSI model. A thorough discussion of it follows with a brief discussion of
the TCP/IP model tossed in for further understanding.
The OSI Seven-Layer Model

As shown in Figure 2.1, the OSI reference model is built, bottom to top, in the
following order: physical, data link, network, transport, session, presentation,
and application. The physical layer is classified as Layer 1, and the top layer of
the model, the application layer, is Layer 7.
FIGURE 2.1 The OSI seven-layer model
ExamAlert
On the Network+ exam, you might see an OSI layer referenced either by
its name, such as network layer, or by its layer number. For instance, you
might find that a router is referred to as a Layer 3 device. An easy
mnemonic that you can use to remember the layers from top to bottom is:
All People Seem To Need Data Processing.
Each layer of the OSI model has a specific function. The following sections
describe the function of each layer, starting with the physical layer and working
up the model.
Physical Layer (Layer 1)
The physical layer of the OSI model identifies the network’s physical
characteristics, including the following specifications:
 Hardware: The type of media used on the network, such as type of cable,
type of connector, and pinout format for cables.

 Topology: The physical layer identifies the topology to be used in the
network. Common topologies include ring, mesh, star, bus, and hybrid.
Protocols and technologies such as USB, Ethernet, DSL, ISDN, T-carrier links
(T1 and T3), GSM, and SONET operate at the physical layer.
In addition to these characteristics, the physical layer defines the voltage used on
a given medium and the frequency at which the signals that carry the data
operate. These characteristics dictate the speed and bandwidth of a given
medium, as well as the maximum distance over which a certain media type can
be used.
Data Link Layer (Layer 2)
The data link layer is responsible for getting data to the physical layer so that it
can transmit over the network. The data link layer is also responsible for error
detection, error correction, and hardware addressing. The term frame describes
the logical grouping of data at the data link layer.
The data link layer has two distinct sublayers:
 Media Access Control (MAC) layer: The MAC address is defined at this
layer. The MAC address is the physical or hardware address burned into each
network interface card (NIC). The MAC sublayer also controls access to
network media. The MAC layer specification is included in the IEEE 802.1
standard.
 Logical Link Control (LLC) layer: The LLC layer is responsible for the
error and flow-control mechanisms of the data link layer. The LLC layer is
specified in the IEEE 802.2 standard.
Protocols and technologies such as High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC),
Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP), Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), Point-to-
Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP), Spanning Tree Protocol (STP), and virtual
LANs (VLANs) operate at the data link layer.
Network Layer (Layer 3)
The primary responsibility of the network layer is routing—providing
mechanisms by which data can be passed from one network system to another.
The network layer does not specify how the data is passed, but rather provides
the mechanisms to do so. Functionality at the network layer is provided through

routing protocols, which are software components.
Protocols at the network layer are also responsible for route selection, which
refers to determining the best path for the data to take throughout the network. In
contrast to the data link layer, which uses MAC addresses to communicate on the
LAN, network layer protocols use software configured addresses and special
routing protocols to communicate on the network. The term packet describes the
logical grouping of data at the network layer.
When working with networks, routes can be configured in two ways: statically
or dynamically. In a static routing environment, routes are manually added to the
routing tables. In a dynamic routing environment, routing protocols such as
Routing Information Protocol (RIP) and Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) are
used. These protocols communicate routing information between networked
devices on the network. Other important network layer protocols include
Internet Protocol (IP), Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), Reverse Address
Resolution Protocol (RARP), Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM), Intermediate
System-to-Intermediate System (IS-IS), IP Security (IPsec), Internet Control
Message Protocol (ICMP), and Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS).
Transport Layer (Layer 4)
The basic function of the transport layer is to provide mechanisms to transport
data between network devices. Primarily it does this in three ways:
 Error checking: Protocols at the transport layer ensure that data is correctly
sent or received.
 Service addressing: A number of protocols support many network services.
The transport layer ensures that data is passed to the right service at the
upper layers of the OSI model.
 Segmentation: To traverse the network, blocks of data need to be broken
into packets of a manageable size for the lower layers to handle. This
process, called segmentation, is the responsibility of the transport layer.
Protocols that operate at the transport layer can either be connectionless, such as
User Datagram Protocol (UDP), or connection oriented, such as Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP).
The transport layer is also responsible for data flow control, which refers to how
the receiving device can accept data transmissions. Two common methods of
flow control are used:

 Buffering: When buffering flow control is used, data is temporarily stored
and waits for the destination device to become available. Buffering can cause
a problem if the sending device transmits data much faster than the receiving
device can manage.
 Windowing: In a windowing environment, data is sent in groups of
segments that require only one acknowledgment. The size of the window
(that is, how many segments fit into one acknowledgment) is defined when
the session between the two devices is established. As you can imagine, the
need to have only one acknowledgment for every five segments, for instance,
can greatly reduce overhead.
Session Layer (Layer 5)
The session layer is responsible for managing and controlling the
synchronization of data between applications on two devices. It does this by
establishing, maintaining, and breaking sessions. Whereas the transport layer is
responsible for setting up and maintaining the connection between the two
nodes, the session layer performs the same function on behalf of the application.
Protocols that operate at the session layer include NetBIOS, Network File System
(NFS), and Server Message Block (SMB).
Presentation Layer (Layer 6)
The presentation layer’s basic function is to convert the data intended for or
received from the application layer into another format. Such conversion is
necessary because of how data is formatted so that it can be transported across
the network. Applications cannot necessarily read this conversion. Some
common data formats handled by the presentation layer include the following:
 Graphics files: JPEG, TIFF, GIF, and so on are graphics file formats that
require the data to be formatted in a certain way.
 Text and data: The presentation layer can translate data into different
formats, such as American Standard Code for Information Interchange
(ASCII) and Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC).
 Sound/video: MPEG, MP3, and MIDI files all have their own data formats
to and from which data must be converted.
Another important function of the presentation layer is encryption, which is the
scrambling of data so that it can’t be read by anyone other than the intended

recipient. Given the basic role of the presentation layer—that of data-format
translator—it is the obvious place for encryption and decryption to take place.
For example, the cryptographic protocol Transport Layer Security (TLS)
operates at the presentation layer.
Application Layer (Layer 7)
In simple terms, the function of the application layer is to take requests and data
from the users and pass them to the lower layers of the OSI model. Incoming
information is passed to the application layer, which then displays the
information to the users. Some of the most basic application layer services
include file and print capabilities.
The most common misconception about the application layer is that it represents
applications used on a system, such as a web browser, word processor, or
spreadsheet. Instead, the application layer defines the processes that enable
applications to use network services. For example, if an application needs to
open a file from a network drive, the functionality is provided by components
that reside at the application layer. Protocols defined at the application layer
include Secure Shell (SSH), Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol (DHCP), Domain Name System (DNS), Network Time
Protocol (NTP), Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP), Session Initiation Protocol
(SIP), Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), Server Message Block (SMB),
File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Hypertext
Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS), Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP),
and Post Office Protocol version 3 (POP3).
ExamAlert
Be sure you understand the OSI model and its purpose. You will almost
certainly be asked questions on it during the exam.
OSI Model Summary
Table 2.1 summarizes the seven layers of the OSI model and describes some of
the most significant points of each layer.
TABLE 2.1 OSI Model Summary
OSI Layer
Major Function

Physical
(Layer 1)
Defines the physical structure of the network and the topology.
Data link
(Layer 2)
Provides error detection and correction. Uses two distinct
sublayers: the Media Access Control (MAC) and Logical Link
Control (LLC) layers. Identifies the method by which media are
accessed. Defines hardware addressing through the MAC
sublayer.
Network
(Layer 3)
Handles the discovery of destination systems and addressing.
Provides the mechanism by which data can be passed and routed
from one network system to another.
Transport
(Layer 4)
Provides connection services between the sending and receiving
devices and ensures reliable data delivery. Manages flow control
through buffering or windowing. Provides segmentation, error
checking, and service identification.
Session
(Layer 5)
Synchronizes the data exchange between applications on separate
devices.
Presentation
(Layer 6)
Translates data from the format used by applications into one that
can be transmitted across the network. Handles encryption and
decryption of data. Provides compression and decompression
functionality. Formats data from the application layer into a
format that can be sent over the network.
Application
(Layer 7)
Provides access to the network for applications.
Comparing OSI to the Four-Layer TCP/IP
Model
The OSI model does a fantastic job outlining how networking should occur and
the responsibility of each layer. However, TCP/IP has also has a reference model
and has to perform the same functionality with only four layers. Figure 2.2
shows how these four layers line up with the seven layers of the OSI model.

FIGURE 2.2 The TCP/IP model compared to the OSI model
The network interface layer in the TCP/IP model is sometimes referred to as the
network access or link layer, and this is where Ethernet, FDDI, or any other
physical technology can run. The Internet layer is where IP runs (along with
ICMP and others). The transport layer is where TCP and its counterpart UDP
operate. The application layer enables any number of protocols to be plugged in,
such as HTTP, SMTP, Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), DNS,
and many others.
Identifying the OSI Layers at Which Various
Network Components Operate
When you understand the OSI model, you can relate network connectivity
devices to the appropriate layer of the OSI model. Knowing at which OSI layer a
device operates enables you to better understand how it functions on the
network. Table 2.2 identifies various network devices and maps them to the OSI
model.
ExamAlert
For the Network+ exam, you are expected to identify at which layer of the
OSI model certain network devices operate.
TABLE 2.2 Mapping Network Devices to the OSI Model
Device
OSI Layer

Hub
Physical (Layer 1)
Wireless bridge
Data link (Layer 2)
Switch
Data link (Layer 2) or network (Layer 3)
Router
Network (Layer 3)
NIC
Data link (Layer 2)
Access point (AP)
Data link (Layer 2)
Cram Quiz
1. At which OSI layer does an AP operate?
 A. Network
 B. Physical
 C. Data link
 D. Session
2. Which of the following are sublayers of the data link layer? (Choose two.)
 A. MAC
 B. LCL
 C. Session
 D. LLC
3. At which two OSI layers can a switch operate? (Choose two.)
 A. Layer 1
 B. Layer 2
 C. Layer 3
 D. Layer 4
4. Which of the following OSI layers is responsible for establishing
connections between two devices?
 A. Network

 B. Transport
 C. Session
 D. Data link
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. A wireless access point (AP) operates at the data link layer of the OSI
model. An example of a network layer device is a router. An example of a
physical layer device is a hub. Session layer components normally are
software, not hardware.
2. A, D. The data link layer is broken into two distinct sublayers: Media
Access Control (MAC) and Logical Link Control (LLC). LCL is not a valid
term. Session is another of the OSI model layers.
3. B, C. A switch uses the MAC addresses of connected devices to make its
forwarding decisions. Therefore, it is called a data link, or Layer 2, network
device. It can also operate at Layer 3 or be a multilayer switch. Devices or
components that operate at Layer 1 typically are media based, such as cables
or connectors. Layer 4 components typically are software based, not
hardware based.
4. B. The transport layer is responsible for establishing a connection between
networked devices. The network layer is most commonly associated with
route discovery and datagram delivery. Protocols at the session layer
synchronize the data exchange between applications on separate devices.
Protocols at the data link layer perform error detection and handling for the
transmitted signals and define the method by which the medium is accessed.
Ports and Protocols
 Explain the purposes and uses of ports and protocols.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.

1. With TCP, a data session is established through a three-step process.
This is known as a three-way _____.
2. What FTP command uploads multiple files to the remote host?
3. The SSH protocol is a more secure alternative to what protocol?
4. What ports do the HTTPS, RDP, and DHCP protocols use?
Answers
1. This is known as a three-way handshake.
2. The mput command uploads multiple files to the remote host in FTP.
3. SSH is a more secure alternative to Telnet.
4. HTTPS uses port 443, RDP uses port 3389, and DHCP uses ports 67 and
68.
When computers were restricted to standalone systems, there was little need for
mechanisms to communicate between them. However, it wasn’t long before the
need to connect computers for the purpose of sharing files and printers became a
necessity. Establishing communication between network devices required more
than a length of cabling; a method or a set of rules was needed to establish how
systems would communicate. Protocols provide that method.
It would be nice if a single protocol facilitated communication between all
devices, but this is not the case. You can use a number of protocols on a network,
each of which has its own features, advantages, and disadvantages. What
protocol you choose can have a significant impact on the network’s functioning
and performance. This section explores some of the more common protocols you
can expect to work with as a network administrator.
Connection-Oriented 
Protocols 
Versus
Connectionless Protocols
Before getting into the characteristics of the various network protocols and
protocol suites, you must first identify the difference between connection-
oriented and connectionless protocols.
In a connection-oriented communication, data delivery is guaranteed. The

sending device resends any packet that the destination system does not receive.
Communication between the sending and receiving devices continues until the
transmission has been verified. Because of this, connection-oriented protocols
have a higher overhead and place greater demands on bandwidth.
ExamAlert
Connection-oriented protocols such as TCP can accommodate lost or
dropped packets by asking the sending device to retransmit them. They
can do this because they wait for all the packets in a message to be
received before considering the transmission complete. On the sending
end, connection-oriented protocols also assume that a lack of
acknowledgment is sufficient reason to retransmit.
In contrast to connection-oriented communication, connectionless protocols such
as User Datagram Protocol (UDP) offer only a best-effort delivery mechanism.
Basically, the information is just sent; there is no confirmation that the data has
been received. If an error occurs in the transmission, there is no mechanism to
resend the data, so transmissions made with connectionless protocols are not
guaranteed. Connectionless communication requires far less overhead than
connection-oriented communication, so it is popular in applications such as
streaming audio and video, where a small number of dropped packets might not
represent a significant problem.
ExamAlert
As you work through the various protocols, keep an eye out for those that
are connectionless and those that are connection oriented. Also, look for
protocols such as TCP that guarantee delivery of data and those such as
UDP that are a fire-and-forget or best-delivery method.
Internet Protocol
Internet Protocol (IP), which is defined in RFC 791, is the protocol used to
transport data from one node on a network to another. IP is connectionless,
which means that it doesn’t guarantee the delivery of data; it simply makes its
best effort to do so. To ensure that transmissions sent via IP are completed, a

higher-level protocol such as TCP is required.
Note
In this chapter and throughout the book, the term Request For Comments
(RFC) is used. RFCs are standards published by the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF) and describe methods, behaviors, research, or innovations
applicable to the operation of the Internet and Internet-connected systems.
Each new RFC has an associated reference number. Looking up this number
gives you information on the specific technology. For more information on
RFCs, look for the Internet Engineering Task Force online.
ExamAlert
IP operates at the network layer of the OSI model.
In addition to providing best-effort delivery, IP also performs fragmentation and
reassembly tasks for network transmissions. Fragmentation is necessary because
the maximum transmission unit (MTU) size is limited in IP. In other words,
network transmissions that are too big to traverse the network in a single packet
must be broken into smaller chunks and reassembled at the other end. Another
function of IP is addressing. IP addressing is a complex subject. Refer to Chapter
3, “Addressing, Routing, and Switching,” for a complete discussion of IP
addressing.
Transmission Control Protocol
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), which is defined in RFC 793, is a
connection-oriented transport layer protocol. Being connection oriented means
that TCP establishes a mutually acknowledged session between two hosts before
communication takes place. TCP provides reliability to IP communications.
Specifically, TCP adds features such as flow control, sequencing, and error
detection and correction. For this reason, higher-level applications that need
guaranteed delivery use TCP rather than its lightweight and connectionless
brother, UDP.
How TCP Works

When TCP wants to open a connection with another host, it follows this
procedure:
1. It sends a message called a SYN to the target host.
2. The target host opens a connection for the request and sends back an
acknowledgment message called an ACK (or SYN ACK).
3. The host that originated the request sends back another acknowledgment,
saying that it has received the ACK message and that the session is ready to
be used to transfer data.
When the data session is completed, a similar process is used to close the
session. This three-step session establishment and acknowledgment process is
called the TCP three-way handshake.
ExamAlert
TCP operates at the transport layer of the OSI model.
TCP is a reliable protocol because it has mechanisms that can accommodate and
handle errors. These mechanisms include timeouts, which cause the sending host
to automatically retransmit data if its receipt is not acknowledged within a given
time period.
User Datagram Protocol
User Datagram Protocol (UDP), which is defined in RFC 768, is the brother of
TCP. Like TCP, UDP is a transport protocol, but the big difference is that UDP
does not guarantee delivery like TCP does. In a sense, UDP is a “fire-and-forget”
protocol; it assumes that the data sent will reach its destination intact. The
checking of whether data is delivered is left to upper-layer protocols. UDP
operates at the transport layer of the OSI model.
Unlike TCP, with UDP no session is established between the sending and
receiving hosts, which is why UDP is called a connectionless protocol. The
upshot of this is that UDP has much lower overhead than TCP. A TCP packet
header has 14 fields, whereas a UDP packet header has only four fields.
Therefore, UDP is much more efficient than TCP. In applications that don’t need
the added features of TCP, UDP is much more economical in terms of bandwidth

and processing effort.
ExamAlert
Remember that TCP is a connection-oriented protocol and UDP is a
connectionless protocol.
File Transfer Protocol
As its name suggests, File Transfer Protocol (FTP) provides for the uploading
and downloading of files from a remote host running FTP server software. As
well as uploading and downloading files, FTP enables you to view the contents
of folders on an FTP server and rename and delete files and directories if you
have the necessary permissions. FTP, which is defined in RFC 959, uses TCP as
a transport protocol to guarantee delivery of packets.
FTP has security mechanisms used to authenticate users. However, rather than
create a user account for every user, you can configure FTP server software to
accept anonymous logons. When you do this, the username is anonymous, and
the password normally is the user’s email address. Most FTP servers that offer
files to the general public operate in this way.
In addition to being popular as a mechanism for distributing files to the general
public over networks such as the Internet, FTP is also popular with organizations
that need to frequently exchange large files with other people or organizations.
For example, the chapters in this book were sent between the author and Pearson
using FTP. Such a system is necessary because the files exchanged were
sometimes larger than can be easily accommodated using email. A number of
apps/programs are available that simplify the process. For example, FileZilla is a
cross-platform graphical FTP, SFTP, and FTPS file management tool for
Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, and more (more information on FileZilla can be
found at https://sourceforge.net/projects/filezilla/)
ExamAlert
Remember that FTP is an application layer protocol. FTP uses ports 20
and 21 and sends information unencrypted, making it unsecure.

All the common network operating systems offer FTP server capabilities;
however, whether you use them depends on whether you need FTP services. All
popular workstation operating systems offer FTP client functionality, although it
is common to use third-party utilities such as FileZilla (mentioned earlier),
CuteFTP, or SmartFTP instead. By default, FTP operates on ports 20 and 21.
FTP assumes that files uploaded or downloaded are straight text (that is, ASCII)
files. If the files are not text, which is likely, the transfer mode must be changed
to binary. With sophisticated FTP clients, such as CuteFTP, the transition
between transfer modes is automatic. With more basic utilities, you must
manually perform the mode switch.
Unlike some of the other protocols discussed in this chapter that perform tasks
transparent to the user, FTP is an application layer service frequently called
upon. Therefore, it can be useful to know some of the commands supported by
FTP. If you use a client such as CuteFTP, you might never need to use these
commands, but they are useful to know in case you use a command-line FTP
client. Table 2.3 lists some of the most commonly used FTP commands.
ExamAlert
You might be asked to identify the appropriate FTP command to use in a
given situation.
TABLE 2.3 Commonly Used FTP Commands
Command
Description
ls
Lists the files in the current directory on the remote system
cd
Changes the working directory on the remote host
lcd
Changes the working directory on the local host
put
Uploads a single file to the remote host
get
Downloads a single file from the remote host
mput
Uploads multiple files to the remote host
mget
Downloads multiple files from the remote host
binary
Switches transfers into binary mode

ascii
Switches transfers into ASCII mode (the default)
Secure File Transfer Protocol
One of the big problems associated with FTP is that it is considered unsecure.
Even though simple authentication methods are associated with FTP, it is still
susceptible to relatively simple hacking approaches. In addition, FTP transmits
data between sender and receiver in an unencrypted format. By using a packet
sniffer, a hacker could easily copy packets from the network and read the
contents. In today’s high-security computing environments, you need a more
robust solution.
That solution is the Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), which, based on
Secure Shell (SSH) technology, provides robust authentication between sender
and receiver. It also provides encryption capabilities, which means that even if
packets are copied from the network, their contents remain hidden from prying
eyes.
SFTP is implemented through client and server software available for all
commonly used computing platforms. SFTP uses port 22 (the same port SSH
uses) for secure file transfers.
Trivial File Transfer Protocol
A variation on FTP is Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP), which is also a file
transfer mechanism. However, TFTP does not have the security capability or the
level of functionality that FTP has. TFTP, which is defined in RFC 1350, is most
often associated with simple downloads, such as those associated with
transferring firmware to a device such as a router and booting diskless
workstations.
Another feature that TFTP does not offer is directory navigation. Whereas in
FTP, commands can be executed to navigate and manage the file system, TFTP
offers no such capability. TFTP requires that you request not only exactly what
you want but also the particular location. Unlike FTP, which uses TCP as its
transport protocol to guarantee delivery, TFTP uses UDP. By default, TFTP
operates on port 69.
ExamAlert

TFTP is an application layer protocol that uses UDP, which is a
connectionless transport layer protocol. For this reason, TFTP is called a
connectionless file transfer method.
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), which is defined in RFC 821, is a
protocol that defines how mail messages are sent between hosts. SMTP uses
TCP connections to guarantee error-free delivery of messages. SMTP is not
overly sophisticated and requires that the destination host always be available.
For this reason, mail systems spool incoming mail so that users can read it later.
How the user then reads the mail depends on how the client accesses the SMTP
server. The default port used by SMTP is 25.
Note
SMTP can be used to both send and receive mail. Post Office Protocol version
3 (POP3) and Internet Message Access Protocol version 4 (IMAP4) can be
used only to receive mail.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which is defined in RFC 2068, is the
protocol that enables text, graphics, multimedia, and other material to be
downloaded from an HTTP server. HTTP defines what actions can be requested
by clients and how servers should answer those requests.
In a practical implementation, HTTP clients (that is, web browsers) make
requests on port 80 in an HTTP format to servers running HTTP server
applications (that is, web servers). Files created in a special language such as
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) are returned to the client, and the
connection is closed.
ExamAlert
Make sure that you understand that HTTP is a connection-oriented
protocol that uses TCP as a transport protocol. By default, it operates at
port 80.

HTTP uses a uniform resource locator (URL) to determine what page should be
downloaded from the remote server. The URL contains the type of request (for
example, http://), the name of the server contacted (for example,
www.microsoft.com), and optionally the page requested (for example, /support).
The result is the syntax that Internet-savvy people are familiar with:
http://www.microsoft.com/support.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
One of the downsides of using HTTP is that HTTP requests are sent in clear text.
For some applications, such as e-commerce, this method to exchange
information is unsuitable—a more secure method is needed. The solution is
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS), which uses a system known as
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), which encrypts the information sent between the
client and host. The port changes from 80 (HTTP’s default) to 443.
For HTTPS to be used, both the client and server must support it. All popular
browsers now support HTTPS, as do web server products, such as Microsoft
Internet Information Services (IIS), Apache, and almost all other web server
applications that provide sensitive applications. When you access an application
that uses HTTPS, the URL starts with https rather than http—for example,
https://www.mybankonline.com.
Post Office Protocol Version 3/Internet Message
Access Protocol Version 4
Both Post Office Protocol Version 3 (POP3), which is defined in RFC 1939, and
Internet Message Access Protocol Version 4 (IMAP4), the latest version which is
defined in RFC 1731, are mechanisms for downloading, or pulling, email from a
server. They are necessary because although the mail is transported around the
network via SMTP, users cannot always immediately read it, so it must be stored
in a central location. From this location, it needs to be downloaded or retrieved,
which is what POP3 and IMAP4 enable you to do.
POP3 and IMAP4 are popular, and many people access email through
applications that are POP3 and IMAP4 clients. The default port for POP3 is 110
and for IMAP4, the default port is 143.
One of the problems with POP3 is that the password used to access a mailbox is
transmitted across the network in clear text. This means that if people want to,

they could determine your POP3 password with relative ease. This is an area in
which IMAP4 offers an advantage over POP3. It uses a more sophisticated
authentication system, which makes it more difficult for people to determine a
password.
ExamAlert
POP3 and IMAP4 can be used to download, or pull, email from a server,
but they cannot be used to send mail. That function is left to SMTP, which
can both send and receive. Also remember, POP3 uses port 110 and
IMAP4 uses port 143.
Note
Although accessing email by using POP3 and IMAP4 has many advantages,
such systems rely on servers to hold the mail until it is downloaded to the
client system. In today’s world, a more sophisticated solution to
anytime/anywhere email access is needed. For many people, that solution is
web-based mail. Having an Internet-based email account enables you to
access your mail from anywhere and from any device that supports a web
browser. Recognizing the obvious advantages of such a system, all the major
email systems have, for some time, included web access gateway products.
Telnet
Telnet, which is defined in RFC 854, is a virtual terminal protocol. It enables
sessions to be opened on a remote host, and then commands can be executed on
that remote host. For many years, Telnet was the method by which clients
accessed multiuser systems such as mainframes and minicomputers. It also was
the connection method of choice for UNIX systems. Today, Telnet is still used to
access routers and other managed network devices. By default, Telnet operates
on port 23.
One of the problems with Telnet is that it is not secure. As a result, remote
session functionality is now almost always achieved by using alternatives such
as SSH.

ExamAlert
Telnet is used to access UNIX and Linux systems. Telnet uses port 23 and
is insecure. SSH is considered the secure replacement for Telnet.
Secure Shell
Created by students at the Helsinki University of Technology, Secure Shell (SSH)
is a secure alternative to Telnet. SSH provides security by encrypting data as it
travels between systems. This makes it difficult for hackers using packet sniffers
and other traffic-detection systems. It also provides more robust authentication
systems than Telnet.
Two versions of SSH are available: SSH1 and SSH2. Of the two, SSH2 is
considered more secure. The two versions are incompatible. If you use an SSH
client program, the server implementation of SSH that you connect to must be
the same version. By default, SSH operates on port 22.
Although SSH, like Telnet, is associated primarily with UNIX and Linux
systems, implementations of SSH are available for all commonly used
computing platforms, including Windows and Mac OS. As discussed earlier,
SSH is the foundational technology for Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP).
ExamAlert
Remember that SSH uses port 22 and is a more secure alternative to
Telnet.
Internet Control Message Protocol
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), which is defined in RFC 792, is a
protocol that works with the IP layer to provide error checking and reporting
functionality. In effect, ICMP is a tool that IP uses in its quest to provide best-
effort delivery.
ICMP can be used for a number of functions. Its most common function is
probably the widely used and incredibly useful ping utility, which can send a
stream of ICMP echo requests to a remote host. If the host can respond, it does

so by sending echo reply messages back to the sending host. In that one simple
process, ICMP enables the verification of the protocol suite configuration of both
the sending and receiving nodes and any intermediate networking devices.
However, ICMP’s functionality is not limited to the use of the ping utility. ICMP
also can return error messages such as “Destination unreachable” and “Time
exceeded.” (The former message is reported when a destination cannot be
contacted and the latter when the Time To Live [TTL] of a datagram has been
exceeded.)
In addition to these and other functions, ICMP performs source quench. In a
source quench scenario, the receiving host cannot handle the influx of data at the
same rate as the data is sent. To slow down the sending host, the receiving host
sends ICMP source quench messages, telling the sender to slow down. This
action prevents packets from dropping and having to be re-sent.
ICMP is a useful protocol. Although ICMP operates largely in the background,
the ping utility makes it one of the most valuable of the protocols discussed in
this chapter.
Network Time Protocol
Network Time Protocol (NTP), which is defined in RFC 958, is the part of the
TCP/IP protocol suite that facilitates the communication of time between
systems. NTP operates over UDP port 123. The idea is that one system
configured as a time provider transmits time information to other systems that
can be both time receivers and time providers for other systems.
Time synchronization is important in today’s IT environment because of the
distributed nature of applications. Two good examples of situations in which
time synchronization is important are email and directory services systems. In
each of these cases, having time synchronized between devices is important
because without it there would be no way to keep track of changes to data and
applications.
In many environments, external time sources such as radio clocks, Global
Positioning System (GPS) devices, and Internet-based time servers are used as
sources of NTP time. In others, the system’s BIOS clock is used. Regardless of
what source is used, the time information is communicated between devices by
using NTP.

Note
Specific guidelines dictate how NTP should be used. You can find these “rules
of 
engagement” 
at
http://support.ntp.org/bin/view/Servers/RulesOfEngagement.
ExamAlert
Remember that NTP is used for time synchronization and is implemented
over UDP port 123.
NTP server and client software is available for a variety of platforms and
devices. If you want a way to ensure time synchronization between devices, look
to NTP as a solution.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) is a protocol that provides a
mechanism to access and query directory services systems. LDAP uses port 389.
In the context of the Network+ exam, these directory services systems are most
likely to be UNIX/Linux based or Microsoft Active Directory based. Although
LDAP supports command-line queries executed directly against the directory
database, most LDAP interactions are via utilities such as an authentication
program (network logon) or locating a resource in the directory through a search
utility.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol over SSL (LDAPS), also known as Secure
LDAP adds an additional layer of security. It operates at port 636 and differs
from LDAP in two ways: 1) upon connection, the client and server establish TLS
session before any LDAP messages are transferred (without a start operation)
and 2) the LDAPS connection must be closed if TLS closes.
ExamAlert
Remember that LDAP uses port 389, and LDAPS (secure LDAP) uses
port 636.

H.323
H.323 is a widely accepted ITU-T standard that addresses call, multimedia, and
bandwidth control for voice and videoconferencing. It operates at port 1720 and
the standard addresses call signaling and control, multimedia transport and
control, and bandwidth control for point-to-point and multi-point conferences.
Simple Network Management Protocol
The Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) uses port 161. It enables
network devices to communicate information about their state to a central
system. It also enables the central system to pass configuration parameters to the
devices.
ExamAlert
SNMP uses port 161. It is a protocol that facilitates network management
functionality. It is not, in itself, a network management system (NMS),
simply the protocol that makes NMS possible.
Components of SNMP
In an SNMP configuration, a central system known as a manager acts as the
central communication point for all the SNMP-enabled devices on the network.
On each device to be managed and monitored via SNMP, software called an
SNMP agent is set up and configured with the manager’s IP address. Depending
on the configuration, the SNMP manager then communicates with and retrieves
information from the devices running the SNMP agent software. In addition, the
agent can communicate the occurrence of certain events to the SNMP manager
as they happen. These messages are known as traps. Figure 2.3 shows how an
SNMP system works.

FIGURE 2.3 How SNMP works
As Figure 2.3 illustrates, there are a number of components to SNMP. The
following discussion looks at the management system, the agents, the
management information base, and communities.
SNMP Management Systems
An SNMP management system is a computer running a special piece of software
called a network management system (NMS). These software applications can be
free, or they can cost thousands of dollars. The difference between the free
applications and those that cost a great deal of money normally boils down to
functionality and support. All NMS applications, regardless of cost, offer the
same basic functionality. Today, most NMS applications use graphical maps of
the network to locate a device and then query it. The queries are built in to the
application and are triggered by pointing and clicking. You can issue SNMP
requests from a command-line utility, but with so many tools available, this is
unnecessary.
Note
Some people call SNMP managers or NMSs trap managers. This reference is
misleading, however, because an NMS can do more than just accept trap

messages from agents.
Using SNMP and an NMS, you can monitor all the devices on a network,
including switches, hubs, routers, servers, and printers, as well as any device that
supports SNMP, from a single location. Using SNMP, you can see the amount of
free disk space on a server in Jakarta or reset the interface on a router in Helsinki
—all from the comfort of your desk in San Jose. Such power, though, brings
with it some considerations. For example, because an NMS enables you to
reconfigure network devices, or at least get information from them, it is common
practice to implement an NMS on a secure workstation platform such as a Linux
or Windows server and to place the NMS PC in a secure location.
SNMP Agents
Although the SNMP manager resides on a PC or server, each device that is part
of the SNMP structure also needs to have SNMP functionality enabled. This is
performed through a software component called an agent.
An SNMP agent can be any device that can run a small software component that
facilitates communication with an SNMP manager. SNMP agent functionality is
supported by almost any device designed to be connected to a network.
In addition to providing a mechanism for managers to communicate with them,
agents can tell SNMP managers when a threshold is surpassed. When this
happens, on a device running an SNMP agent, a trap is sent to the NMS, and the
NMS then performs an action, depending on the configuration. Basic NMS
systems might sound an alarm or flash a message on the screen. Other more
advanced products might dial a cell phone or send an email message.
Management Information Bases
Although the SNMP trap system might be the most commonly used aspect of
SNMP, manager-to-agent communication is not a one-way street. In addition to
reading information from a device using the SNMP commands Get and Get
Next, SNMP managers can issue the Set command. If you have a large
sequence of Get Next commands to perform, you can use the Walk command
to automatically move through them. The purpose of this command is to save a
manager’s time: you issue one command on the root node of a subtree, and the
command “walks” through, getting the value of every node in the subtree.
To demonstrate how SNMP commands work, imagine that you and a friend each

have a list on which the following four words are written: four, book, sky, and
table. If you, as the manager, ask your friend for the first value, she, acting as the
agent, can reply “four.” This is analogous to an SNMP Get command. Now, if
you ask for the next value, she would reply “book.” This is analogous to an
SNMP Get Next command. If you then say “set green,” and your friend
changes the word book to green, you have performed the equivalent of an SNMP
Set command. Sound simplistic? If you can imagine expanding the list to
include 100 values, you can see how you could navigate and set any parameter
in the list, using just those commands. The key, though, is to make sure that you
and your friend have exactly the same list—which is where Management
Information Bases (MIBs) come in.
SNMP uses databases of information called MIBs to define what parameters are
accessible, which of the parameters are read-only, and which can be set. MIBs
are available for thousands of devices and services, covering every imaginable
need.
To ensure that SNMP systems offer cross-platform compatibility, MIB creation
is controlled by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). An
organization that wants to create a MIB can apply to the ISO. The ISO then
assigns the organization an ID under which it can create MIBs as it sees fit. The
assignment of numbers is structured within a conceptual model called the
hierarchical name tree.
SNMP Communities
Another feature of SNMP that enables manageability is communities. SNMP
communities are logical groupings of systems. When a system is configured as
part of a community, it communicates only with other devices that have the same
community name. In addition, it accepts Get, Get Next, or Set commands
only from an SNMP manager with a community name it recognizes. Typically,
two communities are defined by default: a public community, intended for read-
only use, and a private community, intended for read-and-write operations.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should understand the SNMP concepts of Get, Trap,
Walk, and MIBS.

Whether you use SNMP depends on how many devices you have and how
distributed your network infrastructure is. Even in environments that have just a
few devices, SNMP can be useful because it can act as your eyes and ears,
notifying you if a problem on the network occurs.
SNMPv3
SNMP, which runs by default on port 161, is now on its third version, and this
version has some significant differences. One of the most noticeable changes is
that, unlike SNMPv1 and SNMPv2, SNMPv3 supports authentication and
encryption:
 Authentication: Authentication protocols ensure that the message is from a
valid source.
 Encryption: Encryption protocols ensure that data cannot be read by
unintended sources.
ExamAlert
You might be asked to know the differences between SNMPv2 and
SNMPv3. Remember, SNMPv3 supports authentication and encryption.
Session Initiation Protocol
Long-distance calls are expensive, in part because it is costly to maintain phone
lines and employ technicians to keep those phones ringing. Voice over IP (VoIP)
provides a cheaper alternative for phone service. VoIP technology enables
regular voice conversations to occur by traveling through IP packets and via the
Internet. VoIP avoids the high cost of regular phone calls by using the existing
infrastructure of the Internet. No monthly bills or expensive long-distance
charges are required. But how does it work?
Like every other type of network communication, VoIP requires protocols to
make the magic happen. For VoIP, one such protocol is Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP), which is an application layer protocol designed to establish and
maintain multimedia sessions, such as Internet telephony calls. This means that
SIP 
can 
create 
communication 
sessions 
for 
such 
features 
as
audio/videoconferencing, online gaming, and person-to-person conversations
over the Internet. SIP does not operate alone; it uses TCP or UDP as a transport

protocol. Remember, TCP enables guaranteed delivery of data packets, whereas
UDP is a fire-and-forget transfer protocol. The default ports for SIP are 5060 and
5061.
ExamAlert
SIP operates at the application layer of the OSI model and is used to
maintain a multimedia session. SIP uses ports 5060 and 5061.
Tip
SIP also includes a suite of security services, which include denial-of-service
prevention, authentication (both user-to-user and proxy-to-user), integrity
protection, and encryption and privacy services.
Remote Desktop Protocol
Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) is used in a Windows environment for remote
connections. It operates, by default, on port 3389. Remote Desktop Services
(RDS, formally known as Terminal Services) provides a way for a client system
to connect to a server, such as Windows Server, and, by using RDP, operate on
the server as if it were a local client application. Such a configuration is known
as thin client computing, whereby client systems use the resources of the server
instead of their local processing power.
Windows Server products and recent Windows client systems have built-in
support for remote connections using the Windows program Remote Desktop
Connection. The underlying protocol used to manage the connection is RDP.
RDP is a low-bandwidth protocol used to send mouse movements, keystrokes,
and bitmap images of the screen on the server to the client computer. RDP does
not actually send data over the connection—only screenshots and client
keystrokes.
Server Message Block
Server Message Block (SMB) is used on a network for providing access to
resources such as files, printers, ports, and so on that are running on Windows. If

you were wanting to connect Linux-based hosts to Windows-shared printers, for
example, you would need to implement support for SMB; it runs, by default, on
port 445.
One of the most common ways of implementing SMB support is by running
Samba.
Understanding Port Functions
As protocols were mentioned in this chapter, the default ports were also given.
Each TCP/IP or application has at least one default port associated with it. When
a communication is received, the target port number is checked to determine
which protocol or service it is destined for. The request is then forwarded to that
protocol or service. For example, consider HTTP, whose assigned port number is
80. When a web browser forms a request for a web page, that request is sent to
port 80 on the target system. When the target system receives the request, it
examines the port number. When it sees that the port is 80, it forwards the
request to the web server application.
TCP/IP has 65,535 ports available, with 0 to 1023 labeled as the well-known
ports. Although a detailed understanding of the 65,535 ports is not necessary for
the Network+ exam, you need to understand the numbers of some well-known
ports. Network administration often requires you to specify port assignments
when you work with applications and configure services. Table 2.4 shows some
of the most common port assignments.
Note
Both DNS and DHCP appear in the table but were not discussed in this
section. To avoid overlap with the discussion of the objectives, they are
discussed in depth later in this chapter.
ExamAlert
You should concentrate on the information provided in Table 2.4 and
apply it to any port-related questions you might receive on the exam. For
example, the exam may present you with a situation in which you can’t
access a particular service; you may have to determine whether a port is
open or closed on a firewall.

TABLE 2.4 TCP/UDP Port Assignments for Commonly Used Protocols
Protocol
Port Assignment
TCP Ports
 
FTP
20
FTP
21
SSH/SFTP
22
Telnet
23
SMTP
25
DNS
53
HTTP
80
POP3
110
NTP
123
IMAP4
143
LDAP
389
HTTPS
443
SMB
445
LDAPS
636
H.323
1720
RDP
3389
SIP
5060
SIP
5061
UDP Ports
 
DNS
53
DHCP (and BOOTP server)
67
DHCP (and BOOTP client)
68
TFTP
69

SNMP
161
RDP
3389
SIP
5060
ExamAlert
The term well-known ports identifies the ports ranging from 0 to 1023.
When CompTIA says to “identify the well-known ports,” this is what it
refers to.
Note
You might have noticed in Table 2.4 that two ports are associated with FTP
(and some other protocols, as well). With FTP, port 20 is considered the data
port, and port 21 is considered the control port. In practical use, FTP
connections use port 21. Port 20 is rarely used in modern implementations.
ARP and RARP
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), which is defined in RFC 826, is responsible
for resolving IP addresses to Media Access Control (MAC) addresses. When a
system attempts to contact another host, IP first determines whether the other
host is on the same network it is on by looking at the IP address. If IP determines
that the destination is on the local network, it consults the ARP cache to see
whether it has a corresponding entry. The ARP cache is a table on the local
system that stores mappings between data link layer addresses (the MAC address
or physical address) and network layer addresses (IP addresses). Following is a
sample of the ARP cache:
Click here to view code image
Interface: 192.168.1.66 --- 0x8
Internet Address    Physical Address    Type
192.168.1.65        00-1c-c0-17-41-c8   dynamic
192.168.1.67        00-22-68-cb-e2-f9   dynamic
192.168.1.254       00-18-d1-95-f6-02   dynamic
224.0.0.2           01-00-5e-00-00-02   static
239.255.255.250     01-00-5e-7f-ff-fa   static

If the ARP cache does not have an entry for the host, a broadcast on the local
network asks the host with the target IP address to send back its MAC address.
The communication is sent as a broadcast because without the target system’s
MAC address, the source system cannot communicate directly with the target
system.
Because the communication is a broadcast, every system on the network picks it
up. However, only the target system replies because it is the only device whose
IP address matches the request. The target system, recognizing that the ARP
request is targeted at it, replies directly to the source system. It can do this
because the ARP request contains the MAC address of the system that sent it. If
the destination host is determined to be on a different subnet than the sending
host, the ARP process is performed against the default gateway and then
repeated for each step of the journey between the sending and receiving host.
Table 2.5 lists the common switches used with the arp command.
ExamAlert
ARP links IP addressing to Ethernet addressing (MAC addressing).
TABLE 2.5 Commonly Used arp Command Switches
Switch
Description
-a
Displays the entries in the ARP cache
-s
Manually adds a permanent entry to the ARP cache
-d
Deletes an entry from the ARP cache
When you work with the ARP cache, you can dynamically or statically make
entries. With dynamic entries, the ARP cache is automatically updated. The ARP
cache is maintained with no intervention from the user. Dynamic entries are the
ones most used. Static entries are configured manually using the arp -s
command. The static entry becomes a permanent addition to the ARP cache until
it is removed using the arp -d command.
Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP) performs the same function as
ARP, but in reverse. In other words, it resolves MAC addresses to IP addresses.
RARP makes it possible for applications or systems to learn their own IP address
from a router or Domain Name Service (DNS) server. Such a resolution is useful

for tasks such as performing reverse lookups in DNS. RARP is defined in RFC
903.
Tip
The function of ARP is to resolve a system’s IP address to the interface’s
MAC address on that system. Do not confuse ARP with DNS or WINS, which
also perform resolution functions, but for different things.
Cram Quiz
1. TCP is an example of what kind of transport protocol?
 A. Connection oriented
 B. Connection reliant
 C. Connection dependent
 D. Connectionless
2. Which of the following are considered transport protocols? (Choose the two
best answers.)
 A. TCP
 B. IP
 C. UDP
 D. THC
3. What is the function of ARP?
 A. It resolves MAC addresses to IP addresses.
 B. It resolves NetBIOS names to IP addresses.
 C. It resolves IP addresses to MAC addresses.
 D. It resolves hostnames to IP addresses.
4. What is the function of NTP?

 A. It provides a mechanism for the sharing of authentication
information.
 B. It is used to access shared folders on a Linux system.
 C. It is used to communicate utilization information to a central
manager.
 D. It is used to communicate time synchronization information between
systems.
5. Which of the following protocols offers guaranteed delivery?
 A. FTP
 B. POP
 C. IP
 D. TCP
x
6. Which of the following ports are associated with H.323?
 A. 443
 B. 1720
 C. 636
 D. 3389
7. By default, which protocol uses port 68?
 A. DHCP
 B. DNS
 C. SMB
 D. SMTP
8. What are SNMP databases called?
 A. HOSTS
 B. MIBs
 C. WINS

 D. Agents
9. What are logical groupings of SNMP systems known as?
 A. Communities
 B. Pairs
 C. Mirrors
 D. Nodes
10. What are two features supported in SNMPv3 and not previous versions?
 A. Authentication
 B. Dynamic mapping
 C. Platform independence
 D. Encryption
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. TCP is an example of a connection-oriented transport protocol. UDP is
an example of a connectionless protocol. Connection reliant and connection
dependent are not terms commonly associated with protocols.
2. A, C. Both TCP and UDP are transport protocols. IP is a network protocol,
and THC is not a valid protocol.
3. C. ARP resolves IP addresses to MAC addresses. Answer A describes the
function of RARP, answer B describes an unrelated process, and answer D
describes the process of DNS resolution.
4. D. NTP is used to communicate time-synchronization information between
devices. Network File System (NFS) is a protocol typically associated with
accessing shared folders on a Linux system. Utilization information is
communicated to a central management system most commonly by using
SNMP.
5. D. TCP is a connection-oriented protocol that guarantees delivery of data.
FTP is a protocol used to transfer large blocks of data. POP stands for Post
Office Protocol and is not the correct choice. IP is a network layer protocol
responsible for tasks such as addressing and route discovery.
6. B. The default port for H.323 is 1720. HTTPS uses port 443 by default,

whereas LDAPS uses 636, and RDP uses port 3389.
7. A. DHCP uses port 68 by default (along with 67). DNS uses port 53, SMB
uses 445, and SMTP uses port 25.
8. B. SNMP uses databases of information called MIBs to define what
parameters are accessible, which of the parameters are read-only, and which
can be set.
9. A. SNMP communities are logical groupings of systems. When a system is
configured as part of a community, it communicates only with other devices
that have the same community name.
10. A, D. SNMPv3 supports authentication and encryption.
Network Services
 Explain the functions of network services.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What is the name used for ranges of IP addresses available within
DHCP?
2. What is the name of the packet on a system configured to use DHCP
broadcasts when it comes onto the network?
3. What is dynamic DNS?
4. Within DNS, what is the domain name, along with any subdomains,
called?
Answers
1. Within DHCP, ranges of IP addresses are known as scopes.
2. When a system configured to use DHCP comes onto the network, it
broadcasts a special packet that looks for a DHCP server. This packet is

known as the DHCPDISCOVER packet.
3. Dynamic DNS is a newer system that enables hosts to be dynamically
registered with the DNS server.
4. The domain name, along with any subdomains, is called the fully
qualified domain name (FQDN) because it includes all the components
from the top of the DNS namespace to the host.
Network services provide functionality enabling the network to operate. There
are a plethora of services available, but four you need to know for the exam are
DNS, DHCP, NTP, and IPAM.
Domain Name Service (DNS)
DNS performs an important function on TCP/IP-based networks. It resolves
hostnames, such as www.quepublishing.com, to IP addresses, such as
209.202.161.67. Such a resolution system makes it possible for people to
remember the names of and refer to frequently used hosts using easy-to-
remember hostnames rather than hard-to-remember IP addresses. By default,
DNS operates on port 53.
Note
Like other TCP/IP-based services, DNS is a platform-independent protocol.
Therefore, it can be used on Linux, UNIX, Windows, and almost every other
platform.
In the days before the Internet, the network that was to become the Internet used
a text file called HOSTS to perform name resolution. The HOSTS file was
regularly updated with changes and distributed to other servers. Following is a
sample of some entries from a HOSTS file:
Click here to view code image
192.168.3.45     server1   s1            #The main file and print se
192.168.3.223    Mail      mailserver    #The email server
127.0.0.1        localhost
Note

A comment in the HOSTS file is preceded by a hash symbol (#).
As you can see, the host’s IP address is listed, along with the corresponding
hostname. You can add to a HOSTS file aliases of the server names, which in
this example are s1 and mailserver. All the entries must be added manually,
and each system to perform resolutions must have a copy of the file.
Even when the Internet was growing at a relatively slow pace, such a mechanism
was both cumbersome and prone to error. It was obvious that as the network
grew, a more automated and dynamic method of performing name resolution
was needed. DNS became that method.
Tip
HOSTS file resolution is still supported by most platforms. If you need to
resolve just a few hosts that will not change often or at all, you can still use
the HOSTS file for this.
DNS solves the problem of name resolution by offering resolution through
servers configured to act as name servers. The name servers run DNS server
software, which enables them to receive, process, and reply to requests from
systems that want to resolve hostnames to IP addresses. Systems that ask DNS
servers for a hostname-to-IP address mapping are called resolvers or DNS
clients. Figure 2.4 shows the DNS resolution process. In this example, the client
asks to reach the first server at mycoltd.com; the router turns to the DNS server
for an IP address associated with that server; and after the address is returned,
the client can establish a connection.

FIGURE 2.4 The DNS resolution process
Because the DNS namespace (which is discussed in the following section) is
large, a single server cannot hold all the records for the entire namespace. As a
result, there is a good chance that a given DNS server might not resolve the
request for a certain entry. In this case, the DNS server asks another DNS server
if it has an entry for the host.
Note
One of the problems with DNS is that, despite all its automatic resolution
capabilities, entries and changes to those entries must still be manually
performed. A strategy to solve this problem is to use Dynamic DNS (DDNS), a
newer system that enables hosts to be dynamically registered with the DNS
server. By making changes in real-time to hostnames, addresses, and related
information, there is less likelihood of not finding a server or site that has
been recently added or changed.
ExamAlert
You might be asked to identify the difference between DNS and DDNS.
The DNS Namespace

DNS operates in the DNS namespace. This space has logical divisions
hierarchically organized. At the top level are domains such as .com
(commercial) and .edu (education), as well as domains for countries, such as .uk
(United Kingdom) and .de (Germany). Below the top level are subdomains or
second-level domains associated with organizations or commercial companies,
such as Red Hat and Microsoft. Within these domains, hosts or other
subdomains can be assigned. For example, the server ftp.redhat.com would be in
the redhat.com domain. Figure 2.5 shows a DNS hierarchical namespace.
FIGURE 2.5 A DNS hierarchical namespace
ExamAlert
The domain name, along with any subdomains, is called the fully qualified
domain name (FQDN) because it includes all the components from the top
of the DNS namespace to the host.
Note
Many people refer to DNS as resolving FQDNs to IP addresses. An example
of an FQDN is www.comptia.org, where www is the host, comptia is the

second-level domain, and .org is the top-level domain.
The lower domains are largely open to use in whatever way the domain name
holder sees fit. However, the top-level domains are relatively closely controlled.
Table 2.6 lists a selection of the most widely used top-level DNS domain names.
Recently, a number of top-level domains were added, mainly to accommodate
the increasing need for hostnames.
TABLE 2.6 Selected Top-Level Domains in the DNS Namespace
Top-Level Domain
Name
Intended Purpose
com
Commercial organizations
edu
Educational organizations/establishments
gov
U.S. government organizations/establishments
net
Network providers/centers
org
Not-for-profit and other organizations
mil
Military
arpa
Reverse DNS lookup
de
A country-specific domain—in this case,
Germany*
*In addition to country-specific domains, many countries have created
subdomains that follow roughly the same principles as the original top-level
domains (such as co.uk and gov.nz).
Although the assignment of domain names is supposed to conform to the
structure shown in Table 2.6, the assignment of names is not as closely
controlled as you might think. It’s not uncommon for some domain names to be
used for other purposes, such as .org or .net being used for business.
Note
Although the primary function of DNS is to resolve hostnames to IP
addresses, you can also have DNS perform IP address-to-hostname resolution.
This process is called reverse lookup, which is accomplished by using pointer
(PTR) records.

ExamAlert
For the exam, know that PTR records are used for reverse lookup
functions.
Types of DNS Entries
Although the most common entry in a DNS database is an A (address) record,
which maps a hostname to an IP address, DNS can hold numerous other types of
entries as well. Some are the MX record, which can map entries that correspond
to mail exchanger systems, and CNAME (canonical record name), which can
create alias records for a system. A system can have an A record and then
multiple CNAME entries for its aliases. A DNS table with all these types of
entries might look like this:
Click here to view code image
fileserve.mycoltd.com IN   A   192.168.33.2
email.mycoltd.com     IN   A   192.168.33.7
fileprint.mycoltd.com IN CNAME fileserver.mycoltd.com
mailer.mycoltd.com    IN  MX  10   email.mycoltd.com
As you can see, rather than map to an actual IP address, the CNAME and MX
record entries map to another host, which DNS in turn can resolve to an IP
address.
DNS Records
Each DNS name server maintains information about its zone, or domain, in a
series of records, known as DNS resource records. There are several DNS
resource records; each contains information about the DNS domain and the
systems within it. These records are text entries stored on the DNS server. Some
of the DNS resource records include the following:
 Start of Authority (SOA): A record of information containing data on DNS
zones and other DNS records. A DNS zone is the part of a domain for which
an individual DNS server is responsible. Each zone contains a single SOA
record.
 Name Server (NS): Stores information that identifies the name servers in

the domain that store information for that domain.
 Service Locator (SRV): This is a generalized service location record, used
for newer protocols instead of creating protocol-specific records such as MX.
 Canonical Name (CNAME): Stores additional hostnames, or aliases, for
hosts in the domain. A CNAME specifies an alias or nickname for a
canonical hostname record in a Domain Name Service (DNS) database.
CNAME records give a single computer multiple names (aliases).
 Pointer (PTR): A pointer to the canonical name, which is used to perform a
reverse DNS lookup, in which case the name is returned when the query
originates with an IP address.
ExamAlert
The most common type of DNS zone is the forward lookup zone, which
allows DNS clients to obtain information such as IP addresses that
correspond to DNS domain names. Remember that a reverse lookup zone
maps from IP addresses back to DNS domain names.
 IPv6 Address (AAAA): Stores information for IPv6 (128-bit) addresses. It
is most commonly used to map hostnames to an IP address for a host.
 IPv4 Address (A): Stores information for IPv4 (32-bit) addresses. It is most
commonly used to map hostnames to an IP address for a host.
 Text (TXT): This field was originally created to carry human-readable text
in a DNS record, but that purpose has long since passed. Today, it is more
common that it holds machine-readable data, such as SPF (Sender Policy
Framework), and DKIM (DomainKeys Identified Mail).
 Mail Exchange (MX): Stores information about where mail for the domain
should be delivered.
ExamAlert
The exam objectives specifically list DNS records. You should expect to
see a question about records A, MX, AAAA, CNAME, NS, SRV, TXT, or
PTR.

DNS in a Practical Implementation
In a real-world scenario, whether you use DNS is almost a nonissue. If you have
Internet access, you will most certainly use DNS, but you are likely to use the
DNS facilities of your Internet service provider (ISP) rather than have your own
internal DNS server—this is known as external DNS. However, if you operate a
large, complex, multiplatform network, you might find that internal DNS servers
are necessary. The major network operating system vendors know that you might
need DNS facilities in your organization, so they include DNS server
applications with their offerings, making third-party/cloud-hosted DNS a
possibility. Google, for example, offers Cloud DNS, which is “low latency, high
availability and is a cost-effective way to make your applications and services
available 
to 
your 
users” 
(for 
more 
information, 
see
https://cloud.google.com/dns/).
It is common practice for workstations to be configured with the IP addresses of
two DNS servers for fault tolerance (configured via the Alternate Configuration
tab in Windows, for example). The importance of DNS, particularly in
environments in which the Internet is heavily used, cannot be overstated. If DNS
facilities are not accessible, the Internet effectively becomes unusable, unless
you can remember the IP addresses of all your favorite sites.
Windows Internet Name Service (WINS)
On Windows networks, you can use a system called WINS to enable Network
Basic Input/Output System (NetBIOS) names to be resolved to IP addresses.
NetBIOS name resolution is necessary on Windows networks so that systems
can locate and access each other by using the NetBIOS computer name rather
than the IP address. It’s a lot easier for a person to remember a computer called
secretary than to remember its IP address, 192.168.2.34. The NetBIOS name
needs to be resolved to an IP address and subsequently to a MAC address (by
ARP).
NetBIOS name resolution can be performed three ways on a network. The
simplest way is to use a WINS server on the network that automatically
performs the NetBIOS name resolution. If a WINS server is not available,
NetBIOS name resolution can be performed statically using an LMHOSTS file.
Using an LMHOSTS file requires that you manually configure at least one text
file with the entries. As you can imagine, this can be a time-consuming process,

particularly if the systems on the network frequently change. The third method,
and the default, is that systems resolve NetBIOS names using broadcasts. This
approach has two problems. First, the broadcasts create additional network
traffic, and second, the broadcasts cannot traverse routers unless the router is
configured to forward them. This means that resolutions between network
segments are impossible.
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
One method to assign IP addresses to hosts is to use static addressing. This
involves manually assigning an address from those available to you and allowing
the host to always use that address. The problems with this method include the
difficulty in managing addresses for a multitude of machines and efficiently and
effectively issuing them.
ExamAlert
Be sure to know the difference between static and dynamic IP addressing
as you study for the Network+ exam.
DHCP, which is defined in RFC 2131, enables ranges of IP addresses, known as
scopes or predefined groups of addresses within address pools to be defined on a
system running a DHCP server application. When another system configured as
a DHCP client is initialized, it asks the server for an address. If all things are as
they should be, the server assigns an address from the scope to the client for a
predetermined amount of time, known as the lease or lease time.
At various points during the TTL of the lease time (normally the 50 percent and
85 percent points), the client attempts to renew the lease from the server. If the
server cannot perform a renewal, the lease expires at 100 percent, and the client
stops using the address.
In addition to an IP address and the subnet mask, the DHCP server can supply
many other pieces of information; however, exactly what can be provided
depends on the DHCP server implementation. In addition to the address
information, the default gateway is often supplied, along with DNS information.
In addition to having DHCP supply a random address from the scope, you can
configure scope options, such as having it supply a specific address to a client.

Such an arrangement is known as a reservation (see Figure 2.6). Reservations
are a means by which you can still use DHCP for a system but at the same time
guarantee that it always has the same IP address. When based on the MAC
address, this is known as MAC reservations. DHCP can also be configured for
exclusions, also called IP exclusions. In this scenario, certain IP addresses are
not given out to client systems.
FIGURE 2.6 DHCP reservations
The advantages of using DHCP are numerous. First, administrators do not need
to manually configure each system. Second, human error, such as the assignment
of duplicate IP addresses, is eliminated. Third, DHCP removes the need to
reconfigure systems if they move from one subnet to another, or if you decide to
make a wholesale change in the IP addressing structure. The downsides are that
DHCP traffic is broadcast based and thus generates network traffic—albeit a
small amount. Finally, the DHCP server software must be installed and
configured on a server, which can place additional processor load (again,
minimal) on that system. From an administrative perspective, after the initial
configuration, DHCP is about as maintenance-free as a service can get, with only
occasional monitoring normally required.

ExamAlert
DHCP is a protocol-dependent service and is not platform dependent.
This means that you can use, for instance, a Linux DHCP server for a
network with Windows clients or with Linux clients. Although the DHCP
server offerings in the various network operating systems might slightly
differ, the basic functionality is the same across the board. Likewise, the
client configuration for DHCP servers running on a different operating
system platform is the same as for DHCP servers running on the same
base operating system platform.
The DHCP Process
To better understand how DHCP works, spend a few minutes looking at the
processes that occur when a DHCP-enabled client connects to the network.
When a system configured to use DHCP comes onto the network, it broadcasts a
special packet that looks for a DHCP server. This packet is known as the
DHCPDISCOVER packet. The DHCP server, which is always on the lookout for
DHCPDISCOVER broadcasts, picks up the packet and compares the request
with the scopes it has defined. If it finds that it has a scope for the network from
which the packet originated, it chooses an address from the scope, reserves it,
and sends the address, along with any other information, such as the lease
duration, to the client. This is known as the DHCPOFFER packet. Because the
client still does not have an IP address, this communication is also achieved via
broadcast. By default, DHCP operates on ports 67 and 68.
ExamAlert
Remember that DHCP operates on ports 67 and 68.
When the client receives the offer, it looks at the offer to determine if it is
suitable. If more than one offer is received, which can happen if more than one
DHCP server is configured, the offers are compared to see which is best. Best in
this context can involve a variety of criteria but normally is the length of the
lease. When the selection process completes, the client notifies the server that
the offer has been accepted, through a packet called a DHCPREQUEST packet.
At this point the server finalizes the offer and sends the client an

acknowledgment. This last message, which is sent as a broadcast, is known as a
DHCPACK packet. After the client system receives the DHCPACK, it initializes
the TCP/IP suite and can communicate on the network.
DHCP and DNS Suffixes
In DNS, suffixes define the DNS servers to be used and the order in which to use
them. DHCP settings can push a domain suffix search list to DNS clients. When
such a list is specifically given to a client, the client uses only that list for name
resolution. With Linux clients, this can occur by specifying entries in the
resolve.conf file.
ExamAlert
Know that DHCP can provide DNS suffixes to clients.
DHCP Relays and IP Helpers
On a large network, the DHCP server can easily get bogged down trying to
respond to all the requests. To make the job easier, DHCP relays help make the
job easier. A DHCP relay is nothing more than an agent on the router that acts as
a go-between for clients and the server. This is useful when working with clients
on different subnets, because a client cannot communicate directly with the
server until it has the IP configuration information assigned to it.
One level above DHCP relay is IP helper. These two terms are often used as
synonyms, but they are not; a better way to think of it is with IP helper being a
superset DHCP relay. IP helper will, by default, forward broadcasts for
DHCP/BOOTP, TFTP, DNS, TACACS, the time service, and the NetBIOS
name/datagram service (ports 137–139). You can disable the additional traffic
(or add more), but by default IP helper will do more than a DHCP relay.
ExamAlert
Know that an IP helper can do more than a DHCP relay agent.
IP Address Management

Closely related to both DHCP and DNS, IP Address Management (IPAM) is a
means of planning, tracking, and managing the IP addresses used in a network.
IPAM integrates DNS and DHCP so that each is aware of changes in the other. It
can also control reservations in DHCP and track data, such as IP addresses in
use, the devices an IP is assigned to at what time, and which user an IP was
assigned to. This information can be invaluable in troubleshooting connectivity
problems and investigating suspected abuse. A suite of IPAM tools is available
in Windows Server products. To learn more about IPAM in Windows Server visit
https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh831353(v=ws.11).aspx.
Network Time Protocol
Discussed in the ports and protocols section of this chapter, NTP is used to
synchronize all participating computer systems over packet-switched, variable-
latency data networks and is one of the oldest Internet protocols in current use.
Cram Quiz
1. One of the programmers has asked that DHCP always issue his workstation
the same IP address. What feature of DHCP enables you to accomplish this?
 A. Stipulation
 B. Rider
 C. Reservation
 D. Provision
2. Which of the following is not a common packet sent during the normal
DHCP process?
 A. DHCPACK
 B. DHCPPROVE
 C. DHCPDISCOVER
 D. DHCPOFFER
3. During a discussion with your ISP’s technical support representative, he
mentions that you might have been using the wrong FQDN. Which TCP/IP-
based network service is he referring to?

 A. DHCP
 B. WINS
 C. SNMP
 D. DNS
4. Which DNS record stores additional hostnames, or aliases, for hosts in the
domain?
 A. ALSO
 B. ALIAS
 C. CNAME
 D. PTR
5. Which DNS record is most commonly used to map hostnames to an IP
address for a host with IPv6?
 A. A
 B. AAAA
 C. MX
 D. PTR
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. Reservations are specific addresses reserved for clients.
2. B. DHCPPROVE is not a common packet. The other choices presented
(DHCPACK, DHCPDISCOVER, and DHCPOFFER) are part of the normal
process.
3. D. DNS is a system that resolves hostnames to IP addresses. The term
FQDN is used to describe the entire hostname. None of the other services
use FQDNs.
4. C. The CNAME record stores additional hostnames, or aliases, for hosts in
the domain. There is not an ALSO record or ALIAS, and PTR is used for
reverse lookups.
5. B. The AAAA record is most commonly used to map hostnames to an IP
address for a host with IPv6. The A record is not used for this purpose. MX

identifies the mail exchanger, and PTR is used for reverse lookup.
What’s Next?
The TCP/IP suite is the most widely implemented protocol on networks today.
As such, it is an important topic on the Network+ exam. Chapter 3, “Addressing,
Routing, and Switching,” starts by discussing one of the more complex facets of
TCP/IP: addressing.

CHAPTER 3
Addressing, Routing, and Switching
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Explain the concepts and characteristics of routing and switching.
 Given a scenario, configure the appropriate IP addressing components.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 1.3 and 1.4. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
Without question, the TCP/IP suite is the most widely implemented protocol on
networks today. As such, it is an important topic on the Network+ exam. To pass
the exam, you definitely need to understand the material presented in this
chapter.
This chapter deals with the concepts that govern routing and switching. It starts,
however, by discussing one of the more complex facets of TCP/IP: addressing.
IP Addressing
 Given a scenario, configure the appropriate IP addressing components.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. How many octets does a Class A address use to represent the network
portion?
2. What is the range that Class C addresses span in the first octet?
3. What are the reserved IPv4 ranges for private networks?

Answers
1. A Class A address uses only the first octet to represent the network
portion, a Class B address uses two octets, and a Class C address uses
three octets.
2. Class C addresses span from 192 to 223, with a default subnet mask of
255.255.255.0.
3. A private network is any network to which access is restricted. Reserved
IP addresses are 10.0.0.0, 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.0.0, and 192.168.0.0.
IP addressing is one of the most challenging aspects of TCP/IP. It can leave even
the most seasoned network administrators scratching their heads. Fortunately, the
Network+ exam requires only a fundamental knowledge of IP addressing. The
following sections look at how IP addressing works for both IPv4 and the newest
version of IP: IPv6.
To communicate on a network using TCP/IP, each system must be assigned a
unique address. The address defines both the number of the network to which the
device is attached and the number of the node on that network. In other words,
the IP address provides two pieces of information. It’s a bit like a street name
and house number in a person’s home address.
ExamAlert
A node or host is any device connected to the network. A node might be a
client computer, a server computer, a printer, a router, or a gateway.
Each device on a logical network segment must have the same network address
as all the other devices on the segment. All the devices on that network segment
must then have different node addresses.
In IP addressing, another set of numbers, called a subnet mask, defines which
portion of the IP address refers to the network address and which refers to the
node (host) address.
IP addressing is different in IPv4 and IPv6. The discussion begins by looking at
IPv4.

IPv4
An IPv4 address is composed of four sets of 8 binary bits, which are called
octets. The result is that IP addresses contain 32 bits. Each bit in each octet is
assigned a decimal value. The far-left bit has a value of 128, followed by 64, 32,
16, 8, 4, 2, and 1, left to right.
Each bit in the octet can be either a 1 or a 0. If the value is 1, it is counted as its
decimal value, and if it is 0, it is ignored. If all the bits are 0, the value of the
octet is 0. If all the bits in the octet are 1, the value is 255, which is 128 + 64 +
32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1.
By using the set of 8 bits and manipulating the 1s and 0s, you can obtain any
value between 0 and 255 for each octet.
Table 3.1 shows some examples of decimal-to-binary value conversions.
TABLE 3.1 Decimal-to-Binary Value Conversions
Decimal Value
Binary Value
Decimal Calculation
10
00001010
8 + 2 = 10
192
11000000
128 + 64 = 192
205
11001101
128 + 64 + 8 + 4 + 1 = 205
223
11011111
128 + 64 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 223
IP Address Classes
IP addresses are grouped into logical divisions called classes. The IPv4 address
space has five address classes (A through E); however, only three (A, B, and C)
assign addresses to clients. Class D is reserved for multicast addressing, and
Class E is reserved for future development.
Of the three classes available for address assignments, each uses a fixed-length
subnet mask to define the separation between the network and the node (host)
address. A Class A address uses only the first octet to represent the network
portion; a Class B address uses two octets; and a Class C address uses the first
three octets. The upshot of this system is that Class A has a small number of
network addresses, but each Class A address has a large number of possible host
addresses. Class B has a larger number of networks, but each Class B address
has a smaller number of hosts. Class C has an even larger number of networks,

but each Class C address has an even smaller number of hosts. The exact
numbers are provided in Table 3.2.
Be prepared for questions asking you to identify IP class ranges, such as the IP
range for a Class A network.
TABLE 3.2 IPv4 Address Classes and the Number of Available
Network/Host Addresses
Address
Class
Range
Number of
Networks
Number of Hosts
Per Network
Binary Value of
First Octet
A
1 to
126
126
16,777,214
09780789758750xxx
B
128 to
191
16,384
65,534
109780789758750xx
C
192 to
223
2,097,152
254
1109780789758750x
D
224 to
239
N/A
N/A
11109780789758750
E
240 to
255
N/A
N/A
11119780789758750
Note
Notice in Table 3.2 that the network number 127 is not included in any of the
ranges. The 127.0.0.1 network ID is reserved for the IPv4 local loopback. The
local loopback is a function of the protocol suite used in the troubleshooting
process.
ExamAlert
For the Network+ exam, be prepared to identify into which class a given
address falls. Also be prepared to identify the IPv4 loopback address. The
loopback address is 127.0.0.1.

Subnet Mask Assignment
Like an IP address, a subnet mask is most commonly expressed in 32-bit dotted-
decimal format. Unlike an IP address, though, a subnet mask performs just one
function—it defines which parts of the IP address refers to the network address
and which refers to the node (host) address. Each class of the IP address used for
address assignment has a default subnet mask associated with it. Table 3.3 lists
the default subnet masks.
TABLE 3.3 Default Subnet Masks Associated with IP Address Classes
Address Class
Default Subnet Mask
A
255.0.0.0
B
255.255.0.0
C
255.255.255.0
ExamAlert
You will likely see questions about address classes and the corresponding
default subnet mask. Review Table 3.3 before taking the exam.
Subnetting
Now that you have looked at how IPv4 addresses are used, you can learn the
process of subnetting. Subnetting is a process by which the node (host) portions
of an IP address create more networks than you would have if you used the
default subnet mask.
To illustrate subnetting, for example, suppose that you have been assigned the
Class B address 150.150.0.0. Using this address and the default subnet mask,
you could have a single network (150.150) and use the rest of the address as
node addresses. This would give you a large number of possible node addresses,
which in reality is probably not useful. With subnetting, you use bits from the
node portion of the address to create more network addresses. This reduces the
number of nodes per network, but you probably will still have more than
enough.
Following are two main reasons for subnetting:

 It enables you to more effectively use IP address ranges.
 It makes IP networking more secure and manageable by providing a
mechanism to create multiple networks rather than having just one. Using
multiple networks confines traffic to the network that it needs to be on,
which reduces overall network traffic levels. Multiple subnets also create
more broadcast domains, which in turn reduces network-wide broadcast
traffic. A difference exists between broadcast domains and collision domains:
The latter is all the connected nodes, whereas the former is all the logical
nodes that can reach each other. As such, collision domains are typically
subsets of broadcast domains.
ExamAlert
Subnetting does not increase the number of IP addresses available. It
increases the number of network IDs and, as a result, decreases the
number of node IDs per network. It also creates more broadcast domains.
Broadcasts are not forwarded by routers, so they are limited to the
network on which they originate.
With Variable Length Subnet Masking (VLSM), it is possible to use a different
subnet mask for the same network number on different subnets. This way, a
network administrator can use a long mask on networks with few hosts and a
short mask on subnets with many hosts, thus allowing each subnet in a routed
system to be correctly sized for the required size. The routing protocol used
(EIGRP, OSPF, RIPv2, IS-IS, or BGP) must be able to advertise the mask for
each subnet in the routing update, which means that it must be classless.
Classless interdomain routing is discussed shortly.
Identifying the Differences Between IPv4 Public
and Private Networks
IP addressing involves many considerations, not the least of which are public
and private networks:
 A public network is a network to which anyone can connect. The best (and
perhaps only pure) example of such a network is the Internet.
 A private network is any network to which access is restricted. A corporate

network and a network in a school are examples.
Note
The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is responsible for
assigning IP addresses to public networks. However, because of the workload
involved in maintaining the systems and processes to do this, IANA has
delegated the assignment process to a number of regional authorities. For
more information, visit http://www.iana.org/numbers.
The main difference between public and private networks, other than access—a
private network is tightly controlled and access to a public network is not—is
that the addressing of devices on a public network must be carefully considered.
Addressing on a private network has a little more latitude.
As already discussed, for hosts on a network to communicate by using TCP/IP,
they must have unique addresses. This number defines the logical network that
each host belongs to and the host’s address on that network. On a private
network with, for instance, three logical networks and 100 nodes on each
network, addressing is not a difficult task. On a network on the scale of the
Internet, however, addressing is complex.
If you connect a system to the Internet, you need to get a valid registered IP
address. Most commonly, you obtain this address from your Internet service
provider (ISP). Alternatively, if you want a large number of addresses, for
example, you could contact the organization responsible for address assignment
in your area. You can determine who the regional numbers authority for your
area is by visiting the IANA website.
Because of the nature of their business, ISPs have large blocks of IP addresses
that they can assign to their clients. If you need a registered IP address, getting
one from an ISP is almost certainly a simpler process than going through a
regional numbers authority. Some ISP plans include blocks of registered IP
addresses, working on the principle that businesses want some kind of
permanent presence on the Internet. However, if you discontinue your service
with the ISP, you can no longer use the provided IP address.
Private Address Ranges
To provide flexibility in addressing, and to prevent an incorrectly configured
network from polluting the Internet, certain address ranges are set aside for

private use. These address ranges are called private ranges because they are
designated for use only on private networks. These addresses are special because
Internet routers are configured to ignore any packets they see that use these
addresses. This means that if a private network “leaks” onto the Internet, it won’t
get any farther than the first router it encounters. So a private address cannot be
on the Internet because it cannot be routed to public networks.
Three ranges are defined in RFC 1918: one each from Classes A, B, and C. You
can use whichever range you want; however, the Class A and B address ranges
offer more addressing options than Class C. Table 3.4 defines the private address
ranges for Class A, B, and C addresses.
TABLE 3.4 Private Address Ranges
Class
Address Range
Default Subnet Mask
A
10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
255.0.0.0
B
172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
255.255.0.0
C
192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255
255.255.255.0
ExamAlert
You can expect questions on private IP address ranges and their
corresponding default subnet masks.
Classless Interdomain Routing
Classless interdomain routing (CIDR) is an IPv4 method of assigning addresses
outside the standard Class A, B, and C structure. Specifying the number of bits
in the subnet mask offers more flexibility than the three standard class
definitions.
Using CIDR, addresses are assigned using a value known as the slash. The
actual value of the slash depends on how many bits of the subnet mask are used
to express the network portion of the address. For example, a subnet mask that
uses all 8 bits from the first octet and 4 from the second would be described as
/12, or “slash 12.” A subnet mask that uses all the bits from the first three octets
would be called /24. Why the slash? In addressing terms, the CIDR value is
expressed after the address, using a slash. So, the address 192.168.2.1/24 means

that the node’s IP address is 192.168.2.1, and the subnet mask is 255.255.255.0.
Note
You can find a great CIDR calculator that can compute values from ranges at
http://www.subnetcalculator.com.
ExamAlert
You will likely see IP addresses in their CIDR format on the exam. Be sure
that you understand CIDR addressing and IPv4/IPv6 notation for the
exam.
Default Gateways
Default gateways are the means by which a device can access hosts on other
networks for which it does not have a specifically configured route. Most
workstation configurations default to using default gateways rather than having
any static routes configured. This enables workstations to communicate with
other network segments or with other networks, such as the Internet.
ExamAlert
You will be expected to identify the purpose and function of a default
gateway. You may also be asked to place the IP address of the default
gateway (or other specified system) in the correct location within a
performance-based question.
When a system wants to communicate with another device, it first determines
whether the host is on the local network or a remote network. If the host is on a
remote network, the system looks in the routing table to determine whether it has
an entry for the network on which the remote host resides. If it does, it uses that
route. If it does not, the data is sent to the default gateway.
Note
Although it might seem obvious, it’s worth mentioning that the default

gateway must be on the same network as the nodes that use it.
In essence, the default gateway is simply the path out of the network for a given
device. Figure 3.1 shows how a default gateway fits into a network
infrastructure.
FIGURE 3.1 The role of a default gateway
On the network, a default gateway could be a router or a computer with network
interfaces (mutihomed) for all segments to which it is connected. These
interfaces have local IP addresses for the respective segments. If a system is not
configured with any static routes or a default gateway, it is limited to operating
on its own network segment.
ExamAlert
If a system is not configured with any static routes or a default gateway, it
is limited to operating on its own network segment.

Virtual IP
A virtual IP address (VIP) is an IP address assigned to multiple applications and
is often used in high availability implementations. Data packets coming in are
sent to the address and that routes them to the correct network interfaces. This
allows hosting of different applications and virtual appliances on servers with
only one (logical) IP address.
IPv4 Address Types
IPv4 has three primary address types: unicast, broadcast, and multicast. You
need to distinguish among these three types of IPv4 addresses.
Unicast Address
With a unicast address, a single address is specified. Data sent with unicast
addressing is delivered to a specific node identified by the address. It is a point-
to-point address link.
Broadcast Address
A broadcast address is at the opposite end of the spectrum from a unicast
address. A broadcast address is an IP address that you can use to target all
systems on a subnet or network instead of single hosts. In other words, a
broadcast message goes to everyone on the network.
Multicast
Multicasting is a mechanism by which groups of network devices can send and
receive data between the members of the group at one time, instead of separately
sending messages to each device in the group. The multicast grouping is
established by configuring each device with the same multicast IP address.
IPv6 Addressing
Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) has served as the Internet’s protocol for 30
years. When IPv4 was in development more than 30 years ago, it would have
been impossible for its creators to imagine or predict the future demand for IP
devices and therefore IP addresses.
Note

There was an IPv5 after IPv4 and before IPv6, but it was an experimental
protocol that never went anywhere.
Where Have All the IPv4 Addresses Gone?
IPv4 uses a 32-bit addressing scheme. This gives IPv4 a total of 4,294,967,296
possible unique addresses that can be assigned to IP devices. More than 4 billion
addresses might sound like a lot, and it is. However, the number of IP-enabled
devices increases daily at a staggering rate. Not all these addresses can be used
by public networks. Many of these addresses are reserved and are unavailable
for public use. This reduces the number of addresses that can be allocated as
public Internet addresses.
The IPv6 project started in the mid-1990s, well before the threat of IPv4
limitations. Now network hardware and software are equipped for and ready to
deploy IPv6 addressing. IPv6 offers a number of improvements. The most
notable is its capability to handle growth in public networks. IPv6 uses a 128-bit
addressing scheme, enabling a huge number of possible addresses:
340,282,366,920,938,463,463,374,607,431,768,211,456
Identifying IPv6 Addresses
As previously discussed, IPv4 uses a dotted-decimal format: 8 bits converted to
its decimal equivalent and separated by periods. An example of an IPv4 address
is 192.168.2.1.
Because of the 128-bit structure of the IPv6 addressing scheme, it looks quite a
bit different. An IPv6 address is divided along 16-bit boundaries, and each 16-bit
block is converted into a four-digit hexadecimal number and separated by
colons. The resulting representation is called colon hexadecimal. Now look at
how 
it 
works. 
Figure 
3.2 
shows 
the 
IPv6 
address
2001:0:4137:9e50:2811:34ff:3f57:febc from a Windows system.

FIGURE 3.2 An IPv6 address in a Windows dialog screen
An IPv6 address can be simplified by removing the leading 0s within each 16-bit
block. Not all the 0s can be removed, however, because each address block must
have at least a single digit. Removing the 0 suppression, the address
representation becomes
2001:0000:4137:9e50:2811:34ff:3f57:febc
Some of the IPv6 addresses you will work with have sequences of 0s. When this
occurs, the number is often abbreviated to make it easier to read. In the
preceding example you saw that a single 0 represented a number set in
hexadecimal form. To further simplify the representation of IPv6 addresses, a
contiguous sequence of 16-bit blocks set to 0 in colon hexadecimal format can
be compressed to ::, known as the double colon.
For example, the IPv6 address of
2001:0000:0000:0000:3cde:37d1:3f57:fe93
can be compressed to
2001::3cde:37d1:3f57:fe93
However, there are limits on how the IPv6 0s can be reduced. 0s within the IPv6
address cannot be eliminated when they are not first in the number sequence. For
instance, 2001:4000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0003 cannot be compressed as

2001:4::3. This would actually appear as 2001:4000::3.
When you look at an IPv6 address that uses a double colon, how do you know
exactly what numbers are represented? The formula is to subtract the number of
blocks from 8 and then multiply that number by 16. For example, the address
2001:4000::3 uses three blocks: 2001, 4000, and 3. So the formula is as follows:
(8 – 3) × 16 = 80
Therefore, the total number of bits represented by the double colon in this
example is 80.
Note
You can remove 0s only once in an IPv6 address. Using a double colon more
than once would make it impossible to determine the number of 0 bits
represented by each instance of ::.
IPv6 Address Types
Another difference between IPv4 and IPv6 is in the address types. IPv4
addressing was discussed in detail earlier. IPv6 addressing offers several types of
addresses, as detailed in this section.
Unicast IPv6 Addresses
As you might deduce from the name, a unicast address specifies a single
interface. Data packets sent to a unicast destination travel from the sending host
to the destination host. It is a direct line of communication. A few types of
addresses fall under the unicast banner, as discussed next.
Global Unicast Addresses
Global unicast addresses are the equivalent of IPv4 public addresses. These
addresses are routable and travel throughout the network.
Link-Local Addresses
Link-local addresses are designated for use on a single local network. Link-local
addresses are automatically configured on all interfaces. This automatic
configuration is comparable to the 169.254.0.0/16 APIPA automatically assigned
IPv4 addressing scheme (discussed shortly). The prefix used for a link-local

address is fe80::/64. On a single-link IPv6 network with no router, link-local
addresses are used to communicate between devices on the link.
Site-Local Addresses
Site-local addresses are equivalent to the IPv4 private address space (10.0.0.0/8,
172.16.0.0/12, and 192.168.0.0/16). As with IPv4, in which private address
ranges are used in private networks, IPv6 uses site-local addresses that do not
interfere with global unicast addresses. In addition, routers do not forward site-
local traffic outside the site. Unlike link-local addresses, site-local addresses are
not automatically configured and must be assigned through either stateless or
stateful address configuration processes. The prefix used for the site-local
address is FEC0::/10.
Multicast Addresses
As with IPv4 addresses, multicasting sends and receives data between groups of
nodes. It sends IP messages to a group rather than to every node on the LAN
(broadcast) or just one other node (unicast).
Anycast Addresses
Anycast addresses represent the middle ground between unicast addresses and
multicast addresses. Anycast delivers messages to any one node in the multicast
group.
Note
You might encounter the terms stateful and stateless configuration. Stateless
refers to IP autoconfiguration, in which administrators need not manually
input configuration information. In a stateful configuration network, devices
obtain address information from a server.
ExamAlert
Similar to stateful/stateless, classful and classless are address adjectives
that are often used. Classful means that the address falls into one of the
five IPv4 classes (A, B, C, D, or E), whereas classless uses the CIDR
notation previously discussed.

ExamAlert
Earlier you read that IPv4 reserves 127.0.0.1 as the loopback address.
IPv6 has the same reservation. IPv6 addresses 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:0 and
0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 are reserved as the loopback addresses.
Remember that fe80:: is a private link-local address.
Neighbor Discovery
IPv6 supports the Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP). Operating at the network
layer, it is responsible for address autoconfiguration of nodes, discovery of other
nodes on the link, determining the addresses of other nodes, duplicate address
detection, finding available routers and DNS servers, address prefix discovery,
and maintaining reachability information of other active neighbor nodes.
Comparing IPv4 and IPv6 Addressing
Table 3.5 compares IPv4 and IPv6 addressing.
Note
Automatic Private IP Addressing (APIPA) appears in the table and is
discussed in detail in the section “Automatic Private IP Addressing” later in
this chapter.
TABLE 3.5 Comparing IPv4 and IPv6 Addressing
Address
Feature
IPv4 Address
IPv6 Address
Loopback
address
127.0.0.1
0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 (::1)
Network-wide
addresses
IPv4 public address ranges
Global unicast IPv6
addresses
Private network
addresses
10.0.0.0
172.16.0.0
192.168.0.0
Site-local address ranges
(FEC0::)

Autoconfigured
addresses
IPv4 automatic private IP
addressing (169.254.0.0)
Link-local addresses of
the FE80:: prefix
ExamAlert
Make sure that you know the information provided in Table 3.5.
Note
IPv6 supports dual stack: This means that both IPv4 and IPv6 can run on the
same network. This is extremely useful when transitioning from one to the
other during the adoption and deployment phases. It also allows the network
to continue to support legacy devices that may not be able to transition.
Assigning IP Addresses
Now that you understand the need for each system on a TCP/IP-based network
to have a unique address, the following sections examine how those systems
receive their addresses.
Static Addressing
Static addressing refers to the manual assignment of IP addresses to a system.
This approach has two main problems:
 Statically configuring one system with the correct address is simple, but in
the course of configuring, for instance, a few hundred systems, mistakes are
likely. If the IP addresses are entered incorrectly, the system probably cannot
connect to other systems on the network.
 If the IP addressing scheme for the organization changes, each system must
again be manually reconfigured. In a large organization with hundreds or
thousands of systems, such a reconfiguration could take a considerable
amount of time. These drawbacks of static addressing are so significant that
nearly all networks use dynamic IP addressing.
Dynamic Addressing
Dynamic addressing refers to the automatic assignment of IP addresses. On
modern networks, the mechanism used to do this is Dynamic Host Configuration

Protocol (DHCP). DHCP, part of the TCP/IP suite, enables a central system to
provide client systems with IP addresses. Automatically assigning addresses with
DHCP alleviates the burden of address configuration and reconfiguration that
occurs with static IP addressing.
The basic function of the DHCP service is to automatically assign IP addresses
to client systems. To do this, ranges of IP addresses, known as scopes, are
defined on a system running a DHCP server application. When another system
configured as a DHCP client is initialized, it asks the server for an address. If all
things are as they should be, the server assigns an address to the client for a
predetermined amount of time, known as the lease, from the scope.
ExamAlert
As you study DHCP for the exam, make sure you know reservations,
scopes, leases, options, and IP helper/DHCP relay. These topics were
discussed in Chapter 2.
A DHCP server typically can be configured to assign more than just IP
addresses. It often is used to assign the subnet mask, the default gateway, and
Domain Name Service (DNS) information.
Using DHCP means that administrators do not need to manually configure each
client system with a TCP/IP address. This removes the common problems
associated with statically assigned addresses, such as human error. The potential
problem of assigning duplicate IP addresses is also eliminated. DHCP also
removes the need to reconfigure systems if they move from one subnet to
another, or if you decide to make a wholesale change in the IP addressing
structure.
ExamAlert
Even when a network is configured to use DHCP, several mission-critical
network systems continue to use static addressing: DHCP server, DNS
server, web server, and more. They do not have dynamic IP addressing
because their IP addresses can never change. If they do, client systems
may be unable to access the resources from that server.

Configuring a client for TCP/IP can be relatively complex, or it can be simple.
Any complexity involved is related to the possible need to manually configure
TCP/IP. The simplicity is because TCP/IP configuration can occur automatically
via DHCP or through APIPA. At the least, a system needs an IP address and
subnet mask to log on to a network. The default gateway and DNS server IP
information is optional, but network functionality is limited without them. The
following list briefly explains the IP-related settings used to connect to a TCP/IP
network:
 IP address: Each system must be assigned a unique IP address so that it can
communicate on the network.
 Subnet mask: Enables the system to determine what portion of the IP
address represents the network address and what portion represents the node
address.
 Default gateway: Enables the system to communicate on a remote network,
without the need for explicit routes to be defined.
 DNS server addresses: Enables dynamic hostname resolution to be
performed. It is common practice to have two DNS server addresses defined
so that if one server becomes unavailable, the other can be used.
ExamAlert
At the very minimum, an IP address and subnet mask are required to
connect to a TCP/IP network. With this minimum configuration,
connectivity is limited to the local segment, and DNS resolution is not
possible.
DHCP6 (or, more correctly, DHCPv6) is the IPv6 counterpart to DHCP. It issues
the necessary configuration information for clients on IPv6-based networks.
BOOT Protocol (BOOTP)
BOOTP was originally created so that diskless workstations could obtain
information needed to connect to the network, such as the TCP/IP address,
subnet mask, and default gateway. Such a system was necessary because diskless
workstations had no way to store the information.
When a system configured to use BOOTP is powered up, it broadcasts for a

BOOTP server on the network. If such a server exists, it compares the MAC
address of the system issuing the BOOTP request with a database of entries.
From this database, it supplies the system with the appropriate information. It
can also notify the workstation about a file that it must run on BOOTP.
In the unlikely event that you use BOOTP, you should be aware that, like DHCP,
it is a broadcast-based system. Therefore, routers must be configured to forward
BOOTP broadcasts.
Automatic Private IP Addressing
Automatic Private IP Addressing (APIPA) was introduced with Windows 98 and
has been included in all subsequent Windows versions. The function of APIPA is
that a system can give itself an IP address if it is incapable of receiving an
address dynamically from a DHCP server. Then APIPA assigns the system an
address from the 169.254.0.0 address range and configures an appropriate subnet
mask (255.255.0.0). However, it doesn’t configure the system with a default
gateway address. As a result, communication is limited to the local network. So,
if you can connect to other devices on a local network, but can’t reach the
Internet, for example, it is likely that your DHCP server is down and you are
currently using an APIPA address.
ExamAlert
If a system that does not support APIPA cannot get an address from a
DHCP server, it typically assigns itself an IP address of 0.0.0.0. Keep this
in mind when troubleshooting IP addressing problems on non-APIPA
platforms.
The idea behind APIPA is that systems on a segment can communicate with each
other if DHCP server failure occurs. In reality, the limited usability of APIPA
makes it little more than a last resort. For example, imagine that a system is
powered on while the DHCP server is operational and receives an IP address of
192.168.100.2. Then the DHCP server fails. Now, if the other systems on the
segment are powered on and cannot get an address from the DHCP server
because it is down, they would self-assign addresses in the 169.254.0.0 address
range via APIPA. The systems with APIPA addresses would talk to each other,
but they couldn’t talk to a system that received an address from the DHCP
server. Likewise, any system that receives an IP address via DHCP cannot talk to

systems with APIPA-assigned addresses. This, and the absence of a default
gateway, is why APIPA is of limited use in real-world environments.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to answer APIPA questions. Know what it is and how you
can tell whether you have been assigned an APIPA address and why.
Identifying MAC Addresses
Many times this book refers to MAC addresses and how certain devices use
them. However, it has not yet discussed why MAC addresses exist, how they are
assigned, and what they consist of.
Note
A MAC address is sometimes called a physical address because it is
physically embedded in the interface (network interface card).
A MAC address is a 6-byte (48-bit) hexadecimal address that enables a NIC to
be uniquely identified on the network. The MAC address forms the basis of
network communication, regardless of the protocol used to achieve network
connection. Because the MAC address is so fundamental to network
communication, mechanisms are in place to ensure that duplicate addresses
cannot be used.
To combat the possibility of duplicate MAC addresses being assigned, the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) took over the
assignment of MAC addresses. But rather than be burdened with assigning
individual addresses, the IEEE decided to assign each manufacturer an ID and
then let the manufacturer further allocate IDs. The result is that in a MAC
address, the first 3 bytes define the manufacturer, and the last 3 are assigned by
the manufacturer.
For example, consider the MAC address of the computer on which this book is
being written: 00:D0:59:09:07:51. The first 3 bytes (00:D0:59) identify the
manufacturer of the card. Because only this manufacturer can use this address, it
is known as the organizational unique identifier (OUI). The last 3 bytes
(09:07:51) are called the universal LAN MAC address: They make this interface

unique. You can find a complete listing of organizational MAC address
assignments at http://standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui/oui.txt.
Because MAC addresses are expressed in hexadecimal, only the numbers 0
through 9 and the letters A through F can be used in them. If you get an exam
question about identifying a MAC address and some of the answers contain
letters and numbers other than 0 through 9 and the letters A through F, you can
immediately discount those answers.
You can discover the NIC’s MAC address in various ways, depending on what
system or platform you work on. Table 3.6 defines various platforms and
methods you can use to view an interface’s MAC address.
TABLE 3.6 Methods of Viewing the MAC Addresses of NICs
Platform
Method
Windows
Enter ipconfig /all at a command prompt.
Linux/some UNIX
Enter the ifconfig -a command.
Cisco router
Enter the sh int interface name command.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you know the commands used to identify the MAC address
in various operating system formats.
Just as there was fear that there would not be enough IP addresses for all the
devices needed to access the Internet if we stayed with IPv4, there has also been
considerable fear that there are not enough MAC addresses to assign. To deal
with this, 64-bit addresses are now available. The IEEE refers to 48-bit addresses
as EUI48 (for extended unique identifier) and longer addresses as EUI64. It is
projected that there are a sufficient number of 48-bit addresses to last for quite
some time, but the IEEE is encouraging the adoption of the 64-bit addressing as
soon as possible. The most noticeable difference between the addressing
schemes is that EUI64 uses hyphens between number sets instead of colons.
ExamAlert

Be sure that you know what EUI64 is for the exam.
NAT, PAT, SNAT, and DNAT
This chapter has defined many acronyms and continues to do so with four more:
NAT; PAT; SNAT; and DNAT, or port forwarding.
NAT
The basic principle of Network Address Translation (NAT) is that many
computers can “hide” behind a single IP address. The main reason you need to
do this (as pointed out earlier in the section “IP Addressing”) is because there
aren’t enough IPv4 addresses to go around. Using NAT means that only one
registered IP address is needed on the system’s external interface, acting as the
gateway between the internal and external networks.
Note
Don’t confuse NAT with proxy servers. The proxy service is different from
NAT, but many proxy server applications do include NAT functionality.
NAT enables you to use whatever addressing scheme you like on your internal
networks; however, it is common practice to use the private address ranges,
which were discussed earlier.
When a system is performing NAT, it funnels the requests given to it to the
Internet. To the remote host, the request looks like it is originating from a single
address. The system performing the NAT function keeps track of who asked for
what and makes sure that when the data is returned, it is directed to the correct
system. Servers that provide NAT functionality do so in different ways. For
example, you can statically map a specific internal IP address to a specific
external one (known as the one-to-one NAT method) so that outgoing requests
are always tagged with the same IP address. Alternatively, if you have a group of
public IP addresses, you can have the NAT system assign addresses to devices on
a first-come, first-served basis. Either way, the basic function of NAT is the
same.
Tunneling can be used for transmitting packets of one type (such as IPv6) over
another network (such as IPv4). 6to4 is one such tunneling technology, allowing
IPv6 packets to be transmitted over an IPv4 network without having to create a

complex tunnel. It is often used during the transition period when a network is
being updated and is not intended to be a permanent solution. Its counterpart is
4to6.
For a more long-term solution, there is a transition technology known as Teredo
that gives full IPv6 connectivity for IPv6-capable hosts, which are on the IPv4
Internet but lack direct native connection to an IPv6 network. The distinguishing
feature of Teredo is that it can do this from behind NAT devices (such as home
routers). One of the most popular Teredo implementations is Miredo; it is a client
designed to allow full IPv6 connectivity to systems that are strictly IPv4-based.
PAT
NAT enables administrators to conserve public IP addresses and, at the same
time, secure the internal network. Port Address Translation (PAT) is a variation
on NAT. With PAT, all systems on the LAN are translated to the same IP address,
but with a different port number assignment. PAT is used when multiple clients
want to access the Internet. However, with not enough available public IP
addresses, you need to map the inside clients to a single public IP address. When
packets come back into the private network, they are routed to their destination
with a table within PAT that tracks the public and private port numbers.
When PAT is used, there is a typically only a single IP address exposed to the
public network, and multiple network devices access the Internet through this
exposed IP address. The sending devices, IP address, and port number are not
exposed. For example, an internal computer with the IP address of 192.168.2.2
wants to access a remote web server at address 204.23.85.49. The request goes
to the PAT router, where the sender’s private IP and port number are modified,
and a mapping is added to the PAT table. The remote web server sees the request
coming from the IP address of the PAT router and not the computer actually
making the request. The web server sends the reply to the address and port
number of the router. When received, the router checks its table to see the
packet’s actual destination and forwards it.
ExamAlert
PAT enables nodes on a LAN to communicate with the Internet without
revealing their IP address. All outbound IP communications are
translated to the router’s external IP address. Replies come back to the
router, which then translates them back into the private IP address of the

original host for final delivery.
SNAT
Static Network Address Translation (SNAT) is a simple form of NAT. SNAT
directly maps a private IP address to a static unchanging public IP address. This
enables an internal system, such as a mail server, to have an unregistered
(private) IP address and still be reachable over the Internet. For example, if a
network uses a private address of 192.168.2.1 for a mail server, it can be
statically linked to a public IP address such as 213.23.213.85.
DNAT
To get more granular, Destination Network Address Translation (DNAT) can be
implemented on any router to change the destination IP address on a packet (and
do the inverse operation on replies). It is typically used between services located
on a private network and IP addresses that are publicly accessible. It is more
commonly referred to as port forwarding.
Note
For exam purposes, think of DNAT and port forwarding as synonyms.
Cram Quiz
1. What is the IPv6 equivalent of 127.0.0.1? (Choose two.)
 A. 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1
 B. 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:24
 C. ::1
 D. ::24
2. Which of the following is a Class B address?
 A. 129.16.12.200
 B. 126.15.16.122
 C. 211.244.212.5

 D. 193.17.101.27
3. You are the administrator for a network with two Windows Server systems
and 65 Windows desktop systems. At 10 a.m., three users call to report that
they are experiencing network connectivity problems. Upon investigation,
you determine that the DHCP server has failed. How can you tell that the
DHCP server failure is the cause of the connectivity problems experienced
by the three users?
 A. When you check their systems, they have an IP address of 0.0.0.0.
 B. When you check their systems, they have an IP address in the
192.168.x.x address range.
 C. When you check their systems, they have a default gateway value of
255.255.255.255.
 D. When you check their systems, they have an IP address from the
169.254.x.x range.
4. Which of the following address types are associated with IPv6? (Choose
three.)
 A. Broadcast
 B. Multicast
 C. Unicast
 D. Anycast
5. Which of the following IP addresses is not from a private address range?
 A. 192.168.200.117
 B. 172.16.3.204
 C. 127.45.112.16
 D. 10.27.100.143
6. You have been assigned to set up a new network with TCP/IP. For the
external interfaces, you decide to obtain registered IP addresses from your
ISP, but for the internal network, you choose to configure systems by using
one of the private address ranges. Of the following address ranges, which
one would you not consider?

 A. 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255
 B. 131.16.0.0 to 131.16.255.255
 C. 10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
 D. 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
7. You ask your ISP to assign a public IP address for the external interface of
your Windows server, which is running a proxy server application. In the
email message that contains the information, the ISP tells you that you have
been assigned the IP address 203.15.226.12/24. When you fill out the subnet
mask field on the IP configuration dialog box on your system, what subnet
mask should you use?
 A. 255.255.255.255
 B. 255.255.255.0
 C. 255.255.240.0
 D. 255.255.255.240
8. Examine the diagram shown here. What is the most likely reason that user
Spencer cannot communicate with user Evan?
 A. The default gateways should have different values.
 B. Spencer’s IP address is not a loopback address.
 C. The subnet values should be the same.
 D. There is no problem identifiable by the values given.
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A, C. The IPv4 address 127.0.0.1 is reserved as the loopback address, and
IPv6 has the same reservation. IPv6 addresses 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:0 and
0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 are reserved as the loopback addresses. The address

0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 can be shown using the :: notation with the 0s removed,
resulting in ::1.
2. A. Class B addresses fall into the range 128 to 191. Answer A is the only
address listed that falls into that range. Answer B is a Class A address, and
answers C and D are Class C IP addresses.
3. D. When a Windows desktop system that is configured to obtain an IP
address via DHCP fails to obtain an address, it uses APIPA to assign itself an
address from the 169.254.x.x address range. An address of 0.0.0.0 normally
results from a system that does not support APIPA. APIPA does not use the
192.168.x.x address range. The IP address 255.255.255.255 is the broadcast
address. A DHCP failure would not lead to a system assigning itself this
address.
4. B, C, and D. A key difference between IPv4 and IPv6 is in the address
types. IPv6 addressing has three main types of addresses: unicast, multicast,
and anycast. IPv4 uses broadcast addressing, but IPv6 doesn’t.
5. C. The 127.x.x.x network range is reserved for the loopback function. It is
not one of the recognized private address ranges. The private address ranges
as defined in RFC 1918 are 10.x.x.x, 172.16.x.x to 172.31.x.x, and
192.168.x.x.
6. B. The 131.16 range is from the Class B range and is not one of the
recognized private IP address ranges. All the other address ranges are valid
private IP address ranges.
7. B. In CIDR terminology, the number of bits to be included in the subnet
mask is expressed as a slash value. If the slash value is 24, the first three
octets form the subnet mask, so the value is 255.255.255.0.
8. C. The most likely problem, given the IP values for each user’s workstation,
is that the subnet value is not correct on Spencer’s machine and should be
255.255.255.0.
Managing TCP/IP Routing and Switching
 Explain the concepts and characteristics of routing and switching.
CramSaver

If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What are the most common distance-vector routing protocols?
2. What are the most common link-state protocols?
3. What is convergence?
4. What term is used when specific routes are combined into one route?
5. True or false: With the help of FSL, STP avoids or eliminates loops on
Layer 2 bridges.
Answers
1. Distance-vector routing protocols include RIP, RIPv2, and EIGRP. Of
these, RIPv2 would be the most popular from the exam’s perspective.
2. Link-state protocols include OSPF and IS-IS.
3. Convergence represents the time it takes routers to detect change on the
network.
4. The term route aggregation applies when specific routes are combined
into one route.
5. False. With the help of Spanning Tree Algorithm (STA), STP avoids or
eliminates loops on a Layer 2 bridge.
Because today’s networks branch out between interconnected offices all over the
world, networks may have any number of separate physical network segments
connected using routers. Routers are devices that direct data between networks.
Essentially, when a router receives data, it must determine the destination for the
data and send it there. To accomplish this, the network router uses two key
pieces of information: the gateway address and the routing tables.
The Default Gateway
A default gateway is the router’s IP address, which is the pathway to any and all
remote networks. To get a packet of information from one network to another,
the packet is sent to the default gateway, which helps forward the packet to its

destination network. Computers that live on the other side of routers are said to
be on remote networks. Without default gateways, Internet communication is not
possible because your computer does not have a way to send a packet destined
for any other network. On the workstation, it is common for the default gateway
option to be configured automatically through DHCP configuration.
Routing Tables
Before a data packet is forwarded, a chart is reviewed to determine the best
possible path for the data to reach its destination. This chart is the computer’s
routing table. Maintaining an accurate routing table is essential for effective data
delivery. Every computer on a TCP/IP network has a routing table stored locally.
Figure 3.3 shows the routing table on a Windows system.
Note
You can use the route print command to view the routing table on a
client system.

FIGURE 3.3 The routing table on a Windows system
As shown in Figure 3.3, the information in the routing table includes the
following:
 Network Destination: The host IP address.
 Netmask: The subnet mask value for the destination parameter.
 Gateway: Where the IP address is sent. This may be a gateway server, a
router, or another system acting as a gateway.
 Interface: The address of the interface that’s used to send the packet to the
destination.

 Metric: A measurement of the directness of a route. The lower the metric,
the faster the route. If multiple routes exist for data to travel, the one with the
lowest metric is chosen.
Routing tables play an important role in the network routing process. They are
the means by which the data is directed through the network. For this reason, a
routing table needs to be two things. It must be up to date and complete. The
router can get the information for the routing table in two ways: through static
routing or dynamic routing.
Static Routing
In environments that use static routing, routes and route information are
manually entered into the routing tables. Not only can this be a time-consuming
task, but also errors are more common. In addition, when a change occurs to the
network’s layout, or topology, statically configured routers must be manually
updated with the changes. Again, this is a time-consuming and potentially error-
laden task. For these reasons, static routing is suited to only the smallest
environments, with perhaps just one or two routers. A far more practical
solution, particularly in larger environments, is to use dynamic routing.
You can add a static route to a routing table using the route add command.
To do this, specify the route, the network mask, and the destination IP address of
the network card your router will use to get the packet to its destination network.
The syntax for the route add command is as follows:
Click here to view code image
route add 192.168.2.1 mask (255.255.255.0) 192.168.2.4
Adding a static address is not permanent; in other words, it will most likely be
gone when the system reboots. To make it persistent (the route is still in the
routing table on boot), you can use the -p switch with the command.
ExamAlert
The route add command adds a static route to the routing table. The
route add command with the -p switch makes the static route
persistent. You might want to try this on your own before taking the
Network+ exam.

Distributed switching is typically associated with telephone networks and is
nothing more than an architecture in which multiple processor-controlled
switching units are distributed. In this environment, there is usually a hierarchy
of switches, with a centralized host switch working with remote switches located
close to concentrations of users.
Switching Methods
For systems to communicate on a network, the data needs a communication path
or multiple paths on which to travel. To allow entities to communicate, these
paths move the information from one location to another and back. This is the
function of switching, which provides communication pathways between two
endpoints and manages how data flows between them. Following are two of the
more common switching methods used today:
 Packet switching
 Circuit switching
ExamAlert
You will be expected to identify the differences between packet and circuit
switching methods.
Packet Switching
In packet switching, messages are broken into smaller pieces called packets.
Each packet is assigned source, destination, and intermediate node addresses.
Packets are required to have this information because they do not always use the
same path or route to get to their intended destination. Referred to as
independent routing, this is one of the advantages of packet switching.
Independent routing enables better use of available bandwidth by letting packets
travel different routes to avoid high-traffic areas. Independent routing also
enables packets to take an alternative route if a particular route is unavailable for
some reason.
Note
Packet switching is the most popular switching method for networks and is

used on most WANs.
In a packet-switching system, when packets are sent onto the network, the
sending device is responsible for choosing the best path for the packet. This path
might change in transit, and the receiving device can receive the packets in a
random or nonsequential order. When this happens, the receiving device waits
until all the data packets are received, and then it reconstructs them according to
their built-in sequence numbers.
Two types of packet-switching methods are used on networks:
 Virtual-circuit packet switching: A logical connection is established
between the source and the destination device. This logical connection is
established when the sending device initiates a conversation with the
receiving device. The logical communication path between the two devices
can remain active for as long as the two devices are available or can be used
to send packets once. After the sending process has completed, the line can
be closed.
 Datagram packet switching: Unlike virtual-circuit packet switching,
datagram packet switching does not establish a logical connection between
the sending and transmitting devices. The packets in datagram packet
switching are independently sent, meaning that they can take different paths
through the network to reach their intended destination. To do this, each
packet must be individually addressed to determine its source and
destination. This method ensures that packets take the easiest possible routes
to their destination and avoid high-traffic areas. Datagram packet switching
is mainly used on the Internet.
Circuit Switching
In contrast to the packet switching method, circuit switching requires a dedicated
physical connection between the sending and receiving devices. The most
commonly used analogy to represent circuit switching is a telephone
conversation in which the parties involved have a dedicated link between them
for the duration of the conversation. When either party disconnects, the circuit is
broken, and the data path is lost. This is an accurate representation of how circuit
switching works with network and data transmissions. The sending system
establishes a physical connection, and the data is transmitted between the two.
When the transmission is complete, the channel is closed.

Some clear advantages to the circuit switching technology make it well suited
for certain applications, such as public switched telephone network (PSTN) and
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN). The primary advantage is that after
a connection is established, a consistent and reliable connection exists between
the sending and receiving devices. This allows for transmissions at a guaranteed
rate of transfer.
Like all technologies, circuit switching has its downsides. As you might imagine,
a dedicated communication line can be inefficient. After the physical connection
is established, it is unavailable to any other sessions until the transmission
completes. Again, using the phone call analogy, this would be like a caller trying
to reach another caller and getting a busy signal. Circuit switching therefore can
be fraught with long connection delays.
Comparing Switching Methods
Table 3.7 provides an overview of the various switching technologies.
TABLE 3.7 Comparison of Switching Methods
Switching
Method
Pros
Cons
Key Features
Packet
switching
Packets can
be routed
around
network
congestion.
Packet
switching
makes
efficient use
of network
bandwidth.
Packets can
become lost while
taking alternative
routes to the
destination.
Messages are
divided into
packets that contain
source and
destination
information.
The two types of packet
switching are datagram and
virtual circuit. Datagram
packets are independently
sent and can take different
paths throughout the
network. Virtual circuit uses
a logical connection between
the source and destination
devices.
Circuit
switching
Offers a
dedicated
transmission
channel that
is reserved
until it is
disconnected.
Dedicated channels
can cause delays
because a channel
is unavailable until
one side
disconnects. Uses a
dedicated physical
Offers the capability of
storing messages temporarily
to reduce network
congestion.

link between the
sending and
receiving devices.
Software-Defined Networking
Software-defined networking (SDN) is a dynamic approach to computer
networking intended to allow administrators to get around the static limitations
of physical architecture associated with traditional networks. This is
accomplished through the implementation of technologies such as the Cisco
Systems Open Network Environment.
The goal of SDN is to not only add dynamic capabilities to the network, but to
also reduce IT costs through implementation of cloud architectures. SDN
combines network and application services into centralized platforms that can
automate provisioning and configuration of the entire infrastructure.
Dynamic Routing
In a dynamic routing environment, routers use special routing protocols to
communicate. The purpose of these protocols is simple: They enable routers to
pass on information about themselves to other routers so that other routers can
build routing tables. Two types of routing protocols are used: the older distance-
vector protocols and the newer link-state protocols. A third type, hybrid,
combines features of these two.
Note
The use of any routing protocol to advertise routes that have been learned
(through another protocol, through static configuration, and so on) is known
as route redistribution.
Distance-Vector Routing
With distance-vector router communications, each router on the network
communicates all the routes it knows about to the routers to which it is directly
attached. In this way, routers communicate only with their router neighbors and
are unaware of other routers that may be on the network.
The communication between distance-vector routers is known as hops. On the

network, each router represents one hop, so a network using six routers has five
hops between the first and last router.
The tracert command is used in a Windows environment to see how many
hops a packet takes to reach a destination (the same functionality exists in Mac
OS and Linux with the traceroute command). To try this at the command
prompt, enter tracert comptia.org. Figure 3.4 shows an example of the output
on a Windows workstation.
FIGURE 3.4 The results of running tracert on a Windows system
In addition to the tracert command in IPv4, you can get similar functionality
in IPv6 with tracert -6, traceroute6, and traceroute -6.
Several distance-vector protocols are in use today, including Routing
Information Protocol (RIP and RIPv2), and Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing
Protocol (EIGRP):
 RIP: As mentioned earlier, RIP is a distance-vector routing protocol. RIP is
limited to a maximum of 15 hops. One of the downsides of the protocol is
that the original specification required router updates to be transmitted every
30 seconds. On smaller networks this is acceptable; however, this can result
in a huge traffic load on larger networks. The original RIP specification also
did not support router authentication, leaving it vulnerable to attacks.
 RIPv2: The second version of RIP dealt with the shortcomings of the
original design. Authentication was included to enable secure transmissions;

also, it changed from a network-wide broadcast discovery method to a
multicast method to reduce overall network traffic. However, to maintain
compatibility with RIP, RIPv2 still supports a limit of 15 hops.
 EIGRP: This protocol enables routers to exchange information more
efficiently than earlier network protocols. EIGRP uses its neighbors to help
determine routing information. Routers configured to use EIGRP keep copies
of their neighbors’ routing information and query these tables to help find the
best possible route for transmissions to follow. EIGRP uses Diffusing Update
Algorithm (DUAL) to determine the best route to a destination.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you can identify the differences between the distance-vector
protocols discussed here.
Distance-vector routing protocols operate by having each router send updates
about all the other routers it knows about to the routers directly connected to it.
The routers use these updates to compile their routing tables. The updates are
sent automatically every 30 or 60 seconds. The interval depends on the routing
protocol used. Apart from the periodic updates, routers can also be configured to
send a triggered update if a change in the network topology is detected. The
process by which routers learn of a change in the network topology is called
convergence.
Routing loops can occur on networks with slow convergence. Routing loops
occur when the routing tables on the routers are slow to update and a redundant
communication cycle is created between routers. Two strategies can combat
potential routing loops:
 Split horizon: Works by preventing the router from advertising a route back
to the other router from which it was learned. This prevents two nodes from
bouncing packets back and forth between them, creating a loop.
 Poison reverse (also called split horizon with poison reverse): Dictates
that the route is advertised back on the interface from which it was learned,
but it has a hop count of infinity, which tells the node that the route is
unreachable.

ExamAlert
If a change in the routing is made, it takes some time for the routers to
detect and accommodate this change. This is known as convergence.
Although distance-vector protocols can maintain routing tables, they have three
problems:
 The periodic update system can make the update process slow.
 The periodic updates can create large amounts of network traffic—much of
the time unnecessarily, because the network’s topology should rarely change.
 Perhaps the most significant problem is that because the routers know about
only the next hop in the journey, incorrect information can be propagated
between routers, creating routing loops.
ExamAlert
Know that “next hop” in routing is the next closest router that a packet
can go through.
Link-State Routing
A router that uses a link-state protocol differs from a router that uses a distance-
vector protocol because it builds a map of the entire network and then holds that
map in memory. On a network that uses a link-state protocol, routers send link-
state advertisements (LSAs) that contain information about the networks to
which they connect. The LSAs are sent to every router on the network, thus
enabling the routers to build their network maps.
When the network maps on each router are complete, the routers update each
other at a given time, just like with a distance-vector protocol; however, the
updates occur much less frequently with link-state protocols than with distance-
vector protocols. The only other circumstance under which updates are sent is if
a change in the topology is detected, at which point the routers use LSAs to
detect the change and update their routing tables. This mechanism, combined
with the fact that routers hold maps of the entire network, makes convergence on
a link-state-based network quickly occur.

Although it might seem like link-state protocols are an obvious choice over
distance-vector protocols, routers on a link-state-based network require more
powerful hardware and more RAM than those on a distance-vector-based
network. Not only do the routing tables need to be calculated, but they must also
be stored. A router that uses distance-vector protocols need only maintain a
small database of the routes accessible by the routers to which it is directly
connected. A router that uses link-state protocols must maintain a database of all
the routers in the entire network.
Link-state protocols include the following:
 Open Shortest Path First (OSPF): A link-state routing protocol based on
the shortest path first (SPF) algorithm to find the least-cost path to any
destination in the network. In operation, each router using OSPF sends a list
of its neighbors to other routers on the network. From this information,
routers can determine the network design and the shortest path for data to
travel.
 Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System (IS-IS): A link-state
protocol that discovers the shortest path for data to travel using the SPF
algorithm. IS-IS routers distribute topology information to other routers,
enabling them to make the best path decisions.
So what’s the difference between the two? OSPF (a network layer protocol) is
more often used in medium to large enterprise networks because of its special
tunneling features. IS-IS is more often used in large ISP networks because of its
stability features and because it can support more routers.
IGP Versus EGP
Now that routing protocols have been discussed, you need to understand the
difference between interior gateway protocols (IGPs) and exterior gateway
protocols (EGPs). An IGP identifies the protocols used to exchange routing
information between routers within a LAN or interconnected LANs. IGP is not a
protocol itself but describes a category of link-state routing protocols that
support a single, confined geographic area such as a LAN. IGPs fall into two
categories: distance-vector protocols, which include RIPv2, and link-state
protocols, which include OSPF and IS-IS.
Whereas IGPs are geographically confined, EGPs are used to route information
outside the network, such as on the Internet. On the Internet, an EGP is required.

An EGP is a distance-vector protocol commonly used between hosts on the
Internet to exchange routing table information. Border Gateway Protocol (BGP)
is an example of an EGP.
Hybrid Routing Protocols
When you want the best of both worlds, distance vector and link state, you can
turn to a hybrid protocol. The one hybrid protocol to know for this exam is the
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). BGP can be used between gateway hosts on
the Internet. BGP examines the routing table, which contains a list of known
routers, the addresses they can reach, and a cost metric associated with the path
to each router so that the best available route is chosen. BGP communicates
between the routers using TCP. BGP supports the use of autonomous system
numbers (ASNs): globally unique numbers used by connected groups of IP
networks that share the same routing policy.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify the link-state and distance-vector routing
protocols used on TCP/IP networks, as well as the BGP hybrid.
Network Traffic
Network access methods govern how systems access the network media and
send data. Access methods are necessary to ensure that systems on the network
can communicate with each other. Without an access method, two systems could
communicate at the exclusion of every other system. Access methods ensure that
everyone gets an opportunity to use the network.
Several access methods are used in networks; the most popular are CSMA/CD
and CSMA/CA. Look at CSMA/CD first and then CSMA/CA.
Carrier sense multiple access/collision detection (CSMA/CD), which is defined
in the IEEE 802.3 standard, is the most common media access method because it
is associated with 802.3 Ethernet networking, which is by far the most popular
networking standard.
On a network that uses CSMA/CD, when a system wants to send data to another
system, it first checks to see whether the network medium is free. It must do this

because each piece of network medium used in a LAN can carry only one signal
at a time. If the sending node detects that the medium is free, it transmits, and
the data is sent to the destination. It seems simple.
Now, if it always worked like this, you wouldn’t need the CD part of CSMA/CD.
Unfortunately, in networking, as in life, things do not always go as planned. The
problem arises when two systems attempt to transmit at the same time. It might
seem unlikely that two systems would pick the same moment to send data, but
you are dealing with communications that occur many times in a single second
—and most networks have more than two machines. Imagine that 200 people are
in a room. The room is silent, but then two people decide to say something at the
same time. Before they start to speak, they check (listen) to see whether
someone else is speaking; because no one else is speaking, they begin to talk.
The result is two people speaking at the same time, which is similar to a network
collision.
Collision detection works by detecting fragments of the transmission on the
network media that result when two systems try to talk at the same time. The two
systems wait for a randomly calculated amount of time before attempting to
transmit again. This amount of time—a matter of milliseconds—is known as the
backoff period or jam signal.
ExamAlert
Know that collisions do occur with CSMA. You can detect them (CD) or
attempt to avoid them (CA).
When the backoff period has elapsed, the system attempts to transmit again. If
the system does not succeed on the second attempt, it keeps retrying until it
gives up and reports an error.
ExamAlert
CSMA/CD is known as a contention media access method because
systems contend for access to the media.
The upside of CSMA/CD is that it has relatively low overhead, meaning that not
much is involved in the workings of the system. The downside is that as more

systems are added to the network, more collisions occur, and the network
becomes slower. The performance of a network that uses CSMA/CD degrades
exponentially as more systems are added. Its low overhead means that
CSMA/CD systems theoretically can achieve greater speeds than high-overhead
systems. However, because collisions take place, the chance of all that speed
translating into usable bandwidth is relatively low.
ExamAlert
On a network that uses CSMA/CD, every node has equal access to the
network media.
Despite its problems, CSMA/CD is an efficient system. As a result, rather than
replace it with some other technology, workarounds have been created that
reduce the likelihood of collisions. One such strategy is the use of network
switches that create multiple collision domains and therefore reduce the impact
of collisions on performance.
Instead of collision detection, as with CSMA/CD, the carrier sense multiple
access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) access method uses signal
avoidance rather than detection. In a networked environment, CSMA/CA is the
access mechanism used with the 802.11 wireless standards.
On CSMA/CA networks, each computer signals its intent to transmit data signals
before any data is actually sent. When a networked system detects a potential
collision, it waits before sending the transmission, allowing systems to avoid
transmission collisions. The CSMA/CA access method uses a random backoff
time that determines how long to wait before trying to send data on the network.
When the backoff time expires, the system again “listens” to verify a clear
channel on which to transmit. If the medium is still busy, another backoff
interval is initiated that is less than the first. The process continues until the wait
time reaches zero, and the medium is clear.
CSMA/CA uses a broadcast method to signal its intention to transmit data.
Network broadcasts create a considerable amount of network traffic and can
cause network congestion, which could slow down the entire network. Because
CSMA/CD and CSMA/CA differ only in terms of detection and avoidance, they
have similar advantages and disadvantages.

ExamAlert
CSMA/CA is the access mechanism used with the 802.11 wireless
standards. Know that CSMA/CA uses broadcasts.
Note
The CSMA/CA access method uses a “listen before talking” strategy. Any
system wanting to transmit data must first verify that the channel is clear
before transmitting, thereby avoiding potential collisions.
Routing Metrics
Following are several metrics related to routing that you should know for the
exam:
 Hop counts are the number of hops necessary to reach a node. A hop count
of infinity means the route is unreachable.
 The maximum transmission unit (MTU) defines the largest data unit that can
be passed without fragmentation.
 Bandwidth specifies the maximum packet size permitted for Internet
transmission.
 Costs are the numbers associated with traveling from point A to point B
(often hops). The lower the total costs (the fewer links in the route), the more
that route should be favored.
 Administrative distance is a numerical value assigned to a route based on its
perceived quality. The number may be manually assigned, or assigned based
on an algorithm employed by a routing protocol. The lower the number, the
better the route is believed to be: 0 is the best and 255 is the worst.
 Latency is the amount of time it takes for a packet to travel from one
location to another.
In the following section, we look at spanning tree protocols, but before we do, it
is important to point out here that they are being replaced by shortest path
bridging (SPB), based on IEEE 802.1aq. The big advantage of SPB is that it
allows for multiple equal cost paths, leading to faster convergence times and

improving the use of mesh topologies for increased bandwidth.
Virtual Local-Area Networks
The word virtual is used a lot in the computing world—perhaps too often. For
Virtual Local-Area Networks (VLANs), the word virtual does little to help
explain the technology. Perhaps a more descriptive name for the VLAN concept
might have been segmented. For now at least, use virtual.
Tip
802.1Q is the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
specification developed to ensure interoperability of VLAN technologies from
the various vendors.
VLANs are used for network segmentation, a strategy that significantly
increases the network’s performance capability, removes potential performance
bottlenecks, and can even increase network security. A VLAN is a group of
connected computers that act as if they are on their own network segment, even
though they might not be. For instance, suppose that you work in a three-story
building in which the advertising employees are spread over all three floors. A
VLAN can enable all the advertising personnel to be combined and access
network resources as if they were connected on the same physical segment. This
virtual segment can be isolated from other network segments. In effect, it would
appear to the advertising group that they were on a network by themselves.
ExamAlert
VLANs enable you to create multiple broadcast domains on a single
switch. In essence, this is the same as creating separate networks for each
VLAN.
VLANs offer some clear advantages. Logically segmenting a network gives
administrators flexibility beyond the restrictions of the physical network design
and cable infrastructure. VLANs enable easier administration because the
network can be divided into well-organized sections. Furthermore, you can
increase security by isolating certain network segments from others. For

example, you can segment the marketing personnel from finance or the
administrators from the students. VLANs can ease the burden on overworked
routers and reduce broadcast storms. Table 3.8 summarizes the benefits of
VLANs.
TABLE 3.8 Benefits of VLANs
Advantage
Description
Increased
security
With the creation of logical (virtual) boundaries, network
segments can be isolated.
Increased
performance
By reducing broadcast traffic throughout the network, VLANs
free up bandwidth.
Organization
Network users and resources that are linked and that
communicate frequently can be grouped in a VLAN.
Simplified
administration
With a VLAN the network administrator’s job is easier when
moving users between LAN segments, recabling, addressing
new stations, and reconfiguring switches and routers.
VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP), a Cisco proprietary protocol, is used to reduce
administration in the switched network. You can, for example, put all switches in
the same VTP domain and reduce the need to configure the same VLAN
everywhere.
Trunking falls under 802.1Q and a trunk port is one that is assigned to carry
traffic for a specific switch (as opposed to an access port). The trunk port is
usually fiber optic and used to interconnect switches to make a network, to
interconnect LANs to make a WAN, and so on.
ExamAlert
IEEE 802.1Q also focuses on tagging and untagging in VLANs. Tagging
means that the port will send out a packet with a header that has a tag
number that matches its VLAN tag number. On any given port you can
have just one untagged VLAN, and that will be the default port traffic will
go to unless it is tagged to go elsewhere.
Port binding determines whether and how a port is bound. This can be done in

one of three ways: static, dynamic, or ephemeral. Conversely, port aggregation
is the combining of multiple ports on a switch, and it can be done one of three
ways: auto, desirable, or on.
The Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP) is a common aggregation
protocol that allows multiple physical ports to be bound together. Most devices
allow you to bind up to four, but some go up to eight.
VLAN Membership
You can use several methods to determine VLAN membership or how devices
are assigned to a specific VLAN. The following sections describe the common
methods to determine how VLAN membership is assigned:
 Protocol-based VLANs: With protocol-based VLAN membership,
computers are assigned to VLANs using the protocol in use and the Layer 3
address. For example, this method enables a particular IP subnet to have its
own VLAN.
The term Layer 3 address refers to one of the most important networking
concepts, the Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) reference model. This
conceptual model, created by the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) in 1978 and revised in 1984, describes a network
architecture that enables data to be passed between computer systems. There
are seven layers in total, which are discussed in detail in Chapter 2, “Models,
Ports, Protocols, and Networking Services.” In brief, Layer 3, known as the
network layer, identifies the mechanisms by which data can be moved
between two networks or systems, such as transport protocols, which in the
case of TCP/IP is IP.
Although VLAN membership may be based on Layer 3 information, this has
nothing to do with routing or routing functions. The IP numbers are used
only to determine the membership in a particular VLAN, not to determine
routing.
 Port-based VLANs: Port-based VLANs require that specific ports on a
network switch be assigned to a VLAN. For example, ports 1 through 4 may
be assigned to marketing, ports 5 through 7 may be assigned to sales, and so
on. Using this method, a switch determines VLAN membership by taking
note of the port used by a particular packet. Figure 3.5 shows how the ports
on a server could be used for port-based VLAN membership.

FIGURE 3.5 Port-based VLAN membership
 MAC address-based VLANs: The Media Access Control (MAC) address is
a unique 12-digit hexadecimal number that is stamped into every network
interface card. Every device used on a network has this unique address built
in to it. It cannot be modified in any way. As you may have guessed, the
MAC address type of a VLAN assigns membership according to the
workstation’s MAC address. To do this, the switch must keep track of the
MAC addresses that belong to each VLAN. The advantage of this method is
that a workstation computer can be moved anywhere in an office without
needing to be reconfigured. Because the MAC address does not change, the
workstation remains a member of a particular VLAN. Table 3.9 provides
examples of the membership of MAC address-based VLANs.
TABLE 3.9 MAC Address-Based VLANs
MAC Address
VLAN
Description
44-45-53-54-00-00
1
Sales
44-45-53-54-13-12
2
Marketing
44-45-53-54-D3-01
3
Administration
44-45-53-54-F5-17
1
Sales
VLAN Segmentation
The capability to logically segment a LAN provides a level of administrative
flexibility, organization, and security. Whether the LAN is segmented using the
protocol, MAC address, or port, the result is the same: The network is
segmented. The segmentation is used for several reasons, including security,

organization, and performance. To give you a better idea of how this works,
Figure 3.6 shows a network that doesn’t use a VLAN.
FIGURE 3.6 Network configuration without using a VLAN
In Figure 3.6, all systems on the network can see each other. That is, the students
can see the finance and administrator computers. Figure 3.7 shows how this
network may look using a VLAN.

FIGURE 3.7 Network configuration using a VLAN
The Spanning Tree Protocol
An Ethernet network can have only a single active path between devices on a
network. When multiple active paths are available, switching loops can occur.
Switching loops are the result of having more than one path between two
switches in a network. Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) is designed to prevent
these loops from occurring.
STP is used with network bridges and switches. With the help of Spanning Tree
Algorithm (STA), STP avoids or eliminates loops on a Layer 2 bridge.
Note
As a heads up, talking about STP refers to Layer 2 of the OSI model. Both
bridges and most switches work at Layer 2; routers work at Layer 3, as do
Layer 3 switches.

STA enables a bridge or switch to dynamically work around loops in a network’s
topology. Both STA and STP were developed to prevent loops in the network
and provide a way to route around any failed network bridge or ports. If the
network topology changes, or if a switch port or bridge fails, STA creates a new
spanning tree, notifies the other bridges of the problem, and routes around it.
STP is the protocol, and STA is the algorithm STP uses to correct loops.
If a particular port has a problem, STP can perform a number of actions,
including blocking the port, disabling the port, or forwarding data destined for
that port to another port. It does this to ensure that no redundant links or paths
are found in the spanning tree and that only a single active path exists between
any two network nodes.
STP uses bridge protocol data units (BPDUs) to identify the status of ports and
bridges across the network. BPDUs are simple data messages exchanged
between switches. BPDUs contain information on ports and provide the status of
those ports to other switches. If a BPDU message finds a loop in the network, it
is managed by shutting down a particular port or bridge interface.
Redundant paths and potential loops can be avoided within ports in several
ways:
 Blocking: A blocked port accepts BPDU messages but does not forward
them.
 Disabled: The port is offline and does not accept BPDU messages.
 Forwarding: The port is part of the active spanning tree topology and
forwards BPDU messages to other switches.
 Learning: In a learning state, the port is not part of the active spanning tree
topology but can take over if another port fails. Learning ports receive
BPDUs and identify changes to the topology when made.
 Listening: A listening port receives BPDU messages and monitors for
changes to the network topology.
Most of the time, ports are in either a forwarding or blocked state. When a
disruption to the topology occurs or a bridge or switch fails for some reason,
listening and learning states are used.
ExamAlert

STP actively monitors the network, searching for redundant links. When
it finds some, it shuts them down to prevent switching loops. STP uses
STA to create a topology database to find and then remove the redundant
links. With STP operating from the switch, data is forwarded on
approved paths, which limits the potential for loops.
Interface Configuration and Switch Management
Aside from VLAN trunking (802.1Q), binding, and a number of other
possibilities previously discussed in this chapter, when you configure a switch
interface there are often other options that you can choose or tweak. These
include the following:
 Tag versus untag VLANs: Tagging should be used if you are trunking.
Because trunking combines VLANs, you need a way to identify which
packet belongs to which VLAN; this is easily accomplished by placing a
VLAN header (a tag) in the data packet. The only VLAN that is not tagged
in a trunk is the native VLAN, and frames are transmitted to it unchanged.
 Default VLAN: The default VLAN is mandatory (cannot be deleted) and is
used for communication between switches (such as configuring STP). In the
Cisco world, the default VLAN is VLAN 1.
 Port mirroring: There are a number of reasons why port mirroring can be
used (duplicating the data for one port and sending it to another). One of the
most common is to monitor the traffic. This can be done locally or remotely
—the latter using a remote protocol such as Remote Switched Port Analyzer
(RSPAN) instead of Switched Port Analyzer (SPAN).
 Authentication, accounting, and authorization (AAA): AAA overrides
can also be configured for network security parameters as needed. AAA is
the primary method for access control and often uses RADIUS, TACACS+,
or Kerberos to accomplish integrated security.
 Usernames/passwords: It is possible to configure, without AAA, local
username authentication using a configured username and password. This
does not provide the same level of access control as AAA does and is not
recommended.
 Virtual consoles and terminals: The console port (often called the virtual
console or VC) is often a serial or parallel port, and it is possible for virtual
ports to connect to physical ports. The virtual terminal (vt or vty) is a remote

port connected to through Telnet or a similar utility and, as an administrator,
you will want to configure an access list to limit who can use it.
ExamAlert
Know that the simplest way to protect a virtual terminal interface is to
configure a username and password for it and prevent unauthorized
logins.
 Other: Other common configuration parameters include the speed, whether
duplexing will be used or not, IP addressing, and the default gateway.
Trunking
In computer networking, the term trunking refers to the use of multiple network
cables or ports in parallel to increase the link speed beyond the limits of any one
cable or port. Sound confusing? If you have network experience, you might have
heard the term link aggregation, which is essentially the same thing. It is using
multiple cables to increase the throughput. The higher-capacity trunking link is
used to connect switches to form larger networks.
Note
Aggregation is a popular term anytime multiples are combined. The term
route aggregation applies when specific routes are combined into one route,
and this is accomplished in BGP with the aggregate-address command.
VLAN trunking is the application of trunking to the virtual LAN—now common
with routers, firewalls, VMware hosts, and wireless access points. VLAN
trunking provides a simple and cheap way to offer a nearly unlimited number of
virtual network connections. The requirements are only that the switch, the
network adapter, and the OS drivers all support VLANs. The VLAN Trunking
Protocol (VTP) is a proprietary protocol from Cisco for just such a purpose.
Port Mirroring
You need some way to monitor network traffic and monitor how well a switch
works. This is the function of port mirroring. To use port mirroring,

administrators configure a copy of all inbound and outbound traffic to go to a
certain port. A protocol analyzer examines the data sent to the port and therefore
does not interrupt the flow of regular traffic.
ExamAlert
Port mirroring enables administrators to monitor the traffic outbound
and inbound to the switch.
Port Authentication
Port authentication is what it sounds like—authenticating users on a port-by-port
basis. One standard that specifies port authentication is the 802.1X standard,
often associated with wireless security. Systems that attempt to connect to a
LAN port must be authenticated. Those who are authenticated can access the
LAN; those who are not authenticated get no further.
Power over Ethernet
The purpose of Power over Ethernet (PoE) is pretty much described in its name.
Essentially, PoE is a technology defined by 802.3af that enables electrical power
to transmit over twisted-pair Ethernet cable. This was enhanced/extended in
2009 by 802.3at (also known as PoE+) to be able to provide more power
(increasing from 12.95W to 25.5W) and raising the maximum current (from
350mA to 600mA).
The power transfers, along with data, to provide power to remote devices. These
devices may include remote switches, wireless access points, Voice over IP
(VoIP) equipment, and more.
One of the key advantages of PoE is the centralized management of power. For
instance, without PoE, all remote devices need to be independently powered. In
the case of a power outage, each of these devices requires an uninterruptible
power supply (UPS) to continue operating. A UPS is a battery pack that enables
devices to operate for a period of time. With PoE supplying power, a UPS is
required only in the main facility. In addition, centralized power management
enables administrators to power remote equipment up or down.
DMZ

An important firewall-related concept is the demilitarized zone (DMZ),
sometimes called a perimeter network. A DMZ is part of a network where you
place servers that must be accessible by sources both outside and inside your
network. However, the DMZ is not connected directly to either network, and it
must always be accessed through the firewall. The military term DMZ is used
because it describes an area that has little or no enforcement or policing.
Using DMZs gives your firewall configuration an extra level of flexibility,
protection, and complexity. By using a DMZ, you can create an additional step
that makes it more difficult for an intruder to gain access to the internal network.
Although it is not impossible for an intruder to gain access to the internal
network through a DMZ, it is difficult.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify the purpose of a DMZ.
MAC Address Table
It was mentioned earlier that the MAC (Media Access Control) address is a
unique 12-digit hexadecimal number that is stamped into every network
interface card. This value can be used by a switch to “switch” frames between
LAN ports efficiently. When the switch receives a frame, it associates the MAC
address of the sending network device with the LAN port on which it was
received and dynamically builds a MAC address table by using the source
address of the frames received. Then, when the switch receives a frame for a
MAC destination address not listed in its address table, it floods the frame to all
LAN ports of the same VLAN except the port that received the frame.
When a destination station replies, the switch adds the MAC source address and
port ID to this address table. Now that it knows the value, the switch can then
forward all subsequent frames to a single LAN port without flooding all LAN
ports.
ExamAlert
For the exam, know that all Ethernet switching ports maintain MAC
address tables.

Switch Management
Devices can be managed several ways: using Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP), Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI), or Intelligent
Platform Management Interface (IPMI). If the monitoring of devices is done
remotely, this is known as out-of-band management; otherwise, it is known as
in-band management.
ExamAlert
For the exam, associate in-band management with local management (the
most common method) and out-of-band management with remote.
Managed and Unmanaged
If the switch has any configuration interface or options, it is said to be managed.
If it does not have any configuration interface or options, it is said to be
unmanaged. Although not always the case, it is generally such that unmanaged
devices are less-expensive plug-and-play devices intended for a home or small
office.
Quality of Service
Quality of Service (QoS) describes the strategies used to manage and increase the
flow of network traffic. QoS features enable administrators to predict bandwidth
use, monitor that use, and control it to ensure that bandwidth is available to the
applications that need it. These applications generally can be broken into two
categories:
 Latency sensitive: These applications need bandwidth for quick delivery
where network lag time impacts their effectiveness. This includes voice and
video transfer. For example, Voice over IP (VoIP) would be difficult to use if
there were a significant lag time in the conversation.
 Latency insensitive: Controlling bandwidth also involves managing
latency-insensitive applications. This includes bulk data transfers such as
huge backup procedures and File Transfer Protocol (FTP) transfers.
With bandwidth limited, and networks becoming increasingly congested, it
becomes more difficult to deliver latency-sensitive traffic. If network traffic

continues to increase and you cannot always increase bandwidth, the choice is to
prioritize traffic to ensure timely delivery. This is where QoS comes into play.
QoS ensures the delivery of applications, such as videoconferencing (and related
video applications), VoIP telephony, and unified communications without
adversely affecting network throughput. QoS achieves more efficient use of
network resources by differentiating between latency-insensitive traffic such as
fax data and latency-sensitive streaming media.
Two important components of QoS are DSCP and CoS. Differentiated services
code point (also known as Diffserv) is an architecture that specifies a simple and
coarse-grained mechanism for classifying and managing network traffic and
providing QoS on modern networks. Class of service (CoS) is a parameter that is
used in data and voice to differentiate the types of payloads being transmitted.
One important strategy for QoS is priority queuing. Essentially, traffic is placed
in order based of its importance of delivery time. All data is given access, but the
more important and latency-sensitive data is given higher priority.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you understand QoS and the methods used to ensure QoS on
networks. Know that it is used with high-bandwidth applications such as
VoIP, video applications, and unified communications.
Traffic Shaping
The demand for bandwidth on networks has never been higher. Internet and
intranet applications demand a large amount of bandwidth. Administrators must
ensure that despite all these demands, adequate bandwidth is available for
mission-critical applications while few resources are dedicated to spam or peer-
to-peer downloads. To do this, you need to monitor network traffic to ensure that
data flows as you need it to.
The term traffic shaping describes the mechanisms used to control bandwidth
usage on the network. With this, administrators can control who uses bandwidth,
for what purpose, and what time of day bandwidth can be used. Traffic shaping
establishes priorities for data traveling to and from the Internet and within the
network.
A packet shaper essentially performs two key functions: monitoring and shaping.

Monitoring includes identifying where usage is high and the time of day. After
that information is obtained, administrators can customize or shape bandwidth
usage for the best needs of the network.
Access Control Lists
When it comes to computing, many things serve a similar function and go by the
name of an access control list (ACL). When it comes to websites, determining
which ones users can or cannot access is usually done through a list of allowed
or nonallowed websites. When it comes to routing and switching, an ACL
provides rules that are applied to port numbers or IP addresses that are available
on a host or other Layer 3 device, each with a list of hosts and/or networks
permitted to use the service.
Although these two uses of ACL may seem disparate, in both cases, the ACL is
the list of what is allowed by the entity trying to access. An alternative approach
that can serve the same purpose is to reverse the situation and deny access to all
entities (pages or ports, depending on the case) except those that appear in an
“allowed” list. This approach has high administrative overhead and can greatly
limit the productive benefits available.
ExamAlert
Remember that the ACL is a list of allowed or nonallowed services, ports,
websites, and the like.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following best describes the function of the default gateway?
 A. It provides the route for destinations outside the local network.
 B. It enables a single Internet connection to be used by several users.
 C. It identifies the local subnet and formulates a routing table.
 D. It is used to communicate in a multiple-platform environment.
2. What is the term used for the number of hops necessary to reach a node?
 A. Jump list

 B. Link stops
 C. Connections
 D. Hop count
3. Which of the following enables administrators to monitor the traffic
outbound and inbound to the switch?
 A. Spanning Tree Algorithm
 B. Trunking
 C. HSRP
 D. Port mirroring
4. Which of the following is the IEEE specification developed to ensure
interoperability of VLAN technologies from the various vendors?
 A. 802.1z
 B. 802.1s
 C. 802.1Q
 D. 802.1X
5. Which of the following is a proprietary protocol from Cisco used to reduce
administration in the switched network?
 A. VTP
 B. VNMP
 C. VCPN
 D. VNMC
6. Which of the following is PoE+ also known as?
 A. 802.3aa
 B. 802.3ac
 C. 802.3af
 D. 802.3at

Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. The default gateway enables systems on one local subnet to access those
on another. Answer B does not accurately describe the role of the default
gateway. Answers C and D do not describe the main function of a default
gateway, which is to provide the route for destinations outside the local
network.
2. D. The hop count is the number of hops necessary to reach a node.
3. D. Port mirroring enables administrators to monitor the traffic outbound and
inbound to the switch.
4. C. 802.1Q is the IEEE specification developed to ensure interoperability of
VLAN technologies from the various vendors.
5. A. VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP) is used to reduce administration in the
switched network.
6. D. IEEE 802.3at is more commonly known as PoE+.
What’s Next?
Chapter 4, “Network Components and Devices,” introduces you to commonly
used networking devices. All but the most basic of networks require devices to
provide connectivity and functionality. Understanding how these networking
devices operate and identifying the functions they perform are essential skills for
any network administrator and are requirements for a Network+ candidate.

CHAPTER 4
Network Components and Devices
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Given a scenario, determine the appropriate placement of networking
devices on a network and install/configure them.
 Explain the purposes and use cases for advanced network devices.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 2.2 and 2.3. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
All but the most basic of networks require devices to provide connectivity and
functionality. Understanding how these networking devices operate and
identifying the functions they perform are essential skills for any network
administrator and are requirements for a Network+ candidate.
This chapter introduces commonly used networking devices. You are not likely
to encounter all the devices mentioned in this chapter on the exam, but you can
expect to work with at least some of them.
Common Network Devices
 Given a scenario, determine the appropriate placement of networking
devices on a network and install/configure them.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What is the difference between an active and a passive hub?
2. What is the major difference between a hub and a switch?

3. What are the types of ports found on hubs and switches?
Answers
1. Hubs can be either active or passive. Hubs are considered active when
they regenerate a signal before forwarding it to all the ports on the device.
2. Rather than forwarding data to all the connected ports, a switch forwards
data only to the port on which the destination system is connected.
3. Hubs and switches have two types of ports: Medium-Dependent Interface
(MDI) and Medium-Dependent Interface Crossed (MDI-X).
The best way to think about this chapter is as a catalog of networking devices.
The first half looks at devices that you can commonly find in a network of any
substantial size. The devices are discussed in alphabetical order to simplify study
and include everything from access points to VPN concentrators.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Firewall
A firewall is a networking device, either hardware or software based, that
controls access to your organization’s network. This controlled access is
designed to protect data and resources from an outside threat. To do this,
firewalls typically are placed at a network’s entry/exit points—for example,
between an internal network and the Internet. After it is in place, a firewall can
control access into and out of that point.
Although firewalls typically protect internal networks from public networks,
they are also used to control access between specific network segments within a
network. An example is placing a firewall between the Accounts and Sales
departments.

As mentioned, firewalls can be implemented through software or through a
dedicated hardware device. Organizations implement software firewalls through
network operating systems (NOSs) such as Linux/UNIX, Windows Servers, and
Mac OS servers. The firewall is configured on the server to allow or block
certain types of network traffic. In small offices and for regular home use, a
firewall is commonly installed on the local system and is configured to control
traffic. Many third-party firewalls are available.
Hardware firewalls are used in networks of all sizes today. Hardware firewalls
are often dedicated network devices that can be implemented with little
configuration. They protect all systems behind the firewall from outside sources.
Hardware firewalls are readily available and often are combined with other
devices today. For example, many broadband routers and wireless access points
have firewall functionality built in. In such a case, the router or AP might have a
number of ports available to plug systems into.
ExamAlert
Remember that a firewall can protect internal networks from public
networks and control access between specific network segments.
Router
In a common configuration, routers create larger networks by joining two
network segments. A small office/home office (SOHO) router connects a user to
the Internet. A SOHO router typically serves 1 to 10 users on the system. A
router can be a dedicated hardware device or a computer system with more than
one network interface and the appropriate routing software. All modern network
operating systems include the functionality to act as a router.
Note
Routers normally create, add, or divide networks or network segments at the
network layer of the OSI reference model because they normally are IP-based
devices. Chapter 2, “Models, Ports, Protocols, and Networking Services,”
covers the OSI reference model in greater detail.
A router derives its name from the fact that it can route data it receives from one

network to another. When a router receives a packet of data, it reads the packet’s
header to determine the destination address. After the router has determined the
address, it looks in its routing table to determine whether it knows how to reach
the destination; if it does, it forwards the packet to the next hop on the route. The
next hop might be the final destination, or it might be another router. Figure 4.1
shows, in basic terms, how a router works.
Note
You can find more information on network routing in Chapter 3.
FIGURE 4.1 How a router works
A router works at Layer 3 (the network layer) of the OSI model.
Switch
Like hubs, switches are the connectivity points of an Ethernet network. Devices
connect to switches via twisted-pair cabling, one cable for each device. The

difference between hubs and switches is in how the devices deal with the data
they receive. Whereas a hub forwards the data it receives to all the ports on the
device, a switch forwards it to only the port that connects to the destination
device. It does this by the MAC address of the devices attached to it and then by
matching the destination MAC address in the data it receives. Figure 4.2 shows
how a switch works. In this case, it has learned the MAC addresses of the
devices attached to it; when the workstation sends a message intended for
another workstation, it forwards the message on and ignores all the other
workstations.
FIGURE 4.2 How a switch works
By forwarding data to only the connection that should receive it, the switch can
greatly improve network performance. By creating a direct path between two
devices and controlling their communication, the switch can greatly reduce the
traffic on the network and therefore the number of collisions. As you might
recall, collisions occur on Ethernet networks when two devices attempt to
transmit at the same time. In addition, the lack of collisions enables switches to
communicate with devices in full-duplex mode. In a full-duplex configuration,
devices can send data to and receive data from the switch at the same time.
Contrast this with half-duplex communication, in which communication can
occur in only one direction at a time. Full-duplex transmission speeds are double
that of a standard half-duplex connection. So, a 100 Mbps connection becomes
200 Mbps, and a 1000 Mbps connection becomes 2000 Mbps, and so on.
The net result of these measures is that switches can offer significant
performance improvements over hub-based networks, particularly when network
use is high.
Irrespective of whether a connection is at full or half duplex, the method of
switching dictates how the switch deals with the data it receives. The following

is a brief explanation of each method:
 Cut-through: In a cut-through switching environment, the packet begins to
be forwarded as soon as it is received. This method is fast, but it creates the
possibility of errors being propagated through the network because no error
checking occurs.
 Store-and-forward: Unlike cut-through, in a store-and-forward switching
environment, the entire packet is received and error-checked before being
forwarded. The upside of this method is that errors are not propagated
through the network. The downside is that the error-checking process takes a
relatively long time, and store-and-forward switching is considerably slower
as a result.
 Fragment-free: To take advantage of the error checking of store-and-
forward switching, but still offer performance levels nearing that of cut-
through switching, fragment-free switching can be used. In a fragment-free
switching environment, enough of the packet is read so that the switch can
determine whether the packet has been involved in a collision. As soon as the
collision status has been determined, the packet is forwarded.
Hub and Switch Cabling
In addition to acting as a connection point for network devices, hubs and
switches can be connected to create larger networks. This connection can be
achieved through standard ports with a special cable or by using special ports
with a standard cable.
The ports on a hub to which computer systems are attached are called Medium-
Dependent Interface Crossed (MDI-X). The crossed designation is derived from
the fact that two of the wires within the connection are crossed so that the send
signal wire on one device becomes the receive signal of the other. Because the
ports are crossed internally, a standard or straight-through cable can be used to
connect devices.
Another type of port, called a Medium-Dependent Interface (MDI) port, is often
included on a hub or switch to facilitate the connection of two switches or hubs.
Because the hubs or switches are designed to see each other as an extension of
the network, there is no need for the signal to be crossed. If a hub or switch does
not have an MDI port, hubs or switches can be connected by using a cable
between two MDI-X ports. The crossover cable uncrosses the internal crossing.
Auto MDI-X ports on more modern network device interfaces can detect

whether the connection would require a crossover, and automatically choose the
MDI or MDI-X configuration to properly match the other end of the link.
ExamAlert
In a crossover cable, wires 1 and 3 and wires 2 and 6 are crossed.
A switch can work at either Layer 2 (the data link layer) or Layer 3 (the network
layer) of the OSI model.
Hub
At the bottom of the networking food chain, so to speak, are hubs. Hubs are used
in networks that use twisted-pair cabling to connect devices. Hubs also can be
joined to create larger networks. Hubs are simple devices that direct data packets
to all devices connected to the hub, regardless of whether the data package is
destined for the device. This makes them inefficient devices and can create a
performance bottleneck on busy networks.
In its most basic form, a hub does nothing except provide a pathway for the
electrical signals to travel along. Such a device is called a passive hub. Far more
common nowadays is an active hub, which, as well as providing a path for the
data signals, regenerates the signal before it forwards it to all the connected
devices. In addition, an active hub can buffer data before forwarding it.
However, a hub does not perform any processing on the data it forwards, nor
does it perform any error checking.
Hubs come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Small hubs with five or eight
connection ports are commonly called workgroup hubs. Others can
accommodate larger numbers of devices (normally up to 32). These are called
high-density devices.
ExamAlert
Because hubs don’t perform any processing, they do little except enable
communication between connected devices. For today’s high-demand
network applications, something with a little more intelligence is required.
That’s where switches come in.

A basic hub works at Layer 1 (the physical layer) of the OSI model.
Bridge
A bridge, as the name implies, connects two networks. Bridging is done at the
first two layers of the OSI model and differs from routing in its simplicity. With
routing, a packet is sent to where it is intended to go, whereas with bridging, it is
sent away from this network. In other words, if a packet does not belong on this
network, it is sent across the bridge with the assumption that it belongs there
rather than here.
If one or more segments of the bridged network are wireless, the device is
known as a wireless bridge.
Modems
A modem (short for modulator/demodulator) is a device that converts the digital
signals generated by a computer into analog signals that can travel over
conventional phone lines. The modem at the receiving end converts the signal
back into a format that the computer can understand. Modems can be used as a
means to connect to an ISP or as a mechanism for dialing up a LAN.
Modems can be internal add-in expansion cards or integrated with the
motherboard, external devices that connect to a system’s serial or USB port, or
proprietary devices designed for use on other devices, such as portables and
handhelds.
Wireless Access Point
The term access point can technically be used for either a wired or wireless
connection, but in reality it is almost always associated only with a wireless-
enabling device. Wireless access points (APs) are a transmitter and receiver
(transceiver) device used to create a wireless LAN (WLAN). APs typically are a
separate network device with a built-in antenna, transmitter, and adapter. APs
use the wireless infrastructure network mode to provide a connection point
between WLANs and a wired Ethernet LAN. APs also usually have several
ports, giving you a way to expand the network to support additional clients.
Depending on the size of the network, one or more APs might be required.
Additional APs are used to allow access to more wireless clients and to expand
the range of the wireless network. Each AP is limited by a transmission range—

the distance a client can be from an AP and still obtain a usable signal. The
actual distance depends on the wireless standard used and the obstructions and
environmental conditions between the client and the AP.
ExamAlert
An AP can operate as a bridge connecting a standard wired network to
wireless devices or as a router passing data transmissions from one access
point to another.
Saying that an AP is used to extend a wired LAN to wireless clients does not
give you the complete picture. A wireless AP today can provide different
services in addition to just an access point. Today, the APs might provide many
ports that can be used to easily increase the network’s size. Systems can be
added to and removed from the network with no effect on other systems on the
network. Also, many APs provide firewall capabilities and Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) service. When they are hooked up, they give
client systems a private IP address and then prevent Internet traffic from
accessing those systems. So, in effect, the AP is a switch, DHCP server, router,
and firewall.
APs come in all shapes and sizes. Many are cheaper and are designed strictly for
home or small office use. Such APs have low-powered antennas and limited
expansion ports. Higher-end APs used for commercial purposes have high-
powered antennas, enabling them to extend how far the wireless signal can
travel.
Note
APs are used to create a wireless LAN and to extend a wired network. APs
are used in the infrastructure wireless topology.
An AP works at Layer 2 (the data link layer) of the OSI model.
Media Converter
When you have two dissimilar types of network media, a media converter is
used to allow them to connect. They are sometimes referred to as couplers.

Depending on the conversion being done, the converter can be a small device,
barely larger than the connectors themselves, or a large device within a sizable
chassis.
Reasons for not using the same media throughout the network, and thus reasons
for needing a converter, can range from cost (gradually moving from coax to
fiber), disparate segments (connecting the office to the factory), or needing to
run a particular media in a setting (the need for fiber to reduce EMI problems in
a small part of the building).
Figure 4.3 shows an example of a media converter. The one shown converts
between 10/100/1000TX and 1000LX (with an SC-type connector).
FIGURE 4.3 A common media converter
The following converters are commonly implemented and are ones that
CompTIA has previously included on the Network+ exam.
ExamAlert
Make sure you know that the possibilities listed here exist:
 Single mode fiber to Ethernet
 Single mode to multimode fiber
 Multimode fiber to Ethernet
 Fiber to coaxial

Wireless Range Extender
A wireless range extender (also called a repeater or booster), can amplify a
wireless signal to make it stronger. This increases the distance that the client
system can be placed from the access point and still be on the network. The
extender needs to be set to the same channel as the AP for the repeater to take
the transmission and repeat it. This is an effective strategy to increase wireless
transmission distances.
ExamAlert
Carefully read troubleshooting question scenarios to be sure the
transmission from the AP is getting to the repeater first, and then the
repeater is duplicating the signal and passing it on.
VoIP Endpoint
In the world of Voice over IP (VoIP), an endpoint is any final destination for a
voice call. That final destination can be to a physical device (such as a physical
telephone handset), a software application, or a server. Endpoints are used with
the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). To illustrate some of the possibilities, Cisco
publishes 
an 
18-page 
endpoint 
product 
matrix 
(available 
at
https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/products/collateral/collaboration-
endpoints/sales-tool-c96-739424.pdf.
Network Devices Summary
The information in this chapter is important for the Network+ exam. To
summarize the coverage of network devices to this point, Table 4.1 lists some of
the key points about each device. You should learn this information well.
TABLE 4.1 Network Devices Summary
Device
Description
Key Points
Hub
Connects devices on
an Ethernet twisted-
pair network
A hub does not perform any tasks besides
signal regeneration.
Switch
Connects devices on
A switch forwards data to its destination by

a twisted-pair
network
using the MAC address embedded in each
packet.
Router
Connects networks
A router uses the software-configured
network address to make forwarding
decisions.
Modem
Provides serial
communication
capabilities across
phone lines
Modems modulate the digital signal into
analog at the sending end and perform the
reverse function at the receiving end.
Firewall
Provides controlled
data access between
networks
Firewalls can be hardware or software
based. They are an essential part of a
network’s security strategy.
Bridge
The simplest way to
connect two
networks
Operates on Layers 1 and 2 of the OSI
model and has largely been replaced in
most networks by switches.
Media
Converter
Used to change from
one media to another
Commonly used in conjunction with fiber.
Wireless
Access
Point
Used to create a
wireless LAN and to
extend a wired
network
Use the wireless infrastructure network
mode to provide a connection point
between WLANs and a wired Ethernet
LAN.
Wireless
Extender
Used to extend the
distance of a wireless
network
The extender is also known as a repeater as
it amplifies what it receives and retransmits
it.
VoIP
Endpoint
The receiving item
for a VoIP network
This can be a handset, application, or
server.
ExamAlert
You will be expected to know the function of the devices mentioned in this
chapter. Review Table 4.1. Make sure that you understand each device
and how and why it is used on the network.

Cram Quiz
1. Users are complaining that the network’s performance is unsatisfactory. It
takes a long time to pull files from the server, and, under heavy loads,
workstations can become disconnected from the server. The network is
heavily used, and a new videoconferencing application is about to be
installed. The network is a 1000BASE-T system created with Ethernet hubs.
Which device are you most likely to install to alleviate the performance
problems?
 A. Switch
 B. Router
 C. Media converter
 D. Firewall
2. Which of the following devices forwards data packets to all connected
ports?
 A. Router
 B. Switch
 C. Content filter
 D. Hub
3. Which of the following devices passes data based on the MAC address?
 A. Hub
 B. Switch
 C. MSAU
 D. Router
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. Replacing Ethernet hubs with switches can yield significant performance
improvements. Of the devices listed, switches are also the only ones that can
be substituted for hubs. A router is used to separate networks, not as a
connectivity point for workstations. A media converter is used to connect
two dissimilar types of network media. A firewall is not a solution to the

problem presented.
2. D. Hubs are inefficient devices that send data packets to all connected
devices. Switches pass data packets to the specific destination device. This
method significantly increases network performance.
3. B. When determining the destination for a data packet, the switch learns the
MAC address of all devices attached to it and then matches the destination
MAC address in the data it receives. None of the other devices listed passes
data based solely on the MAC address.
Advanced Networking Devices
 Explain the purposes and use cases for advanced networking devices.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
complete the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What can distribute incoming data to specific application servers and
help distribute the load?
2. True or false: A multilayer switch operates as both a router and a switch.
3. Your company is looking to add a hardware device to the network that
can increase redundancy and data availability as it increases performance
by distributing the workload. What use case might this example
technology apply to?
Answers
1. A content switch can distribute incoming data to specific application
servers and help distribute the load.
2. True. A multilayer switch operates as both a router and a switch.
3. A load balancer can be either a software or hardware component, and it
increases redundancy and data availability as it increases performance by
distributing the workload.

In addition to the networking devices discussed previously, CompTIA wants you
to be aware of 12 others for the Network+ exam. The exam expects you to be
able to explain the purposes and identify actual use cases for the advanced
networking devices covered in this section.
ExamAlert
Notice that this objective contains the wording “use cases”: this is new to
the Network+ exam objectives and means that you should expect
questions which contain phrasing such as “Common use cases for this
technology/device are…”
Multilayer Switch
It used to be that networking devices and the functions they performed were
separate. Bridges, routers, hubs, and more existed but were separate devices.
Over time, the functions of some individual network devices became integrated
into a single device. This is true of multilayer switches.
A multilayer switch is one that can operate at both Layer 2 and Layer 3 of the
OSI model, which means that the multilayer device can operate as both a switch
and a router. Also called a Layer 3 switch, the multilayer switch is a high-
performance device that supports the same routing protocols that routers do. It is
a regular switch directing traffic within the LAN; in addition, it can forward
packets between subnets.
ExamAlert
A multilayer switch operates as both a router and a switch.
A content switch is another specialized device. A content switch is not as
common on today’s networks, mostly due to cost. A content switch examines the
network data it receives, decides where the content is intended to go, and
forwards it. The content switch can identify the application that data is targeted
for by associating it with a port. For example, if data uses the Simple Mail
Transfer Protocol (SMTP) port, it could be forwarded to an SMTP server.

Content servers can help with load balancing because they can distribute
requests across servers and target data to only the servers that need it, or
distribute data between application servers. For example, if multiple mail servers
are used, the content switch can distribute requests between the servers, thereby
sharing the load evenly. This is why the content switch is sometimes called a
load-balancing switch.
ExamAlert
A content switch can distribute incoming data to specific application
servers and help distribute the load.
Wireless Controller
Wireless controllers are often used with branch/remote office deployments for
wireless authentication. When an AP boots, it authenticates with a controller
before it can start working as an AP. This is often used with VLAN pooling, in
which multiple interfaces are treated as a single entity (usually for load
balancing).
Load Balancer
Network servers are the workhorses of the network. They are relied on to hold
and distribute data, maintain backups, secure network communications, and
more. The load of servers is often a lot for a single server to maintain. This is
where load balancing comes into play. Load balancing is a technique in which
the workload is distributed among several servers. This feature can take
networks to the next level; it increases network performance, reliability, and
availability.
ExamAlert
Remember that load balancing increases redundancy and therefore data
availability. Also, load balancing increases performance by distributing
the workload.
A load balancer can be either a hardware device or software specially configured

to balance the load.
Note
Multilayer switches and DNS servers can serve as load balancers.
IDS/IPS
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is a passive detection system. The IDS can
detect the presence of an attack and then log that information. It also can alert an
administrator to the potential threat. The administrator then analyzes the
situation and takes corrective measures if needed.
A variation on the IDS is the Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), which is an
active detection system. With IPS, the device continually scans the network,
looking for inappropriate activity. It can shut down any potential threats. The IPS
looks for any known signatures of common attacks and automatically tries to
prevent those attacks. An IPS is considered an active/reactive security measure
because it actively monitors and can take steps to correct a potential security
threat.
Following are several variations on IDSs/IPSs:
 Behavior based: A behavior-based system looks for variations in behavior
such as unusually high traffic, policy violations, and so on. By looking for
deviations in behavior, it can recognize potential threats and quickly respond.
 Signature based: A signature-based system, also commonly known as
misuse-detection system (MD-IDS/MD-IPS), is primarily focused on
evaluating attacks based on attack signatures and audit trails. Attack
signatures describe a generally established method of attacking a system. For
example, a TCP flood attack begins with a large number of incomplete TCP
sessions. If the MD-IDS knows what a TCP flood attack looks like, it can
make an appropriate report or response to thwart the attack. This IDS uses an
extensive database to determine the signature of the traffic.
 Network-based intrusion detection/prevention system (NIDS or NIPS):
The system examines all network traffic to and from network systems. If it is
software, it is installed on servers or other systems that can monitor inbound
traffic. If it is hardware, it may be connected to a hub or switch to monitor
traffic.

 Host-based intrusion detection/prevention system (HIDS or HIPS): This
refers to applications such as spyware or virus applications that are installed
on individual network systems. The system monitors and creates logs on the
local system.
ExamAlert
The four types of IDS/IPS tested on the exam are behavior based,
signature based, network based, and host based.
Proxy Server
Proxy servers typically are part of a firewall system. They have become so
integrated with firewalls that the distinction between the two can sometimes be
lost.
However, proxy servers perform a unique role in the network environment—a
role that is separate from that of a firewall. For the purposes of this book, a
proxy server is defined as a server that sits between a client computer and the
Internet and looks at the web page requests the client sends. For example, if a
client computer wants to access a web page, the request is sent to the proxy
server rather than directly to the Internet. The proxy server first determines
whether the request is intended for the Internet or for a web server locally. If the
request is intended for the Internet, the proxy server sends the request as if it
originated the request. When the Internet web server returns the information, the
proxy server returns the information to the client. Although a delay might be
induced by the extra step of going through the proxy server, the process is
largely transparent to the client that originated the request. Because each request
a client sends to the Internet is channeled through the proxy server, the proxy
server can provide certain functionality over and above just forwarding requests.
One of the most notable extra features is that proxy servers can greatly improve
network performance through a process called caching. When a caching proxy
server answers a request for a web page, the server makes a copy of all or part of
that page in its cache. Then, when the page is requested again, the proxy server
answers the request from the cache rather than going back to the Internet. For
example, if a client on a network requests the web page www.comptia.org, the
proxy server can cache the contents of that web page. When a second client
computer on the network attempts to access the same site, that client can grab it

from the proxy server cache, and accessing the Internet is unnecessary. This
greatly increases the response time to the client and can significantly reduce the
bandwidth needed to fulfill client requests.
Nowadays, speed is everything, and the capability to quickly access information
from the Internet is a crucial concern for some organizations. Proxy servers and
their capability to cache web content accommodate this need for speed.
An example of this speed might be found in a classroom. If a teacher asks 30
students to access a specific uniform resource locator (URL) without a proxy
server, all 30 requests would be sent into cyberspace and subjected to delays or
other issues that could arise. The classroom scene with a proxy server is quite
different. Only one request of the 30 finds its way to the Internet; the other 29
are filled by the proxy server’s cache. Web page retrieval can be almost
instantaneous.
However, this caching has a potential drawback. When you log on to the
Internet, you get the latest information, but this is not always so when
information is retrieved from a cache. For some web pages, it is necessary to go
directly to the Internet to ensure that the information is up to date. Some proxy
servers can update and renew web pages, but they are always one step behind.
The second key feature of proxy servers is allowing network administrators to
filter client requests. If a server administrator wants to block access to certain
websites, a proxy server enables this control, making it easy to completely
disallow access to some websites. This is okay, but what if it were necessary to
block numerous websites? This is when maintaining proxy servers gets a bit
more complicated.
Determining which websites users can or cannot access is usually done through
something called an access control list (ACL). Chapter 3 discussed how an ACL
can be used to provide rules for which port numbers or IP addresses are allowed
access. An ACL can also be a list of allowed or nonallowed websites; as you
might imagine, compiling such a list can be a monumental task. Given that
millions of websites exist, and new ones are created daily, how can you target
and disallow access to the “questionable” ones? One approach is to reverse the
situation and deny access to all pages except those that appear in an “allowed”
list. This approach has high administrative overhead and can greatly limit the
productive benefits available from Internet access.
Understandably, it is impossible to maintain a list that contains the locations of
all sites with questionable content. In fairness, that is not what proxy servers

were designed to do. However, by maintaining a list, proxy servers can better
provide a greater level of control than an open system. Along the way, proxy
servers can make the retrieval of web pages far more efficient.
A reverse proxy server is one that resides near the web servers and responds to
requests. These are often used for load balancing purposes because each proxy
can cache information from a number of servers.
VPN Concentrator
A VPN concentrator can be used to increase remote-access security. This device
can establish a secure connection (tunnel) between the sending and receiving
network devices. VPN concentrators add an additional level to VPN security.
Not only can they create the tunnel, they also can authenticate users, encrypt the
data, regulate the data transfer, and control traffic.
The concentrator sits between the VPN client and the VPN server, creates the
tunnel, authenticates users using the tunnel, and encrypts data traveling through
the tunnel. When the VPN concentrator is in place, it can establish a secure
connection (tunnel) between the sending and receiving network devices.
VPN concentrators add an additional level to VPN security. Depending on the
exact concentrator, they can do the following:
 Create the tunnel.
 Authenticate users who want to use the tunnel.
 Encrypt and decrypt data.
 Regulate and monitor data transfer across the tunnel.
 Control inbound and outbound traffic as a tunnel endpoint or router.
The VPN concentrator invokes various standard protocols to accomplish these
functions.
AAA/RADIUS Server
Among the potential issues network administrators face when implementing
remote access are utilization and the load on the remote-access server. As a
network’s remote-access implementation grows, reliance on a single remote-
access server might be impossible, and additional servers might be required.
RADIUS can help in this scenario.

ExamAlert
RADIUS is a protocol that enables a single server to become responsible
for all remote-access authentication, authorization, and auditing (or
accounting) services; this is referred to as AAA.
RADIUS functions as a client/server system. The remote user dials in to the
remote-access server, which acts as a RADIUS client, or network access server
(NAS), and connects to a RADIUS server. The RADIUS server performs
authentication, authorization, and auditing (or accounting) functions and returns
the information to the RADIUS client (which is a remote-access server running
RADIUS client software); the connection is either established or rejected based
on the information received.
Note
To 
learn 
more 
about 
AAA/RADIUS, 
visit
www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/ios/12_2/security/configuration/guide/fsecur_c/s
UTM Appliances and NGFW/Layer 7 Firewalls
A firewall can employ a variety of methods to ensure security. In addition to the
role just described, modern firewall applications can perform a range of other
functions, often through the addition of add-on modules directed at the
application layer (Layer 7) of the OSI model; they are then often referred to as
Unified Threat Management (UTM) devices or Next Generation Firewalls
(NGFW). UTMs can include the following functionality:
 Content filtering: Most firewalls can be configured to provide some level
of content filtering. This can be done for both inbound and outbound content.
For instance, the firewall can be configured to monitor inbound content,
restricting certain locations or particular websites. Firewalls can also limit
outbound traffic by prohibiting access to certain websites by maintaining a
list of URLs and IP addresses. This is often done when organizations want to
control employee access to Internet sites.
 Signature identification: A signature is a unique identifier for a particular
application. In the antivirus world, a signature is an algorithm that uniquely
identifies a specific virus. Firewalls can be configured to detect certain

signatures associated with malware or other undesirable applications and
block them before they enter the network.
 Virus scanning services: As web pages are downloaded, content within the
pages can be checked for viruses. This feature is attractive to companies
concerned about potential threats from Internet-based sources.
 Network Address Translation (NAT): To protect the identity of machines
on the internal network, and to allow more flexibility in internal TCP/IP
addressing structures, many firewalls translate the originating address of data
into a different address. This address is then used on the Internet. The most
common type of NAT is Port Address Translation (PAT), enabling multiple
devices on the network to share one single public address (or a few). NAT is
a popular function because it works around the limited availability of TCP/IP
addresses in IPv4. When the migration to IPv6 becomes complete, the need
for NAT will lessen.
 URL filtering: By using a variety of methods, the firewall can choose to
block certain websites from being accessed by clients within the
organization. This blocking allows companies to control what pages can be
viewed and by whom.
 Bandwidth management: Although it is required in only certain situations,
bandwidth management can prevent a certain user or system from hogging
the network connection. The most common approach to bandwidth
management is to divide the available bandwidth into sections and then make
a certain section available to a user or system.
 Other: Although the preceding functions are the most common, UTMs can
also be used for network intrusion IDS/IPS, VPN, data loss prevention
(DLP), and load balancing, as well as to enable logging and monitoring
features.
These functions are not strictly firewall activities. However, the flexibility
offered by a firewall, coupled with its placement at the edge of a network, makes
a firewall the ideal base for controlling access to external resources.
ExamAlert
You can expect to see exam questions on the types of firewalls and their
characteristics. For example, you should know the differences between
software and hardware firewalls and understand stateful inspection

versus stateless packet filtering firewalls.
VoIP PBX and Gateway
When telephone technology is married with information technology, the result is
called telephony. There has been a massive move from landlines to Voice over IP
(VoIP) for companies to save money. One of the biggest issues with the
administration of this is security. By having both data and VoIP on the same line,
they are both vulnerable in the case of an attack. Standard telephone systems
should be replaced with a securable PBX.
A VoIP gateway, also sometimes called a PBX gateway, can be used to convert
between the legacy telephony connection and a VoIP connection using SIP
(Session Initiation Protocol). This is referred to as a “digital gateway” because
the voice media are converted in the process.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you know that by having both data and VoIP on the same
line, they are both vulnerable in the case of an attack.
Content Filter
A content filter is any software that controls what a user is allowed to peruse and
is most often associated with websites. Using a content filter, an employer can
block access to pornographic sites to all users, some users, or even just an
individual user. The filter can be applied as software on client machines (known
as client-side filters), on a proxy server on the network (a server-side filter), at
the Internet service provider (ISP), or even within the search engine itself. The
latter is most commonly used on home machines.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following can serve as load balancers?
 A. IDS and DNS servers
 B. Multilayer switches and IPS

 C. Multilayer switches and DNS servers
 D. VoIP PBXs and UTM appliances
2. Which of the following is the best answer for a device that continually scans
the network, looking for inappropriate activity?
 A. IPS
 B. NGFW
 C. VCPN
 D. AAA
3. Which of the following is the best answer for any software that controls
what a user is allowed to peruse and is most often associated with websites?
 A. IDS
 B. Proxy server
 C. RADIUS server
 D. Content filter
4. You are wanting to add a protocol to the network that enables a single server
to become responsible for all remote-access authentication, authorization,
and auditing (or accounting) services. Which use case is the best example of
this?
 A. VPN
 B. RADIUS
 C. UTM
 D. VoIP
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. Multilayer switches and DNS servers can serve as load balancers.
2. A. An intrusion prevention system (IPS) is a device that continually scans
the network, looking for inappropriate activity.
3. D. A content filter is any software that controls what a user is allowed to
peruse and is most often associated with websites.

4. B. RADIUS is a protocol that enables a single server to become responsible
for all remote-access authentication, authorization, and auditing (or
accounting) services.
What’s Next?
Chapter 5, “WAN Technologies,” looks at wide-area networks (WANs) and
reviews the characteristics of various WAN technologies. Many of today’s
network environments are not restricted to a single location or LAN. Instead,
many networks span great distances, making WAN knowledge essential for the
network administrator.

CHAPTER 5
WAN Technologies
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objective:
 Compare and contrast WAN technologies.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objective 2.5. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
If you think of networking as something that can be represented on a plane, there
would be two ends of the spectrum. At one end of the spectrum, there would be
small networks of only a few nodes and devices connected together. At the other
end of the spectrum is the wide-area network (WAN): an amalgamation of
multiple local-area networks (LANs) creating an entity that is only as strong as
its weakest link.
This chapter focuses mostly on the WAN end of the spectrum, but also covers
such small network practices such as dial-up connectivity. It also looks at best
practices and safety practices associated with networking today.
WAN Technologies
 Compare and contrast WAN technologies.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What are T-lines used for, and what is the maximum speed of T1 and
T3?
2. What are the X.25 transmission speed restrictions?

3. What is the difference between circuit switching and packet switching
technologies?
Answers
1. T-carrier lines create point-to-point network connections for private
networks. T1 lines offer transmission speeds of up to 1.544 Mbps,
whereas T3 lines offer transmission speeds of 44.736 Mbps.
2. X.25 is restricted to transmission rates of 56 Kbps or 64 Kbps with
digital implementations.
3. Circuit switching networking offers a dedicated transmission channel
that is reserved until it is disconnected. Packet switching enables packets
to be routed around network congestion.
Many of today’s network environments are not restricted to a single location or
LAN. Instead, many networks span great distances, becoming wide-area
networks (WANs). When they do, hardware and software are needed to connect
these networks. This section reviews the characteristics of various WAN
technologies.
Integrated Services Digital Network
ISDN has long been an alternative to the slower modem WAN connections but at
a higher cost. ISDN enables the transmission of voice and data over the same
physical connection.
ISDN connections are considerably faster than regular modem connections. To
access ISDN, a special phone line is required. This line usually is paid for
through a monthly subscription. You can expect these monthly costs to be
significantly higher than those for traditional dial-up modem connections.
To establish an ISDN connection, you dial the number associated with the
receiving computer, much as you do with a conventional phone call or modem
dial-up connection. A conversation between the sending and receiving devices is
then established. The connection is dropped when one end disconnects or hangs
up. The line pickup of ISDN is fast, enabling a connection to be established, or
brought up, much more quickly than a conventional phone line.
ISDN has two defined interface standards: Basic Rate Interface (BRI) and

Primary Rate Interface (PRI).
BRI
BRI ISDN uses three separate channels—two bearer (B) channels of 64 Kbps
each and a delta channel of 16 Kbps. B channels can be divided into four D
channels, which enable businesses to have eight simultaneous Internet
connections. The B channels carry the voice or data, and the D channels are used
for signaling.
Note
BRI ISDN channels can be used separately using 64 Kbps transfer or
combined to provide 128 Kbps transfer rates.
PRI
PRI is a form of ISDN that generally is carried over a T1 line and can provide
transmission rates of up to 1.544 Mbps. PRI is composed of 23 B channels, each
providing 64 Kbps for data/voice capacity, and one 64 Kbps D channel, which is
used for signaling.
Comparing BRI and PRI ISDN
Table 5.1 compares BRI to PRI ISDN.
ExamAlert
ISDN is considered a leased line because access to ISDN is leased from a
service provider.
TABLE 5.1 BRI to PRI ISDN Comparison
Characteristic
BRI
PRI
Speed
128 Kbps
1.544 Mbps
Channels
2B+D
23B+D
Transmission carrier
ISDN
T1

Note
It is recommended that you know how PRI compares to BRI and their basic
characteristics shown in Table 5.1.
Leased Lines
T-carrier lines are high-speed dedicated digital lines that can be leased from
telephone companies. This creates an always-open, always-available line
between you and whomever you choose to connect to when you establish the
service.
T-carrier lines can support both voice and data transmissions and are often used
to create point-to-point private networks. Because they are a dedicated link, they
can be a costly WAN option. Four types of T-carrier lines are available:
 T1: Offers transmission speeds of 1.544 Mbps and can create point-to-point
dedicated digital communication paths. T1 lines have commonly been used
for connecting LANs. In North America, DS (digital signal) notation is used
with T-lines to describe the circuit. For all practical purposes, DS1 is
synonymous with T1.
 T2: Offers transmission speeds of 6.312 Mbps. It accomplishes this by using
96 64 Kbps B channels.
 T3: Offers transmission speeds of up to 44.736 Mbps, using 672 64 Kbps B
channels. Digital signal 3 (DS3) is a more accurate name in North America,
but T3 is what most refer to the link as.
ExamAlert
When you take the exam, think of DS3 and T3 as synonymous.
 T4: Offers impressive transmission speeds of up to 274.176 Mbps by using
4,032 64 Kbps B channels.
ExamAlert
Of these T-carrier lines, the ones commonly associated with networks and

the ones most likely to appear on the exam are the T1 and T3 lines.
Note
Because of the cost of a T-carrier solution, you can lease portions of a T-
carrier service. This is known as fractional T. You can subscribe and pay for
service based on 64 Kbps channels.
T-carrier is the designation for the technology used in the United States and
Canada. In Europe, they are called E-carriers, and in Japan, J-carriers. Table 5.2
describes the T/E/J carriers.
TABLE 5.2 Comparing T/E/J Carriers
Name
Transmission Speed
T1
1.544 Mbps
T1C
3.152 Mbps
T2
6.312 Mbps
T3
44.736 Mbps
T4
274.176 Mbps
J0
64 Kbps
J1
1.544 Mbps
J1C
3.152 Mbps
J2
6.312 Mbps
J3
32.064 Mbps
J3C
97.728 Mbps
J4
397.200 Mbps
E0
64 Kbps
E1
2.048 Mbps
E2
8.448 Mbps
E3
34.368 Mbps

E4
139.264 Mbps
E5
565.148 Mbps
ExamAlert
Ensure that you review the speeds of the T1, T3, E1, and E3 carriers.
T3 Lines
For a time, the speeds offered by T1 lines were sufficient for all but a few
organizations. As networks and the data they support expanded, T1 lines did not
provide enough speed for many organizations. T3 service answered the call by
providing transmission speeds of 44.736 Mbps.
T3 lines are dedicated circuits that provide high capacity; generally, they are
used by large companies, ISPs, and long-distance companies. T3 service offers
all the strengths of a T1 service (just a whole lot more), but the cost associated
with T3 limits its use to the few organizations that have the money to pay for it.
Fiber, SONET, and OCx Levels
In 1984, the U.S. Department of Justice and AT&T reached an agreement stating
that AT&T was a monopoly that needed to be divided into smaller, directly
competitive companies. This created a challenge for local telephone companies,
which were faced with the task of connecting to an ever-growing number of
independent long-distance carriers, each of which had a different interfacing
mechanism. Bell Communications Research answered the challenge by
developing Synchronous Optical Network (SONET), a fiber-optic WAN
technology that delivers voice, data, and video at speeds starting at 51.84 Mbps.
Bell’s main goals in creating SONET were to create a standardized access
method for all carriers within the newly competitive U.S. market and to unify
different standards around the world. SONET is capable of transmission speeds
from 51.84 Mbps to 2.488 Gbps and beyond.
One of Bell’s biggest accomplishments with SONET was that it created a new
system that defined data rates in terms of Optical Carrier (OCx) levels. Table 5.3
lists the OCx levels you should be familiar with.

ExamAlert
Before taking the exam, review the information provided in Table 5.3. Be
sure that you are familiar with OC-3 and OC-192 specific transmission
rates.
TABLE 5.3 OCx Levels and Transmission Rates
OCx Level
Transmission Rate
OC-1
51.84 Mbps
OC-3
155.52 Mbps
OC-12
622.08 Mbps
OC-24
1.244 Gbps
OC-48
2.488 Gbps
OC-96
4.976 Gbps
OC-192
9.953 Gbps
OC-768
39.813 Gbps
Note
Optical carrier (OCx) levels represent the range of digital signals that can be
carried on SONET fiber-optic networks. Each OCx level defines the speed at
which it operates.
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) is the European counterpart to SONET.
ExamAlert
When you take the exam, equate SDH with SONET.
A passive optical network (PON) is one in which unpowered optical splitters are
used to split the fiber so it can service a number of locations, and it brings the
fiber either to the curb, the building, or the home. It is known as a passive

system because there is no power to the components and consists of an optical
line termination (OLT) at the split and a number of optical network units (ONUs)
at the end of each run (typically near the end user). It can be combined with
wavelength division multiplexing and is then known as WDM-PON.
A form of multiplexing optical signals is dense wavelength-division multiplexing
(DWDM). This method replaces SONET/SDH regenerators with erbium doped
fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) and can also amplify the signal and enable it to travel a
greater distance. The main components of a DWDM system include the
following:
 Terminal multiplexer
 Line repeaters
 Terminal demultiplexer
Note
Chapter 6, “Cabling Solutions,” discusses several other methods of
multiplexing.
ExamAlert
Make sure that you understand that DWDM works with SONET/SDH.
An alternative to DWDM is coarse wavelength-division multiplexing (CWDM).
This method is commonly used with television cable networks. The main thing
to know about it is that it has relaxed stabilization requirements; thus, you can
have vastly different speeds for download than upload.
ExamAlert
Make sure that you associate CWDM with television cabling.
Frame Relay
To understand Frame Relay, it is important to understand some ancient history
and X.25. X.25 was one of the original packet-switching technologies, but today

it has been replaced in most applications by Frame Relay. Various telephone
companies, along with network providers, developed X.25 in the mid-1970s to
transmit digital data over analog signals on copper lines. Because so many
entities had their hands in the development and implementation of X.25, it works
well on many kinds of networks with different types of traffic. X.25 is one of the
oldest standards, and therein lies both its greatest advantage and its greatest
disadvantage. On the upside, X.25 is a global standard that can be found all over
the world. On the downside, its maximum transfer speed is 56 Kbps—which is
reasonable when compared to other technologies in the mid-1970s but slow and
cumbersome today. However, in the 1980s a digital version of X.25 was
released, increasing throughput to a maximum of 64 Kbps. This, too, is slow by
today’s standards.
Because X.25 is a packet-switching technology, it uses different routes to get the
best possible connection between the sending and receiving device at a given
time. As conditions on the network change, such as increased network traffic, so
do the routes that the packets take. Consequently, each packet is likely to take a
different route to reach its destination during a single communication session.
The device that makes it possible to use the X.25 service is called a packet
assembler/disassembler (PAD), which is required at each end of the X.25
connection.
At its core, Frame Relay is a WAN protocol that operates at the physical and data
link layers of the OSI model. Frame Relay enables data transmission for
intermittent traffic between LANs and between endpoints in a WAN.
Frame Relay was designed to provide standards for transmitting data packets in
high-speed bursts over digital networks, using a public data network service.
Frame Relay is a packet-switching technology that uses variable-length packets.
Essentially, Frame Relay is a streamlined version of X.25. It uses smaller packet
sizes and fewer error-checking mechanisms than X.25; consequently, it has less
overhead than X.25.
A Frame Relay connection is built by using permanent virtual circuits (PVCs)
that establish end-to-end communication. This means that Frame Relay is not
dependent on the best-route method of X.25. Frame Relay can be implemented
on several WAN technologies, including 56 Kbps, T1, T3, and ISDN lines.
To better understand how it works, look at some of the components of Frame
Relay technology. All devices in the Frame Relay WAN fall into two primary
categories:

 Data terminal equipment (DTE): In the Frame Relay world, the term DTE
refers to terminating equipment located within a company’s network.
Termination equipment includes such hardware as end-user systems, servers,
routers, bridges, and switches.
 Data circuit-terminating equipment (DCE): DCE refers to the equipment
owned by the carrier. This equipment provides the switching services for the
network and therefore is responsible for actually transmitting the data
through the WAN.
As previously mentioned, Frame Relay uses virtual circuits to create a
communication channel. These virtual circuits establish a bidirectional
communication link between DTE devices. Two types of virtual circuits are used
with Frame Relay:
 Permanent virtual circuit (PVC): A permanent dedicated virtual link
shared in a Frame Relay network, replacing a hard-wired dedicated end-to-
end line.
 Switched virtual circuit (SVC): Represents a temporary virtual circuit
established and maintained only for the duration of a data transfer session.
Figure 5.1 shows the components of a Frame Relay network.
FIGURE 5.1 A Frame Relay network
Asynchronous Transfer Mode

Introduced in the early 1990s, Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) was heralded
as a breakthrough technology for networking because it was an end-to-end
solution, ranging in use from a desktop to a remote system. Although it was
promoted as both a LAN and WAN solution, ATM did not live up to its hype due
to associated implementation costs and a lack of standards. The introduction of
Gigabit Ethernet, which offered great transmission speeds and compatibility with
existing network infrastructure, further dampened the momentum of the ATM
bandwagon. ATM has, however, found a niche with some ISPs and is also
commonly used as a network backbone. It provides functionality that combines
the benefits of both packet switching and circuit switching.
ATM is a packet-switching technology that provides transfer speeds ranging
from 1.544 Mbps to 622 Mbps. It is well suited for a variety of data types, such
as voice, data, and video. Using fixed-length packets, or cells, that are 53 bytes
long, ATM can operate more efficiently than variable-length-packet packet-
switching technologies such as Frame Relay. Having a fixed-length packet
allows ATM to be concerned only with the header information of each packet. It
does not need to read every bit of a packet to determine its beginning and end.
ATM’s fixed cell length also makes it easily adaptable to other technologies as
they develop. Each cell has 48 bytes available for data, with 5 bytes reserved for
the ATM header.
ATM is a circuit-based network technology because it uses a virtual circuit to
connect two networked devices. Like Frame Relay, ATM is a circuit-based
network technology that also uses PVCs and SVCs. PVCs and SVCs were
discussed in the preceding section.
ATM is compatible with the most widely used and implemented networking
media types available today, including single-mode and multimode fiber, coaxial
cable, unshielded twisted-pair, and shielded twisted-pair. Although ATM can be
used over various media, the limitations of some of the media types make them
impractical choices for deployment in an ATM network. ATM can also operate
over other media, including FDDI, T1, T3, SONET, OC-3, and Fibre Channel.
Copper Versus Fiber
The WAN technology used is often based on the infrastructure on which it is
built, and the infrastructure—in turn—is based on the WAN technology that you
want to deploy. The symbiotic relationship between the technology and the
media is one of great interdependence.

The two most common media in use with WANs are copper and fiber. Both are
explored in much more detail in the next chapter, “Cabling Solutions,” but Table
5.4 provides an overview of the technologies discussed so far and the media that
support them.
TABLE 5.4 Comparing WAN Technologies
WAN
Technology
Speed
Supported
Media
Switching
Method
Used
Key Characteristics
ISDN
BRI:
64
Kbps
to 128
Kbps
PRI:
64
Kbps
to 1.5
Mbps
Copper/fiber-
optic
Can be
used for
circuit-
switching
or packet-
switching
connections
ISDN can be used to
transmit all types of
traffic, including voice,
video, and data. BRI uses
2B+D channels; PRI uses
23B+D channels. B
channels are 64 Kbps.
ISDN uses the public
network and requires
dial-in access.
T-carrier (T1,
T3)
T1:
1.544
Mbps
T3:
44.736
Mbps
Copper/fiber-
optic
Circuit
switching
T-carrier is used to create
point-to-point network
connections for private
networks.
ATM
1.544
Mbps
to 622
Mbps
Copper/fiber-
optic
Cell
switching
ATM uses fixed cells that
are 53 bytes long.
X.25
56
Kbps/
64
Kbps
Copper/fiber-
optic
Packet
switching
X.25 is limited to 56
Kbps. X.25 provides a
packet-switching
network over standard
phone lines.
Frame Relay
56
Kbps
Copper/fiber-
optic
PVCs and
SVCs
Frame Relay is a packet-
oriented protocol, and it

to
1.544
Mbps
uses variable-length
packets.
SONET/OCx
51.8
Mbps
to 2.4
Gbps
Fiber-optic
N/A
SONET defines
synchronous data transfer
over optical cable.
ExamAlert
For the Network+ exam, be sure that you can identify the characteristics
of the various WAN technologies from Table 5.4.
Other WAN Technologies
Table 5.4 lists the most popular WAN technologies used today, but you should be
aware of several others as well:
 PPP: Point-to-Point Protocol is a data link protocol that is used to establish a
connection between two nodes. PPP works with plain old telephone service
(POTS), ISDN, fiber links such as SONET, and other faster connections,
such as T1. PPP does not provide data security, but it does provide
authentication using the Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol
(CHAP). A PPP connection allows remote users to log on to the network and
have access as though they were local users on the network. PPP by itself
does not provide for any encryption services for the channel. As you might
have guessed, the unsecure nature of PPP makes it largely unsuitable for
WAN connections. To counter this issue, other protocols have been created
that take advantage of PPP’s flexibility and build on it. For example, PPP can
be used with the Encryption Control Protocol (ECP). You should make sure
that all your PPP connections use secure channels, dedicated connections, or
high-speed connections.
 PPPoE: Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet offers the capability to
encapsulate PPP frames inside Ethernet frames. It was first utilized to tunnel
packets over a DSL connection to an ISP’s IP network. Although it has been
around for many years, it is still widely used by DSL Internet providers.

Note
PPPoE is not used by cable (or fiber) Internet providers.
ExamAlert
Be sure you understand the WAN technology characteristics of service for
MPLS, PPPoE, PPP, DMVPN and SIP trunk.
 Multilink PPP: Building off of PPP, Multilink PPP allows you to configure
multiple links to act as one, thus increasing the speed of the connection. This
technology has gained popularity with the cloud, but still suffers from
problems inherent with PPP.
 MPLS (Multiprotocol Label Switching): Used in high-performance-based
telecom networks, MPLS is a technology that uses short path labels instead
of longer network addresses to direct data from one node to another. These
“labels” are used to identify shorter virtual links between nodes instead of
endpoints. MPLS supports technologies such as ATM, Frame Relay, DSL,
T1, and E1.
 GSM/CDMA: The Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) can
work with code division-multiple access (CDMA) to provide various means
of cell phone coverage. The methods that can be used include LTE/4G,
HSPA+, 3G, or Edge.
 DMVPN: The Dynamic Multipoint Virtual Private Network offers the
capability to create a dynamic-mesh VPN network without having to
preconfigure all the possible tunnel endpoints. The hubs are statically
configured, and then it dynamically builds out a hub-and-spoke network by
finding, and accepting, new spokes, thus requiring no additional
configuration on the hubs or the spokes.
 Metro-Ethernet (Metropolitan Ethernet): This is nothing more than an
Ethernet-based MAN (metropolitan-area network). Various levels of
deployment can be implemented, but all have limitations based on the
underlying technology.
 SIP Trunk: With SIP trunking, the Session Initiation Protocol is used as a
streaming media service with Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) to provide

telephone services and unified communications. It requires the use of SIP-
based private branch exchanges (IP-PBX) and Unified Communications
software applications, such as voice, video, and other streaming media
applications (desktop sharing, shared whiteboard, web conferencing, and the
like).
Cram Quiz
1. Your company currently uses a standard communication link to transfer files
between LANs. Until now, the transfer speeds have been sufficient for the
amount of data that needs to be transferred. Recently, a new application was
purchased that requires a minimum transmission speed of 1.5 Mbps. You
have been given the task to find the most cost-effective solution to
accommodate the new application. Which of the following technologies
would you use?
 A. T3
 B. X.25
 C. T1
 D. BRI ISDN
2. Which of the following best describes the process to create a dedicated
circuit between two communication endpoints and direct traffic between
those two points?
 A. Multiplexing
 B. Directional addressing
 C. Addressing
 D. Circuit switching
3. Which of the following statements are true of ISDN? (Choose the two best
answers.)
 A. BRI ISDN uses 2 B+1 D channels.
 B. BRI ISDN uses 23 B+1 D channels.
 C. PRI ISDN uses 2 B+1 D channels.

 D. PRI ISDN uses 23 B+1 D channels.
4. You have been hired to establish a WAN connection between two offices:
one in Vancouver and one in Seattle. The transmission speed can be no less
than 2 Mbps. Which of the following technologies could you choose?
 A. T1
 B. PPPoE
 C. T3
 D. ISDN
5. On an ISDN connection, what is the purpose of the D channel?
 A. It carries the data signals.
 B. It carries signaling information.
 C. It enables multiple channels to be combined to provide greater
bandwidth.
 D. It provides a temporary overflow capacity for the other channels.
6. Which of the following circuit-switching strategies does ATM use? (Choose
the two best answers.)
 A. SVC
 B. VCD
 C. PVC
 D. PCV
7. Due to recent cutbacks, your boss approaches you and demands an
alternative to the company’s costly dedicated T1 line. Only small amounts of
data require transfer over the line. Which of the following are you likely to
recommend?
 A. ISDN
 B. FDDI
 C. A public switched telephone network
 D. X.25

8. Which of the following technologies requires a logical connection between
the sending and receiving devices?
 A. Circuit switching
 B. Virtual-circuit packet switching
 C. Message switching
 D. High-density circuit switching
9. Which technology uses short path labels instead of longer network
addresses to direct data from one node to another?
 A. MPLS
 B. Metropolitan Ethernet
 C. DMVPN
 D. PPP
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. A T1 line has a transmission capability of 1.544 Mbps and is
considerably cheaper than a T3 line. X.25 and BRI ISDN cannot provide the
required transmission speed.
2. D. Circuit switching is the process of creating a dedicated circuit between
two communications endpoints and directing traffic between those two
points. None of the other answers are valid types of switching.
3. A, D. BRI ISDN uses 2 B+1 D channels, which are two 64 Kbps data
channels, and PRI ISDN uses 23 B+1 D channels. The D channel is 16 Kbps
for BRI and 64 Kbps for PRI.
4. C. The only possible answer capable of transfer speeds above 2 Mbps is a
T3 line. None of the other technologies listed can provide the transmission
speed required.
5. B. The D channel on an ISDN link carries signaling information, whereas
the B, or bearer, channels carry the data.
6. A, C. ATM uses two types of circuit switching: PVC and SVC. VCD and
PCV are not the names of switching methods.
7. C. When little traffic will be sent over a line, a public switched telephone

network (PSTN) is the most cost-effective solution, although it is limited to
56 Kbps. All the other WAN connectivity methods accommodate large
amounts of data and are expensive compared to the PSTN.
8. B. When virtual-circuit switching is used, a logical connection is established
between the source and the destination device.
9. A. Used in high-performance-based telecom networks, MPLS is a
technology that uses short path labels instead of longer network addresses to
direct data from one node to another. Metropolitan Ethernet is nothing more
than an Ethernet-based MAN (metropolitan-area network). DMVPN offers
the capability to create a dynamic-mesh VPN network without having to
preconfigure all the possible tunnel endpoints. PPP is a data link protocol
that is used to establish a connection between two nodes. PPP works with
plain old telephone service (POTS), ISDN, fiber links such as SONET, and
other faster connections, such as T1.
Internet Access Technologies
 Compare and contrast WAN technologies.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What is VHDSL commonly used for?
2. True or false: DSL using regular phone lines transfers data over the same
copper wire.
3. What is the difference between a one-way and a two-way satellite
system?
4. What hardware is located at the demarcation point?
Answers
1. VHDSL supports high-bandwidth applications such as VoIP and HDTV.

2. True. DSL using regular phone lines transfers data over the same copper
wire.
3. A one-way satellite system requires a satellite card and a satellite dish
installed at the end user’s site. This system works by sending outgoing
requests on one link using a phone line, with inbound traffic returning on
the satellite link. A two-way satellite system, in contrast, provides data
paths for both upstream and downstream data.
4. The hardware at the demarcation point is the smart jack, also known as
the network interface device (NID).
Internet access has become an integral part of modern business. You can obtain
Internet access in several ways. Which type you choose often depends on the
cost and what technologies are available in your area. This section explores
some of the more common methods of obtaining Internet access.
Note
The term broadband often refers to high-speed Internet access. Both DSL and
cable modems are common broadband Internet technologies. Broadband
routers and broadband modems are network devices that support both DSL
and cable.
DSL Internet Access
Digital subscriber line (DSL) is an Internet access method that uses a standard
phone line to provide high-speed Internet access. DSL is most commonly
associated with high-speed Internet access. Because it is a relatively inexpensive
Internet access, it is often found in homes and small businesses. With DSL, a
different frequency can be used for digital and analog signals, which means that
you can talk on the phone while you upload data.
For DSL services, two types of systems exist: asymmetric digital subscriber line
(ADSL) and high-rate digital subscriber line (HDSL). ADSL provides a high
data rate in only one direction. It enables fast download speeds but significantly
slower upload speeds. ADSL is designed to work with existing analog telephone
service (POTS) service. With fast download speeds, ADSL is well suited for
home-use Internet access where uploading large amounts of data isn’t a frequent

task.
In contrast to ADSL, HDSL provides a bidirectional high-data-rate service that
can accommodate services such as videoconferencing that require high data rates
in both directions. A variant of HDSL is very high-rate digital subscriber line
(VHDSL), which provides an HDSL service at very high data transfer rates.
DSL arrived on the scene in the late 1990s and brought with it a staggering
number of flavors. Together, all these variations are known as xDSL:
 Asymmetric DSL (ADSL): Probably the most common of the DSL varieties
is ADSL, which uses different channels on the line. One channel is used for
POTS and is responsible for analog traffic. The second channel provides
upload access, and the third channel is used for downloads. With ADSL,
downloads are faster than uploads, which is why it is called asymmetric
DSL.
Note
ADSL2 made some improvements in the data rate and increased the distance
from the telephone exchange that the line can run. ADSL2+ doubled the
downstream bandwidth and kept all the features of ADSL2. Both ADSL2 and
ADSL2+ are compatible with legacy ADSL equipment.
 Symmetric DSL (SDSL): Offers the same speeds for uploads and
downloads, making it most suitable for business applications such as web
hosting, intranets, and e-commerce. It is not widely implemented in the
home/small business environment and cannot share a phone line.
 ISDN DSL (IDSL): A symmetric type of DSL commonly used in
environments in which SDSL and ADSL are unavailable. IDSL does not
support analog phones.
 Rate-adaptive DSL (RADSL): A variation on ADSL that can modify its
transmission speeds based on signal quality. RADSL supports line sharing.
 Very high bit rate DSL (VHDSL or VDSL): An asymmetric version of
DSL and, as such, can share a telephone line. VHDSL supports high-
bandwidth applications such as VoIP and HDTV. VHDSL can achieve data
rates up to approximately 10 Mbps, making it the fastest available form of
DSL. To achieve high speeds, VHDSL uses fiber-optic cabling.
 High bit rate DSL (HDSL): A symmetric technology that offers identical

transmission rates in both directions. HDSL does not allow line sharing with
analog phones.
Why are there are so many DSL variations? The answer is quite simply that each
flavor of DSL is aimed at a different user, business, or application. Businesses
with high bandwidth needs are more likely to choose a symmetric form of DSL,
whereas budget-conscious environments such as home offices are likely to
choose an option that enables phone line sharing at the expense of bandwidth. In
addition, some of the DSL variants are older technologies. Although the name
persists, they have been replaced with newer DSL implementations. When you
work in a home/small office environment, you should expect to work with an
ADSL system.
Table 5.5 summarizes the maximum speeds of the various DSL options.
Maximum speeds are rarely obtained.
TABLE 5.5 DSL Speeds
DSL Variation
Upload Speed*
Download Speed*
ADSL
1 Mbps
3 Mbps
ADSL2
1.3 Mbps
12 Mbps
ADSL2+
1.4 Mbps
24 Mbps
SDSL
1.5 Mbps
1.5 Mbps
IDSL
144 Kbps
144 Kbps
RADSL
1 Mbps
7 Mbps
VHDSL
1.6 Mbps
13 Mbps
HDSL
768 Kbps
768 Kbps
*Speeds may vary greatly, depending on the technologies used and the quality of
the connection.
ExamAlert
For the exam, focus on ADSL as you study, but be able to put it in
perspective with other varieties.

Note
DSL using regular phone lines transfers data over the same copper wire. The
data and voice signals are sent over different frequencies, but sometimes the
signals interfere with each other. This is why you use DSL filters. A DSL filter
works by minimizing this interference, making for a faster and cleaner DSL
connection.
DSL Troubleshooting Procedures
Troubleshooting DSL is similar to troubleshooting any other Internet connection.
The following are a few things to check when users are experiencing problems
with a DSL connection:
 Physical connections: The first place to look when troubleshooting a DSL
problem is the network cable connections. From time to time, these cables
can come loose or inadvertently be detached, and they are often overlooked
as the cause of a problem. DSL modems typically have a minimum of three
connections: one for the DSL line, one for the local network, and one for the
power. Make sure that they are all plugged in appropriately.
 The network interface card (NIC): While you are checking the cable at the
back of the system, take a quick look to see whether the network card LED is
lit. If it is not, something could be wrong with the card. It might be necessary
to swap out the network card and replace it with one that is known to be
working.
 Drivers: Ensure that the network card is installed and has the correct
drivers. Many times, simply using the most up-to-date driver can resolve
connectivity issues.
 Protocol configuration: The device you are troubleshooting might not have
a valid IP address. Confirm the IP address by using the appropriate tool for
the operating system (and version of IP whether it be IPv4 or IPv6) being
used—for example, ipconfig or ifconfig. If the system requires the
automatic assignment of an IP address, confirm that the system is
automatically set to obtain an IP address. It might be necessary to use the
ipconfig /release and ipconfig /renew commands to get a new
IP address.
 DSL LEDs: Each DSL box has an LED on it. The light sequences are often
used to identify connectivity problems or problems with the box itself. Refer

to the manufacturer’s website for specific information about error codes and
LEDs, but remember the basics. A link light should be on to indicate that the
physical connection is complete, and a flashing LED indicates that the
connection is active.
ExamAlert
When troubleshooting remote connectivity on a cable or DSL modem, use
the LEDs that are always present on these devices to aid in your
troubleshooting process.
Ultimately, if none of these steps cures or indicates the cause of the problem, you
might have to call the DSL provider for assistance.
Cable Broadband
Cable broadband Internet access is an always-on Internet access method
available in areas that have digital cable television. Cable Internet access is
attractive to many small businesses and home office users because it is both
inexpensive and reliable. Most cable providers do not restrict how much use is
made of the access, but they do control the speed. Connectivity is achieved by
using a device called a cable modem. It has a coaxial connection for connecting
to the provider’s outlet and an unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) connection for
connecting directly to a system or to a hub, switch, or router.
Cable providers often supply the cable modem, with a monthly rental agreement.
Many cable providers offer free or low-cost installation of cable Internet service,
which includes installing a network card in a PC. Some providers also do not
charge for the network card. Cable Internet costs are comparable to DSL
subscription.
Most cable modems offer the capability to support a higher-speed Ethernet
connection for the home LAN than is achieved. The actual speed of the
connection can vary somewhat, depending on the utilization of the shared cable
line in your area.
ExamAlert
A cable modem generally is equipped with a medium-dependent interface

crossed (MDI-X) port, so you can use a straight-through UTP cable to
connect the modem to a system.
One of the biggest disadvantages of cable access (by DSL providers, at least) is
that you share the available bandwidth with everyone else in your cable area. As
a result, during peak times, performance of a cable link might be poorer than in
low-use periods. In residential areas, busy times are evenings and weekends, and
particularly right after school. In general, though, performance with cable
systems is good, and in low-usage periods, it can be fast.
Note
The debate between cable and DSL has gone on for years. Although cable
modem technology delivers shared bandwidth within the local neighborhood,
its speeds are theoretically higher but influenced by this shared bandwidth.
DSL delivers dedicated local bandwidth but is sensitive to distance that
impacts overall performance. With the monthly costs about the same, the
decision of which to use is often based on the package and bundle specials
offered by local providers.
Cable Troubleshooting Procedures
In general, cable Internet access is a low-maintenance system with few
problems. When problems do occur, you can try various troubleshooting
measures:
 Check the user’s end: Before looking at the cable modem, make sure that
the system is configured correctly and that all cables are plugged in. If a hub,
switch, or router is used to share the cable Internet access among a group of
computers, make sure that the device is on and correctly functioning.
 Check the physical connections: Like DSL modems, cable modems have
three connections: one for the cable signal, one for the local network, and
one for the power. Make sure that they are all appropriately plugged in.
 Ensure that the protocol configuration on the system is valid: If an IP
address is assigned via Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), the
absence of an address is a sure indicator that connectivity is at fault. Try
obtaining a new IP address by using the appropriate command for the
operating system platform you use. If the IP addresses are statically

configured, make sure that they are correctly set. Trying to use any address
other than that specified by the ISP might prevent a user from connecting to
the network.
 Check the indicator lights on the modem: Most cable modems have
indicator lights that show the modem’s status. Under normal conditions, a
single light labeled Ready or Online should be lit. Most cable providers give
the user a modem manual that details the functions of the lights and what
they indicate in certain states. Generally, any red light is bad. Flashing LEDs
normally indicate traffic on the connection.
 Cycle the power on the modem: Cycling the power on the modem is a
surefire way to reset it.
 Call the technical support line: If you are sure that the connectors are all in
place and the configuration of the system is correct, the next step is to call
the technical support line of the cable provider. If the provider experiences
problems that affect many users, you might get a message while you’re on
hold, informing you of that. If not, you eventually get to speak to someone
who can help you troubleshoot the problem. One of the good things about
cable access is that the cable company can remotely monitor and reset the
modem. The cable company should tell you whether the modem is correctly
functioning.
Unless the modem is faulty, which is not that common, by this point the user
should be back on the Internet, or at least you should fully understand why the
user cannot connect. If the problem is with the cable provider’s networking
equipment, you and the user simply have to wait for the system to come back on.
Broadband Security Considerations
Whether you use DSL or cable Internet access, keep a few things in mind. Each
of these technologies offers always-on service. This means that even when you
are away from your computer, it still connects to the Internet. As you can
imagine, this creates a security risk. The longer you are online, the better the
chances that someone can remotely access your system.
The operating systems in use today all have some security holes that attackers
wait to exploit. These attacks often focus on technologies such as email or open
TCP/UDP ports. Combining OS security holes with an always-on Internet
technology is certainly a dangerous mix.

Today, DSL and cable Internet connections must be protected by mechanisms
such as firewalls. The firewall offers features such as packet filtering and
Network Address Translation (NAT). The firewall can be a third-party software
application installed on the system, or it can be a hardware device.
In addition to a firewall, it is equally important to ensure that the operating
system you use is completely up to date in terms of updates and security patches.
Today’s client systems typically offer automatic update features that alert you
when a new security update or patch is available.
If you diligently follow a few security measures, both DSL and cable Internet
can provide safe Internet access.
Dial-up
Although it’s somewhat slow, one means to connect to the Internet or a remote
network from a remote location where broadband access is not available may
still be the good old telephone line and a modem: either an internal PCIe or
external USB one. Because the same line used for a household phone is used for
dial-up access, it is called the plain old telephone system (POTS) method of
access. Although many parts of the world are served by broadband providers
offering services such as those discussed so far in this chapter, some people still
must (or choose to) connect with a dial-up modem.
Internet access through a phone system requires two things: a modem and a dial-
up access account through an ISP. Dial-up modems are devices that convert the
digital signals generated by a computer system into analog signals that can travel
across a phone line. A computer can have either an internal or external modem.
External USB modems tend to be less problematic to install and troubleshoot
because they don’t require reconfiguration of the host system. Internal modems
use one of the serial port assignments (that is, a COM port) and therefore must
be configured not to conflict with other devices.
The second piece of the puzzle, the dial-up ISP account, can easily be obtained
by contacting one of the many local, regional, or national ISPs. Most ISPs offer a
range of plans normally priced based on the amount of time the user is allowed
to spend online. Almost without exception, ISPs offer 56 Kbps access, the
maximum possible under current standards. Most ISPs also provide email
accounts, access to newsgroup servers, and often small amounts of web space.
It is a good idea to carefully research an ISP choice. Free services exist, but they

generally restrict users to a certain number of online hours per month or use
extensive banner advertising to pay for the services.
Another big consideration for dial-up Internet access is how many lines the ISP
has. ISPs never have the same number of lines as subscribers; instead, they work
on a first-come, first-served basis for dial-up clients. This means that sometimes
users get busy signals when they try to connect. Before signing up for a dial-up
Internet access account, ask the company what its ratio of lines to subscribers is,
and use that figure as part of your comparison criteria.
With a modem and an ISP account, you are ready to connect. But what happens
if things don’t go as you plan? Welcome to the interesting and sometimes
challenging world of troubleshooting dial-up connections.
Dial-up Troubleshooting Procedures
Troubleshooting a dial-up connection problem can be tricky and time-consuming
because you must consider many variables. Of the remote connectivity
mechanisms discussed in this chapter, you are far more likely to have problems
with a POTS connection than with any of the others. The following are some
places to start your troubleshooting under various conditions.
Note
In some cases, users may not even use an ISP; instead, they may directly dial
another system on the corporate network. In that case, all the troubleshooting
steps in this section apply. The exception is that you must rely on the technical
support capabilities of the person responsible for the remote system rather
than the ISP if you have a problem.
If the user cannot dial out, try the following:
 Check physical connections: The most common problem with modem
connections is that something has become unplugged; modems rarely fail
after they initially work. For an external modem, you also need to verify that
the modem has power and that it is connected to the correct COM port.
 Check that the line has a dial tone: You can do this by plugging a normal
phone into the socket to see whether you can dial out. Also, a modem
generally has a speaker, and you can set up the modem to use the speaker so
that you can hear what is going on.

If the user can dial out but cannot connect to the network, try the following:
 Make sure that the user is dialing the correct number: This suggestion
sounds obvious, but sometimes numbers change or are incorrectly entered.
 Call the ISP: You can call the ISP to determine whether it is having
problems.
 Check the modem speaker: Find out whether you get busy signals from the
ISP by turning on the modem speaker.
If the user can dial out and can get a connection but is then disconnected, try the
following:
 Make sure that the modem connection is correctly configured: The most
common modem configuration is 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, and no parity
(commonly called eight-one-none).
 Check the username and password: Make sure that the correct username
and password combination is configured for the dial-up connection.
 Verify that the connection settings are correct: Pay particular attention to
things such as the IP address. Nearly all ISPs assign IP addresses through
DHCP, and trying to connect with a statically configured IP address is not
permitted.
 Make sure that the user has not exceeded a preset connection time limit:
Some ISPs restrict the number of monthly access hours. If the user has such
a plan, check to ensure that some time credit is left.
 Try specifying a lower speed for the connection: Modems are designed to
negotiate a connection speed with which both devices are comfortable.
Sometimes, during the negotiation process, the line can be dropped. Initially
setting a lower speed might get you a connection. You can then increase the
modem speed to accommodate a better connection.
The Public Switched Telephone Network
The Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), often considered a POTS, is
the entire collection of interconnected telephone wires throughout the world.
Discussions of the PSTN include all the equipment that goes into connecting two
points, such as the cable, the networking equipment, and the telephone
exchanges.

ExamAlert
Although PSTN is not specifically listed as an exam objective, you need to
know how it compares with other technologies. Know that if money is a
major concern, the PSTN is the method of choice for creating a WAN.
The modern PSTN is largely digital, with analog connections existing primarily
between homes and local phone exchanges. Modems are used to convert the
computer system’s digital signals into analog so that they can be sent over the
analog connection.
Using the PSTN to establish WAN connections is a popular choice, although the
significant drawback is the limited transfer speeds. Transfer on the PSTN is
limited to 56 Kbps with a modem and 128 Kbps with an ISDN connection, and it
is difficult to share large files or videoconferencing at such speeds. However,
companies that need to send only small amounts of data remotely can use the
PSTN as an inexpensive alternative for remote access, particularly when other
resources such as the Internet are unavailable.
Satellite Internet Access
Many people take DSL and cable Internet access for granted, but these
technologies are not offered everywhere. Many rural areas do not have cable
Internet access. For areas where cheaper broadband options are unavailable, a
limited number of Internet options are available. One of the primary options is
Internet via satellite.
Satellite access provides a viable Internet access solution for those who cannot
get other methods of broadband. Satellite Internet offers an always-on
connection with download speeds considerably faster than an old dial-up
connection. Satellite Internet access does have a few drawbacks, though, such as
cost and high latency. Latency is the time it takes for the signal to travel back and
forth from the satellite.
Although satellite Internet is slower and costlier than DSL or cable, it offers
some attractive features, the first of which is its portability. Quite literally,
wherever you go, you have Internet access with no phone lines or other cables.
For businesses with remote users and clients, the benefit is clear. But the
technology has a far-reaching impact; it is not uncommon to see recreational

vehicles (RVs) with a satellite dish on the roof. They have 24/7 unlimited access
to the Internet as they travel.
Many companies offer satellite Internet services; a quick Internet search reveals
quite a few. These Internet providers offer different Internet packages that vary
greatly in terms of price, access speeds, and service. Some target businesses,
whereas others aim for the private market.
Two different types of broadband Internet satellite services are deployed: one-
way and two-way systems. A one-way satellite system requires a satellite card
and a satellite dish installed at the end user’s site. This system works by sending
outgoing requests on one link using a phone line, with inbound traffic returning
on the satellite link. A two-way satellite system, in contrast, provides data paths
for both upstream and downstream data. Like a one-way system, a two-way
system uses a satellite card and a satellite dish installed at the end user’s site;
bidirectional communication occurs directly between the end user’s node and the
satellite.
Home satellite systems are asymmetric; that is, download speeds are faster than
upload speeds. A home satellite system is likely to use a modem for the uplink
traffic, with downloads coming over the satellite link. The exact speeds you can
expect with satellite Internet depend on many factors. As with other wireless
technologies, atmospheric conditions can significantly affect the performance of
satellite Internet access. One additional consideration for satellite Internet is
increased propagation time—how long it takes the signal to travel back and forth
from the satellite. In networking terms, this time is long and therefore is an
important consideration for business applications.
Home Satellite Troubleshooting Procedures
Your ability to troubleshoot satellite Internet connections might be limited.
Home satellite Internet is a line-of-sight wireless technology, and the installation
configuration must be precise. Because of this requirement, many satellite
companies insist that the satellite be set up and configured by trained staff
members. If you install a satellite system in a way that does not match the
manufacturer’s recommendations, you might void any warranties.
Given this limitation, troubleshooting satellite connections often requires you to
concentrate less on connectivity issues and more on physical troubleshooting
techniques. Perhaps more than for any other Internet technology, calls to
technical support occur early in the troubleshooting process. Satellite Internet

has a few aspects that you should be aware of:
 Rain fade: Refers to signal loss due to moisture interference. The general
rule is that the smaller the dish, the more susceptible it is to rain fade. Homes
and small businesses use small dishes.
 Latency: Refers to the time lapse between sending or requesting
information and the time it takes to return. As you might expect, satellite
communication experiences high latency due to the distance it has to travel.
 Line-of-sight: Despite the distance, satellite is basically a line-of-sight
technology. This means that the path between the satellite dish and the
satellite should be as unobstructed as possible.
Wireless Internet Access
Not too long ago, it would have been inconceivable to walk into your local
coffee shop with your laptop under your arm and surf the Web while drinking a
latte. Putting aside that beverages and laptops don’t mix, wireless Internet access
has become common.
Wireless Internet access is provided by an ISP providing public wireless Internet
access known as hotspots. Hotspots offer Internet access for mobile network
devices such as laptops, handheld computers, and cell phones in airports, coffee
shops, conference rooms, and so on. A hotspot is created using one or many
wireless access points near the hotspot location.
Client systems might need to install special application software for billing and
security purposes; others require no configuration other than obtaining the
network name (service set identifier [SSID]). Hotspots do not always require a
fee for service, because companies use them as a marketing tool to lure Internet
users to their businesses.
Hotspots are not everywhere, but finding them is not difficult. Typically,
airports, hotels, and coffee shops advertise that they offer Internet access for
customers or clients. In addition, ISPs list their hotspot sites online so that they
are easily found.
Establishing a connection to a wireless hotspot is a straightforward process. If
not equipped with built-in wireless capability, laptops require an external
wireless adapter card. With the physical requirements of the wireless card taken
care of, connect as follows:

1. When you arrive at the hotspot site, power up your laptop or other mobile
device. In some instances, you might need to reboot your system to clear out
old configuration settings if it was on standby.
2. The card might automatically detect the network. If this is the case,
configuration settings, such as the SSID, are automatically detected, and the
wireless Internet is available. If Internet access is free, there is little else to
do; if it is a paid-for service, you need to enter a method of payment. One
thing to remember is to verify that you use encryption for secure data
transfer.
3. If for some reason the wireless settings are not automatically detected, you
need to open your wireless NIC’s configuration utility and manually set the
configurations. These can include setting the mode to infrastructure,
inputting the correct SSID, and setting the level of encryption used.
In addition to using an ISP, some companies, such as hotels and cafes, provide
wireless Internet access by connecting a wireless router to a DSL or cable
Internet connection. The router becomes the wireless access point to which the
users connect, and it enables clients to connect to the Internet through the
broadband connection. The technology is based on the 802.11 standards,
typically 802.11n/ac today, and client systems require only an internal or
external wireless adapter.
Note
Want more information on wireless? Chapter 7, “Wireless Solutions,” covers
wireless technologies in detail.
Termination Points
To work properly, a network must have termination points. These endpoints stop
the signal and prevent it from living beyond its needed existence. For the exam,
CompTIA wants you to be familiar with a number of termination-related topics,
all of which are discussed in the sections that follow.
Demarc, Demarc Extension, and Smart Jacks
A network’s demarcation point is the connection point between the operator’s
part of the network and the customer’s portion of the network. This point is

important for network administrators because it distinguishes the portion of the
network that the customer is responsible for from the section the owner is
responsible for. For example, for those who have high-speed Internet, the
boundary between the customer’s premises and the ISP typically is mounted on
the wall on the side of the home. However, high-speed service providers support
everything from the cable modem back to their main distribution center. This is
why, if a modem fails, it is replaced by the ISP and not by the customer. This is
true for the wiring to that point as well.
Knowing the location of the demarcation point is essential because it marks the
point between where the customer (or administrator) is responsible and where
the owner is. It also identifies the point at which the customer is responsible
should a problem occur, and who should pay for that problem. The ISP is
responsible for ensuring that the network is functional up to the demarcation
point. The customer/administrator is responsible for ensuring that everything
from that point is operational.
The demarcation point is the point at which the ISP places its services in your
network. There is not always a choice of where this demarcation is placed. This
means that a company might have six floors of offices, and the demarcation
point is in the basement—impractical for the network. This is when you need a
demarcation extension, which extends the demarcation point to a more
functional location. This might sound simple, but it involves knowledge of
cabling distances and other infrastructure needs. The demarcation extension
might be the responsibility of the administrator, or for a fee, owners might
provide extension services.
As you might imagine, you need some form of hardware at the demarcation
point. This is the smart jack, also known as the network interface device (NID).
The smart jack performs several primary functions:
 Loopback feature: The loopback feature is built in to the smart jack. Like
the Ethernet loopback cable, it is used for testing purposes. In this case, the
loopback feature enables remote testing so that technicians do not always
need to be called to visit the local network to isolate problems.
 Signal amplification: The smart jack can amplify signals. This feature is
similar to that of the function of repeaters in an Ethernet network.
 Surge protection: Lightning and other environmental conditions can cause
electrical surges that can quickly damage equipment. Many smart jacks
include protection from environmental situations.

 Remote alarms: Smart jacks typically include an alarm that allows the
owner to identify if something goes wrong with the smart jack and therefore
the connections at the demarcation point.
ExamAlert
Demarcation point is the telephone company or ISP term for where their
facilities or wires end and where yours begin.
CSUs/DSUs
A channel service unit/data service unit (CSU/DSU) acts as a translator between
the LAN data format and the WAN data format. Such a conversion is necessary
because the technologies used on WAN links are different from those used on
LANs. Some consider a CSU/DSU a type of digital modem. But unlike a normal
modem, which changes the signal from digital to analog, a CSU/DSU changes
the signal from one digital format to another.
A CSU/DSU has physical connections for the LAN equipment, normally via a
serial interface, and another connection for a WAN.
ExamAlert
Traditionally, the CSU/DSU has been in a box separate from other
networking equipment. However, the increasing use of WAN links means
that some router manufacturers are now including CSU/DSU
functionality in routers or are providing the expansion capability to do so.
Verify Wiring Installation and Termination
After a segment of network cable has been placed where it needs to go, whether
run through the plenum or connecting a patch cable, the final task is wiring
termination. Termination is the process to connect the network cable to the wall
jack, plug, or patch panel. Termination generally is a straightforward process.
You can quickly see if the wiring and termination worked if the LED on the
connected network card is lit. Also, if you connect a client system, you can ping
other devices on the network if all works.

Note
Cabling topics, such as patch cables and plenums, are discussed in Chapter 6,
“Cabling Solutions.”
If you run the wiring and complete termination, but a system cannot access the
network and the link light is not lit, you should look for a few things when
troubleshooting the wiring installation and termination.
Verify that the termination and wiring installation link light on the device
(switch/NIC) is not lit:
 If you connect a patch cable to a PC or a switch, and no link light is lit,
verify that the patch cable is good by switching it with a known working one.
 If it is a homemade patch cable, ensure that the RJ-45 connector is properly
attached.
 Ensure that the RJ-45 connector is properly seated in the wall jack and NIC
or switch port.
 If no link light is lit when you connect to a switch, change to another port on
the switch. Sometimes a single port can be faulty.
 Verify that the correct patch cable is used. It is possible that a rollover cable
or crossover cable has been accidentally used.
 Verify that the cables used are the correct standard. For example, the patch
cable should be a 568A or 568B.
If the link light on a device is lit and intermittent problems occur, check the
following:
 Try replacing the cable with a known working one.
 Verify where the network cable is run. Ensure that a plenum-rated cable is
used if it runs through ceilings or ductwork.
 Look for heavy bends or partial breaks in the network cable.
 Verify that shielded cabling is used in areas of potentially high interference.
 Check the length of the cable run. Remember, the total run of cable should
be about 100 meters. If the patch cable or the cable between the wall jack
and the wiring closet is too long, intermittent signals can occur.

Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following technologies require dial-up access? (Choose the
best answer.)
 A. Fiber
 B. ISDN
 C. Packet switching
 D. DMVPN
2. Which of the following is an advantage of ISDN over a public switched
telephone network?
 A. ISDN is more reliable.
 B. ISDN is cheaper.
 C. ISDN is faster.
 D. ISDN uses 53 Kbps fixed-length packets.
3. Which of the following is the time lapse between sending or requesting
information and the time it takes to return?
 A. Echo
 B. Attenuation
 C. Bandwidth
 D. Latency
4. What is the speed usually offered with dial-up service?
 A. 1 Gbps
 B. 256 Kbps
 C. 144 Kbps
 D. 56 Kbps
5. What device acts as a translator between the LAN data format and the WAN
data format?
 A. SIP Trunk

 B. PRI
 C. MPLS
 D. CSU/DSU
Cram Quiz Answers
1. B. ISDN requires a dial-up connection to establish communication sessions.
2. C. One clear advantage that ISDN has over the PSTN is its speed. ISDN can
combine 64 Kbps channels for faster transmission speeds than the PSTN can
provide. ISDN is no more or less reliable than the PSTN. ISDN is more
expensive than the PSTN.
3. D. Latency refers to the time lapse between sending or requesting
information and the time it takes to return.
4. D. Almost without exception, ISPs offer 56 Kbps access, the maximum
possible under current dial-up standards.
5. D. A channel service unit/data service unit (CSU/DSU) acts as a translator
between the LAN data format and the WAN data format. Such a conversion
is necessary because the technologies used on WAN links are different from
those used on LANs.
What’s Next?
For the Network+ exam, and for routinely working with an existing network or
implementing a new one, you need to identify the characteristics of network
media and their associated cabling. Chapter 6, “Cabling Solutions,” focuses on
the media and connectors used in today’s networks and what you are likely to
find in wiring closets.

CHAPTER 6
Cabling Solutions
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Given a scenario, deploy the appropriate cabling solution.
 Given a scenario, troubleshoot common wired connectivity and
performance issues.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 2.1 and 5.3. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
When working with an existing network or implementing a new one, you need to
identify the characteristics of network media and their associated cabling. This
chapter focuses on the media and connectors used in today’s networks and how
they fit into wiring closets.
General Media Considerations
 Given a scenario, deploy the appropriate cabling solution.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What are the two main types of twisted-pair wiring used today?
2. What is the name of the wiring standard that offers a minimum of 500
MHz of bandwidth and specifies transmission distances up to 100 meters
with 10 Gbps?
3. What is the difference between RJ-11 and RJ-45 connectors?

4. What are the two most common connectors used with fiber-optic
cabling?
5. What are F-type connectors used for?
Answers
1. The two main types of twisted-pair cabling in use today are unshielded
twisted-pair (UTP) and shielded twisted-pair (STP).
2. Category 6a (Cat 6a) offers improvements over Category 6 (Cat 6) by
offering a minimum of 500 MHz of bandwidth. It specifies transmission
distances up to 100 meters with 10 Gbps networking speeds.
3. RJ-11 connectors are used with standard phone lines and are similar in
appearance to RJ-45 connectors used in networking. However, RJ-11
connectors are smaller. RJ-45 connectors are used with UTP cabling.
4. Fiber-optic cabling uses a variety of connectors, but SC and ST are more
commonly used than others. ST connectors offer a twist-type attachment,
whereas SCs have a push-on connector. LC and MTRJ are other types of
fiber-optic connectors. In environments where vibration can be a
problem, FC connectors can be used and feature a threaded body.
5. F-type connectors are used to connect coaxial cable to devices such as
Internet modems.
In addition to identifying the characteristics of network media and their
associated cabling, the Network+ exam requires knowledge of some general
terms and concepts that are associated with network media. Before looking at the
individual media types, it is a good idea to first have an understanding of some
general media considerations.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.

Broadband Versus Baseband Transmissions
Networks employ two types of signaling methods/modulation techniques:
 Baseband transmissions: Baseband transmissions use digital signaling over
a single wire. Communication on baseband transmissions is bidirectional,
allowing signals to be sent and received, but not at the same time. To send
multiple signals on a single cable, baseband uses something called time-
division multiplexing (TDM). TDM divides a single channel into time slots.
The key thing about TDM is that it does not change how baseband
transmission works—only how data is placed on the cable.
ExamAlert
Most networks use baseband transmissions. (Notice the word base.)
Examples are 1000BASE-T and 10GBASE-T.
 Broadband transmissions: In terms of LAN network standards, broadband
transmissions use analog transmissions. For broadband transmissions to be
sent and received, the medium must be split into two channels.
(Alternatively, two cables can be used: one to send and one to receive
transmissions.) Multiple channels are created using frequency-division
multiplexing (FDM). FDM allows broadband media to accommodate traffic
going in different directions on a single medium at the same time.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify the characteristics of baseband and broadband.
Simplex, Half-Duplex, and Full-Duplex Modes
Simplex, half-duplex, and full-duplex modes are referred to as dialog modes, and
they determine the direction in which data can flow through the network media:
 Simplex mode enables one-way communication of data through the network,
with the full bandwidth of the cable used for the transmitting signal. One-
way communication is of little use on LANs, making it unusual at best for
network implementations.

 Far more common is half-duplex mode, which accommodates transmitting
and receiving on the network, but not at the same time. Many networks are
configured for half-duplex communication.
 The preferred dialog mode for network communication is full-duplex mode.
To use full-duplex, both the network card and the hub or switch must support
full duplexing. Devices configured for full duplexing can simultaneously
transmit and receive. This means that 100 Mbps network cards theoretically
can transmit at 200 Mbps using full-duplex mode.
Data Transmission Rates
One of the more important media considerations is the supported data
transmission rate or speed. Different media types are rated to certain maximum
speeds, but whether they are used to this maximum depends on the networking
standard used and the network devices connected to the network.
Note
The transmission rate of media is sometimes incorrectly called the bandwidth.
But the term bandwidth refers to the width of the range of electrical
frequencies or the number of channels that the medium can support.
Transmission rates normally are measured by the number of data bits that can
traverse the medium in a single second. In the early days of data
communications, this measurement was expressed in bits per second (bps), but
today’s networks are measured in megabits per second (Mbps) and gigabits per
second (Gbps).
The different network media vary greatly in the transmission speeds they
support. Many of today’s application-intensive networks require more than the
10 Mbps or 100 Mbps offered by the older networking standards. In some cases,
even 1 Gbps, which is found in many modern LANs, is not enough to meet
current network needs. For this reason, many organizations now deploy 10 Gbps
implementations.
Types of Network Media
Whatever type of network is used, some type of network medium is needed to
carry signals between computers. Two types of media are used in networks:

cable-based media, such as twisted-pair, and the media types associated with
wireless networking, such as radio waves.
In networks using cable-based media, there are two basic choices:
 Copper
 Fiber-optic
Copper wire is used with both twisted-pair and coaxial cables to conduct the
signals electronically; fiber-optic cable uses a glass or plastic conductor and
transmits the signals as light.
For many years, coaxial was the cable of choice for most LANs. Today, twisted-
pair has proven to be the cable medium of choice, thus retiring coaxial to the
confines of storage closets. Fiber-optic cable has seen a rise in popularity, but
cost slowed its adoption to the home (although it is common today). It is widely
used as a network backbone where segment length and higher speeds are needed
and is common in server room environments as a server-to-switch connection
method and in building-to-building connections in metropolitan-area networks
(MANs).
The following sections summarize the characteristics of each of these cable
types.
Twisted-Pair Cabling
Twisted-pair cabling has been around for a long time. It was originally created
for voice transmissions and has been widely used for telephone communication.
Today, in addition to telephone communication, twisted-pair is the most widely
used medium for networking.
The popularity of twisted-pair can be attributed to the fact that it is lighter, more
flexible, and easier to install than coaxial or fiber-optic cable. It is also cheaper
than other media alternatives and can achieve greater speeds than its coaxial
competition. These factors make twisted-pair the ideal solution for most network
environments.
Two main types of twisted-pair cabling are in use today: unshielded twisted-pair
(UTP) and shielded twisted-pair (STP). UTP is significantly more common than
STP and is used for most networks. Shielded twisted-pair is used in
environments in which greater resistance to EMI and attenuation is required. The
greater resistance comes at a price, however. The additional shielding, plus the

need to ground that shield (which requires special connectors), can significantly
add to the cost of a cable installation of STP.
STP provides the extra shielding by using an insulating material that is wrapped
around the wires within the cable. This extra protection increases the distances
that data signals can travel over STP but also increases the cost of the cabling.
Figure 6.1 shows UTP and STP cabling.
FIGURE 6.1 UTP and STP cabling
There are several categories of twisted-pair cabling. The early categories are
most commonly associated with voice transmissions. The categories are
specified by the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industry
Association (EIA/TIA). EIA/TIA is an organization that focuses on developing
standards 
for 
electronic 
components, 
electronic 
information,
telecommunications, and Internet security. These standards are important to
ensure uniformity of components and devices.
Note
When learning about cabling, you need to understand the distinction between
hertz and bits per second in relation to bandwidth. When you talk about
bandwidth and a bits-per-second rating, you refer to a rate of data transfer.
EIA/TIA has specified a number of categories of twisted-pair cable, some of
which are now obsolete. Those still in use today include the following:
 Category 3: Data-grade cable that can transmit data up to 10 Mbps with a
possible bandwidth of 16 MHz. For many years, Category 3 was the cable of
choice for twisted-pair networks. As network speeds pushed the 100 Mbps
speed limit, Category 3 became ineffective.
 Category 5: Data-grade cable that typically was used with Fast Ethernet
operating at 100 Mbps with a transmission range of 100 meters. Although

Category 5 was a popular media type, this cable is an outdated standard.
Newer implementations use the 5e or greater standards. Category 5 provides
a minimum of 100 MHz of bandwidth. Category 5, despite being used
primarily for 10/100 Ethernet networking, can go faster. The IEEE 802.11ae
standard specifies 1000 Mbps over Category 5 cable.
 Category 5e: Data-grade cable used on networks that run at 10/100 Mbps
and even up to 1000 Mbps. Category 5e cabling can be used up to 100
meters, depending on the implementation and standard used. Category 5e
cable provides a minimum of 100 MHz of bandwidth.
 Category 6: High-performance UTP cable that can transmit data up to 10
Gbps. Category 6 has a minimum of 250 MHz of bandwidth and specifies
cable lengths up to 100 meters with 10/100/1000 Mbps transfer, along with
10 Gbps over shorter distances. Category 6 cable typically is made up of four
twisted pairs of copper wire, but its capabilities far exceed those of other
cable types. Category 6 twisted-pair uses a longitudinal separator, which
separates each of the four pairs of wires from each other. This extra
construction significantly reduces the amount of crosstalk in the cable and
makes the faster transfer rates possible.
 Category 6a: Also called augmented 6. Offers improvements over Category
6 by offering a minimum of 500 MHz of bandwidth. It specifies transmission
distances up to 100 meters with 10 Gbps networking speeds.
 Category 7: The big advantage to this cable is that shielding has been added
to individual pairs and to the cable as a whole to greatly reduce crosstalk. It
is rated for transmission of 600 MHz and is backward compatible with
Category 5 and Category 6. Category 7 differs from the other cables in this
group in that it is not recognized by the EIA/TIA and that it is shielded
twisted pair while all others listed as exam objectives are unshielded.
ExamAlert
On the exam, you might see these as Cat 3, Cat 5, Cat 5e, Cat 6, Cat 6a,
and Cat 7. Remember their characteristics, such as cable length, speed,
and bandwidth.
Tip

If you work on a network that is a few years old, you might need to determine
which category of cable it uses. The easiest way to do this is to read the cable.
The category number should be clearly printed on it.
Table 6.1 summarizes the categories and the speeds they support in common
network implementations.
TABLE 6.1 Twisted-Pair Cable Categories
Category
Common Application
3
16 Mbps
5
100 Mbps
5e
1000 Mbps
6
10/100/1000 Mbps plus 10 Gbps
6a
10 Gbps and beyond networking
7
10 Gbps and beyond networking
Note
The numbers shown in Table 6.1 refer to speeds these cables are commonly
used to support. Ratified standards for these cabling categories might actually
specify lower speeds than those listed, but cable and network component
manufacturers are always pushing the performance envelope in the quest for
greater speeds. The ratified standards define minimum specifications. For
more information on cabling standards, visit the TIA website at
http://www.tiaonline.org/.
Coaxial Cables
Coaxial cable, or coax as it is commonly called, has been around for a long time.
Coax found success in both TV signal transmission and network
implementations. As shown in Figure 6.2, coax is constructed with a copper core
at the center (the main wire) that carries the signal, insulation (made of plastic),
ground (braided metal shielding), and insulation on the outside (an outer plastic
covering).

FIGURE 6.2 Coaxial cabling
Coaxial cable is constructed in this way to add resistance to attenuation (the loss
of signal strength as the signal travels over distance), crosstalk (the degradation
of a signal caused by signals from other cables running close to it), and EMI.
Two types of coax are used in networking: thin coax, also known as thinnet or
10BASE2, and thick coax, also known as thicknet. Neither is particularly
popular anymore, but you are most likely to encounter thin coax. Thick coax was
used primarily for backbone cable. It could be run through plenum spaces
because it offered significant resistance to EMI and crosstalk and could run in
lengths up to 500 meters. Thick coax offers speeds up to 10 Mbps, far too slow
for today’s network environments.
Thin coax is much more likely to be seen than thick coax in today’s networks,
but it isn’t common. Thin coax is only .25 inches in diameter, making it fairly
easy to install. Unfortunately, one of the disadvantages of all thin coax types is
that they are prone to cable breaks, which increase the difficulty when installing
and troubleshooting coaxial-based networks.
Several types of thin coax cable exist, each of which has a specific use. Table 6.2
summarizes these categories.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should focus on RG-59 and RG-6.
TABLE 6.2 Thin Coax Categories
Cable
Type
Description
RG-
59
Used to generate low-power video connections. The RG-59 cable
cannot be used over long distances because of its high-frequency power

losses. In such cases, RG-6 cables are used instead.
RG-6
Often used for cable TV and cable modems.
Fiber-Optic Cables
In many ways, fiber-optic media addresses the shortcomings of copper-based
media. Because fiber-based media use light transmissions instead of electronic
pulses, threats such as EMI, crosstalk, and attenuation become nonissues. Fiber
is well suited for the transfer of data, video, and voice transmissions. In addition,
fiber-optic is the most secure of all cable media. Anyone trying to access data
signals on a fiber-optic cable must physically tap into the medium. Given the
composition of the cable, this is a particularly difficult task.
Unfortunately, despite the advantages of fiber-based media over copper, it still
does not enjoy the popularity of twisted-pair cabling. The moderately difficult
installation and maintenance procedures of fiber often require skilled technicians
with specialized tools. Furthermore, the cost of a fiber-based solution limits the
number of organizations that can afford to implement it. Another sometimes
hidden drawback of implementing a fiber solution is the cost of retrofitting
existing network equipment. Fiber is incompatible with most electronic network
equipment. This means you have to purchase fiber-compatible network
hardware.
ExamAlert
Fiber-optic cable, although still more expensive than other types of cable,
is well suited for high-speed data communications. It eliminates the
problems associated with copper-based media, such as near-end crosstalk,
EMI, and signal tampering.
As shown in Figure 6.3, fiber-optic cable is composed of a core (glass fiber) that
is surrounded by cladding (silica). A silicone coating is next, followed by a
buffer jacket. There are strength members next and then a protective sheath
(polyurethane outer jacket) surrounds everything.

FIGURE 6.3 Fiber-optic cabling
Two types of fiber-optic cable are available:
 Multimode fiber: Many beams of light travel through the cable, bouncing
off the cable walls. This strategy actually weakens the signal, reducing the
length and speed at which the data signal can travel.
 Single-mode fiber: Uses a single direct beam of light, thus allowing for
greater distances and increased transfer speeds.
Some common types of fiber-optic cable include the following:
 62.5-micron core/125-micron cladding multimode
 50-micron core/125-micron cladding multimode
 8.3-micron core/125-micron cladding single mode
In the ever-increasing search for bandwidth that can keep pace with the demands
of modern applications, fiber-optic cables are sure to continue to play a key role.
ExamAlert
Understanding the types of fiber optics available, as well as their

advantages and limitations, is important for real-world applications as
well as the Network+ exam.
Plenum Versus PVC Cables
A plenum is the mysterious space that resides between the false, or drop, ceiling
and the true ceiling. This space typically is used for air conditioning and heating
ducts. It might also hold a myriad of cables, including telephone, electrical, and
networking. The cables that occupy this space must be plenum-rated rather than
the standard PVC cables. Plenum cables are coated with a nonflammable
material, often Teflon or Kynar, and they do not give off toxic fumes if they
catch fire. As you might imagine, plenum-rated cables cost more than regular
(PVC-based) cables, but they are mandatory when cables are not run through a
conduit. As a bonus, plenum-rated cables suffer from less attenuation than non-
plenum cables.
ExamAlert
Cables run through the plenum areas must have two important
characteristics: They must be fire resistant, and they must not produce
toxic fumes if exposed to intense heat.
Types of Media Connectors
A variety of connectors are used with the associated network media. Media
connectors attach to the transmission media and allow the physical connection
into the computing device. For the Network+ exam, you need to identify the
connectors associated with a specific medium. The following sections describe
the connectors and associated media.
BNC Connectors
BNC connectors are associated with coaxial media and 10BASE2 networks.
BNC connectors are not as common as they previously were, but they still are
used on some networks, older network cards, and older hubs. Common BNC
connectors include a barrel connector, T-connector, and terminators. Figure 6.4
shows two terminators (top and bottom) and two T-connectors (left and right).

FIGURE 6.4 BNC connectors
ExamAlert
Connectors are sometimes referred to as couplers. For exam purposes,
consider the two words to be synonyms.
RJ-11 Connectors
RJ-11 (Registered Jack) connectors are small plastic connectors used on
telephone cables. They have capacity for six small pins. However, in many
cases, not all the pins are used. For example, a standard telephone connection
uses only two pins, and a cable used for a digital subscriber line (DSL) modem
connection uses four.
RJ-11 connectors are somewhat similar to RJ-45 connectors, which are discussed
next, although they are a little smaller. Both RJ-11 and RJ-45 connectors have a
small plastic flange on top of the connector to ensure a secure connection. Figure
6.5 shows two views of an RJ-11 connector.

FIGURE 6.5 RJ-11 connectors
RJ-45 Connectors
RJ-45 connectors, as shown in Figure 6.6, are the ones you are most likely to
encounter in your network travels. RJ-45 connectors are used with twisted-pair
cabling, the most prevalent network cable in use today. RJ-45 connectors
resemble the aforementioned RJ-11 phone jacks, but they support up to eight
wires instead of the six supported by RJ-11 connectors. RJ-45 connectors are
also larger than RJ-11 connectors.
FIGURE 6.6 RJ-45 connectors
F-Type Connectors and RG-59 and RG-6 Cables
F-type connectors, as shown in Figure 6.7, are screw-on connections used to
attach coaxial cable to devices. This includes RG-59 and RG-6 cables. In the
world of modern networking, F-type connectors are most commonly associated
with connecting Internet modems to cable or satellite Internet service providers’

(ISP) equipment. However, F-type connectors are also used to connect to some
proprietary peripherals.
FIGURE 6.7 F-type connector
F-type connectors have a “nut” on the connection that provides something to
grip as the connection is tightened by hand. If necessary, this nut can also be
lightly gripped with pliers to aid disconnection.
ExamAlert
For the Network+ exam, you will be expected to identify the connectors
discussed in this chapter by their appearance.
Fiber Connectors
A variety of connectors are associated with fiber cabling, and there are several
ways of connecting them. These include bayonet, snap-lock, and push-pull
connectors. Figure 6.8 shows the fiber connectors identified in the Network+
objectives.
ExamAlert
As with the other connectors discussed in this section, be prepared to
identify fiber connectors by their appearance and by how they are
physically connected.

FIGURE 6.8 Fiber connectors
Within the various types of connectors (ST, SC, LC, MT-RJ, and so on), you can
choose to purchase ones that are either angle polished connectors (APC) or ultra
polished connectors (UPC). The biggest difference between these two is the
“angle” present in APC. UPC connectors have an endface polished at a zero-
degree angle (flat), whereas APC is eight degrees. As a general rule, the more
polished (UPC) gives less insertion loss.
MT-RJ (standing for either Mechanical Transfer Registered Jack or Media
Termination Recommended Jack) is popular for duplex multimode connections.
It is often written with the dash between the letters, but CompTIA prefers to use
MTRJ in their objectives and on the exam.

RS-232 Standard Connectors (DB-9 and DB-25)
Recommended Standard (RS-232) is a TIA/EIA standard for serial transmission
between computers and peripheral devices such as modems, mice, and
keyboards. The RS-232 standard was introduced way back in the 1960s and is
still used today. However, peripheral devices are more commonly connected
using USB or wireless connections. RS-232 commonly uses a 25-pin DB-25
connector or a nine-pin DB-9 connector. Figure 6.9 shows an example of RS-232
standard connectors with the numbers identifying the pin sequences used by all.
FIGURE 6.9 RS-232 DB connectors
Serial connectors need to attach to a serial cable. Serial cables often use four to
six wires to attach to the connectors. Similar to other cable types, they can come
in both an unshielded and shielded type. Shielding reduces interference and EMI
for the cable. The distance that a length of serial cable can run varies somewhat.
It depends on the characteristics of the serial port and the quality of the serial
cable. The RS-232 standard specifies serial cable distances up to 50 feet and a
transfer speed up to 20 Kbps. Other serial standards increase this range and
speed.
Universal Serial Bus (USB) Connectors
USB ports are now an extremely common sight on desktop and mobile computer
systems. USB is associated more with connecting consumer peripherals such as
smartphones, MP3 players, and digital cameras than with networking. However,

many manufacturers now make wireless network cards that plug directly into a
USB port. Most desktop and mobile computers have between two and four USB
ports, but USB hubs are available that provide additional ports if required.
A number of connectors are associated with USB ports, but the three most
popular are Type A, Type B, and Type C. Type A connectors were traditionally
the more common and used on PCs, whereas many peripheral devices used Type
B connectors. In recent years, Type C (commonly called USB-C) has increased
in popularity. Type C is a 24-pin USB connector that has a horizontally
symmetrical “reversible” connector. Figure 6.10 shows the three types of USB
connectors.
FIGURE 6.10 Type A, B, and C connectors
Transceivers
On routers, small form-factor pluggable (SFP) modules and gigabit interface
converter (GBIC) modules are often used to link a gigabit Ethernet port with a
fiber network (often 1000BASE-X). Both SFPs and GBICs exist for
technologies other than fiber (Ethernet and SONET/SDH are usual), but
connecting to fiber has become the most common use.
Note
SFP+ is an enhanced small form-factor pluggable module that is a newer
version of SFP that supports data rates up to 16 Gbps. Quad Small Form-
factor Pluggable (QSFP) is a different transceiver that is both compact and
hot-pluggable that has been jointly developed by many networking vendors.
Fiber transceivers are bidirectional and capable of operating in duplex mode.

With either an SFP or GBIC, there is a receiver port (RX) and transmitter port
(TX). These devices are static-sensitive as well as dust-sensitive, and dirty
connectors can cause intermittent problems. Care should be taken to not remove
them more often than absolutely necessary to keep from shortening their life.
After a module goes bad, they can be swapped for a new one to resolve the
problem.
Note
Cisco has a great post on the care and maintenance of SFPs at
www.cisco.com/en/US/products/hw/modules/ps4999/products_tech_note09186a
Signal loss can occur not only from unclean connectors, but also from connector
mismatch. Improper alignment and differences in core diameters contribute to
signal loss.
When troubleshooting an SFP or GBIC, you want to make sure that you do not
have a cable mismatch or a bad cable/transceiver. As simple as it may sound, it
is important to verify that you are using a single-mode fiber with a single-mode
interface and a multimode fiber cable for a multimode interface. Such a fiber
type mismatch can cause the physical link to go completely down but does not
always do so, thus making troubleshooting it difficult.
Media Couplers/Converters
When you have two dissimilar types of network media, a media converter is
used to allow them to connect. They are sometimes referred to as couplers.
Depending on the conversion being done, the converter can be a small device
barely larger than the connectors themselves or a large device within a sizable
chassis.
Reasons for not using the same media throughout the network, and thus reasons
for needing a converter, can range from cost (gradually moving from coax to
fiber), disparate segments (connecting the office to the factory), or needing to
run a particular media in a setting (the need for fiber to reduce EMI problems in
a small part of the building).
Figure 6.11 shows an example of a media converter. The one shown converts
between 10/100/1000TX and SFP.

FIGURE 6.11 A common media converter
The following converters are commonly implemented and ones that CompTIA
includes on the Network+ exam.
ExamAlert
Make sure you know that the possibilities listed here exist.
Single mode fiber to Ethernet
Single mode to multimode fiber
Multimode fiber to Ethernet
Fiber to coaxial
568A and 568B Wiring Standards
568A and 568B are telecommunications standards from TIA and EIA. These 568
standards specify the pin arrangements for the RJ-45 connectors on UTP or STP
cables. The number 568 refers to the order in which the wires within the cable
are terminated and attached to the connector.
The TIA/EIA 568A and 568B standards (often referred to as T568A and T568B
for termination standard) are similar; the difference is the order in which the pins
are terminated. The signal is the same for both. Both are used for patch cords in
an Ethernet network.
ExamAlert
The only notable difference between T568A and T568B is that pairs 2 and

3 (orange and green) are swapped.
Network media might not always come with connectors attached, or you might
need to make custom length cables. This is when you need to know something
about how these standards actually work. Before you can crimp on the
connectors, you need to know in which order the individual wires will be
attached to the connector. Figure 6.12 shows the pin number assignments for the
T568A and T568B standards.
FIGURE 6.12 Pin assignments for the T568A and T568B standards
Straight-Through Versus Crossover Cables
Two types of cables are used to connect devices to hubs and switches: crossover
cables and straight-through cables. The difference between the two types is that
in a crossover cable, two of the wires are crossed; in a straight-through cable, all
the wires run straight through.
Specifically, in a crossover cable, wires 1 and 3 and wires 2 and 6 are crossed.
Wire 1 at one end becomes wire 3 at the other end, wire 2 at one end becomes
wire 6 at the other end, and vice versa in both cases. You can see the differences
between the two cables in Figures 6.13 and 6.14. Figure 6.13 shows the pinouts
for a straight-through cable, and Figure 6.14 shows the pinouts for a crossover
cable.
ExamAlert
The crossover cable can be used to directly network two PCs without
using a hub or switch. This is done because the cable performs the

function of the switch.
FIGURE 6.13 Pinouts for a straight-through twisted-pair cable
Note
Auto MDI-X ports on newer interfaces detect whether the connection requires
a crossover and automatically choose the MDI or MDI-X configuration to
match the other end of the link.

FIGURE 6.14 Pinouts for a crossover twisted-pair cable
To make a crossover Ethernet cable, you need to use both the 568A and 568B
standards. One end of the cable can be wired according to the 568A standard and
the other with the 568B standard.
A T1 crossover cable, the pinouts of which are shown in Figure 6.15, is used to
connect two T1 CSU/DSU devices in a back-to-back configuration. RJ-45
connectors are used on both ends.

FIGURE 6.15 Pinouts for a T1 crossover cable
Rollover and Loopback Cables
The rollover cable is a Cisco proprietary cable used to connect a computer
system to a router or switch console port. The rollover cable resembles an
Ethernet UTP cable; however, it is not possible to use it on anything but Cisco
equipment. Like UTP cable, the rollover cable has eight wires inside and an RJ-
45 connectors on each end that connect to the router and the computer port.
As far as pinouts are concerned, pin 1 on one end of the rollover cable connects
to pin 8 at the other end of the cable. Similarly, pin 2 connects to pin 7, and so
on. The ends are simply reversed. As soon as one end of the rollover cable is
connected to the PC and the other to the Cisco terminal, the Cisco equipment can
be accessed from the computer system using a program such as PuTTY.
ExamAlert
Remember that the rollover cable is a proprietary cable used to connect a
PC to a Cisco router.
A loopback cable, also known as a plug, is used to test and isolate network
problems. If made correctly, the loopback plug causes the link light on a device
such as a network interface card (NIC) to come on. This is a quick and cheap
way to test simple network cabling problems. The loopback plug redirects

outgoing data signals to the system. The system then believes that it is both
sending and receiving data.
The loopback cable is basically a troubleshooting tool used to test the device to
see if it is sending and receiving properly. It uses UTP cable and RJ-45
connectors.
ExamAlert
Know that a loopback cable is a basic troubleshooting tool.
Components of Wiring Distribution
So far, this chapter has examined various types of media and the associated
connectors. This section looks at wiring in the closet, the place in networks
where you connect the cables and networking devices. These rooms have many
names, including the wiring closet, the telecommunications room, and the
network operations center (NOC). These telecommunications rooms contain the
key network devices, such as the hubs, routers, switches, and servers. These
rooms also contain the network media, such as patch cables that connect network
devices to horizontal cables and the rest of the network.
Network Cross-Connects
The cable that runs throughout a network can be divided into two distinct
sections:
 Horizontal cabling: Connects client systems to the network.
 Vertical (backbone) cabling: Runs between floors to connect different
locations on the network.
Both of these cable types have to be consolidated and distributed from a location
—a wiring closet.
Following are three types of cable distribution:
 Vertical or main cross-connect: The location where outside cables enter the
building for distribution. This can include Internet and phone cabling.
 Horizontal cross-connect: The location where the vertical and horizontal
connections meet.

 Intermediate cross-connect: Typically used in larger networks. Provides an
intermediate cross-connect between the main and horizontal cross-connects.
The term cross-connect refers to the point where the cables running throughout
the network meet and are connected.
Horizontal Cabling
Within the telecommunications room, horizontal cabling connects the
telecommunications room to the end user, as shown in Figure 6.16. Specifically,
the horizontal cabling extends from the telecommunications outlet, or a network
outlet with RJ-45 connectors, at the client end. It includes all cable from that
outlet to the telecommunications room to the horizontal cross-connect—the
distribution point for the horizontal cable. The horizontal cross-connect includes
all connecting hardware, such as patch panels and patch cords. The horizontal
cross-connect is the termination point for all network horizontal cables.
Horizontal cabling runs within walls and ceilings and therefore is called
permanent cable or structure cable. The length of cable running from the
horizontal connects and the telecommunication outlet on the client side should
not exceed 90 meters. Patch cables used typically should not exceed 5 meters.
This is because of the 100-meter distance limitation of most UTP cable.
Note
Horizontal wiring includes all cabling run from the wall plate or network
connection to the telecommunications closet. The outlets, cable, and cross-
connects in the closet are all part of the horizontal wiring, which gets its name
because the cable typically runs horizontally above ceilings or along the floor.

FIGURE 6.16 Horizontal cabling
Vertical Cables
Vertical cable, or backbone cable, refers to the media used to connect
telecommunications rooms, server rooms, and remote locations and offices.
Vertical cable may be used to connect locations outside the local LAN that
require high-speed connections. Therefore, vertical cable is often fiber-optic
cable or high-speed UTP cable. Figure 6.17 shows the relationship between
horizontal cable and vertical cable.

FIGURE 6.17 Vertical and horizontal cabling
Patch Panels
If you have ever looked in a telecommunications room, you have probably seen
a distribution block, more commonly called a patch panel. A patch panel is a
freestanding or wall-mounted unit with a number of RJ-45 port connections on
the front. In a way, it looks like a wall-mounted hub without the light-emitting
diodes (LEDs). The patch panel provides a connection point between network
equipment, such as hubs and switches, and the ports to which PCs are connected,
which normally are distributed throughout a building.
Note
Not all environments use patch panels. In some environments, cables run
directly between systems and a hub or switch. This is an acceptable method of
connectivity, but it is not as easy to make tidy as a structured cabling system
that uses a patch panel system and wall or floor sockets.

Also found in a wiring closet is the punchdown block. The wires from a
telephony or UTP cable are attached to the punchdown block using a punchdown
tool. To use the punchdown tool, you place the wires in the tip of the tool and
push it into the connectors attached to the punchdown block. The wire insulation
is stripped, and the wires are firmly embedded into the metal connector. Because
the connector strips the insulation on the wire, it is known rather grandiosely as
an insulation displacement connector (IDC). Figure 6.18 shows a punchdown
tool placing wires into an IDC of a patch panel.
FIGURE 6.18 Punchdown tool inserting wires into an IDC
Using a punchdown tool is much faster than using wire strippers to prepare each
individual wire and then twisting the wire around a connection pole or tightening
a screw to hold the wire in place. In many environments, cable tasks are left to a
specialized cable contractor. In others, the administrator is the one who must
connect wires to a patch panel.
ExamAlert
Punchdown tools are used to attach twisted-pair network cable to
connectors within a patch panel. Specifically, they connect twisted-pair
wires to the IDC.
Fiber Distribution Panels

Just as a patch panel is used to provide a connection point between network
equipment, so too is a fiber distribution panel (FDP). The difference between
the two is that the FDP is a cabinet intended to provide space for termination,
storage, and splicing of fiber connections.
ExamAlert
As you study for the exam, make sure you can identify the following exam
objectives discussed here and following: termination points, 66 block, 110
block, patch panel, and fiber distribution panel.
66 and 110 Blocks (T568A, T568B)
Two main types of punchdown blocks are used: type 66 and type 110. Type 66 is
an older design used to connect wiring for telephone systems and other low-
speed network systems and is not as widely used as type 110. The 66 block has
50 rows of IDC contacts to accommodate 25-pair twisted-pair cable. Block 66
was used primarily for voice communication. Although it was approved for
Category 5 and greater, it is not really suitable for anything greater than
10BASE-T due to crosstalk problems. However, specialized CAT5e certified 66
blocks are available that do meet CAT5e termination standards.
In the network wiring closet, the 110 block is used to connect network cable to
patch panels. 110 connections can also be used at the other end of the network
cable at the RJ-45 wall jack. 110 blocks are preferred over the older 66 blocks,
the 110 block improves on the 66 block by supporting higher frequencies and
less crosstalk. Therefore, it supports higher-speed networks and higher grade
twisted-pair cable. The termination will be T568A or T568B, depending on
which wiring standard is used.
MDF and IDF Wiring Closets
The preceding section looked at wiring closets. Two types of wiring closets are
main distribution frame (MDF) and intermediate distribution frame (IDF). The
main wiring closet for a network typically holds the majority of the network
gear, including routers, switches, wiring, servers, and more. This is also typically
the wiring closet where outside lines run into the network. This main wiring
closet is known as the MDF. One of the key components in the MDF is a
primary patch panel. The network connector jacks attached to this patch panel

lead out to the building for network connections.
In some networks, multiple wiring closets are used. When this is the case, the
MDF connects to these secondary wiring closets, or IDFs, using a backbone
cable. This backbone cable may be UTP, fiber, or even coaxial. In today’s high-
speed networks, UTP Gigabit Ethernet or high-speed fiber are the media of
choice. Figure 6.19 shows the relationship between the MDF and the IDF.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify the difference between an IDF and an MDF.
FIGURE 6.19 The relationship between MDFs and IDFs
Ethernet Deployment Standards
A number of IEEE standards relate to networking and cover everything from
implementation to security. The 802.3 standards relate to Ethernet deployment,

and many of the early ones have become outdated. Make sure that you are
familiar with the information that follows for the most popular standards
presently before you take the Network+ exam.
100BaseT
At one time, 10 Mbps networks were considered fast enough, but those days are
long gone. Today, companies and home users alike demand more bandwidth than
that and three Fast Ethernet (100BaseT) standards are specified in the IEEE
802.3u standard: 100BASE-T4, 100BASE-TX, and 100BASE-FX—not all of
which you need to know for the Network+ exam objectives.
As its name suggests, 100BASE-TX transmits network data at speeds up to 100
Mbps. 100BASE-TX is most often implemented with UTP cable, but it can use
STP; therefore, it suffers from the same 100-meter distance limitations as other
UTP-based networks. 100BASE-TX uses Category 5, or higher, UTP cable, and
it uses independent transmit and receive paths and therefore can support full-
duplex operation. 100BASE-TX is the most common implementation of the Fast
Ethernet standard.
ExamAlert
Hyphens have no meaning when it comes to wiring standards; 100Base-T
is the same as 100BaseT. Although the most recent iteration of the exam
objectives leaves the hyphen out, know that both notations mean the same
thing.
Tip
Repeaters are sometimes needed when you connect segments that use
100BASE-TX, or 100BASE-FX.
100BASE-FX is the IEEE standard for running Fast Ethernet over fiber-optic
cable. Due to the expense of fiber implementations, 100BASE-FX is largely
limited to use as a network backbone. 100BASE-FX can use two-strand
multimode fiber or single-mode fiber media. The maximum segment length for
half-duplex multimode fiber is 412 meters, but this maximum increases to an

impressive 10,000 meters for full-duplex single-mode fiber. 100BASE-FX often
uses SC or ST fiber connectors. Table 6.3 summarizes the characteristics of the
802.3u Fast Ethernet specifications.
TABLE 6.3 Summary of 802.3u Fast Ethernet Characteristics
Characteristic
100BASE-
TX
100BASE-FX
Transmission
method
Baseband
Baseband
Speed
100 Mbps
100 Mbps
Distance
100 meters
412 meters (multimode half duplex); 10,000
meters (single mode full duplex)
Cable type
Category
UTP, STP
Fiber optic
Connector
type
RJ-45
SC, ST
1000BaseT
1000BaseT, sometimes called 1000BASE-T or 1000BASE-TX, is a Gigabit
Ethernet standard, and it is given the IEEE 802.3ab designation. The 802.3ab
standard specifies Gigabit Ethernet over Category 5 or better UTP cable. The
standard allows for full-duplex transmission using the four pairs of twisted cable.
To reach speeds of 1000 Mbps over copper, a data transmission speed of 250
Mbps is achieved over each pair of twisted-pair cable. Table 6.4 summarizes the
characteristics of 1000BaseT.
TABLE 6.4 Summary of 1000BaseT Characteristics
Characteristic
Description
Transmission method
Baseband
Speed
1000 Mbps
Total distance/segment
75 meters
Cable type
Category 5 or better
Connector type
RJ-45

10GBaseT
The 802.3an standard brings 10-gigabit speed to regular copper cabling.
Although transmission distances may not be that of fiber, it allows a potential
upgrade from 1000 Gbps networking to 10 Gbps networking using the current
wiring infrastructure.
The 10GBaseT standard specifies 10 Gbps transmissions over UTP or STP
twisted-pair cables. The standard calls for a cable specification of Category 6 or
Category 6a. With Category 6, the maximum transmission range is 55 meters;
with the augmented Category 6a cable, transmission range increases to 100
meters. Category 6 and 6a cables are specifically designed to reduce attenuation
and crosstalk, making 10 Gbps speeds possible. 802.3an specifies regular RJ-45
networking connectors. Table 6.5 outlines the characteristics of the 802.3an
standard.
TABLE 6.5 Summary of 802.3an Characteristics
Characteristic
Descriptions
Transmission method
Baseband
Speed
10 Gbps
Total
distance/segment
100 meters Category 6a cable; 55 meters Category 6
cable
Cable type
Category 6, 6a UTP or STP
Connector
RJ-45
1000BaseLX and 1000BaseSX
Both 1000BaseLX and 1000BaseSX are Gigabit Ethernet standards for fiber.
1000BaseLX is a fiber standard for Gigabit Ethernet that utilizes single-mode
fiber. It can also run over multimode fiber with a maximum segment length of
550m.
1000BaseSX is intended for use with multimode fiber and has a maximum
length of 220 meters for default installations (550 meters is possible with the
right optics and terminations). This standard is popular for intrabuilding links in
office buildings.

Cram Quiz
1. Which of following connectors is commonly used with fiber cabling?
 A. RJ-45
 B. BNC
 C. SC
 D. RJ-11
2. What kind of cable would you associate with an F-type connector?
 A. Fiber optic
 B. UTP
 C. Coaxial
 D. STP
3. Which of the following is not a type of fiber-optic connector used in
network implementations?
 A. MTRJ
 B. SC
 C. BNC
 D. LC
4. Which of the following fiber connectors uses a twist-type connection
method?
 A. ST
 B. SC
 C. BNC
 D. SA
5. Which of the following is a fiber standard for Gigabit Ethernet that utilizes
single-mode fiber?
 A. 1000BaseSX

 B. TIA/EIA 568a
 C. RG-6
 D. 1000BaseLX
6. In a crossover cable, which wire is wire 1 crossed with?
 A. 2
 B. 3
 C. 4
 D. 5
7. What are the two main types of punchdown blocks? (Choose two.)
 A. 110
 B. 220
 C. 66
 D. 12
8. Which of the following are cables that are specifically coated with a
nonflammable material and do not give off toxic fumes if they catch fire?
 A. SFP and GBIC
 B. Cat 5e, Cat 6, Cat 6a
 C. FDP
 D. Plenum-rated
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. SC connectors are used with fiber-optic cable. RJ-45 connectors are used
with UTP cable, BNC is used for thin coax cable, and RJ-11 is used for
regular phone connectors.
2. C. F-type connectors are used with coaxial cables. They are not used with
fiber-optic, unshielded twisted-pair (UTP), or shielded twisted-pair (STP)
cabling.
3. C. BNC is a connector type used with coaxial cabling. It is not used as a

connector for fiber-optic cabling. MTRJ, SC, and LC are all recognized
types of fiber-optic connectors.
4. A. ST fiber connectors use a twist-type connection method. SC connectors
use a push-type connection method. The other choices are not valid fiber
connectors.
5. D. 1000BaseLX is a fiber standard for Gigabit Ethernet that utilizes single-
mode fiber. 1000BaseSX is intended for use with multimode fiber and has a
maximum length of 220 meters for default installations. TIA/EIA 568A (and
568B) are telecommunications standards that specify the pin arrangements
for the RJ-45 connectors on UTP or STP cables. RG-6 is a common type of
coaxial cable often used for cable TV and cable modems.
6. B. In a crossover cable, wires 1 and 3 and wires 2 and 6 are crossed.
7. A, C. The two main types of punchdown blocks are type 66 and type 110.
Type 66 is an older design used to connect wiring for telephone systems and
other low-speed network systems and is not as widely used as type 110.
8. D. Plenum-rated cables are coated with a nonflammable material, often
Teflon or Kynar, and they do not give off toxic fumes if they catch fire. On
routers, SFP modules and GBIC modules are often used to link a gigabit
Ethernet port with a fiber network. Cat 5, Cat 5e, Cat 6, Cat 6a are general
categories of twisted-pair cabling. FDP is an acronym for fiber distribution
panel: a cabinet intended to provide space for termination, storage, and
splicing of fiber connections.
Troubleshooting 
Common 
Wired
Connectivity Issues
 Given a scenario, troubleshoot common wired connectivity and
performance issues.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.

1. What is the correct term for delay time on a satellite-based network?
2. What are two types of crosstalk?
Answers
1. Latency is the time of the delay.
2. Two types of crosstalk are near end (NEXT) and far end crosstalk
(FEXT).
When administering a wired network, you should be aware of a number of
performance issues and common connectivity problems. Some of the topics
lumped within this objective are more knowledge/definitions than actionable
items, but make sure you are familiar with the following.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Attenuation
Attenuation refers to the weakening of data signals as they travel through a
medium. Network media vary in their resistance to attenuation. Coaxial cable
generally is more resistant than unshielded twisted-pair (UTP); shielded twisted-
pair (STP) is slightly more resistant than UTP; and fiber-optic cable does not
suffer from attenuation. That’s not to say that a signal does not weaken as it
travels over fiber-optic cable, but the correct term for this weakening is
chromatic dispersion rather than attenuation.
You must understand attenuation or chromatic dispersion and the maximum
distances specified for network media. Exceeding a medium’s distance without
using repeaters can cause hard-to-troubleshoot network problems. A repeater is a
network device that amplifies data signals as they pass, enabling them to travel
farther. Most attenuation-related or chromatic dispersion-related difficulties on a

network require using a network analyzer to detect them.
All media have recommended lengths at which the cable can be run. This is
because data signals weaken as they travel farther from the point of origin. If the
signal travels far enough, it can weaken so much that it becomes unusable. The
weakening of data signals as they traverse the medium is called attenuation. The
measurement of it is done in decibels; thus, attenuation is also known as dB loss.
All copper-based cabling is particularity susceptible to attenuation. When cable
lengths have to be run farther than the recommended lengths, signal repeaters
can be used to boost the signal as it travels. If you work on a network with
intermittent problems, and you notice that cable lengths are run too far,
attenuation may be the problem.
ExamAlert
For the Network+ objective referencing cable problems associated with
distance, think of attenuation.
Latency
One of the biggest problems with satellite access is trouble with latency (the
time lapse between sending or requesting information and the time it takes to
return). Satellite communication experiences high latency due to the distance it
has to travel as well as weather conditions.
The current average latency with satellite is 638ms. Attempts have been made to
reduce latency by using satellites in lower orbit (thus a shorter distance to
travel), but they usually offer service at lower rates of speed and thus have not
been an ideal solution.
While latency is not restricted solely to satellites, it is one of the easiest forms of
transmission to associate with it. In reality, latency can occur with almost any
form of transmission.
Jitter
Closely tied to latency, which was discussed earlier, jitter differs in that the
length of the delay between received packets differs. While the sender continues
to transmit packets in a continuous stream and space them evenly apart, the

delay between packets received varies instead of remaining constant. This can be
caused by network congestion, improper queuing, or configuration errors.
Crosstalk
Whether it is coaxial cable or UTP, copper-based cabling is susceptible to
crosstalk. Crosstalk happens when the signal in one cable gets mixed up with the
signal in another cable. This can happen when cables are run too closely
together. Cables use shielding to help reduce the impact of crosstalk. If shielded
cable is not used, cables should be separated from each other. Crosstalk can also
occur when one wire pair within the twisted-pair cable interferes with the signals
on other wires. Crosstalk can be a result of insufficient cable shielding, disparity
between signal levels in adjacent circuits, and twisted terminations at connection
points. There are two types of crosstalk interference: near end (NEXT) and far
end crosstalk (FEXT).
ExamAlert
Remember that fiber-optic uses optical signals, not electrical, giving it a
greater resistance to EMI and crosstalk.
Near End Crosstalk (NEXT)
NEXT refers to interference between adjacent wire pairs within the twisted-pair
cable at the near end of the link (the end closest to the origin of the data signal).
NEXT occurs when an outgoing data transmission leaks over to an incoming
transmission. In effect, the incoming transmission overhears the signal sent by a
transmitting station at the near end of the link. The result is that a portion of the
outgoing signal is coupled back into the received signal.
Far End Crosstalk (FEXT)
FEXT occurs when a receiving station overhears a data signal being sent by a
transmitting station at the other end of a transmission line. FEXT identifies the
interference of a signal through a wire pair to an adjacent pair at the farthest end
from the interfering source (the end where the signal is received).
Note

As mentioned previously, crosstalk occurs when the signals sent through
media interfere with data signals on adjacent wires. Within the twisted-pair
cable, each wire pair is twisted to help reduce crosstalk; the tighter the twist,
the more effective the cable is at managing crosstalk. This is one reason to
buy high-quality cable.
EMI
Depending on where network cabling (commonly called media) is installed,
interference can be a major consideration. Two types of media interference can
adversely affect data transmissions over network media: electromagnetic
interference (EMI) and crosstalk (discussed earlier).
EMI is a problem when cables are installed near electrical devices, such as air
conditioners or fluorescent light fixtures. If a network medium is placed close
enough to such a device, the signal within the cable might become corrupt.
Network media vary in their resistance to the effects of EMI. Standard
unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) cable is susceptible to EMI, whereas fiber cable,
with its light transmissions, is resistant to EMI. When deciding on a particular
medium, consider where it will run and the impact EMI can have on the
installation.
EMI can reduce or corrupt signal strength. This can happen when cables are run
too close to everyday office fixtures, such as computer monitors, fluorescent
lights, elevators, microwaves, and anything else that creates an electromagnetic
field. Again, the solution is to carefully run cables away from such devices. If
they have to be run through EMI areas, shielded cabling or fiber cabling is
needed.
Open/Short
In addition to the common issue of miswiring, other problems that can occur
with cables (and that can be checked with a multifunction cable tester) include
open/short faults. An open fault means that the cables are not making a full
circuit; this can be due to a cut in the cable (across all or some of the wires). A
short fault means that the data attempts to travel on wires other than those for
which it is intended; this can be caused by miswiring or a twist in the cabling at
a cut allowing the bare wires to touch.

ExamAlert
You should expect questions asking you what tool can be used to identify
an open/short fault.
Incorrect Pin-Out
Most splits in a cable are intentional—enabling you to run the wiring in multiple
directions with the use of a splitter. Depending on the type of cabling in
question, it is not uncommon for each split to reduce the strength of the signal. It
is also not uncommon for splitters to go bad. You want to split the cable as few
times as possible and check the splitter if a problem in a run that was normally
working suddenly occurs.
If the split is unintentional, you are often dealing with an open/short, which was
the subject of the previous discussion.
Incorrect Cable Types
An incorrect cable type—using a crossover cable instead of a standard cable, for
instance—will keep the host from being able to communicate on the network. A
cable tester can be used to diagnose individual cabling issues, and the solution is
to swap the incorrect cable with one suited for the purpose you are intending to
use it for.
Bad Port
On the router, the port configuration dictates what traffic is allowed to flow
through. The router can be configured to enable individual port traffic in, out, or
both and is referred to as port forwarding. If a port is blocked (such as 80 for
HTTP or 21 for FTP), the data will not be allowed through, and users will be
affected.
ExamAlert
Think of port configuration and port forwarding as the same when it
comes to the router.

A condition known as a black hole can occur when a router does not send back
an expected message that the data has been received. It is known as a black hole
from the view that data is being sent, but is essentially being lost.
This condition occurs when the packet the router receives is larger than the
configured size of the maximum transmission unit (MTU) and the Don’t
Fragment flag is configured on that packet. When this occurs, the router is
supposed to send a “Destination Unreachable” message back to the host. If the
packet is not received, the host does not know that the packet did not go through.
Although there are several solutions to this problem, the best is to verify whether
a mismatch has occurred between the maximum size packet clients can send and
that the router can handle. You can use ping to check that packets of a particular
size can move through the router by using the −l parameter to set a packet size
and the −f parameter to set the Do Not Fragment bit.
Transceiver Mismatch
When troubleshooting an SFP or GBIC, you want to make sure that you do not
have a bad, or mismatched, transceiver. As simple as it may sound, it is
important to verify that you are using a single-mode fiber with a single-mode
interface and a multimode fiber cable for a multimode interface. Such a fiber
type mismatch can cause the physical link to go completely down but does not
always do so, thus making troubleshooting it difficult.
TX/RX Reversed
Two primary types of cables can be used in an Ethernet network: a straight-
through cable (as the name implies, all wires run straight through and are the
same on both ends) and a crossover cable. In a crossover cable, two pairs of the
wires are reversed; these are the TX and RX pairs (transmit and receive).
A crossover cable is intended to be used in specific applications only (such as to
directly network two PCs without using a hub or switch) and will cause
problems when used where a straight-through cable is called for (as a general
rule, in all fixed wiring).
Duplex/Speed Mismatch
When configuring a client for the network, you must be aware of two settings:
port speed and duplex settings. These are adjusted in Windows in the Network

Properties area. Speed and duplex mismatches can slow data rates to a crawl and
prevent high-bandwidth applications (such as voice or streaming video) from
being possible.
You have several choices for port speed and duplex settings. You can choose
Auto Negotiation to detect the setting that the network uses. You also can choose
one of the other settings to match the network configuration, such as 100 Mbps
Half Duplex. If you work with a client system that is unable to log on to a
network, you might need to ensure that the duplex setting and port speeds are
correctly set for the network.
Damaged Cables
Damaged or bad wiring could be a patch cable (easy to replace) or the in-wall
wiring (more difficult to replace). If you suspect wiring to be the faulty
component, you can diagnose rather quickly by taking the device that is having
trouble connecting to another location and/or bringing a working machine to this
environment.
Note
Never assume that the cable you use is good until you test it and confirm that
it is good. Sometimes cables break, and bad media can cause network
problems.
You can use a multifunction cable tester to troubleshoot most wiring problems.
You must check for cable continuity, as well as for shorts.
Bent Pins
Bent pins on a network cable or socket can result in very little or no contact
being made on those connections. If the problem is with the cable, you can
replace the cable. If the problem is with the client machine, it can be difficult to
fix because most Ethernet ports are soldered directly to the motherboard. Often,
the solution is to abandon that port and use a USB/Ethernet adapter to allow the
client to continue to connect to the network.
Bottlenecks
Network bottlenecks often lead to network breakdowns. Because of that, you

want to always be scanning for them and identify them before they have the
opportunity to bring your system down. A number of tools are useful in checking
connectivity. One of the simplest might be traceroute, which provides a lot
of useful information, including the IP address of every router connection it
passes through and, in many cases, the name of the router. (This depends on the
router’s configuration.) traceroute also reports the length, in milliseconds,
of the round-trip the packet made from the source location to the router and
back.
Note
The traceroute utility/command is usually associated with Linux and
Mac OS, and tracert performs the same function in Microsoft Windows.
After a bottleneck has been identified, it is imperative to monitor it and plan to
eliminate it as soon as possible.
VLAN Mismatch
VLANs provide a method to segment and organize the network. Computer
systems can be located anywhere on the network but communicate as if they are
on the same segment. For example, networks with VLANs can be segmented
according to an organization’s departments, such as sales, finance, and
secretaries, or can be segmented according to usage, security permissions, and
more.
Segmenting the network offers some clear advantages. It provides increased
security because devices can communicate only with other systems in the
VLAN. Users can see only the systems in their VLAN segment. This can help
control broadcast traffic and makes it easier to move end systems around the
network.
Problems can arise when users are moved or otherwise connected to the wrong
VLAN. Administrators have to ensure that the user system is plugged into the
correct VLAN port. For example, suppose a network is using port-based VLANs
to assign ports 1 through 8 to marketing, ports 9 through 18 to sales, and so on.
Plugging a sales client into port 6 would make that sales client part of the
marketing network. This sounds simple, but if the documentation is not up-to-
date, and you work with a new network, this can be tricky to identify.

One of the keys to preventing VLAN assignment errors is to clearly document
the VLAN arrangement. If systems are moved, you need to know how to
reconnect them and forward them to the correct VLAN port.
ExamAlert
VLAN assignment is one of the troubleshooting topics you should expect
to see a question about on the exam.
Another consideration to keep in mind is that membership to a VLAN can be
assigned both statically and dynamically. In static VLAN assignment, the switch
ports are assigned to a specific VLAN. New systems added are assigned to the
VLAN associated with that particular port. For example, if you plug a new
system into port 8, the user becomes part of the administrator’s network. So you
must ensure that you have the right port assigned to users.
Dynamic VLAN assignment requires specific software to control VLAN
distribution. Using a VLAN server, administrators can dynamically assign
VLAN membership based on criteria such as a MAC address or a
username/password combination. As a system tries to access the network, it
queries the VLAN server database to ask for VLAN membership information.
The server responds and logs the system on to the appropriate VLAN network.
When correctly configured, dynamic assignment reduces the human error
associated with static VLAN assignment.
Network Connection LED Status Indicators
Hubs and switches provide light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that provide
information on the port status. For instance, by using the LEDs, you can
determine whether there is a jabbering network card, whether there is a proper
connection to the network device, and whether there are too many collisions on
the network.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following describes the loss of signal strength as a signal
travels through a particular medium?
 A. Attenuation

 B. Crosstalk
 C. EMI
 D. Chatter
2. A user calls to report that he is experiencing periodic problems connecting
to the network. Upon investigation, you find that the cable connecting the
user’s PC to the switch is close to a fluorescent light fixture. What condition
is most likely causing the problem?
 A. Crosstalk
 B. EMI
 C. Attenuation
 D. Faulty cable
3. Which of the following is similar to latency but differs in that the length of
the delay between received packets differs?
 A. Slack
 B. Jitter
 C. Stretch
 D. Lax
4. With a crossover cable, which two pairs are reversed?
 A. RX and SX
 B. TX and RX
 C. SX and TX
 D. SX and CX
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. The term used to describe the loss of signal strength for media is
attenuation. Crosstalk refers to the interference between two cables, EMI is
electromagnetic interference, and chatter is not a valid media interference
concern.
2. B. EMI is a type of interference that is often seen when cables run too close

to electrical devices. Crosstalk is when two cables interfere with each other.
Attenuation is a loss of signal strength. Answer D is incorrect also. It may be
that a faulty cable is causing the problem. However, the question asked for
the most likely cause. Because the cable is running near fluorescent lights,
the problem is more likely associated with EMI.
3. B. Jitter is when the length of the delay between received packets differs.
4. B. In a crossover cable, two pairs of the wires are reversed; these are the TX
and RX pairs (transmit and receive).
What’s Next?
This chapter focused on wiring solutions. Chapter 7, “Wireless Solutions,” looks
at wireless solutions. Client systems communicate with a wireless access point
using wireless LAN adapters. Such adapters are built in to or can be added to
laptop, handheld, or desktop computers. Wireless LAN adapters provide the
communication point between the client system and the airwaves via an antenna.

CHAPTER 7
Wireless Solutions
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Given a scenario, implement the appropriate wireless technologies and
configurations.
 Given a scenario, troubleshoot common wireless connectivity and
performance issues.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 1.6 and 5.4. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
One of the bigger changes in the networking world since the Network+ exam
first came into being is in wireless networking technologies. Networks of all
shapes and sizes incorporate wireless segments into their networks. Home
wireless networking has also grown significantly in the past few years.
Wireless networking enables users to connect to a network using radio waves
instead of wires. Network users within range of a wireless access point (AP) can
move around an office or any other location within range of a hotspot freely,
without needing to plug into a wired infrastructure. The benefits of wireless
networking clearly have led to its continued growth.
This chapter explores the many facets of wireless networking, starting with some
of the concepts and technologies that make wireless networking possible.
Understanding Wireless Basics
 Given a scenario, implement the appropriate wireless technologies and
configurations.
CramSaver

If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. How many nonoverlapping channels are supported by 802.11a?
2. What are the ranges the 802.11b and 802.11g standards operate in?
3. True or false: Linux users can use the iwconfig command to view the
state of their wireless network.
Answers
1. 802.11a supports up to eight nonoverlapping channels.
2. 802.11b and 802.11g standards operate in the 2.4 to 2.497 GHz range.
3. True. Linux users can use the iwconfig command to view the state of
their wireless network.
Note
One of the topics that objective 1.6 includes is the 802.11 wireless standards,
but they are not discussed in this chapter because they were included in the
first chapter. If you need a refresher on these topologies, review Chapter 1,
“Introduction to Networking Technologies.”
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Wireless Channels and Frequencies
Radio frequency (RF) channels are an important part of wireless communication.
A channel is the band of RF used for the wireless communication. Each IEEE
wireless standard specifies the channels that can be used. The 802.11a standard

specifies radio frequency ranges between 5.15 and 5.875 GHz. In contrast,
802.11b and 802.11g standards operate in the 2.4 to 2.497 GHz range. 802.11n
can operate in either 2.4 GHz/5 GHz ranges, and 802.11ac operates in the 5 GHz
range. IEEE wireless standards are discussed in detail later in this chapter.
Note
Hertz (Hz) is the standard of measurement for radio frequency. Hertz is used
to measure the frequency of vibrations and waves, such as sound waves and
electromagnetic waves. One hertz is equal to one cycle per second. RF is
measured in kilohertz (KHz), 1,000 cycles per second; megahertz (MHz), one
million cycles per second; or gigahertz (GHz), one billion cycles per second.
As far as channels are concerned, 802.11a has a wider frequency band, enabling
more channels and therefore more data throughput. As a result of the wider
band, 802.11a supports up to eight nonoverlapping channels. 802.11b/g
standards use the smaller band and support only up to three nonoverlapping
channels.
It is recommended that nonoverlapping channels be used for communication. In
the United States, 802.11b/g use 11 channels for data communication, as
mentioned; three of these—channels 1, 6, and 11—are nonoverlapping. Most
manufacturers set their default channel to one of the nonoverlapping channels to
avoid transmission conflicts. With wireless devices you can select which channel
your WLAN operates on to avoid interference from other wireless devices that
operate in the 2.4 GHz frequency range.
When troubleshooting a wireless network, be aware that overlapping channels
can disrupt the wireless communications. For example, in many environments,
APs are inadvertently placed close together—perhaps two APs in separate
offices located next door to each other or between floors. Signal disruption
results if channel overlap exists between the APs. The solution is to try to move
the AP to avoid the overlap problem, or to change channels to one of the other
nonoverlapping channels. For example, you could switch from channel 6 to
channel 11.
Typically, you would change the channel of a wireless device only if it
overlapped with another device. If a channel must be changed, it must be
changed to another, nonoverlapping channel. Table 7.1 shows the channel ranges
for 802.11b/g wireless standards. Table 7.2 shows the channel ranges for

802.11a. 802.11n added the option of using both channels used by 802.11a and
b/g and operating at 2.4 GHz/5 GHz. As such, you can think of 802.11n as an
amendment that improved upon the previous 802.11 standards by adding
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) antennas and a huge increase in the data
rate. 802.11n devices are still available, but they have largely been superseded
today by 802.11ac, which became an approved standard in January 2014, and
can be thought of as an extension of 802.11n.
ExamAlert
When troubleshooting a wireless problem in Windows, you can use the
ipconfig command to see the status of IP configuration. Similarly, the
ifconfig command can be used in Linux. In addition, Linux users can
use the iwconfig command to view the state of your wireless network.
Using iwconfig, you can view such important information as the link
quality, AP MAC address, data rate, and encryption keys, which can be
helpful in ensuring that the parameters in the network are consistent.
Note
IEEE 802.11b/g wireless systems communicate with each other using radio
frequency signals in the band between 2.4 GHz and 2.5 GHz. Neighboring
channels are 5 MHz apart. Applying two channels that allow the maximum
channel separation decreases the amount of channel crosstalk and provides a
noticeable performance increase over networks with minimal channel
separation.
Tables 7.1 and 7.2 outline the available wireless channels. When deploying a
wireless network, it is recommended that you use channel 1, grow to use channel
6, and add channel 11 when necessary, because these three channels do not
overlap.
ExamAlert
802.11n and 802.11ac are the standards most common today, and you will
be hard pressed to purchase (or even find) older technologies. It is,
however, recommended that you know the older technologies for the

exam.
TABLE 7.1 RF Channels for 802.11b/g
Channel
Frequency Band
1
2412 MHz
2
2417 MHz
3
2422 MHz
4
2427 MHz
5
2432 MHz
6
2437 MHz
7
2442 MHz
8
2447 MHz
9
2452 MHz
10
2457 MHz
11
2462 MHz
Note
One thing to remember when looking at Table 7.1 is that the RF channels
listed (2412 for channel 1, 2417 for 2, and so on) are actually the center
frequency that the transceiver within the radio and AP uses. There is only a 5
MHz separation between the center frequencies, and an 802.11b signal
occupies approximately 30 MHz of the frequency spectrum. As a result, data
signals fall within about 15 MHz of each side of the center frequency and
overlap with several adjacent channel frequencies. This leaves you with only
three channels (channels 1, 6, and 11 for the United States) that you can use
without causing interference between APs.
TABLE 7.2 RF Channels for 802.11a
Channel
Frequency
36
5180 MHz

40
5200 MHz
44
5220 MHz
48
5240 MHz
52
5260 MHz
56
5280 MHz
60
5300 MHz
64
5320 MHz
As mentioned, channels 1, 6, and 11 do not overlap. On a non-MIMO setup
(such as with 802.11a, b, or g), always try to use one of these three channels.
Similarly, if you use 802.11n with 20 MHz channels, stay with channels 1, 6, and
11.
ExamAlert
Understand the importance of channels 1, 6, and 11 as you study for the
exam.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should know the values in Table 7.2.
Cellular Access
The Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) can work with code
division-multiple access (CDMA) to provide various means of cell phone
coverage. GSM also uses time-division multiple access (TDMA) to provide
multiuser access by chopping up the channel into sequential time slices. Each
user of the channel takes turns to transmit and receive signals. The individual
methods that can be used include LTE/4G, HSPA+, 3G, or Edge.
Speed, Distance, and Bandwidth
When talking about wireless transmissions, you need to distinguish between

throughput and data rate. From time to time these terms are used
interchangeably, but technically speaking, they are different. As shown later in
this chapter, each wireless standard has an associated speed. For instance,
802.11n lists a theoretical speed of up to 600 Mbps, and 802.11ac lists speeds up
to a whopping 1300 Mbps. This represents the speed at which devices using this
standard can send and receive data. However, in network data transmissions,
many factors prevent the actual speeds from reaching this end-to-end theoretical
maximum. For instance, data packets include overhead such as routing
information, checksums, and error recovery data. Although this might all be
necessary, it can impact overall speed.
The number of clients on the network can also impact the data rate; the more
clients, the more collisions. Depending on the network layout, collisions can
have a significant impact on end-to-end transmission speeds. Wireless network
signals degrade as they pass through obstructions such as walls or doors; the
signal speed deteriorates with each obstruction.
All these factors leave you with the actual throughput of wireless data
transmissions. Goodput represents the actual speed to expect from wireless
transmissions (what is often thought of as throughput). In practical application,
wireless transmissions are approximately one-half or less of the data rate.
Depending on the wireless setup, the transmission rate could be much less than
its theoretical maximum.
ExamAlert
Data rate refers to the theoretical maximum of a wireless standard, such
as 600 Mbps or 1300 Mbps. Throughput refers to the actual speeds
achieved after all implementation and interference factors.
Note
Speed is always an important factor in the design of any network, and high
throughput (ht) is a goal that has been around for a while. A number of the
802.11 standards offer a high throughput connection type, such as 802.11a-ht
and 802.11g-ht. Although these implementations are better with the ht than
without, it is true that today you will achieve better results with 802.11ac.

Channel Bonding
With channel bonding, you can use two channels at the same time. As you might
guess, the ability to use two channels at once increases performance. Bonding
can help increase wireless transmission rates from the 54 Mbps offered with the
802.11g standards to a theoretical maximum of 600 Mbps with 802.11n. 802.11n
uses the OFDM transmission strategy.
MIMO/MU-
MIMO/Unidirectional/Omnidirectional
A wireless antenna is an integral part of overall wireless communication.
Antennas come in many shapes and sizes, with each one designed for a specific
purpose. Selecting the right antenna for a particular network implementation is a
critical consideration, and one that could ultimately decide how successful a
wireless network will be. In addition, using the right antenna can save you
money on networking costs because you need fewer antennas and APs.
ExamAlert
Multiple input, multiple output (MIMO) and multiuser multiple input,
multiple output (MU-MIMO) are advanced antenna technologies that are
key in wireless standards such as 802.11n, 802.11ac, HSPA+, WiMAX, and
LTE.
Many small home network adapters and APs come with a nonupgradable
antenna, but higher-grade wireless devices require you to choose an antenna.
Determining which antenna to select takes careful planning and requires an
understanding of what range and speed you need for a network. The antenna is
designed to help wireless networks do the following:
 Work around obstacles
 Minimize the effects of interference
 Increase signal strength
 Focus the transmission, which can increase signal speed
The following sections explore some of the characteristics of wireless antennas.

Antenna Ratings
When a wireless signal is low and is affected by heavy interference, it might be
possible to upgrade the antenna to create a more solid wireless connection. To
determine an antenna’s strength, refer to its gain value. But how do you
determine the gain value?
ExamAlert
For the exam, know that an antenna’s strength is its gain value.
Suppose that a huge wireless tower is emanating circular waves in all directions.
If you could see these waves, you would see them forming a sphere around the
tower. The signals around the antenna flow equally in all directions, including up
and down. An antenna that does this has a 0dBi gain value and is called an
isotropic antenna. The isotropic antenna rating provides a base point for
measuring actual antenna strength.
Note
The dB in dBi stands for decibels, and the i stands for the hypothetical
isotropic antenna.
An antenna’s gain value represents the difference between the 0dBi isotropic and
the antenna’s power. For example, a wireless antenna advertised as 15dBi is 15
times stronger than the hypothetical isotropic antenna. The higher the decibel
figure, the higher the gain.
When looking at wireless antennas, remember that a higher gain value means
stronger send and receive signals. In terms of performance, the general rule is
that every 3dB of gain added doubles an antenna’s effective power output.
Antenna Coverage
When selecting an antenna for a particular wireless implementation, you need to
determine the type of coverage the antenna uses. In a typical configuration, a
wireless antenna can be either omnidirectional or unidirectional. Which one you
choose depends on the wireless environment.

An omnidirectional antenna is designed to provide a 360-degree dispersed wave
pattern. This type of antenna is used when coverage in all directions from the
antenna is required. Omnidirectional antennas are advantageous when a broad-
based signal is required. For example, if you provide an even signal in all
directions, clients can access the antenna and its associated AP from various
locations. Because of the dispersed nature of omnidirectional antennas, the
signal is weaker overall and therefore accommodates shorter signal distances.
Omnidirectional antennas are great in an environment that has a clear line of
sight between the senders and receivers. The power is evenly spread to all
points, making omnidirectional antennas well suited for home and small office
applications.
ExamAlert
Omnidirectional antennas provide wide coverage but weaker signal
strength in any one direction than a directional antenna.
Unidirectional antennas are designed to focus the signal in a particular direction.
This focused signal enables greater distances and a stronger signal between two
points. The greater distances enabled by unidirectional antennas give you a
viable alternative for connecting locations, such as two offices, in a point-to-
point configuration.
Unidirectional antennas are also used when you need to tunnel or thread a signal
through a series of obstacles. This concentrates the signal power in a specific
direction and enables you to use less power for a greater distance than an
omnidirectional antenna. Table 7.3 compares omnidirectional and unidirectional
wireless antennas.
TABLE 7.3 Comparing Omnidirectional and Unidirectional Antennas
Characteristic
Omnidirectional
Unidirectional
Advantage/Disadvantage
Wireless area
coverage
General coverage
area
Focused
coverage area
Omnidirectional allows
360-degree coverage,
giving it a wide coverage
area. Unidirectional
provides a targeted path
for signals to travel.

Wireless
transmission
range
Limited
Long point-to-
point range
Omnidirectional antennas
provide a 360-degree
coverage pattern and, as a
result, far less range.
Unidirectional antennas
focus the wireless
transmission; this focus
enables greater range.
Wireless
coverage
shaping
Restricted
The
unidirectional
wireless range
can be
increased and
decreased.
Omnidirectional antennas
are limited to their
circular pattern range.
Unidirectional antennas
can be adjusted to define a
specific pattern, wider or
more focused.
Note
In the wireless world, polarization refers to the direction in which the antenna
radiates wavelengths. This direction can be vertical, horizontal, or circular.
Today, vertical antennas are perhaps the most common. As far as the
configuration is concerned, the sending and receiving antennas should be set
to the same polarization.
Site Surveys
As more networks go wireless, you need to pay special attention to issues
associated with them. Wireless survey tools can be used to create heat maps
showing the quantity and quality of wireless network coverage in areas. They
can also allow you to see access points (including rogues) and security settings.
These can be used to help you design and deploy an efficient network, and they
can also be used (by you or others) to find weaknesses in your existing network
(often marketed for this purpose as wireless analyzers).
Establishing Communications Between Wireless
Devices

When you work with wireless networks, you must have a basic understanding of
the communication that occurs between wireless devices. If you use an
infrastructure wireless network design, the network has two key parts: the
wireless client, also known as the station (STA), and the AP. The AP acts as a
bridge (or wireless bridge) between the STA and the wired network.
ExamAlert
When a single AP is connected to the wired network and to a set of
wireless stations, it is called a basic service set (BSS). An extended service
set (ESS) describes the use of multiple BSSs that form a single
subnetwork. Ad hoc mode is sometimes called an independent basic service
set (IBSS).
As with other forms of network communication, before transmissions between
devices can occur, the wireless AP and the client must begin to talk to each other.
In the wireless world, this is a two-step process involving association and
authentication.
The association process occurs when a wireless adapter is turned on. The client
adapter immediately begins scanning the wireless frequencies for wireless APs
or, if using ad hoc mode, other wireless devices. When the wireless client is
configured to operate in infrastructure mode, the user can choose a wireless AP
with which to connect. This process may also be automatic, with the AP
selection based on the SSID, signal strength, and frame error rate. Finally, the
wireless adapter switches to the assigned channel of the selected wireless AP and
negotiates the use of a port.
If at any point the signal between the devices drops below an acceptable level, or
if the signal becomes unavailable for any reason, the wireless adapter initiates
another scan, looking for an AP with stronger signals. When the new AP is
located, the wireless adapter selects it and associates with it. This is known as re-
association.
ExamAlert
The 802.11 standards enable a wireless client to roam between multiple
APs. An AP transmits a beacon signal every so many milliseconds. It

includes a time stamp for client synchronization and an indication of
supported data rates. A client system uses the beacon message to identify
the strength of the existing connection to an AP. If the connection is too
weak, the roaming client attempts to associate itself with a new AP. This
enables the client system to roam between distances and APs.
With the association process complete, the authentication process begins. After
the 
devices 
associate, keyed security 
measures 
are applied 
before
communication can take place. On many APs, authentication can be set to either
shared key authentication or open authentication. The default setting for older
APs typically is open authentication. Open authentication enables access with
only the SSID and/or the correct WEP key for the AP. The problem with open
authentication is that if you do not have other protection or authentication
mechanisms in place, your wireless network is totally open to intruders. When
set to shared key mode, the client must meet security requirements before
communication with the AP can occur.
After security requirements are met, you have established IP-level
communication. This means that wireless standard requirements have been met,
and Ethernet networking takes over. There is basically a switch from 802.11 to
802.3 standards. The wireless standards create the physical link to the network,
enabling regular networking standards and protocols to use the link. This is how
the physical cable is replaced, but to the networking technologies there is no
difference between regular cable media and wireless media.
Several components combine to enable wireless communications between
devices. Each of these must be configured on both the client and the AP:
 Service set identifier (SSID): Whether your wireless network uses
infrastructure mode or ad hoc mode, an SSID is required. The SSID is a
configurable client identification that enables clients to communicate with a
particular base station. Only client systems configured with the same SSID
as the AP can communicate with it. SSIDs provide a simple password
arrangement between base stations and clients in a BSS network. ESSIDs are
used for the ESS wireless network.
 Wireless channel: As stated earlier in the chapter, RF channels are an
important part of wireless communications. A channel is the frequency band
used for the wireless communication. Each standard specifies the channels
that can be used. The 802.11a standard specified radio frequency ranges

between 5.15 GHz and 5.875 GHz. In contrast, the 802.11b and 802.11g
standards operate in the 2.4 GHz to 2.497 GHz ranges. 802.11n can operate
in either 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz range, and 802.11ac is at 5 GHz. Fourteen
channels are defined in the IEEE 802.11 channel set, 11 of which are
available in North America.
 Security features: IEEE 802.11 provides security using two methods:
authentication and encryption. Authentication verifies the client system. In
infrastructure mode, authentication is established between an AP and each
station. Wireless encryption services must be the same on the client and the
AP for communication to occur.
ExamAlert
Wireless devices ship with default SSIDs, security settings, channels,
passwords, and usernames. To protect yourself, it is strongly
recommended that you change these default settings. Today, many
Internet sites list the default settings used by manufacturers with their
wireless devices. This information is used by people who want to gain
unauthorized access to your wireless devices.
Configuring the Wireless Connection
Wireless connection configuration is fairly straightforward. Figure 7.1 shows an
example of a simple wireless router. In addition to providing wireless access, it
also includes a four-port wired switch.
FIGURE 7.1 A wireless broadband router for a small network
Most of the broadband routers similar to the one shown in Figure 7.1 differ
based upon the following features:
 Wireless bands: The routers can provide only 2.4 GHz, only 5 GHz, or be
either selectable (choosing one of the two) or simultaneous (using both).

 Switch speed: The ports on the switch can usually support either Fast
Ethernet (10/100 Mbps) or Gigabit Ethernet (10/100/1000 Mbps).
 Security supported: The SSID, security mode, and passphrase may be
configurable for each band, and some routers include a push-button feature
for accessing setup. Some enable you to configure MAC address filtering
and guest access. MAC address filtering enables you to limit access to only
those specified hosts. Guest access uses a different password and network
name and enables visitors to use the Internet without having access to the
rest of the network (thus avoiding your data and computers).
ExamAlert
Make sure that you understand the purpose of MAC address filtering.
 Antenna: The antenna may be a single external pole, two poles or even
more, or be entirely internal. The model shown in Figure 7.1 uses an internal
antenna, as shown in Figure 7.2.
FIGURE 7.2 The antenna is the wire and metal component on the left
Note
The wireless antenna for a laptop, all-in-one desktop system, or mobile device
is often built in to the areas around the screen.

The settings for a wireless router are typically clearly laid out. You can adjust
many settings for troubleshooting or security reasons. For example, most newer
small office/home office (SOHO) wireless routers offer useful configuration
setup screens for administering firewall, demilitarized zone (DMZ), apps and
gaming, parental controls, guest access, and diagnostic settings (as illustrated in
Figure 7.3). Following are some of the basic settings that can be adjusted on a
wireless AP:
 SSID: This name is used for anyone who wants to access the Internet
through this wireless AP. The SSID is a configurable client identification that
enables clients to communicate with a particular base station. In an
application, only clients configured with the same SSID can communicate
with base stations having the same SSID. SSID provides a simple password
arrangement between base stations and clients.
FIGURE 7.3 Common configuration parameters for a wireless router
As far as troubleshooting is concerned, if a client cannot access a base
station, ensure that both use the same SSID. Incompatible SSIDs are
sometimes found when clients move computers, such as laptops or other
mobile devices, between different wireless networks. They obtain an SSID

from one network. If the system is not rebooted, the old SSID does not
enable communication with a different base station.
 Channel: To access this network, all systems must use this channel. If
needed, you can change the channel using the drop-down menu. The menu
lists channels 1 through 11.
 SSID broadcast: In their default configuration, wireless APs typically
broadcast the SSID name into the air at regular intervals. This feature is
intended to allow clients to easily discover the network and roam between
WLANs. The problem with SSID broadcasting is that it makes it a little
easier to get around security. SSIDs are not encrypted or protected in any
way. Anyone can snoop and get a look at the SSID and attempt to join the
network if not secured.
Note
For SOHO use, roaming is not needed. This feature can be disabled for home
use to improve the security of your WLAN. As soon as your wireless clients
are manually configured with the right SSID, they no longer require these
broadcast messages.
 Authentication: When configuring authentication security for the AP, you
have several options depending on the age of the AP. At the lower (older)
end, choices often include WEP-Open, WEP-Shared, and WPA-PSK. WEP-
Open is the simplest of the authentications methods because it does not
perform any type of client verification. It is a weak form of authentication
because it requires no proof of identity. WEP-Shared requires that a WEP
key be configured on both the client system and the AP. This makes
authentication with WEP-Shared mandatory, so it is more secure for wireless
transmission. Wi-Fi Protected Access with Pre-Shared Key (WPA-PSK) is a
stronger form of encryption in which keys are automatically changed and
authenticated between devices after a specified period of time, or after a
specified number of packets have been transmitted.
On newer APs, the choices usually include WPA Personal, WPA Enterprise,
WPA2 Personal, and WPA2 Enterprise, with one of the two WPA2 choices as
the default. Other choices can include WPA2/WPA Mixed Mode and
RADIUS.
 Wireless mode: To access the network, the client must use the same

wireless mode as the AP. Today, most users configure the network for
802.11n or 802.11ac for faster speeds.
 DTIM period (seconds): Wireless transmissions can broadcast to all
systems—that is, they can send messages to all clients on the wireless
network. Multiple broadcast messages are known as multicast or broadcast
traffic. Delivery Traffic Indication Message (DTIM) is a feature used to
ensure that when the multicast or broadcast traffic is sent, all systems are
awake to hear the message. The DTIM setting specifies how often the DTIM
is sent within the beacon frame. For example, if the DTIM setting by default
is 1, this means that the DTIM is sent with every beacon. If the DTIM is set
to 3, the DTIM is sent every three beacons as a DTIM wake-up call.
 Maximum connection rate: The transfer rate typically is set to Auto by
default. This enables the maximum connection speed. However, it is possible
to decrease the speed to increase the distance that the signal travels and boost
signal strength caused by poor environmental conditions.
 Network type: This is where the network can be set to use the ad hoc or
infrastructure network design.
It is easy to fall into the trap of thinking of wireless devices as being laptops
connecting to the AP. Over the years, however, the number and type of mobile
devices that need to connect to the network has expanded tremendously. In
addition to the laptops and tablets, gaming devices, media devices, and cell
phones now all connect for wireless access. Although they might all seem
different, they require the same information to connect.
Unfortunately, they all bring security concerns as well. Bring your own device
(BYOD) policies are highly recommended for every organization. Administrators
can implement mobile device management (MDM) and mobile application
management (MAM) products to help with the management and administration
issues with these devices.
ExamAlert
Know that devices on networks today include such things as PCs, cell
phones, laptops, tablets, gaming devices, and media devices.

Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following wireless protocols operate at 2.4 GHz? (Select
three.)
 A. 802.11a
 B. 802.11b
 C. 802.11g
 D. 802.11n
 E. 802.11ac
2. Under what circumstance would you change the default channel on an
access point?
 A. When channel overlap occurs between APs
 B. To release and renew the SSID
 C. To increase WPA2 security settings
 D. To decrease WPA2 security settings
3. A client on your network has had no problems accessing the wireless
network in the past, but recently she moved to a new office. Since the move,
she cannot access the network. Which of the following is most likely the
cause of the problem?
 A. The SSIDs on the client and the AP are different.
 B. The SSID has been erased.
 C. The client has incorrect broadcast settings.
 D. The client system has moved too far from the AP.
4. You are installing a wireless network solution, and you require a standard
that can operate using either 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz frequencies. Which of the
following standards would you choose?
 A. 802.11a
 B. 802.11b
 C. 802.11g

 D. 802.11n
 E. 802.11ac
5. You are installing a wireless network solution that uses a feature known as
MU-MIMO. Which wireless networking standard are you using?
 A. 802.11a
 B. 802.11b
 C. 802.11n
 D. 802.11ac
Cram Quiz Answers
1. B, C, D. Wireless standards specify an RF range on which communications
are sent. The 802.11b and 802.11g standards use the 2.4 GHz range. 802.11a
and 802.11ac use the 5 GHz range. 802.11n can operate at 2.4 GHz and 5
GHz.
2. A. Ordinarily, the default channel used with a wireless device is adequate;
however, you might need to change the channel if overlap occurs with
another nearby AP. The channel should be changed to another,
nonoverlapping channel. Changing the channel would not impact the WPA2
security settings.
3. D. An AP has a limited distance that it can send data transmissions. When a
client system moves out of range, it cannot access the AP. Many strategies
exist to increase transmission distances, including RF repeaters, amplifiers,
and buying more powerful antennas or wireless APs. The problem is not
likely related to the SSID or broadcast settings, because the client had access
to the network before, and no settings were changed.
4. D. The IEEE standard 802.11n can use either the 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz radio
frequencies. 802.11a uses 5 GHz, and 802.11b and 802.11g use 2.4 GHz.
802.11ac operates at 5 GHz.
5. D. MU-MIMO is used by the 802.11ac standard and makes multiuser
MIMO possible (increasing the range and speed of wireless networking).
MIMO, itself, enables the transmission of multiple data streams traveling on
different antennas in the same channel at the same time.

Troubleshooting Wireless Issues
 Given a scenario, troubleshoot common wireless connectivity and
performance issues.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. You have noticed that connections between nodes on one network are
inconsistent and suspect there may be another network using the same
channel. What should you try first?
2. True or false: Weather conditions should not have a noticeable impact on
wireless signal integrity.
Answers
1. If connections are inconsistent, try changing the channel to another,
nonoverlapping channel.
2. False. Weather conditions can have a huge impact on wireless signal
integrity.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Poor communication between wireless devices has many different potential
causes. Some of these problems, such as latency and jitter, are similar to those
that exist with wired connections and were discussed in the previous chapter.
Others are characteristic only of wireless connectivity and are discussed in the

following sections.
To put a lot of information into a format that is coherent, the discussion starts
with a review checklist of wireless troubleshooting and then moves into some
individual topics:
 Signal loss: The cause of signal loss, known as attenuation, can be anything
from distance to obstacles to interference. The signal-to-noise ratio should
be examined to measure the desired signal against the background noise
interfering with it. Look for signs of saturation with either the device or the
bandwidth.
ExamAlert
Signal-to-noise ratio can be used to measure that which the name implies.
 Wireless enabled: Some laptops make it incredibly easy to turn wireless on
and off. A user may accidentally press a button that he is not aware of and
then suddenly not be able to access the network. Although this is a simple
problem to fix, it is one that you need to identify as quickly as possible.
Figure 7.4 shows the wireless light on an HP laptop. This light is also a
button that toggles wireless on and off. When the light is blue, wireless is
enabled, and when it is not blue (orange), it is disabled.

FIGURE 7.4 A light also serves as a button, enabling wireless to be quickly
turned on and off
 Untested updates: Never apply untested updates to the network. This is
especially true with AP updates, which should always be tested in
nonproduction environments before being applied to live machines.
 Wrong wireless standard: Make sure that the standard you are using
supports the rates and attributes you are striving for. This is particularly
important in terms of throughput, frequency, distance, and channels.
 Auto transfer rate: By default, wireless devices are configured to use the
strongest, fastest signal. If you experience connectivity problems between
wireless devices, try using the lower transfer rate in a fixed mode to achieve
a more stable connection. For example, you can manually choose the
wireless transfer rate. Also, instead of using the highest transfer rate
available, try a lesser speed. The higher the transfer rate, the shorter the
connection distance.
 AP placement and configuration: If signal strength is low, try moving the
AP to a new location. Moving it just a few feet can make a difference. You
can also try to bounce a signal, as needed, off of reflective surfaces. The
configuration of the AP should take into account the use of Lightweight

Access Point Protocol (LWAPP), which can allow you to monitor the
network and reduce the amount of time needed to configure and troubleshoot
it—and whether the authentication/configuration will be done at the AP
(known as thick) or it will be passed on up (known as thin).
Note
Anytime an AP is doing key functions—authentication, filtering, QoS
enforcement, and so on—it is said to be thick. If it is not doing these key
functions—even though it might be doing others—it is usually said to be thin.
Although there is no 100% sure method of distinguishing what a vendor will
label thick or thin, one good rule is to question whether the AP is dependent
on another device (thin) or not (thick).
 Antenna: The default antenna shipped with wireless devices may not be
powerful enough for a particular client system. Better-quality antennas can
be purchased for some APs, which can boost the distance the signal can go.
Make sure you do not use the wrong antenna type or have other
incompatibilities.
 Environmental obstructions: Wireless RF communications are weakened
if they have to travel through obstructions such as metal studs, window film,
and concrete walls. Wireless site surveys can be performed to troubleshoot
RF signal loss issues as well as assist in planning optimal locations for new
wireless networks.
 Conflicting devices: Any device that uses the same frequency range as the
wireless device can cause interference. For example, 2.4 GHz phones,
appliances, or Bluetooth devices can cause interference with devices using
the 802.11g or single-band 802.11n wireless standards.
 Wireless channels: If connections are inconsistent, try changing the channel
to another, nonoverlapping channel. Make certain you do not have
mismatched channels between devices.
 Protocol issues: If an IP address is not assigned to the wireless client, a
wrong SSID or incorrect WEP/WPA/WPA2 settings can prevent a system
from obtaining IP information.
 SSID: The SSID number used on the client system must match the one used
on the AP. You might need to change it if you are switching a laptop or other
wireless device between different WLANs.

 Encryption type: If encryption is enabled on the connecting system, the
encryption type must match what is set in the AP. For example, if the AP
uses WPA2-AES, the connecting system must also use WPA2-AES.
Most router configuration interfaces allow you to run basic diagnostics through
them, as illustrated in Figure 7.5. You can also usually change the security
settings and configure the firewall, as shown in Figure 7.6.
FIGURE 7.5 Wireless router diagnostic options
FIGURE 7.6 Configuring security settings

Factors Affecting Wireless Signals
Because wireless signals travel through the atmosphere, they are susceptible to
different types of interference than are standard wired networks. Interference
weakens wireless signals and therefore is an important consideration when
working with wireless networking.
Interference
Wireless interference is an important consideration when you plan a wireless
network. Interference is, unfortunately, inevitable, but the trick is to minimize
the levels of interference. Wireless LAN communications typically are based on
radio frequency signals that require a clear and unobstructed transmission path.
The following are some factors that cause interference:
 Physical objects: Trees, masonry, buildings, and other physical structures
are some of the most common sources of interference. The density of the
materials used in a building’s construction determines the number of walls
the RF signal can pass through and still maintain adequate coverage.
Concrete and steel walls are particularly difficult for a signal to pass through.
These structures weaken or at times completely prevent wireless signals.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you understand that physical objects are a common source of
interference. A wireless site survey can be used to test for interference.
 Radio frequency interference: Wireless technologies such as 802.11n can
use an RF range of 2.4 GHz, and so do many other devices, such as cordless
phones, microwaves, Bluetooth devices, and so on. Devices that share the
channel can cause noise and weaken the signals.
 Electrical interference: Electrical interference comes from devices such as
computers, refrigerators, fans, lighting fixtures, or any other motorized
devices. The impact that electrical interference has on the signal depends on
the proximity of the electrical device to the wireless AP. Advances in
wireless technologies and in electrical devices have reduced the impact that
these types of devices have on wireless transmissions.
 Environmental factors: Weather conditions can have a huge impact on

wireless signal integrity. Lightning, for example, can cause electrical
interference, and fog can weaken signals as they pass through.
Reflection, Refraction, and Absorption
It can be a blurry line differentiating between interference and reflection when it
comes to wireless networking. The key difference between them is that
interference is a conflict with something else (usually another signal), whereas
reflection is a problem caused by a bouncing of the same signal off of an object.
A subset of this is refraction, which involves a change in direction of the wave as
a result of its traveling at different speeds at different points. Put in simple terms,
reflection happens when the signal hits a piece of metal and cannot pass through,
and refraction happens when the signal goes through a body of water.
If the wave is completely swallowed by the object it hits (not reflected, or
refracted), then it is said to be absorbed. Where security is concerned, items
known to absorb wireless signals can be used to prevent the signal from
traveling beyond an established perimeter. Shielding paint (sometimes called RF
paint) can be used for this purpose, as can copper plates and aluminum sheets.
Many wireless implementations are found in the office or at home. Even when
outside interference such as weather is not a problem, every office has plenty of
wireless obstacles. Table 7.4 highlights a few examples to be aware of when
implementing a wireless network indoors.
TABLE 7.4 Wireless Obstacles Found Indoors
Obstruction
Obstacle
Severity
Sample Use
Wood/wood
paneling
Low
Inside a wall or hollow door
Drywall
Low
Inside walls
Furniture
Low
Couches or office partitions
Clear glass
Low
Windows
Tinted glass
Medium
Windows
People
Medium
High-volume traffic areas that have
considerable pedestrian traffic
Ceramic tile
Medium
Walls

Concrete
blocks
Medium/high
Outer wall construction
Mirrors
High
Mirror or reflective glass
Metals
High
Metal office partitions, doors, metal office
furniture
Water
High
Aquariums, rain, fountains
ExamAlert
Be sure that you understand the severity of obstructions given in Table
7.4.
Troubleshooting AP Coverage
Like any other network medium, APs have a limited transmission distance. This
limitation is an important consideration when you decide where an AP should be
placed on the network. When troubleshooting a wireless network, pay close
attention to how far the client systems are from the AP.
ExamAlert
Distance limitations from the AP are among the first things to check when
troubleshooting AP coverage.
When faced with a problem in which client systems cannot consistently access
the AP, you could try moving the AP to better cover the area, but then you may
disrupt access for users in other areas. So what can be done to troubleshoot AP
coverage?
Depending on the network environment, the quick solution may be to throw
money at the problem and purchase another access point, cabling, and other
hardware to expand the transmission area. However, you can try a few things
before installing another wireless AP. The following list starts with the least
expensive solution and progresses to the most expensive:
 Increase transmission power: Some APs have a setting to adjust the

transmission power output (power levels). By default, most of these settings
are set to the maximum output; however, this is worth verifying just in case.
You can decrease the transmission power if you are trying to reduce the
dispersion of radio waves beyond the immediate network. Increasing the
power gives clients stronger data signals and greater transmission distances.
 Relocate the AP: When wireless client systems suffer from connectivity
problems, the solution may be as simple as relocating the AP. You could
relocate it across the room, a few feet away, or across the hall. Finding the
right location will likely take a little trial and error.
 Adjust or replace antennas: If the AP distance is insufficient for some
network clients, it might be necessary to replace the default antenna used
with both the AP and the client with higher-end antennas. Upgrading an
antenna can make a big difference in terms of transmission range.
Unfortunately, not all APs have replaceable antennas.
 Signal amplification: Radio frequency (RF) amplifiers add significant
distance to wireless signals. An RF amplifier increases the strength and
readability of the data transmission. The amplifier improves both the
received and transmitted signals, resulting in an increase in wireless network
performance.
 Use a repeater: Before installing a new AP, you might want to think about a
wireless repeater. When set to the same channel as the AP, the repeater takes
the transmission and repeats it. So, the AP transmission gets to the repeater,
and then the repeater duplicates the signal and passes it on. This is an
effective strategy to increase wireless transmission distances.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to answer questions on AP coverage and possible reasons to
relocate or replace APs.
Cram Quiz
1. You purchase a new wireless AP that uses no security by default. You
change the security settings to use 128-bit encryption. How must the client
systems be configured?

 A. All client systems must be set to 128-bit encryption.
 B. The client system inherits security settings from the AP.
 C. Wireless security does not support 128-bit encryption.
 D. The client wireless security settings must be set to autodetect.
2. You experience connectivity problems with your SOHO network. What can
you change in an attempt to solve this problem?
 A. Shorten the SSID.
 B. Remove all encryption.
 C. Lower the transfer rate.
 D. Raise the transfer rate.
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. On a wireless connection between an AP and the client, each system
must be configured to use the same wireless security settings. In this case,
they must both be configured to use 128-bit encryption.
2. C. If you experience connectivity problems between wireless devices, try
using the lower transfer rate in a fixed mode to achieve a more stable
connection. For example, you can manually choose the wireless transfer rate.
The higher the transfer rate, the shorter the connection distance.
What’s Next?
Chapter 8, “Cloud Computing and Virtualization,” focuses on the definitions of
cloud computing and virtualization at the level you need to know them for the
Network+ exam.

CHAPTER 8
Cloud Computing and Virtualization
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Summarize cloud concepts and their purposes.
 Explain the purposes of virtualization and network storage technologies.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 1.7 and 2.4. For more
information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About the
Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
The term cloud computing is used everywhere these days, even by those who
have no idea what it means. Being a Network+ candidate, it is important to be
versed in the definitions of cloud computing, and virtualization, and able to
discuss it with others using a common vernacular.
This chapter focuses on the definitions of cloud computing and virtualization at
the level you need to know them for the Network+ exam. If you want to go
further with the technology, consider the newly created Cloud+ certification
from CompTIA.
Cloud Concepts
 Summarize cloud concepts and their purposes.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. In which cloud delivery model are resources owned by the organization,
and that organization acts as both the provider and the consumer?
2. With which cloud service model can consumers deploy, but not manage

or control, any of the underlying cloud infrastructure (but they can have
control over the deployed applications)?
3. What are some of the characteristics of cloud computing?
Answers
1. In a private cloud model, the cloud is owned by the organization and it
acts as both the provider and the consumer.
2. With the Platform as a Service (PaaS) cloud service model, consumers
can deploy, but not manage or control, any of the underlying cloud
infrastructure (but they can have control over the deployed applications).
3. Regardless of the service model used, the characteristics include on-
demand self-service, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid
elasticity, and measured service.
The best way to think about this chapter is as an introduction to cloud computing
and an agreement on the definition of what the terms associated with it really
mean. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defines three
service models in Special Publication 800-145: Software as a Service (SaaS);
Platform as a Service (PaaS); and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). It also
defines four possible delivery models: private, public, community, and hybrid.
This chapter looks at each of these seven terms and what they mean as defined
by the NIST and agreed upon by the computing community. Know that it is
possible to mix and match the service models with the platform models so that
you can have public IaaS, or private PaaS, and so on and that you utilize a Cloud
Access Security Broker (CASB)—a software program—to sit between the cloud
service users and cloud applications to monitor activity and enforce established
security policies.
Note
The CASB can offer services beyond just monitoring users’ actions, but must
always be able to enforce compliance with security policies.
Software as a Service

According to the NIST, Software as a Service (SaaS) is defined as follows: “The
capability provided to the consumer is to use the provider’s applications running
on a cloud infrastructure. The applications are accessible from various client
devices through either a thin client interface, such as a web browser (for
example, web-based email), or a program interface. The consumer does not
manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network,
servers, operating systems, storage, or even individual application capabilities,
with the possible exception of limited user-specific application configuration
settings.”
The words used are significant and the ones to focus on in this definition are that
consumers can use the provider’s applications and that they do not manage or
control any of the underlying cloud infrastructure. Figure 8.1 depicts the
responsibility of each party in the SaaS model.

FIGURE 8.1 The SaaS service model
Platform as a Service
According to the NIST, Platform as a Service (PaaS) is defined as follows: “The
capability provided to the consumer is to deploy onto the cloud infrastructure
consumer-created or acquired applications created using programming
languages, libraries, services and tools supported by the provider. The consumer
does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including
network, servers, operating systems, or storage, but has control over the

deployed applications and possible configuration settings for the application-
hosting environment.”
The important words to focus on in this definition are that consumers can deploy,
that they do not manage or control any of the underlying cloud infrastructure,
but they can have control over the deployed applications. Figure 8.2 depicts the
responsibility of each party in the PaaS model.
FIGURE 8.2 The PaaS service model

Infrastructure as a Service
According to the NIST, Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is defined as follows:
“The capability provided to the consumer is to provision processing, storage,
networks, and other fundamental computing resources where the consumer is
able to deploy and run arbitrary software, which can include operating systems
and applications. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud
infrastructure but has control over operating systems, storage, and deployed
applications; and possible limited control of select networking components (e.g.,
host firewalls).”
The words to focus on are that the consumer can provision, is able to deploy and
run, but still does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure, but
now can be responsible for some aspects. Figure 8.3 depicts the responsibility of
each party in the IaaS model.

FIGURE 8.3 The IaaS service model
Note
Regardless of the service model used, the characteristics of each of them are
that they include on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource
pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service.
After you have a service model selected, both CompTIA and the NIST recognize
the different delivery models, which are discussed next.

ExamAlert
For the exam, know that there are three possible cloud service models:
IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS.
Other Types of Services
The CompTIA objectives specifically list IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS as the three they
test on. These are the most popular models in use today, but virtually anything
can have “aaS” tacked to the end of it and its subscription referenced “as a
Service.” This is important because three models appear in the official acronym
list that do not appear in the objectives. For that reason, be sure you know what
the acronyms stand for and a brief definition. The three are as follows:
 CaaS: Communication as a Service is outsourced communications leased
from a vendor(s) such as Voice over IP (VoIP), videoconferencing apps, and
so on.
 DaaS: Desktop as a Service is an implementation of desktop virtualization
that does not require you to build and manage your own infrastructure.
 MaaS: Mobility as a Service is much different from the other service models
and is also known as Transportation as a Service (TaaS). It is the use of other
forms of transportation—on an as-needed basis—than company-owned
vehicles.
Private Cloud
A private cloud is defined as follows: “The cloud infrastructure is provisioned
for exclusive use by a single organization comprising multiple consumers (e.g.,
business units). It may be owned, managed, and operated by the organization, a
third party, or some combination of them, and it may exist on or off premises.”
Under most circumstances, a private cloud is owned by the organization, and it
acts as both the provider and the consumer. It has a security-related advantage in
not needing to put its data on the Internet.
Public Cloud
A public cloud is defined as follows: “The cloud infrastructure is provisioned for
open use by the general public. It may be owned, managed, and operated by a

business, academic, or government organization, or some combination of them.
It exists on the premises of the cloud provider.”
Under most circumstances, a public cloud is owned by the cloud provider, and it
uses a pay-as-you-go model. A good example of a public cloud is webmail or
online document sharing/collaboration.
Hybrid Cloud
A hybrid cloud is defined as follows: “The cloud infrastructure is a composition
of two or more distinct cloud infrastructures (private, community, or public) that
remain unique entities, but are bound together by standardized or proprietary
technology that enables data and application portability (e.g., cloud bursting for
load balancing between clouds).”
A hybrid can be any combination of other delivery models. Not only are public
and private listed in the definition, but also community. CompTIA no longer
includes the community cloud delivery model on the Network+ exam (but does
require you to know it for its cloud-focused certifications). For real-world
purposes, you should know that the key to distinguishing between a community
cloud and other types of cloud delivery is that it serves a similar group. There
must be joint interests and limited enrollment.
Note
A common reason for using cloud computing is to be able to offload traffic to
resources from a cloud provider if your own servers become too busy. This is
known as cloud bursting, and it requires load-balancing/prioritizing
technologies such as quality of service (QoS) protocols to make it possible.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should know that the most deployed cloud delivery
models are private, public, and hybrid.
Connectivity Methods
Most cloud providers offer a number of methods that clients can employ to
connect to them. It is important, before making an investment in infrastructure,

to check with your provider and see what methods it recommends and supports.
One of the most common is to use an IPsec, hardware VPN connection between
your network(s) and the cloud providers. This method offers the capability to
have a managed VPN endpoint that includes automated multidata center
redundancy and failover.
A dedicated direct connection is another, simpler, method. You can combine the
dedicated network connection(s) with the hardware VPN to create a combination
that offers an IPsec-encrypted private connection while also reducing network
costs.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is one of the most popular cloud providers on the
market. They allow the two connectivity methods discussed (calling the
dedicated connection “AWS Direct Connect”) and a number of others that are
variations, or combinations, of these two.
Security Implications and Considerations
Security is one of the most important issues to discuss with your cloud provider.
Cloud computing holds great promise when it comes to scalability, cost savings,
rapid deployment, and empowerment. As with any technology where so much is
removed from your control, though, risks are involved. Each risk should be
considered carefully to identify ways to help mitigate it. Naturally, the
responsibilities of both the organization and the cloud provider vary depending
on the service model chosen, but ultimately the organization is accountable for
the security and privacy of the outsourced service.
Software and services not necessary for the implementation should be removed
or at least disabled. Patches and firmware updates should be kept current, and
log files should be carefully monitored. You should find the vulnerabilities in the
implementation before others do and work with your service provider(s) to close
any holes.
When it comes to data storage on the cloud, encryption is one of the best ways to
protect it (keeping it from being of value to unauthorized parties), and VPN
routing and forwarding can help. Backups should be performed regularly (and
encrypted and stored in safe locations), and access control should be a priority.
Note
For a good discussion of cloud computing and data protection, visit

http://whoswholegal.com/news/features/article/18246/cloud-computing-data-
protection.
The Relationship Between Resources
Just as the cloud holds such promise for running applications, balancing loads,
and a plethora of other options, it also offers the ability to store more and more
data on it and to let a provider worry about scaling issues instead of local
administrators. From an economic perspective, this can be a blessing. From an
administrative point, though, it can present some issues. Redundancy that occurs
from having data in more than one location (local and remote) can be wonderful
when you need to recover data, but problematic when you want to make sure
you are always working with the most recent version. To minimize problems, be
sure that files are kept current, and synchronization between local and remote
files is always running.
Cram Quiz
1. With which cloud service model can consumers use the provider’s
applications but not manage or control any of the underlying cloud
infrastructure?
 A. SaaS
 B. PaaS
 C. IaaS
 D. GaaS
2. Which of the following involves offloading traffic to resources from a cloud
provider if your own servers become too busy?
 A. Ballooning
 B. Cloud bursting
 C. Bridging
 D. Harvesting
3. Which of the following does the NIST define as a composition of two or

more distinct cloud infrastructures?
 A. Private cloud
 B. Public cloud
 C. Community cloud
 D. Hybrid cloud
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. With the SaaS cloud service model, consumers are able to use the
provider’s applications, but they do not manage or control any of the
underlying cloud infrastructure.
2. B. A common reason for using cloud computing is to be able to offload
traffic to resources from a cloud provider if your own servers become too
busy. This is known as cloud bursting.
3. D. The hybrid cloud delivery model is a composition of two or more distinct
cloud infrastructures (public, private, and so on).
Virtualization and Storage-Area Networks
 Explain the purposes of virtualization and network storage technologies.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What technology sends very large Ethernet frames that are less
processor intensive?
2. True or false: Virtual NICs have MAC addresses assigned to them.
Answers
1. The goal of jumbo frames is to send very large Ethernet frames that are
less processor intensive.

2. True. Virtual NICs (VNICs) have MAC addresses assigned to them.
Cloud computing and virtualization are two items that go together like ketchup
and mustard on a hot dog; it is possible to use one without the other, but they are
often used together. In the first half of this chapter, you learned the definitions
for cloud computing; now you learn the principles of virtualization and storage-
area networks.
Virtualization
Cloud computing is built on virtualization; it is the foundation on which cloud
computing stands. At the core of virtualization is the hypervisor (the
software/hardware combination that makes it possible). There are two methods
of implementation: Type I (known as bare metal) and Type II (known as hosted).
Type I is independent of the operating system and boots before the OS, whereas
Type II is dependent on the operating system and cannot boot until the OS is up;
it needs the OS to stay up so that it can operate. Figure 8.4 depicts the Type I
model while Figure 8.5 depicts the Type II model. From a performance and
scalability standpoint, Type I is considered superior to Type II.
FIGURE 8.4 The Type I hypervisor model

FIGURE 8.5 The Type II hypervisor model
Tip
The machine on which virtualization software is running is known as a host,
and the virtual machines are known as guests.
Note
Whereas once it was the case that hypervisors were the only way to have
virtualization, containers are now thought by most to be their successor. These
are not tested on in this iteration of the Network+ exam, but you should know
for the real world that the use of containers (a piece of software bundled with
everything that it needs to run—code, runtime, system tools, system libraries,
and so on) are becoming more common.
Cloud computing holds great promise when it comes to scalability, cost saving,
rapid deployment, and empowerment. As with any technology where so much is
removed from your control, however, risks are involved. Each risk should be
considered and thought through to identify ways to help mitigate them. Data
segregation, for example, can help reduce some of the risks associated with
multitenancy. Common virtual network components include virtual network
interface cards (VNICs), virtual routers and switches, shared memory, virtual

CPUs, and storage (shared or clustered).
In the following sections, we look at some of these components used to create
the virtual environment.
Virtual Routers and Switches
Just as physical routers establish communication by maintaining tables about
destinations and local connections, a virtual router works similarly but is
software only. Remember that a router contains information about the systems
connected to it and where to send requests if the destination is not known. These
routing tables grow as connections are made through the router. Routing can
occur within the network (interior) or outside it (exterior). The routes,
themselves, can be configured as static or dynamic.
A virtual switch, similarly, is a software program that allows one virtual machine
(VM) to communicate with another. The virtual switch allows the VM to use the
hardware of the host OS (the NIC) to connect to the Internet.
Switches are multiport devices that improve network efficiency. A switch
typically contains a small amount of information about systems in a network— a
table of MAC addresses as opposed to IP addresses. Switches improve network
efficiency over routers because of the virtual circuit capability. Switches also
improve network security because the virtual circuits are more difficult to
examine with network monitors. The switch maintains limited routing
information about nodes in the internal network, and it allows connections to
systems such as a hub or a router.
Virtual Firewall
A virtual firewall (VF) is either a network firewall service or an appliance
running entirely within the virtualized environment. Regardless of which
implementation, a VF serves the same purpose as a physical one: packet filtering
and monitoring. The firewall can also run in a guest OS VM.
One key to a VF is to not overlook the contribution from Network Address
Translation (NAT). This allows an organization to present a single address (or set
of addresses) to the Internet for all computer connections—it acts as a proxy
between the local-area network (which can be using private IP addresses) and the
Internet. NAT effectively hides your network from the world, making it much
harder to determine what systems exist on the other side of the router.

Not only can NAT save IP addresses, but it can also act as a firewall.
Tip
Not only can NAT save IP addresses, but it can also act as a firewall.
Virtual Versus Physical NICs
A NIC card within a machine can be either virtual or physical and will be
configured the same. Existing on the virtual network, it must have an IP address,
a MAC address, a default gateway, a subnet mask value, and can have a
connection that is bridged or not. A VNIC is software only but allows interaction
with other devices on network. (The VLAN makes it possible for VNICs to
communicate with other network devices.)
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should be able to differentiate between the various
virtualization components: switches, routers, firewalls, and NICs.
When talking about virtual networking, it is important to note that so much of
what is discussed is software based. Never forget that the goal of virtualization is
to emulate physical environments and devices without actually having those
physical elements.
Storage-Area Networks
When it comes to data storage in the cloud, encryption is one of the best ways to
protect it (keeping it from being of value to unauthorized parties), and VPN
routing and forwarding can help. Backups should be performed regularly (and
encrypted and stored in safe locations), and access control should be a priority.
The consumer retains the ultimate responsibility for compliance. Per NIST SP
800-144, “The main issue centers on the risks associated with moving important
applications or data from within the confines of the organization’s computing
center to that of another organization (i.e., a public cloud), which is readily
available for use by the general public. The responsibilities of both the

organization and the cloud provider vary depending on the service model.
Reducing cost and increasing efficiency are primary motivations for moving
towards a public cloud, but relinquishing responsibility for security should not
be. Ultimately, the organization is accountable for the choice of public cloud and
the security and privacy of the outsourced service.” For more information, see
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-144.pdf.
Shared storage can be done on storage-area networks (SANs), network-attached
storage (NAS), and so on; the virtual machine sees only a “physical disk.” With
clustered storage, you can use multiple devices to increase performance. A
handful of technologies exist in this realm, and the following are those that you
need to know for the Network+ exam.
Tip
Look to CompTIA’s Cloud+ certification for more specialization in cloud and
virtualization technologies.
iSCSI
The Small Computer System Interface (SCSI) standard has long been the
language of storage. Internet Small Computer System Interface (iSCSI) expands
this through Ethernet, allowing IP to be used to send SCSI commands.
Logical unit numbers (LUNs) came from the SCSI world and carry over, acting
as unique identifiers for devices. Both NAS and SAN use “targets” that hold up
to eight devices.
Using iSCSI for a virtual environment gives users the benefits of a file system
without the difficulty of setting up Fibre Channel. Because iSCSI works both at
the hypervisor level and in the guest operating system, the rules that govern the
size of the partition in the OS are used rather than those of the virtual OS (which
are usually more restrictive).
The disadvantage of iSCSI is that users can run into IP-related problems if
configuration is not carefully monitored.
Jumbo Frames
One of the biggest issues with networking is that data of various sizes is

crammed into packets and sent across the medium. Each time this is done,
headers are created (more data to process), along with any filler needed, creating
additional overhead. To get around this, the concept of jumbo frames is used to
allow for very large Ethernet frames; by sending a lot of data at once, the
number of packets is reduced, and the data sent is less processor intensive.
Fibre Channel and FCoE
Instead of using an older technology and trying to adhere to legacy standards,
Fibre Channel (FC) is an option providing a higher level of performance than
anything else. It utilizes FCP, the Fiber Channel Protocol, to do what needs to be
done, and Fiber Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) can be used in high-speed (10
GB and higher) implementations.
The big advantage of Fibre Channel is its scalability. FCoE encapsulates FC over
the Ethernet portions of connectivity, making it easy to add into an existing
network. As such, FCoE is an extension to FC intended to extend the scalability
and efficiency associated with Fibre Channel.
Network-Attached Storage
Storage is always a big issue, and the best answer is always a SAN.
Unfortunately, a SAN can be costly and difficult to implement and maintain.
That is where network-attached storage (NAS) comes in. NAS is easier than
SAN and uses TCP/IP. It offers file level access, and a client sees the shared
storage as a file server.
Note
On a VLAN, multipathing creates multiple paths to the storage resources and
can be used to increase availability and add fault tolerance.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should know the difference between NAS and SAN
technologies and how to apply them.
InfiniBand

One high-speed technology on the market, and supported by the InfiniBand
Trade Association, is InfiniBand (IB). This standard promises high throughput
and low latency, making it ideal for use in high-performance computing
connections (both within the computer and between computers). Both Mellanox
and Intel manufacture InfiniBand host bus adapters and network switches, and
Oracle Corporation has introduced a line of products as well.
Note
InfiniBand is designed to be scalable and uses a switched fabric network
topology.
ExamAlert
For the exam, you should know that InfiniBand competes with Fibre
Channel and a number of proprietary technologies.
Cram Quiz
1. Logical unit numbers (LUNs) came from the SCSI world and use “targets”
that hold up to how many devices?
 A. 4
 B. 6
 C. 8
 D. 128
2. Which of the following technologies creates multiple paths to the storage
resource?
 A. Multilisting
 B. Multihoming
 C. Multitenancy
 D. Multipathing

3. Which of the following types of virtualization is known as bare metal?
 A. Type 0
 B. Type I
 C. Type II
 D. Type III
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. LUNs came from the SCSI world and carry over, acting as unique
identifiers for devices. Both NAS and SAN use “targets” that hold up to
eight devices.
2. D. On a VLAN, multipathing creates multiple paths to the storage resources
and can be used to increase availability and add fault tolerance.
3. B. There are two methods of implementation: Type I (known as bare metal)
and Type II (known as hosted). Type I is independent of the operating system
and boots before the OS, whereas Type II is dependent on the operating
system and cannot boot until the OS is up, and it needs the OS to stay up.
What’s Next?
Chapter 9, “Network Operations,” focuses on two important topics: network
management and network optimization technologies and techniques.

CHAPTER 9
Network Operations
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Given a scenario, use appropriate documentation and diagrams to manage
the network.
 Compare and contrast business continuity and disaster recovery concepts.
 Explain common scanning, monitoring, and patching processes and
summarize their expected outputs.
 Given a scenario, use remote access methods.
 Identify policies and best practices.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, and
3.5. For more information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the
“About the Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
This chapter focuses on two important parts of the role of a network
administrator: documentation and the tools to use to monitor or optimize
connectivity. Documentation, although not glamorous, is an essential part of the
job. This chapter looks at several aspects of network documentation.
Documentation Management
 Given a scenario, use appropriate documentation and diagrams to
manage the network.
 Identify policies and best practices.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.

1. Which network topology focuses on the direction in which data flows
within the physical environment?
2. In computing, what are historical readings used as a measurement for
future calculations referred to as?
3. True or false: Both logical and physical network diagrams provide an
overview of the network layout and function.
Answers
1. The logical network refers to the direction in which data flows on the
network within the physical topology. The logical diagram is not intended
to focus on the network hardware but rather on how data flows through
that hardware.
2. Keeping and reviewing baselines is an essential part of the
administrator’s role.
3. True. Both logical and physical network diagrams provide an overview
of the network layout and function.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Administrators have several daily tasks, and new ones often crop up. In this
environment, tasks such as documentation sometimes fall to the background. It’s
important that you understand why administrators need to spend valuable time
writing and reviewing documentation. Having a well-documented network offers
a number of advantages:
 Troubleshooting: When something goes wrong on the network, including
the wiring, up-to-date documentation is a valuable reference to guide the
troubleshooting effort. The documentation saves you money and time in
isolating potential problems.

 Training new administrators: In many network environments, new
administrators are hired, and old ones leave. In this scenario, documentation
is critical. New administrators do not have the time to try to figure out where
cabling is run, what cabling is used, potential trouble spots, and more. Up-to-
date information helps new administrators quickly see the network layout.
 Working with contractors and consultants: Consultants and contractors
occasionally may need to visit the network to make recommendations for the
network or to add wiring or other components. In such cases, up-to-date
documentation is needed. If documentation is missing, it would be much
more difficult for these people to do their jobs, and more time and money
would likely be required.
 Inventory management: Knowing what you have, where you have it, and
what you can turn to in the case of an emergency is both constructive and
helpful.
Quality network documentation does not happen by accident; rather, it requires
careful planning. When creating network documentation, you must keep in mind
who you are creating the documentation for and that it is a communication tool.
Documentation is used to take technical information and present it in a manner
that someone new to the network can understand. When planning network
documentation, you must decide what you need to document.
Note
Imagine that you have just taken over a network as administrator. What
information would you like to see? This is often a clear gauge of what to
include in your network documentation.
All networks differ and so does the documentation required for each network.
However, certain elements are always included in quality documentation:
 Network topology: Networks can be complicated. If someone new is
looking over the network, it is critical to document the entire topology. This
includes both the wired and wireless topologies used on the network.
Network topology documentation typically consists of a diagram or series of
diagrams labeling all critical components used to create the network. These
diagrams utilize common symbols for components such as firewalls, hubs,
routers, and switches. Figure 9.1, for example, shows standard figures for,

from left to right, a firewall, a hub, a router, and a switch.
FIGURE 9.1 Diagram symbols for a firewall, a hub, a router, and a switch
 Wiring layout and rack diagrams: Network wiring can be confusing.
Much of it is hidden in walls and ceilings, making it hard to know where the
wiring is and what kind is used on the network. This makes it critical to keep
documentation on network wiring up to date. Diagram what is on each rack
and any unusual configurations that might be employed.
 IDF/MDF documentation: It is not enough to show that there is an
intermediate distribution frame (IDF) and/or main distribution frame (MDF)
in your building. You need to thoroughly document any and every free-
standing or wall-mounted rack and the cables running between them and the
end user devices.
 Server configuration: A single network typically uses multiple servers
spread over a large geographic area. Documentation must include schematic
drawings of where servers are located on the network and the services each
provides. This includes server function, server IP address, operating system
(OS), software information, and more. Essentially, you need to document all
the information you need to manage or administer the servers.
 Network equipment: The hardware used on a network is configured in a
particular way—with protocols, security settings, permissions, and more.
Trying to remember these would be a difficult task. Having up-to-date
documentation makes it easier to recover from a failure.
 Network configuration, performance baselines, and key applications:
Documentation also includes information on all current network
configurations, performance baselines taken, and key applications used on
the network, such as up-to-date information on their updates, vendors, install
dates, and more.
 Detailed account of network services: Network services are a key
ingredient in all networks. Services such as Domain Name Service (DNS),
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), Remote Access Services
(RAS), and more are an important part of documentation. You should

describe in detail which server maintains these services, the backup servers
for these services, maintenance schedules, how they are structured, and so
on.
 
Standard 
operating 
procedures/work 
instructions: 
Finally,
documentation should include information on network policy and
procedures. This includes many elements, ranging from who can and cannot
access the server room, to network firewalls, protocols, passwords, physical
security, cloud computing use, mobile device use, and so on.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you know the types of information that should be included in
network documentation.
Wiring and Port Locations
Network wiring schematics are an essential part of network documentation,
particularly for midsize to large networks, where the cabling is certainly
complex. For such networks, it becomes increasingly difficult to visualize
network cabling and even harder to explain it to someone else. A number of
software tools exist to help administrators clearly document network wiring in
detail.
Several types of wiring schematics exist. They can be general, as shown in
Figure 9.2, or they can be very specific, indicating the actual type of wiring used,
the operating system on each machine, and so on. The more generalized they are,
the less they need updating, whereas very specific schematics often need to be
changed regularly. Table 9.1 represents another way of documenting data.
ExamAlert
For the exam, be familiar with the look of a general wiring schematic such
as the one shown in Figure 9.2.

FIGURE 9.2 A general wiring schematic
TABLE 9.1 Wiring Details
Cable
Description
Installation Notes
1
Category 6
plenum-rated
cable
Cable runs 50 feet from the MDF to IDF. Cable placed
through the ceiling and through a mechanical room.
Cable was installed 02/26/2017, upgrading a
nonplenum Category 5e cable.
2
Category 6a
plenum cable
Horizontal cable runs 45 feet to 55 feet from IDF to
wall jack. Replaced Category 5 cable February 2017.
Section of cable run through the ceiling and over
fluorescent lights.

3
Category 5e
UTP cable
All patch cable connectors were attached in-house.
Patch cable connecting the printer runs 45 feet due to
printer placement.
4
8.3-micron
core/ 125-
micron
cladding
single mode
Connecting fiber cable runs 2 kilometers between the
primary and secondary buildings.
Figure 9.2 provides a simplified look at network wiring schematics. Imagine
how complicated these diagrams would look on a network with 1,000, 2,000, or
even 6,000 computers. Quality network documentation software makes this
easier; however, the task of network wiring can be a large one for administrators.
Administrators need to ensure that someone can pick up the wiring
documentation diagrams and have a good idea of the network wiring.
Caution
Reading schematics and determining where wiring runs are an important part
of the administrator’s role. Expect to see a schematic on your exam.
Port locations should be carefully recorded and included in the documentation as
well. SNMP can be used directly to map ports on switches and other devices; it
is much easier, however, to use software applications that incorporate SNMP and
use it to create ready-to-use documentation. A plethora of such programs are
available; some are free and many are commercial products.
Troubleshooting Using Wiring Schematics
Some network administrators do not take the time to maintain quality
documentation. This will haunt them when it comes time to troubleshoot some
random network problems. Without any network wiring schematics, the task will
be frustrating and time-consuming. The information shown in Figure 9.2 might
be simplified, but you could use that documentation to evaluate the network and
make recommendations.
Caution
When looking at a wiring schematic, pay close attention to where the cable is

run and the type of cable used if the schematic indicates this. If a correct cable
is not used, a problem could occur.
Note
Network wiring schematics are a work in progress. Although changes to
wiring do not happen daily, they do occur when the network expands or old
cabling is replaced. It is imperative to remember that when changes are made
to the network, the schematics and their corresponding references must be
updated to reflect the changes. Out-of-date schematics can be frustrating to
work with.
Physical and Logical Network Diagrams
In addition to the wiring schematics, documentation should include diagrams of
the physical and logical network design. Recall from Chapter 1, “Introduction to
Networking Technologies,” that network topologies can be defined on a physical
or a logical level. The physical topology refers to how a network is physically
constructed—how it looks. The logical topology refers to how a network looks
to the devices that use it—how it functions.
Network infrastructure documentation isn’t reviewed daily; however, this
documentation is essential for someone unfamiliar with the network to manage
or troubleshoot the network. When it comes to documenting the network, you
need to document all aspects of the infrastructure. This includes the physical
hardware, physical structure, protocols, and software used.
ExamAlert
You should be able to identify a physical and logical diagram. You need to
know the types of information that should be included in each diagram.
The physical documentation of the network should include the following
elements:
 Cabling information: A visual description of all the physical
communication links, including all cabling, cable grades, cable lengths,
WAN cabling, and more.

 Servers: The server names and IP addresses, types of servers, and domain
membership.
 Network devices: The location of the devices on the network. This includes
the printers, hubs, switches, routers, gateways, and more.
 Wide-area network: The location and devices of the WAN and
components.
 User information: Some user information, including the number of local
and remote users.
As you can see, many elements can be included in the physical network diagram.
Figure 9.3 shows a physical segment of a network.
FIGURE 9.3 A physical network diagram
Caution
You should recognize the importance of maintaining documentation that
includes network diagrams, asset management, IP address utilization, vendor
documentation, and internal operating procedures, policies, and standards.
Networks are dynamic, and changes can happen regularly, which is why the

physical network diagrams also must be updated. Networks have different
policies and procedures on how often updates should occur. Best practice is that
the diagram should be updated whenever significant changes to the network
occur, such as the addition of a switch or router, a change in protocols, or the
addition of a new server. These changes impact how the network operates, and
the documentation should reflect the changes.
Caution
There are no hard-and-fast rules about when to change or update network
documentation. However, most administrators will want to update whenever
functional changes to the network occur.
The logical network refers to the direction in which data flows on the network
within the physical topology. The logical diagram is not intended to focus on the
network hardware but rather on how data flows through that hardware. In
practice, the physical and logical topologies can be the same. In the case of the
bus physical topology, data travels along the length of the cable from one
computer to the next. So, the diagram for the physical and logical bus would be
the same.
This is not always the case. For example, a topology can be in the physical shape
of a star, but data is passed in a logical ring. The function of data travel is
performed inside a switch in a ring formation. So the physical diagram appears
to be a star, but the logical diagram shows data flowing in a ring formation from
one computer to the next. Simply put, it is difficult to tell from looking at a
physical diagram how data is flowing on the network.
In today’s network environments, the star topology is a common network
implementation. Ethernet uses a physical star topology but a logical bus
topology. In the center of the physical Ethernet star topology is a switch. It is
what happens inside the switch that defines the logical bus topology. The switch
passes data between ports as if they were on an Ethernet bus segment.
In addition to data flow, logical diagrams may include additional elements, such
as the network domain architecture, server roles, protocols used, and more.
Figure 9.4 shows how a logical topology may look in the form of network
documentation.

FIGURE 9.4 A logical topology diagram
Caution
The logical topology of a network identifies the logical paths that data signals
travel over the network.
Baselines
Baselines play an integral part in network documentation because they let you
monitor the network’s overall performance. In simple terms, a baseline is a
measure of performance that indicates how hard the network is working and
where network resources are spent. The purpose of a baseline is to provide a
basis of comparison. For example, you can compare the network’s performance
results taken in March to results taken in June, or from one year to the next.
More commonly, you would compare the baseline information at a time when
the network is having a problem to information recorded when the network was
operating with greater efficiency. Such comparisons help you determine whether
there has been a problem with the network, how significant that problem is, and
even where the problem lies.
To be of any use, baselining is not a one-time task; rather, baselines should be

taken periodically to provide an accurate comparison. You should take an initial
baseline after the network is set up and operational, and then again when major
changes are made to the network. Even if no changes are made to the network,
periodic baselining can prove useful as a means to determine whether the
network is still operating correctly.
All network operating systems (NOSs), including Windows, Mac OS, UNIX, and
Linux, have built-in support for network monitoring. In addition, many third-
party software packages are available for detailed network monitoring. These
system-monitoring tools provided in a NOS give you the means to take
performance baselines, either of the entire network or for an individual segment
within the network. Because of the different functions of these two baselines,
they are called a system baseline and a component baseline.
To create a network baseline, network monitors provide a graphical display of
network statistics. Network administrators can choose a variety of network
measurements to track. They can use these statistics to perform routine
troubleshooting tasks, such as locating a malfunctioning network card, a downed
server, or a denial-of-service (DoS) attack.
Note
Graphing, and the process of seeing data visually, can be much more helpful
in identifying trends than looking at raw data and log files.
Collecting network statistics is a process called capturing. Administrators can
capture statistics on all elements of the network. For baseline purposes, one of
the most common statistics to monitor is bandwidth usage. By reviewing
bandwidth statistics, administrators can see where the bulk of network
bandwidth is used. Then they can adapt the network for bandwidth use. If too
much bandwidth is used by a particular application, administrators can actively
control its bandwidth usage. Without comparing baselines, however, it is
difficult to see what is normal network bandwidth usage and what is unusual.
Caution
Remember that baselines need to be taken periodically and under the same
conditions to be effective. They are used to compare current performance with
past performance to help determine whether the network is functioning
properly or if troubleshooting is required.

Policies, 
Procedures, 
Configurations, 
and
Regulations
Well-functioning networks are characterized by documented policies,
procedures, configurations, and regulations. Because they are unique to every
network, policies, procedures, configurations, and regulations should be clearly
documented.
Policies
By definition, policies refer to an organization’s documented rules about what is
to be done, or not done, and why. Policies dictate who can and cannot access
particular network resources, server rooms, backup media, and more.
Although networks might have different policies depending on their needs, some
common policies include the following:
 Network usage policy: Defines who can use network resources such as
PCs, printers, scanners, and remote connections. In addition, the usage policy
dictates what can be done with these resources after they are accessed. No
outside systems will be networked without permission from the network
administrator.
 Internet usage policy: This policy specifies the rules for Internet use on the
job. Typically, usage should be focused on business-related tasks. Incidental
personal use is allowed during specified times.
 Bring your own device (BYOD) policy: This policy specifies the rules for
employees’ personally owned mobile devices (smartphones, laptops, tablets,
and so on) that they bring into the workplace and use to interact with
privileged company information and applications. Two things the policy
needs to address are onboarding and offboarding. Onboarding the mobile
device is the procedures gone through to get it ready to go on the network
(scanning for viruses, adding certain apps, and so forth). Offboarding is the
process of removing company-owned resources when it is no longer needed
(often done with a wipe or factory reset). Mobile device management (MDM)
and mobile application management (MAM) tools (usually third party) are
used to administer and leverage both employee-owned and company-owned
mobile devices and applications.

ExamAlert
For the exam, be familiar with onboarding and offboarding.
 Email usage policy: Email must follow the same code of conduct as
expected in any other form of written or face-to-face communication. All
emails are company property and can be accessed by the company. Personal
emails should be immediately deleted.
 Personal software policy: No outside software should be installed on
network computer systems. All software installations must be approved by
the network administrator. No software can be copied or removed from a
site. Licensing restrictions must be adhered to.
 Password policy: Detail how often passwords must be changed and the
minimum level of security for each (number of characters, use of
alphanumeric character set, and so on).
 User account policy: All users are responsible for keeping their password
and account information secret. All staff are required to log off and
sometimes lock their systems after they finish using them. Attempting to log
on to the network with another user account is considered a serious violation.
 International export controls: A number of laws and regulations govern
what can and cannot be exported when it comes to software and hardware to
various countries. Employees should take every precaution to make sure they
are adhering to the letter of the law.
 Data loss prevention: Losses from employees can quickly put a company in
the red. It should be understood that it is every employee’s responsibility to
make sure all preventable losses are prevented.
 Incident response policies: When an incident occurs, all employees should
understand it is their responsibility to be on the lookout for it and report it
immediately to the appropriate party.
 Non Disclosure Agreements (NDAs): NDAs are the oxygen that many
companies need to thrive. Employees should understand the importance of
them to continued business operations and agree to follow them to the letter,
and spirit, of the law.
 Safety procedures and policies: Safety is everyone’s business, and all
employees should know how to do their job in the safest manner while also

looking out for other employees and customers alike.
 Ownership policy: The company owns all data, including users’ email,
voice mail, and Internet usage logs, and the company reserves the right to
inspect these at any time. Some companies even go so far as controlling how
much personal data can be stored on a workstation.
This list is just a snapshot of the policies that guide the behavior for
administrators and network users. Network policies should be clearly
documented and available to network users. Often, these policies are reviewed
with new staff members or new administrators. As they are updated, they are
rereleased to network users. Policies are regularly reviewed and updated.
Note
You might be asked about network policies. Network policies dictate network
rules and provide guidelines for network conduct. Policies are often updated
and reviewed and are changed to reflect changes to the network and perhaps
changes in business requirements.
Password-Related Policies
Although biometrics and smart cards are becoming more common, they still
have a long way to go before they attain the level of popularity that username
and password combinations enjoy. Usernames and passwords do not require any
additional equipment, which practically every other method of authentication
does; the username and password process is familiar to users, easy to implement,
and relatively secure. For that reason, they are worthy of more detailed coverage
than the other authentication systems previously discussed.
Note
Biometrics are not as ubiquitous as username/password combinations, but
they are coming up quickly. Some smartphones, for example, offer the ability
to use a fingerprint scanner and/or gestures to access the system instead of
username and password. Features such as these are expected to become more
common with future releases.
Passwords are a relatively simple form of authentication in that only a string of

characters can be used to authenticate the user. However, how the string of
characters is used and which policies you can put in place to govern them make
usernames and passwords an excellent form of authentication.
Password Policies
All popular network operating systems include password policy systems that
enable the network administrator to control how passwords are used on the
system. The exact capabilities vary between network operating systems.
However, generally they enable the following:
 Minimum length of password: Shorter passwords are easier to guess than
longer ones. Setting a minimum password length does not prevent a user
from creating a longer password than the minimum; however, each network
operating system has a limit on how long a password can be.
 Password expiration: Also known as the maximum password age,
password expiration defines how long the user can use the same password
before having to change it. A general practice is that a password be changed
every 30 days. In high-security environments, you might want to make this
value shorter, but you should generally not make it any longer. Having
passwords expire periodically is a crucial feature because it means that if a
password is compromised, the unauthorized user will not indefinitely have
access.
 Prevention of password reuse: Although a system might cause a password
to expire and prompt the user to change it, many users are tempted to use the
same password again. A process by which the system remembers the last 10
passwords, for example, is most secure because it forces the user to create
completely new passwords. This feature is sometimes called enforcing
password history.
 Prevention of easy-to-guess passwords: Some systems can evaluate the
password provided by a user to determine whether it meets a required level
of complexity. This prevents users from having passwords such as password,
12345678, their name, or their nickname.
ExamAlert
You must identify an effective password policy. For example, a robust
password policy would include forcing users to change their passwords on

a regular basis.
Password Strength
No matter how good a company’s password policy, it is only as effective as the
passwords created within it. A password that is hard to guess, or strong, is more
likely to protect the data on a system than one that is easy to guess, or weak.
If you are using only numbers and letters—and the OS is not case sensitive—36
possible combinations exist for each entry, and the total number of possibilities
is 366. That might seem like a lot, but to a password-cracking program, it’s not
much security. A password that uses eight case-sensitive characters, with letters,
numbers, and special characters, has so many possible combinations that a
standard calculator cannot display the actual number.
There has always been a debate over how long a password should be. It should
be sufficiently long that it is hard to break but sufficiently short that the user can
easily remember it (and type it). In a normal working environment, passwords of
eight characters are sufficient. Certainly, they should be no fewer than six
characters. In environments in which security is a concern, passwords should be
10 characters or more.
Users should be encouraged to use a password that is considered strong. A strong
password has at least eight characters; has a combination of letters, numbers, and
special characters; uses mixed case; and does not form a proper word. Examples
are 3Ecc5T0h and e1oXPn3r. Such passwords might be secure, but users are
likely to have problems remembering them. For that reason, a popular strategy is
to use a combination of letters and numbers to form phrases or long words.
Examples include d1eTc0La and tAb1eT0p. These passwords might not be quite
as secure as the preceding examples, but they are still strong and a whole lot
better than the name of the user’s pet.
Procedures
Network procedures differ from policies in that they describe how tasks are to be
performed. For example, each network administrator has backup procedures
specifying the time of day backups are done, how often they are done, and where
they are stored. A network is full of a number of procedures for practical reasons
and, perhaps more important, for security reasons.
Administrators must be aware of several procedures when on the job. The

number and exact type of procedures depends on the network. The network’s
overall goal is to ensure uniformity and ensure that network tasks follow a
framework. Without this procedural framework, different administrators might
approach tasks differently, which could lead to confusion on the network.
Network procedures might include the following:
 Backup procedures: Backup procedures specify when they are to be
performed, how often a backup occurs, who does the backup, what data is to
be backed up, and where and how it will be stored. Network administrators
should carefully follow backup procedures.
 Procedures for adding new users: When new users are added to a network,
administrators typically have to follow certain guidelines to ensure that the
users have access to what they need, but no more. This is called the principle
of least privilege.
 Privileged user agreement: Administrators and authorized users who have
the ability to modify secure configurations and perform tasks such as account
setup, account termination, account resetting, auditing, and so on need to be
held to high standards.
 Security procedures: Some of the more critical procedures involve security.
Security procedures are numerous but may include specifying what the
administrator must do if security breaches occur, security monitoring,
security reporting, and updating the OS and applications for potential
security holes.
 Network monitoring procedures: The network needs to be constantly
monitored. This includes tracking such things as bandwidth usage, remote
access, user logons, and more.
 Software procedures/system life cycle: All software must be periodically
monitored and updated. Documented procedures dictate when, how often,
why, and for whom these updates are done. When assets are disposed of,
asset disposal procedures should be followed to properly document and log
their removal.
 Procedures for reporting violations: Users do not always follow outlined
network policies. This is why documented procedures should exist to
properly handle the violations. This might include a verbal warning upon the
first offense, followed by written reports and account lockouts thereafter.
 Remote-access and network admission procedures: Many workers

remotely access the network. This remote access is granted and maintained
using a series of defined procedures. These procedures might dictate when
remote users can access the network, how long they can access it, and what
they can access. Network admission control (NAC)—also referred to as
network access control—determines who can get on the network and is
usually based on 802.1X guidelines.
Change Management Documentation
Change management procedures might include the following:
 Document reason for a change: Before making any change at all, the first
question to ask is why. A change requested by one user may be based on a
misunderstanding of what technology can do, may be cost prohibitive, or
may deliver a benefit not worth the undertaking.
 Change request: An official request should be logged and tracked to verify
what is to be done and what has been done. Within the realm of the change
request should be the configuration procedures to be used, the rollback
process that is in place, potential impact identified, and a list of those who
need to be notified.
 Approval process: Changes should not be approved on the basis of who
makes the most noise, but rather who has the most justified reasons. An
official process should be in place to evaluate and approve changes prior to
actions being undertaken. The approval can be done by a single administrator
or a formal committee based on the size of your organization and the scope
of the change being approved.
 Maintenance window: After a change has been approved, the next question
to address is when it is to take place. Authorized downtime should be used to
make changes to production environments.
 Notification of change: Those affected by a change should be notified after
the change has taken place. The notification should not be just of the change
but should include any and all impact to them and identify who they can turn
to with questions.
 Documentation: One of the last steps is always to document what has been
done. This should include documentation on network configurations,
additions to the network, and physical location changes.
These represent just a few of the procedures that administrators must follow on

the job. It is crucial that all these procedures are well documented, accessible,
reviewed, and updated as needed to be effective.
Configuration Documentation
One other critical form of documentation is configuration documentation. Many
administrators believe they could never forget the configuration of a router,
server, or switch, but it often happens. Although it is often a thankless, time-
consuming task, documenting the network hardware and software configurations
is critical for continued network functionality.
Note
Organizing and completing the initial set of network documentation is a huge
task, but it is just the beginning. Administrators must constantly update all
documentation to keep it from becoming obsolete. Documentation is perhaps
one of the less-glamorous aspects of the administrator’s role, but it is one of
the most important.
Regulations
The terms regulation and policy are often used interchangeably; however, there
is a difference. As mentioned, policies are written by an organization for its
employees. Regulations are actual legal restrictions with legal consequences.
These regulations are set not by the organizations but by applicable laws in the
area. Improper use of networks and the Internet can certainly lead to legal
violations and consequences. The following is an example of network regulation
from an online company:
“Transmission, distribution, uploading, posting or storage of any material in
violation of any applicable law or regulation is prohibited. This includes, without
limitation, material protected by copyright, trademark, trade secret or other
intellectual property right used without proper authorization, material kept in
violation of state laws or industry regulations such as social security numbers or
credit card numbers, and material that is obscene, defamatory, libelous, unlawful,
harassing, abusive, threatening, harmful, vulgar, constitutes an illegal threat,
violates export control laws, hate propaganda, fraudulent material or fraudulent
activity, invasive of privacy or publicity rights, profane, indecent or otherwise
objectionable material of any kind or nature. You may not transmit, distribute, or
store material that contains a virus, ‘Trojan Horse,’ adware or spyware, corrupted

data, or any software or information to promote or utilize software or any of
Network Solutions services to deliver unsolicited email. You further agree not to
transmit any material that encourages conduct that could constitute a criminal
offense, gives rise to civil liability or otherwise violates any applicable local,
state, national or international law or regulation.”
ExamAlert
For the exam and for real-life networking, remember that regulations
often are enforceable by law.
Labeling
One of the biggest problems with documentation is in the time that it takes to do
it. To shorten this time, it is human nature to take shortcuts and use code or
shorthand when labeling devices, maps, reports, and the like. Although this can
save time initially, it can render the labels useless if a person other than the one
who created the labels looks at them or if a long period of time has passed since
they were created and the author cannot remember what the label now means.
To prevent this dilemma, it is highly recommended that standard labeling rules
be created by each organization and enforced at all levels.
Cram Quiz
You have been given a physical wiring schematic that shows the following:
Description
Installation Notes
Category 5E 350
MHz plenum-rated
cable
Cable runs 50 feet from the MDF to the IDF.
Cable placed through the ceiling and through a
mechanical room.
Cable was installed 01/15/2018, upgrading a nonplenum
cable.
Category 5E 350
MHz nonplenum
cable
Horizontal cable runs 45 feet to 55 feet from the IDF to
a wall jack.
Cable 6 replaced Category 5e cable February 2018.
Section of cable run through ceiling and over

fluorescent lights.
Category 6a UTP
cable
Patch cable connecting printer runs 15 feet due to
printer placement.
8.3-micron core/125-
micron
Connecting fiber cable runs 2 kilometers cladding
single mode between the primary and secondary
buildings.
1. Given this information, what cable recommendation might you make, if
any?
 A. Nonplenum cable should be used between the IDF and MDF.
 B. The horizontal cable run should use plenum cable.
 C. The patch cable connecting the printer should be shorter.
 D. Leave the network cabling as is.
2. You have been called in to inspect a network configuration. You are given
only one network diagram, shown in the following figure. Using the
diagram, what recommendation might you make?

 A. Cable 1 does not need to be plenum rated.
 B. Cable 2 should be STP cable.
 C. Cable 3 should be STP cable.
 D. None. The network looks good.
3. Hollis is complaining that the network cabling in her office is outdated and
should be changed. What should she do to have the cabling evaluated and
possibly changed?
 A. Tell her supervisor that IT needs to get on the ball.
 B. Tell your supervisor that IT needs to get on the ball.
 C. Purchase new cabling at the local electronics store.
 D. Complete a change request.

Cram Quiz Answers
1. B. In this scenario, a section of horizontal cable runs through the ceiling and
over fluorescent lights. This cable run might be a problem because such
devices can cause EMI. Alternatively, plenum cable is used in this scenario.
STP may have worked as well.
2. B. In this diagram, Cable 1 is plenum rated and should be fine. Cable 3 is
patch cable and does not need to be STP rated. Cable 2, however, goes
through walls and ceilings. Therefore, it would be recommended to have a
better grade of cable than regular UTP. STP provides greater resistance to
EMI.
3. D. An official change request should be logged and tracked to verify what is
to be done and what has been done. Within the realm of the change request
should be the configuration procedures to be used, the rollback process that
is in place, potential impact identified, and a list of those that need to be
notified.
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery
 Compare and contrast business continuity and disaster recovery
concepts.
 Identify policies and best practices.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What is the difference between an incremental backup and a differential
backup?
2. What are hot, warm, and cold sites used for?
3. True or false: Acceptable use policies define what controls are required
to implement and maintain the security of systems, users, and networks.

Answers
1. With incremental backups, all data that has changed since the last full or
incremental backup is backed up. The restore procedure requires several
backup iterations: the media used in the latest full backup and all media
used for incremental backups since the last full backup. An incremental
backup uses the archive bit and clears it after a file is saved to disk. With
a differential backup, all data changed since the last full backup is backed
up. The restore procedure requires the latest full backup media and the
latest differential backup media. A differential backup uses the archive bit
to determine which files must be backed up but does not clear it.
2. Hot, warm, and cold sites are designed to provide alternative locations
for network operations if a disaster occurs.
3. False. Security policies define what controls are required to implement
and maintain the security of systems, users, and networks. Acceptable use
policies (AUPs) describe how the employees in an organization can use
company systems and resources: both software and hardware.
Even the most fault-tolerant networks can fail, which is an unfortunate fact.
When those costly and carefully implemented fault-tolerance strategies fail, you
are left with disaster recovery.
Disaster recovery can take many forms. In addition to disasters such as fire,
flood, and theft, many other potential business disruptions can fall under the
banner of disaster recovery. For example, the failure of the electrical supply to
your city block might interrupt the business functions. Such an event, although
not a disaster per se, might invoke the disaster recovery methods.
The cornerstone of every disaster recovery strategy is the preservation and
recoverability of data. When talking about preservation and recoverability, you
must talk about backups. Implementing a regular backup schedule can save you
a lot of grief when fault tolerance fails or when you need to recover a file that
has been accidentally deleted. When it’s time to design a backup schedule, you
can use three key types of backups: full, differential, and incremental.
Backups
Full Backups

The preferred method of backup is the full backup method, which copies all files
and directories from the hard disk to the backup media. There are a few reasons
why doing a full backup is not always possible. First among them is likely the
time involved in performing a full backup.
ExamAlert
During a recovery operation, a full backup is the fastest way to restore
data of all the methods discussed here, because only one set of media is
required for a full restore.
Depending on the amount of data to be backed up, however, full backups can
take an extremely long time when you are backing up and can use extensive
system resources. Depending on the configuration of the backup hardware, this
can considerably slow down the network. In addition, some environments have
more data than can fit on a single medium. This makes doing a full backup
awkward because someone might need to be there to change the media.
The main advantage of full backups is that a single set of media holds all the
data you need to restore. If a failure occurs, that single set of media should be all
that is needed to get all data and system information back. The upshot of all this
is that any disruption to the network is greatly reduced.
Unfortunately, its strength can also be its weakness. A single set of media
holding an organization’s data can be a security risk. If the media were to fall
into the wrong hands, all the data could be restored on another computer. Using
passwords on backups and using a secure offsite and onsite location can
minimize the security risk.
Differential Backups
Companies that don’t have enough time to complete a full backup daily can use
the differential backup. Differential backups are faster than a full backup because
they back up only the data that has changed since the last full backup. This
means that if you do a full backup on a Saturday and a differential backup on the
following Wednesday, only the data that has changed since Saturday is backed
up. Restoring the differential backup requires the last full backup and the latest
differential backup.
Differential backups know what files have changed since the last full backup

because they use a setting called the archive bit. The archive bit flags files that
have changed or have been created and identifies them as ones that need to be
backed up. Full backups do not concern themselves with the archive bit because
all files are backed up, regardless of date. A full backup, however, does clear the
archive bit after data has been backed up to avoid future confusion. Differential
backups notice the archive bit and use it to determine which files have changed.
The differential backup does not reset the archive bit information.
Incremental Backups
Some companies have a finite amount of time they can allocate to backup
procedures. Such organizations are likely to use incremental backups in their
backup strategy. Incremental backups save only the files that have changed since
the last full or incremental backup. Like differential backups, incremental
backups use the archive bit to determine which files have changed since the last
full or incremental backup. Unlike differentials, however, incremental backups
clear the archive bit, so files that have not changed are not backed up.
ExamAlert
Both full and incremental backups clear the archive bit after files have
been backed up.
The faster backup time of incremental backups comes at a price—the amount of
time required to restore. Recovering from a failure with incremental backups
requires numerous sets of media—all the incremental backup media sets and the
one for the most recent full backup. For example, if you have a full backup from
Sunday and an incremental for Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, you need four
sets of media to restore the data. Each set in the rotation is an additional step in
the restore process and an additional failure point. One damaged incremental
media set means that you cannot restore the data. Table 9.2 summarizes the
various backup strategies.
TABLE 9.2 Backup Strategies
Backup
Type
Advantage
Disadvantage
Data Backed
Up
Archive Bit
Full
Backs up all
data on a
Depending on
the amount of
All files and
directories are
Does not use
the archive bit,

single media
set. Restoring
data requires
the fewest
media sets.
data, full
backups can
take a long
time.
backed up.
but resets it
after data has
been backed up.
Differential
Faster
backups than
a full backup.
The restore
process takes
longer than
just a full
backup.
Uses more
media sets
than a full
backup.
All files and
directories
that have
changed since
the last full
backup.
Uses the
archive bit to
determine the
files that have
changed, but
does not reset
the archive bit.
Incremental
Faster backup
times
Requires
multiple disks;
restoring data
takes more
time than the
other backup
methods.
The files and
directories
that have
changed since
the last full or
incremental
backup.
Uses the
archive bit to
determine the
files that have
changed, and
resets the
archive bit.
ExamAlert
Review Table 9.2 before taking the Network+ exam.
Snapshots
In addition to the three types of backups previously discussed, there are also
snapshots. Whereas a backup can take a long time to complete, the advantage of
a snapshot—an image of the state of a system at a particular point in time—is
that it is an instantaneous copy of the system. This is often accomplished by
splitting a mirrored set of disks or by creating a copy of a disk block when it is
written in order to preserve the original and keep it available.
Snapshots are popular with virtual machine implementations. You can take as
many snapshots as you want (provided you have enough storage space) in order

to be able to revert a machine to a “saved” state. Snapshots contain a copy of the
virtual machine settings (hardware configuration), information on all virtual
disks attached, and the memory state of the machine at the time of the snapshot.
This makes the snapshots additionally useful for virtual machine cloning,
allowing the machine to be copied once—or multiple times—for testing.
ExamAlert
Think of a snapshot as a photograph, which is where the name came
from, of a moment in time of any system.
Backup Best Practices
Many details go into making a backup strategy a success. The following are
issues to consider as part of your backup plan:
 Offsite storage: Consider storing backup media sets offsite so that if a
disaster occurs in a building, a current set of media is available offsite. The
offsite media should be as current as any onsite and should be secure.
 Label media: The goal is to restore the data as quickly as possible. Trying
to find the media you need can prove difficult if it is not marked.
Furthermore, this can prevent you from recording over something you need
to keep.
 Verify backups: Never assume that the backup was successful. Seasoned
administrators know that checking backup logs and performing periodic test
restores are part of the backup process.
 Cleaning: You need to occasionally clean the backup drive. If the inside
gets dirty, backups can fail.
ExamAlert
A backup strategy must include offsite storage to account for theft, fire,
flood, or other disasters.
Using Uninterruptible Power Supplies
No discussion of fault tolerance can be complete without a look at power-related

issues and the mechanisms used to combat them. When you design a fault-
tolerant system, your planning should definitely include uninterruptible power
supplies (UPSs). A UPS serves many functions and is a major part of server
consideration and implementation.
On a basic level, a UPS, also known as a battery backup, is a box that holds a
battery and built-in charging circuit. During times of good power, the battery is
recharged; when the UPS is needed, it’s ready to provide power to the server.
Most often, the UPS is required to provide enough power to give the
administrator time to shut down the server in an orderly fashion, preventing any
potential data loss from a dirty shutdown.
Why Use a UPS?
Organizations of all shapes and sizes need UPSs as part of their fault tolerance
strategies. A UPS is as important as any other fault-tolerance measure. Three key
reasons make a UPS necessary:
 Data availability: The goal of any fault-tolerance measure is data
availability. A UPS ensures access to the server if a power failure occurs—or
at least as long as it takes to save a file.
 Protection from data loss: Fluctuations in power or a sudden power-down
can damage the data on the server system. In addition, many servers take full
advantage of caching, and a sudden loss of power could cause the loss of all
information held in cache.
 Protection from hardware damage: Constant power fluctuations or sudden
power-downs can damage hardware components within a computer.
Damaged hardware can lead to reduced data availability while the hardware
is repaired.
Power Threats
In addition to keeping a server functioning long enough to safely shut it down, a
UPS safeguards a server from inconsistent power. This inconsistent power can
take many forms. A UPS protects a system from the following power-related
threats:
 Blackout: A total failure of the power supplied to the server.
 Spike: A short (usually less than 1 second) but intense increase in voltage.
Spikes can do irreparable damage to any kind of equipment, especially
computers.

 Surge: Compared to a spike, a surge is a considerably longer (sometimes
many seconds) but usually less intense increase in power. Surges can also
damage your computer equipment.
 Sag: A short-term voltage drop (the opposite of a spike). This type of
voltage drop can cause a server to reboot.
 Brownout: A drop in voltage that usually lasts more than a few minutes.
Many of these power-related threats can occur without your knowledge; if you
don’t have a UPS, you cannot prepare for them. For the cost, it is worth buying a
UPS, if for no other reason than to sleep better at night.
Alternatives to UPS
Power management is not limited only to the use of UPSs. In addition, to these
devices, you should employ power generators to be able to keep your systems
up and running when the electrical provider is down for an extended period of
time. Redundant circuits and dual power supplies should also be used for key
equipment.
Hot, Warm, and Cold Sites
A disaster recovery plan might include the provision for a recovery site that can
be quickly brought into play. These sites fall into three categories: hot, warm,
and cold. The need for each of these types of sites depends largely on the
business you are in and the funds available. Disaster recovery sites represent the
ultimate in precautions for organizations that need them. As a result, they do not
come cheaply.
The basic concept of a disaster recovery site is that it can provide a base from
which the company can be operated during a disaster. The disaster recovery site
normally is not intended to provide a desk for every employee. It’s intended
more as a means to allow key personnel to continue the core business functions.
In general, a cold recovery site is a site that can be up and operational in a
relatively short amount of time, such as a day or two. Provision of services, such
as telephone lines and power, is taken care of, and the basic office furniture
might be in place. But there is unlikely to be any computer equipment, even
though the building might have a network infrastructure and a room ready to act
as a server room. In most cases, cold sites provide the physical location and
basic services.

Cold sites are useful if you have some forewarning of a potential problem.
Generally, cold sites are used by organizations that can weather the storm for a
day or two before they get back up and running. If you are the regional office of
a major company, it might be possible to have one of the other divisions take
care of business until you are ready to go. But if you are the only office in the
company, you might need something a little hotter.
For organizations with the dollars and the desire, hot recovery sites represent the
ultimate in fault-tolerance strategies. Like cold recovery sites, hot sites are
designed to provide only enough facilities to continue the core business function,
but hot recovery sites are set up to be ready to go at a moment’s notice.
A hot recovery site includes phone systems with connected phone lines. Data
networks also are in place, with any necessary routers and switches plugged in
and turned on. Desks have installed and waiting desktop PCs, and server areas
are replete with the necessary hardware to support business-critical functions. In
other words, within a few hours, the hot site can become a fully functioning
element of an organization.
The issue that confronts potential hot-recovery site users is that of cost. Office
space is expensive in the best of times, but having space sitting idle 99.9 percent
of the time can seem like a tremendously poor use of money. A popular strategy
to get around this problem is to use space provided in a disaster recovery facility,
which is basically a building, maintained by a third-party company, in which
various businesses rent space. Space is usually apportioned according to how
much each company pays.
Sitting between the hot and cold recovery sites is the warm site. A warm site
typically has computers but is not configured ready to go. This means that data
might need to be upgraded or other manual interventions might need to be
performed before the network is again operational. The time it takes to get a
warm site operational lands right in the middle of the other two options, as does
the cost.
ExamAlert
A hot site mirrors the organization’s production network and can assume
network operations at a moment’s notice. Warm sites have the equipment
needed to bring the network to an operational state but require
configuration and potential database updates. A cold site has the space

available with basic services but typically requires equipment delivery.
High Availability and Recovery Concepts
When an incident occurs, it is too late to consider policies and procedures then;
this must be done well ahead of time. Business continuity should always be of
the utmost concern. Business continuity is primarily concerned with the
processes, policies, and methods that an organization follows to minimize the
impact of a system failure, network failure, or the failure of any key component
needed for operation. Business continuity planning (BCP) is the process of
implementing policies, controls, and procedures to counteract the effects of
losses, outages, or failures of critical business processes. BCP is primarily a
management tool that ensures that critical business functions (CBFs) can be
performed when normal business operations are disrupted.
Critical business functions refer to those processes or systems that must be made
operational immediately when an outage occurs. The business can’t function
without them, and many are information intensive and require access to both
technology and data. When you evaluate your business’s sustainability, realize
that disasters do indeed happen. If possible, build infrastructures that don’t have
a single point of failure (SPOF) or connection. If you’re the administrator for a
small company, it is not uncommon for the SPOF to be a router/gateway, but you
must identify all critical nodes and critical assets. The best way to remove an
SPOF from your environment is to add in redundancy.
Know that every piece of equipment can be rated in terms of mean time between
failures (MTBF) and mean time to recovery (MTTR). The MTBF is the
measurement of the anticipated or predicted incidence of failure of a system or
component between inherent failures, whereas the MTTR is the measurement of
how long it takes to repair a system or component after a failure occurs.
Some technologies that can help with availability are the following:
 Fault tolerance is the capability to withstand a fault (failure) without losing
data. This can be accomplished through the use of RAID, backups, and
similar technologies. Popular fault-tolerant RAID implementations include
RAID 1, RAID 5, and RAID 10.
 Load balancing is a technique in which the workload is distributed among
several servers. This feature can take networks to the next level; it increases
network performance, reliability, and availability. A load balancer can be

either a hardware device or software specially configured to balance the load.
ExamAlert
Remember that load balancing increases redundancy and therefore data
availability. Also, load balancing increases performance by distributing
the workload.
 NIC teaming is the process of combining multiple network cards for
performance and redundancy (fault tolerance) reasons. This can also be
called bonding, balancing, or aggregation.
 Port aggregation is the combining of multiple ports on a switch; it can be
done one of three ways: auto, desirable, or on.
 Clustering is a method of balancing loads and providing fault tolerance.
Use vulnerability scanning and penetration testing to find the weaknesses in
your systems before others do. Make sure that end user awareness and training
is a priority when it comes to identifying problems and that you stress adherence
to standards and policies. Those policies should include the following:
 Standard business documents: Many of these have been discussed in
previous chapters, but they include service-level agreements (SLAs),
memorandums of understanding (MOUs), master license agreements
(MLAs), and statements of work (SOWs). An SLA, in particular, is an
agreement between you or your company and a service provider, typically a
technical support provider. SLAs are also usually part of network availability
and other agreements. They stipulate the performance you can expect or
demand by outlining the expectations a vendor has agreed to meet. They
define what is possible to deliver and provide the contract to make sure what
is delivered is what was promised.
 Acceptable use policy: Acceptable use policies (AUPs) describe how the
employees in an organization can use company systems and resources: both
software and hardware. This policy should also outline the consequences for
misuse. In addition, the policy (also known as a use policy) should address
installation of personal software on company computers and the use of
personal hardware, such as USB devices.
 Network policies: Similar to AUPs, these describe acceptable uses for the

network resources.
 Security policies: Security policies define what controls are required to
implement and maintain the security of systems, users, and networks. This
policy should be used as a guide in system implementations and evaluations.
One of particular note is a consent to monitoring policy in which employees
and other network users acknowledge that they know they’re being
monitored and consent to it.
 BYOD policies: Bring your own device (BYOD) policies define what
personally owned mobile devices (laptops, tablets, and smartphones)
employees are allowed to bring to their workplace and use. Mobile device
management (MDM) and mobile application management (MAM) systems
can be used to help enterprises manage and secure the use of those mobile
devices in the workplace.
ExamAlert
As you study for the exam, three topics to pay attention to are adherence
to standards and policies, vulnerability scanning, and penetration testing.
All these policies are important, but those that relate to first responders and deal
with data breaches are of elevated importance.
Cram Quiz
1. Which two types of backup methods clear the archive bit after the backup
has been completed? (Choose two.)
 A. Full
 B. Differential
 C. Incremental
 D. GFS
2. You come to work on Thursday morning to find that the server has failed
and you need to restore the data from backup. You finished a full backup on
Sunday and incremental backups on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. How
many media sets are required to restore the backup?

 A. Four
 B. Two
 C. Three
 D. Five
3. Which of the following recovery sites might require the delivery of
computer equipment and an update of all network data?
 A. Cold site
 B. Warm site
 C. Hot site
 D. None of the above
4. As part of your network administrative responsibilities, you have completed
your monthly backups. As part of backup best practices, where should the
media be stored?
 A. In a secure location in the server room
 B. In a secure location somewhere in the building
 C. In an offsite location
 D. In a secure offsite location
5. As network administrator, you have been tasked with designing a disaster
recovery plan for your network. Which of the following might you include in
a disaster recovery plan?
 A. RAID 5
 B. Offsite media storage
 C. Mirrored hard disks
 D. UPS
6. Which type of recovery site mirrors the organization’s production network
and can assume network operations on a moment’s notice?
 A. Warm site
 B. Hot site

 C. Cold site
 D. Mirrored site
7. Which of the following are used to find weaknesses in your systems before
others do? (Choose two.)
 A. Data breachers
 B. Vulnerability scanners
 C. Penetration testers
 D. First responders
8. Which of the following is a type of policy in which employees and other
network users give consent to be monitored?
 A. Consent to monitoring
 B. Acceptable use
 C. Memorandum of Understanding
 D. Service-Level Agreement
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A, C. The archive bit is reset after a full backup and an incremental backup.
Answer B is incorrect because the differential backup does not reset the
archive bit. Answer D is wrong because GFS is a rotation strategy, not a
backup method.
2. A. Incremental backups save all files and directories that have changed since
the last full or incremental backup. To restore, you need the latest full
backup and all incremental media sets. In this case, you need four sets of
media to complete the restore process.
3. A. A cold site provides an alternative location but typically not much more.
A cold site often requires the delivery of computer equipment and other
services. A hot site has all network equipment ready to go if a massive
failure occurs. A warm site has most equipment ready but still needs days or
weeks to have the network up and running.
4. D. Although not always done, it is a best practice to store backups in a
secure offsite location in case of fire or theft. Answer A is incorrect because

if the server room is damaged by fire or flood, the backups and the data on
the server can be compromised by the same disaster. Similarly, answer B is
incorrect because storing the backups onsite does not eliminate the threat of
a single disaster destroying the data on the server and backups. Answer C is
incorrect because of security reasons. The offsite media sets must be
secured.
5. B. Offsite storage is part of a disaster recovery plan. The other answers are
considered fault-tolerance measures because they are implemented to ensure
data availability.
6. B. A hot site mirrors the organization’s production network and can assume
network operations at a moment’s notice. Answer A is incorrect because
warm sites have the equipment needed to bring the network to an operational
state but require configuration and potential database updates. Answer C is
incorrect because cold sites have the space available with basic services but
typically require equipment delivery. Answer D is incorrect because a
mirrored site is not a valid option.
7. B, C. Use vulnerability scanning and penetration testing to find the
weaknesses in your systems before others do. Answer A is incorrect because
data breaches are invalid. Answer D is incorrect because first responders are
typically those who are first on the scene after an incident.
8. A. A consent to monitoring policy is one in which employees and other
network users acknowledge that they know they’re being monitored and
consent to it. Answer B is incorrect because acceptable use policies describe
how the employees in an organization can use company systems and
resources. Answers C and D are incorrect because a Memorandum of
Understanding and Service-Level Agreements are standard business
documents.
Monitoring Network Performance
 Explain common scanning, monitoring and patching processes and
summarize their expected outputs.
CramSaver

If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What can be used to capture network data?
2. True or false: Port scanners detect open and often unsecured ports.
3. True or false: Interface monitoring tools can be used to create “heat
maps” showing the quantity and quality of wireless network coverage in
areas.
4. True or false: Always test updates on a lab machine before rolling out on
production machines.
5. What is it known as when you roll a system back to a previous version
of a driver or firmware?
Answers
1. Packet sniffers can be used by both administrators and hackers to capture
network data.
2. True. Port scanners detect open and often unsecured ports.
3. False. Wireless survey tools can be used to create heat maps showing the
quantity and quality of wireless network coverage in areas.
4. True. Always test updates on a lab machine before rolling out on
production machines.
5. This is known as downgrading and is often necessary when dealing with
legacy systems and implementations.
When networks were smaller and few stretched beyond the confines of a single
location, network management was a simple task. In today’s complex, multisite,
hybrid networks, however, the task of maintaining and monitoring network
devices and servers has become a complicated but essential part of the network
administrator’s role. Nowadays, the role of network administrator often stretches
beyond the physical boundary of the server room and reaches every node and
component on the network. Whether an organization has 10 computers on a
single segment or a multisite network with several thousand devices attached,
the network administrator must monitor all network devices, protocols, and

usage—preferably from a central location.
Given the sheer number and diversity of possible devices, software, and systems
on any network, it is clear why network management is such a significant
consideration. Despite that a robust network management strategy can improve
administrator productivity and reduce downtime, many companies choose to
neglect network management because of the time involved in setting up the
system or because of the associated costs. If these companies understood the
potential savings, they would realize that neglecting network management
provides false economies.
Network management and network monitoring are essentially methods to
control, configure, and monitor devices on a network. Imagine a scenario in
which you are a network administrator working out of your main office in
Spokane, Washington, and you have satellite offices in New York, Dallas,
Vancouver, and London. Network management allows you to access systems in
the remote locations or have the systems notify you when something goes awry.
In essence, network management is about seeing beyond your current boundaries
and acting on what you see.
Network management is not one thing. Rather, it is a collection of tools, systems,
and protocols that, when used together, enables you to perform tasks such as
reconfiguring a network card in the next room or installing an application in the
next state.
Common Reasons to Monitor Networks
The capabilities demanded from network management vary somewhat among
organizations, but essentially, several key types of information and functionality
are required, such as fault detection and performance monitoring. Some of the
types of information and functions that network management tools can provide
include the following:
 Utilization: Once upon a time, it was not uncommon for a network to have
to limp by with scarce resources. Administrators would constantly have to
trim logs and archive files to keep enough storage space available to service
print jobs. Those days are gone, and any such hint of those conditions would
be unacceptable today. To keep this from happening, one of the keys is to
manage utilization and stay on top of problems before they escalate. Five
areas of utilization to monitor are as follows:
 Bandwidth/throughput: There must be enough bandwidth to serve all

users, and you need to be alert for bandwidth hogs. You want to look for
top talkers (those that transmit the most) and top listeners (those that
receive the most) and figure out why they are so popular.
 Storage space: Free space needs to be available for all users, and quotas
may need to be implemented.
 Network device CPU: Just as a local machine will slow when the
processor is maxed out, so will the network.
 Network device memory: It is next to impossible to have too much
memory. Balance loads to optimize the resources you have to work with.
 Wireless channel utilization: Akin to bandwidth utilization is channel
utilization in the wireless realm. As a general rule, a wireless network
starts experiencing performance problems when channel utilization reaches
50% of the channel capacity.
 Fault detection: One of the most vital aspects of network management is
knowing if anything is not working or is not working correctly. Network
management tools can detect and report on a variety of faults on the network.
Given the number of possible devices that constitute a typical network,
determining faults without these tools could be an impossible task. In
addition, network management tools might not only detect the faulty device,
but also shut it down. This means that if a network card is malfunctioning,
you can remotely disable it. When a network spans a large area, fault
detection becomes even more invaluable because it enables you to be alerted
to network faults and to manage them, thereby reducing downtime.
ExamAlert
Most of this discussion involves your being alerted to some condition.
Those alerts can generally be sent to you through email or SMS to any
mobile device.
 Performance monitoring: Another feature of network management is the
ability to monitor network performance. Performance monitoring is an
essential consideration that gives you some crucial information. Specifically,
performance monitoring can provide network usage statistics and user usage
trends. This type of information is essential when you plan network capacity
and growth. Monitoring performance also helps you determine whether there

are any performance-related concerns, such as whether the network can
adequately support the current user base.
 Security monitoring: Good server administrators have a touch of paranoia
built into their personality. A network management system enables you to
monitor who is on the network, what they are doing, and how long they have
been doing it. More important, in an environment in which corporate
networks are increasingly exposed to outside sources, the ability to identify
and react to potential security threats is a priority. Reading log files to learn
of an attack is a poor second to knowing that an attack is in progress and
being able to react accordingly. Security information and event management
(SIEM) products provide notifications and real-time analysis of security
alerts and can help you head off problems quickly.
 Link status: You should regularly monitor link status to make sure that
connections are up and functioning. Breaks should be found and identified as
quickly as possible to repair them or find workarounds. A number of link
status monitors exist for the purpose of monitoring connectivity, and many
can reroute (per a configured script file) when a down condition occurs.
 Interface monitoring: Just as you want to monitor for a link going down,
you also need to know when there are problems with an interface. Particular
problems to watch for include errors, utilization problems (unusually high,
for example), discards, packet drops, resets, and problems with speed/duplex.
An interface monitoring tool is invaluable for troubleshooting problems here.
 Maintenance and configuration: Want to reconfigure or shut down the
server located in Australia? Reconfigure a local router? Change the settings
on a client system? Remote management and configuration are key parts of
the network management strategy, enabling you to centrally manage huge
multisite locations.
 Environmental monitoring: It is important to monitor the server room, and
other key equipment, for temperature and humidity conditions. Humidity
control prevents the buildup of static electricity and when the level drops
much below 50%, electronic components become vulnerable to damage from
electrostatic shock. Environmental monitoring tools can alert you to any
dangers that arise here.
ExamAlert

For the exam, recognize the role humidity plays in controlling
electrostatic shock.
 Power monitoring: A consistent flow of reliable energy is needed to keep a
network up and running. A wide array of power monitoring tools are
available to help identify and log problems that you can then begin to
resolve.
 Wireless monitoring: As more networks go wireless, you need to pay
special attention to issues associated with them. Wireless survey tools can be
used to create heat maps showing the quantity and quality of wireless
network coverage in areas. They can also allow you to see access points
(including rogues) and security settings. These can be used to help you
design and deploy an efficient network, and they can also be used (by you or
others) to find weaknesses in your existing network (often marketed for this
purpose as wireless analyzers).
Many tools are available to help monitor the network and ensure that it is
properly functioning. Some tools, such as a packet sniffer, can be used to
monitor traffic by administrators and those who want to obtain data that does not
belong to them. The following sections look at several monitoring tools.
SNMP Monitors
An SNMP management system is a computer running a special piece of software
called a network management system (NMS). These software applications can be
free, or they can cost thousands of dollars. The difference between the free
applications and those that cost a great deal of money normally boils down to
functionality and support. All NMS applications, regardless of cost, offer the
same basic functionality. Today, most NMS applications use graphical maps of
the network to locate a device and then query it. The queries are built in to the
application and are triggered by pointing and clicking. You can actually issue
SNMP requests from a command-line utility, but with so many tools available,
this is unnecessary.
Note
Some people call SNMP managers or NMSs trap managers. This reference is
misleading, however, because an NMS can do more than just accept trap

messages from agents.
Using SNMP and an NMS, you can monitor all the devices on a network,
including switches, hubs, routers, servers, and printers, as well as any device that
supports SNMP, from a single location. Using SNMP, you can see the amount of
free disk space on a server in Jakarta or reset the interface on a router in Helsinki
—all from the comfort of your desk in San Jose. Such power, though, brings
with it some considerations. For example, because an NMS enables you to
reconfigure network devices, or at least get information from them, it is common
practice to implement an NMS on a secure workstation platform, such as a Linux
or Windows server, and to place the NMS PC in a secure location.
Management Information Bases (MIB)
Although the SNMP trap system might be the most commonly used aspect of
SNMP, manager-to-agent communication is not a one-way street. In addition to
reading information from a device using the SNMP commands Get and Get
Next, SNMP managers can issue the Set command. If you have a large
sequence of Get Next commands to perform, you can use the Walk command
to automatically move through them. The purpose of this command is to save a
manager’s time: you issue one command on the root node of a subtree and the
command “walks” through, getting the value of every node in the subtree.
To demonstrate how SNMP commands work, imagine that you and a friend each
have a list on which the following four words are written: four, book, sky, and
table. If you, as the manager, ask your friend for the first value, she, acting as the
agent, can reply “four.” This is analogous to an SNMP Get command. Now, if
you ask for the next value, she would reply “book.” This is analogous to an
SNMP Get Next command. If you then say “set green,” and your friend
changes the word book to green, you have performed the equivalent of an SNMP
Set command. Sound simplistic? Well, if you can imagine expanding the list to
include 100 values, you can see how you could navigate and set any parameter
in the list, using just those commands. The key, though, is to make sure that you
and your friend have the same list—which is where Management Information
Bases (MIBs) come in.
SNMP uses databases of information called MIBs to define what parameters are
accessible, which of the parameters are read-only, and which can be set. MIBs
are available for thousands of devices and services, covering every imaginable
need.

To ensure that SNMP systems offer cross-platform compatibility, MIB creation
is controlled by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). An
organization that wants to create MIBs can apply to the ISO. The ISO then
assigns the organization an ID under which it can create MIBs as it sees fit. The
assignment of numbers is structured within a conceptual model called the
hierarchical name tree.
Packet Sniffers
Packet sniffers are commonly used on networks and are also referred to as
packet/network analyzers. They are either a hardware device or software that
basically eavesdrops on transmissions traveling throughout the network, and can
be helpful in performing packet flow monitoring. The packet sniffer quietly
captures data and saves it to be reviewed later. Packet sniffers can also be used
on the Internet to capture data traveling between computers. Internet packets
often have long distances to travel, going through various servers, routers, and
gateways. Anywhere along this path, packet sniffers can quietly sit and collect
data. Given the capability of packet sniffers to sit and silently collect data
packets, it is easy to see how they could be exploited.
You should use two key defenses against packet sniffers to protect your network:
 Use a switched network, which most today are. In a switched network, data
is sent from one computer system and is directed from the switch only to
intended targeted destinations. In an older network using traditional hubs, the
hub does not switch the traffic to isolated users but to all users connected to
the hub’s ports. This shotgun approach to network transmission makes it
easier to place a packet sniffer on the network to obtain data.
 Ensure that all sensitive data is encrypted as it travels. Ordinarily, encryption
is used when data is sent over a public network such as the Internet, but it
may also be necessary to encrypt sensitive data on a LAN. Encryption can be
implemented in a number of ways. For example, connections to web servers
can be protected using the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol and HTTPS.
Communications to mail servers can also be encrypted using SSL. For public
networks, the IPsec protocol can provide end-to-end encryption services.
Note
Chapter 10, “Network Security,” provides more information about encryption
protocols.

Throughput Testing
In the networking world, throughput refers to the rate of data delivery over a
communication channel. In this case, throughput testers test the rate of data
delivery over a network. Throughput is measured in bits per second (bps).
Testing throughput is important for administrators to make them aware of
exactly what the network is doing. With throughput testing, you can tell whether
a high-speed network is functioning close to its expected throughput.
A throughput tester is designed to quickly gather information about network
functionality—specifically, the average overall network throughput. Many
software-based throughput testers are available online—some for free and some
for a fee. Figure 9.5 shows a software-based throughput tester.
FIGURE 9.5 A software throughput tester
As you can see, throughput testers do not need to be complicated to be effective.
A throughput tester tells you how long it takes to send data to a destination point
and receive an acknowledgment that the data was received. To use the tester,
enter the beginning point and then the destination point. The tester sends a
predetermined number of data packets to the destination and then reports on the

throughput level. The results typically display in kilobits per second (Kbps),
megabits per second (Mbps), or gigabits per second (Gbps). Table 9.3 shows the
various data rate units.
TABLE 9.3 Data Rate Units
Data Transfer
Abbreviation
Rate
Kilobits per
second
Kbps or
Kbit/s
1,000 bits per second
Megabits per
second
Mbps or
Mbit/s
1,000,000 bits per second
Gigabits per
second
Gbps or
Gbit/s
1,000,000,000 bits per second
Kilobytes per
second
KBps
1,000 bytes per second, or 8 kilobits per
second
Megabytes per
second
MBps
1,000,000 bytes per second, or 8 megabits
per second
Gigabytes per
second
GBps
1,000,000,000 bytes per second, or 8
gigabits per second
Administrators can periodically conduct throughput tests and keep them on file
to create a picture of network performance. If you suspect a problem with the
network functioning, you can run a test to compare with past performance to see
exactly what is happening.
One thing worth mentioning is the difference between throughput and
bandwidth. These terms are often used interchangeably, but they have different
meanings. When talking about measuring throughput, you measure the amount
of data flow under real-world conditions—measuring with 
possible
electromagnetic interference (EMI) influences, heavy traffic loads, improper
wiring, and even network collisions. Take all this into account, take a
measurement, and you have the network throughput. Bandwidth, in contrast,
refers to the maximum amount of information that can be sent through a
particular medium under ideal conditions.
Note

Be sure that you know the difference between throughput and bandwidth.
Port Scanners
A port scanner is an application written to probe a host (usually a server) for
open ports. This can be done by an administrator for legitimate purposes—to
verify security policies on the network—or by attackers to find vulnerabilities to
exploit. Port scanners are discussed in more detail in Chapter 11, “Network
Troubleshooting.”
Vulnerability Scanners
In a vulnerability test, you run a software program that contains a database of
known vulnerabilities against your system to identify weaknesses. It is highly
recommended that you obtain such a vulnerability scanner and run it on your
network to check for any known security holes. It is always preferable for you to
find them on your own network before someone outside the organization does by
running such a tool against you.
The vulnerability scanner may be a port scanner (such as Nmap:
https://nmap.org/), a network enumerator, a web application, or even a worm, but
in all cases it runs tests on its target against a gamut of known vulnerabilities.
Although Nessus and Retina are two of the better-known vulnerability scanners,
SAINT and OpenVAS (which was originally based on Nessus) are also widely
used.
ExamAlert
For the exam, CompTIA wants you to know that Nessus and Nmap are
two popular vulnerability scanners.
Network Performance, Load, and Stress Testing
To test the network, administrators often perform three distinct types of tests:
 Performance tests
 Load tests
 Stress tests

These test names are sometimes used interchangeably. Although some overlap
exists, they are different types of network tests, each with different goals.
Performance Tests
A performance test is, as the name suggests, all about measuring the network’s
current performance level. The goal is to take ongoing performance tests and
evaluate and compare them, looking for potential bottlenecks. For performance
tests to be effective, they need to be taken under the same type of network load
each time, or the comparison is invalid. For example, a performance test taken at
3 a.m. will differ from one taken at 3 p.m.
Note
The goal of performance testing is to establish baselines for the comparison of
network functioning. The results of a performance test are meaningless unless
you can compare them to previously documented performance levels.
Load Tests
Load testing has some overlap with performance testing. Sometimes called
volume or endurance testing, load tests involve artificially placing the network
under a larger workload. For example, the network traffic might be increased
throughout the entire network. After this is done, performance tests can be done
on the network with the increased load. Load testing is sometimes done to see if
bugs exist in the network that are not currently visible but that may become a
problem as the network grows. For example, the mail server might work fine
with current requirements. However, if the number of users in the network grew
by 10%, you would want to determine whether the increased load would cause
problems with the mail server. Load tests are all about finding a potential
problem before it happens.
Performance tests and load tests are actually quite similar; however, the
information outcomes are different. Performance tests identify the current level
of network functioning for measurement and benchmarking purposes. Load tests
are designed to give administrators a look into the future of their network load
and to see if the current network infrastructure can handle it.
Note

Performance tests are about network functioning today. Load tests look
forward to see whether performance may be hindered in the future by growth
or other changes to the network.
Stress Tests
Whereas load tests do not try to break the system under intense pressure, stress
tests sometimes do. They push resources to the limit. Although these tests are
not done often, they are necessary and—for administrators, at least—
entertaining. Stress testing has two clear goals:
 It shows you exactly what the network can handle. Knowing a network’s
breaking point is useful information when you consider network expansion.
 It enables administrators to test their backup and recovery procedures. If a
test knocks out network resources, administrators can verify that their
recovery procedures work. Stress testing enables administrators to observe
network hardware failure.
Stress tests assume that someday something will go wrong, and administrators
will know exactly what to do when it happens.
Performance Metrics
Whether the testing being done is related to performance, load, or stress, you
have to choose the metrics you want to monitor and focus on. Although a
plethora of options are available, the most common four are the following:
 Error rate: This identifies the frequency of errors.
 Utilization: This shows the percentage of resources being utilized.
 Packet drops: How many packets of data on the network fail to reach their
destination.
 Bandwidth/throughput: The capability to move data through a channel as
related to the total capability of the system to identify bottlenecks, throttling,
and other issues.
Tracking Event Logs
In a network environment, all NOSs and most firewalls, proxy servers, and other
network components have logging features. These logging features are essential

for network administrators to review and monitor. Many types of logs can be
used. The following sections review some of the most common log file types.
On a Windows Server system, as with the other operating systems, events and
occurrences are logged to files for later review. Windows Server and desktop
systems use Event Viewer to view many of the key log files. The logs in Event
Viewer can be used to find information on, for example, an error on the system
or a security incident. Information is recorded into key log files; however, you
will also see additional log files under certain conditions, such as if the system is
a domain controller or is running a DHCP server application.
Event logs refer generically to all log files used to track events on a system.
Event logs are crucial for finding intrusions and diagnosing current system
problems. In a Windows environment, for example, three primary event logs are
used: Security, Application, and System.
Note
Be sure that you know the types of information included in the types of log
files.
Security Logs
A system’s Security log contains events related to security incidents, such as
successful and unsuccessful logon attempts and failed resource access. Security
logs can be customized, meaning that administrators can fine-tune exactly what
they want to monitor. Some administrators choose to track nearly every security
event on the system. Although this might be prudent, it can often create huge log
files that take up too much space. Figure 9.6 shows a Security log from a
Windows system.

FIGURE 9.6 A Windows Security log from Windows 10
Figure 9.6 shows that some successful logons and account changes have
occurred. A potential security breach would show some audit failures for logon
or logoff attempts. To save space and prevent the log files from growing too big,
administrators might choose to audit only failed logon attempts and not
successful ones.
Each event in a Security log contains additional information to make it easy to
get the details on the event:
 Date: The exact date the security event occurred.
 Time: The time the event occurred.
 User: The name of the user account that was tracked during the event.
 Computer: The name of the computer used when the event occurred.
 Event ID: The event ID tells you what event has occurred. You can use this
ID to obtain additional information about the particular event. For example,
you can take the ID number, enter it at the Microsoft support website, and
gather information about the event. Without the ID, it would be difficult to
find this information.

To be effective, Security logs should be regularly reviewed.
Application Log
This log contains information logged by applications that run on a particular
system rather than the operating system itself. Vendors of third-party
applications can use the Application log as a destination for error messages
generated by their applications.
The Application log works in much the same way as the Security log. It tracks
both successful events and failed events within applications. Figure 9.7 shows
the details provided in an Application log.
FIGURE 9.7 An Application log in Windows 10
Figure 9.7 shows that three types of events occurred: general application
information events, a warning event, and error events. Vigilant administrators
would likely want to check the event ID of both the event and warning failures
to isolate the cause.
System Logs
System logs record information about components or drivers in the system, as

shown in Figure 9.8. This is the place to look when you are troubleshooting a
problem with a hardware device on your system or a problem with network
connectivity. For example, messages related to the client element of Dynamic
Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) appear in this log. The System log is also
the place to look for hardware device errors, time synchronization issues, or
service startup problems.
FIGURE 9.8 A System log in Windows 10
Syslog
In addition to the specific logs mentioned previously, most UNIX/Linux-based
systems include the capability to write messages (either directly or through
applications) to log files via syslog. This can be done for security or management
reasons and provides a central means by which devices that otherwise could not
write to a central repository can easily do so (often by using the logger utility).
History Logs
History logs are most often associated with the tracking of Internet surfing
habits. They maintain a record of all sites that a user visits. Network
administrators might review these for potential security or policy breaches, but

generally these are not commonly reviewed.
Another form of history log is a compilation of events from other log files. For
instance, one History log might contain all significant events over the past year
from the Security log on a server. History logs are critical because they provide a
detailed account of alarm events that can be used to track trends and locate
problem areas in the network. This information can help you revise maintenance
schedules, determine equipment replacement plans, and anticipate and prevent
future problems.
Note
Application logs and system logs can often be viewed by any user. Security
logs can be viewed only by users who use accounts with administrative
privileges.
Log Management
While discussing these logs, it becomes clear that monitoring them can be a huge
issue. That is where log management (LM) comes in. LM describes the process
of managing large volumes of system-generated computer log files. LM includes
the collection, retention, and disposal of all system logs. Although LM can be a
huge task, it is essential to ensure the proper functioning of the network and its
applications. It also helps you keep an eye on network and system security.
Configuring systems to log all sorts of events is the easy part. Trying to find the
time to review the logs is an entirely different matter. To assist with this process,
third-party software packages are available to help with the organization and
reviewing of log files. To find this type of software, enter log management into a
web browser, and you will have many options to choose from. Some have trial
versions of their software that may give you a better idea of how LM works.
Patch Management
All applications, including productivity software, virus checkers, and especially
the operating system, release patches and updates often designed to address
potential security weaknesses. Administrators must keep an eye out for these
patches and install them when they are released.
Note

The various types of updates discussed in this section apply to all systems and
devices, including mobile devices and laptops, as well as servers and routers.
Special server systems (and services) are typically used to deploy mass
updates to clients in a large enterprise network.
Discussion items related to this topic include the following:
 OS updates: Most operating system updates relate to either functionality or
security issues. For this reason, it is important to keep your systems up to
date. Most current operating systems include the capability to automatically
find updates and install them. By default, the automatic updates feature is
usually turned on; you can change the settings if you do not want this
enabled.
Note
Always test updates on a lab machine before rolling out on production
machines.
 Firmware updates: Firmware updates keep the hardware interfaces
working properly. Router manufacturers, for example, often issue patches
when problems are discovered. Those patches need to be applied to the
router to remove any security gaps that may exist.
ExamAlert
Just as security holes can exist with operating systems and applications
(and get closed through patches), they can also exist in firmware and be
closed through updates.
 Driver updates: The main reason for updating drivers is when you have a
piece of hardware that is not operating correctly. The failure to operate can
be caused by the hardware interacting with software it was not intended to
prior to shipping (such as OS updates). Because the problem can be from the
vendor or the OS provider, updates can be automatically included (such as
with Windows Update) or found on the vendor’s site.
 Feature changes/updates: Not considered as critical as security or
functionality updates, feature updates and changes can extend what you

could previously do and extend your time using the hardware/software
combination you have.
 Major versus minor updates: Most updates are classified as major (must
be done) or minor (can be done). Depending on the vendor, the difference in
the two may be telegraphed in the numbering: An update of 4.0.0 would be a
major update, whereas one of 4.10.357 would be considered a minor one.
ExamAlert
As a general rule, the smaller the number of the update, the less
significant it is.
 Vulnerability patches: Vulnerabilities are weaknesses, and patches related
to them should be installed correctly with all expediency. After a
vulnerability in an OS, a driver, or a piece of hardware has been identified,
the fact that it can be exploited is often spread quickly: a zero-day exploit is
any attack that begins the very day the vulnerability is discovered.
Note
If attackers learn of the weakness the same day as the developer, they have the
ability to exploit it until a patch is released. Often, the only thing that you as a
security administrator can do between the discovery of the exploit and the
release of the patch is to turn off the system. Although this can be a costly
undertaking in terms of productivity, it can be the only way to keep the
network safe.
 Upgrading versus downgrading: Not all changing needs to be upgrading.
If, for example, a new patch is applied that changes the functionality of a
hardware component to where it will no longer operate as you need it to, you
can consider reverting back to a previous state. This is known as
downgrading and is often necessary when dealing with legacy systems and
implementations.
ExamAlert
For the exam, know that removing patches and updates is considered

downgrading.
Before installing or removing patches, it is important to do a configuration
backup. Many vendors offer products that perform configuration backups across
the network on a regular basis and allow you to roll back changes if needed. Free
tools are often limited in the number of devices they can work with, and some of
the more expensive ones include the capability to automatically analyze and
identify the changes that could be causing any problems.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following involves pushing the network beyond its limits,
often taking down the network to test its limits and recovery procedures?
 A. Crash and burn
 B. Stress test
 C. Recovery test
 D. Load test
2. You suspect that an intruder has gained access to your network. You want to
see how many failed logon attempts there were in one day to help determine
how the person got in. Which of the following might you do?
 A. Review the History logs.
 B. Review the Security logs.
 C. Review the Logon logs.
 D. Review the Performance logs.
3. Which utility can be used to write syslog entries on a Linux-based operating
system?
 A. memo
 B. record
 C. logger
 D. trace

4. Which of the following is not a standard component of an entry in a
Windows-based Security log?
 A. Event ID
 B. Date
 C. Computer
 D. Domain
 E. User
5. You have just used a port scanner for the first time. On one port, it reports
that there is not a process listening and access to this port will likely be
denied. Which state is the port most likely to be considered to be in?
 A. Listening
 B. Closed
 C. Filtered
 D. Blocked
6. You are required to monitor discards, packet drops, resets, and problems
with speed/duplex. Which of the following monitoring tools would assist
you?
 A. Interface
 B. Power
 C. Environmental
 D. Application
7. By default, the automatic update feature on most modern operating systems
is
 A. Disabled
 B. Turned on
 C. Set to manual
 D. Ineffective
8. What should you do if a weakness is discovered that affects network

security, and no patch has yet been released?
 A. Post information about the weakness on the vendor’s site.
 B. Call the press to put pressure on the vendor.
 C. Ignore the problem and wait for the patch.
 D. Take the at-risk system offline.
Cram Quiz Answers
1. B. Whereas load tests do not try to break the system under intense pressure,
stress tests sometimes do. Stress testing has two goals. The first is to see
exactly what the network can handle. It is useful to know the network’s
breaking point in case the network ever needs to be expanded. Second, stress
testing allows administrators to test their backup and recovery procedures.
2. B. The Security logs can be configured to show failed or successful logon
attempts as well as object access attempts. In this case, the administrator can
review the Security logs and failed logon attempts to get the desired
information. The failed logs will show the date and time when the failed
attempts occurred.
3. C. The syslog feature exists in most UNIX/Linux-based distributions, and
entries can be written using logger. The other options are not possibilities for
writing syslog entries.
4. D. The standard components of an entry in a Windows-based Security log
include the date, time, user, computer, and event ID. The domain is not a
standard component of a log entry.
5. B. When a port is closed, no process is listening on that port and access to
this port will likely be denied. When the port is open/listening, the host sends
a reply indicating that a service is listening on the port. When the port is
filtered or blocked, there is no reply from the host, meaning that the port is
not listening or the port is secured and filtered.
6. A. An interface monitoring tool is invaluable for troubleshooting problems
and errors that include utilization problems, discards, packet drops, resets,
and problems with speed/duplex.
7. B. By default, the automatic update feature is usually turned on.
8. D. Often, the only thing that you as a security administrator can do, between

the discovery of the exploit and the release of the patch, is to turn off the
service. Although this can be a costly undertaking in terms of productivity, it
can be the only way to keep the network safe.
Remote Access
 Given a scenario, use remote access methods.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. True or false: VPNs require a secure protocol to safely transfer data over
the Internet.
2. What port does SSH for connections?
3. What port does Telnet use for connections?
Answers
1. True. VPNs require a secure protocol, such as IPsec or SSL, to safely
transfer data over the Internet.
2. SSH uses port 22 and TCP for connections.
3. Telnet uses port 23 for connections.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Several protocols are associated with remote-control access that you should be

aware of: Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP), Secure Shell (SSH), Virtual Network
Computing (VNC), and Telnet. RDP is used in a Windows environment and is
now called Remote Desktop Services (RDS). It provides a way for a client system
to connect to a server, such as Windows Server, and, by using RDP, operate on
the server as if they were local client applications. Such a configuration is known
as thin client computing, whereby client systems use the resources of the server
instead of their local processing power.
Windows products (server as well as client) have built-in support for Remote
Desktop Connections. The underlying protocol used to manage the connection is
RDP. RDP is a low-bandwidth protocol used to send mouse movements,
keystrokes, and bitmap images of the screen on the server to the client computer.
RDP does not actually send data over the connection—only screenshots and
client keystrokes. RDP uses TCP and UDP port 3389.
SSH is a tunneling protocol originally created for UNIX/Linux systems. It uses
encryption to establish a secure connection between two systems and provides
alternative, security-equivalent applications for such utilities as Telnet, File
Transfer Protocol (FTP), Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP), and other
communications-oriented applications. Although it is available with Windows
and other operating systems, it is the preferred method of security for Telnet and
other clear-text-oriented programs in the UNIX/Linux environment. SSH uses
port 22 and TCP for connections.
Virtual Network Computing (VNC) enables remote login, in which clients can
access their own desktops while being physically away from their computers. By
default, it uses port 5900 and it is not considered overly secure.
Telnet enables sessions to be opened on a remote host and is one of the oldest
TCP/IP protocols still in use today. On most systems, Telnet is blocked because
of problems with security (it truly does not have any), and SSH is considered a
secure alternative to Telnet that enables secure sessions to be opened on the
remote host.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you know the ports associated with RDP (3389), Telnet (23),
FTP (20, 21), VNC (5900), and SSH (22).

ExamAlert
The protocols described in this chapter enable access to remote systems
and enable users to run applications on the system, using that system’s
resources. Only the user interface, keystrokes, and mouse movements
transfer between the client system and the remote computer.
Remote File Access
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is an application that allows connections to FTP
servers for file uploads and downloads. FTP is a common application that uses
ports 20 and 21 by default. It is used to transfer files between hosts on the
Internet but is inherently insecure. A number of options have been released to try
to create a more secure protocol, including FTP over SSL (FTPS), which adds
support for SSL cryptography, and SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), which is
also known as Secure FTP.
An alternative utility for copying files is Secure Copy (SCP), which uses port 22
by default and combines an old remote copy program (RCP) from the first days
of TCP/IP with SSH.
On the opposite end of the spectrum from a security standpoint is the Trivial File
Transfer Protocol (TFTP), which can be configured to transfer files between
hosts without any user interaction (unattended mode). It should be avoided
anywhere there are more secure alternatives.
VPNs
A virtual private network (VPN) encapsulates encrypted data inside another
datagram that contains routing information. The connection between two
computers establishes a switched connection dedicated to the two computers.
The encrypted data is encapsulated inside Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), and
that connection is used to deliver the data.
A VPN enables users with an Internet connection to use the infrastructure of the
public network to connect to the main network and access resources as if they
were logged on to the network locally. It also enables two networks to be
connected to each other securely.
To put it more simply, a VPN extends a LAN by establishing a remote

connection using a public network such as the Internet. A VPN provides a point-
to-point dedicated link between two points over a public IP network. For many
companies, the VPN link provides the perfect method to expand their
networking capabilities and reduce their costs. By using the public network
(Internet), a company does not need to rely on expensive private leased lines to
provide corporate network access to its remote users. Using the Internet to
facilitate the remote connection, the VPN enables network connectivity over a
possibly long physical distance. In this respect, a VPN is a form of wide-area
network (WAN).
Note
Many companies use a VPN to provide a cost-effective method to establish a
connection between remote clients and a private network. There are other
times a VPN link is handy. You can also use a VPN to connect one private
LAN to another, known as LAN-to-LAN internetworking. For security
reasons, you can use a VPN to provide controlled access within an intranet.
As an exercise, try drawing what the VPN would look like in these two
scenarios.
Components of the VPN Connection
A VPN enables anyone with an Internet connection to use the infrastructure of
the public network to dial in to the main network and access resources as if the
user were locally logged on to the network. It also enables two networks to
securely connect to each other.
Many elements are involved in establishing a VPN connection, including the
following:
 VPN client: The computer that initiates the connection to the VPN server.
 VPN server: Authenticates connections from VPN clients.
 Access method: As mentioned, a VPN is most often established over a
public network such as the Internet; however, some VPN implementations
use a private intranet. The network used must be IP based.
 VPN protocols: Required to establish, manage, and secure the data over the
VPN connection. Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) and Layer 2
Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) are commonly associated with VPN connections.
These 
protocols 
enable 
authentication 
and 
encryption 
in 
VPNs.

Authentication enables VPN clients and servers to correctly establish the
identity of people on the network. Encryption enables potentially sensitive
data to be guarded from the general public.
VPNs have become popular because they enable the public Internet to be safely
used as a WAN connectivity solution.
ExamAlert
VPNs support analog modems, Integrated Services Digital Network
(ISDN) wireless connections, and dedicated broadband connections, such
as cable and digital subscriber line (DSL). Remember this for the exam.
VPN Pros and Cons
As with any technology, VPN has both pros and cons. Fortunately with VPN
technology, these are clear cut, and even the cons typically do not prevent an
organization from using VPNs in its networks. Using a VPN offers two primary
benefits:
 Cost: If you use the infrastructure of the Internet, you do not need to spend
money on dedicated private connections to link remote clients to the private
network. Furthermore, when you use the public network, you do not need to
hire support personnel to support those private links.
 Easy scalability: VPNs make it easy to expand the network. Employees
who have a laptop with wireless capability can simply log on to the Internet
and establish the connection to the private network.
Table 9.4 outlines some of the advantages and potential disadvantages of using a
VPN.
TABLE 9.4 Pros and Cons of Using a VPN
Advantage
Description
Reduced cost
When you use the Internet, you do not need to rent dedicated
lines between remote clients and a private network. In addition,
a VPN can replace remote-access servers and long-distance
dial-up network connections that were commonly used in the
past by business travelers who needed access to their company

intranet. This eliminates long-distance phone charges.
Network
scalability
The cost to an organization to build a dedicated private
network may be reasonable at first, but it increases
exponentially as the organization grows. The Internet enables
an organization to grow its remote client base without having
to increase or modify an internal network infrastructure.
Reduced
support
Using the Internet, organizations do not need to employ
support personnel to manage a VPN infrastructure.
Simplified
With a VPN, a network administrator can easily add remote
clients. All authentication work is managed from the VPN
authentication server, and client systems can be easily
configured for automatic VPN access.
Disadvantage
Description
Security
Using a VPN, data is sent over a public network, so data
security is a concern. VPNs use security protocols to address
this shortcoming, but VPN administrators must understand data
security over public networks to ensure that data is not
tampered with or stolen.
Reliability
The reliability of the VPN communication depends on the
public network and is not under an organization’s direct
control. Instead, the solution relies on an Internet service
provider (ISP) and its quality of service (QoS).
IPsec
The IP Security (IPsec) protocol is designed to provide secure communications
between systems. This includes system-to-system communication in the same
network, as well as communication to systems on external networks. IPsec is an
IP layer security protocol that can both encrypt and authenticate network
transmissions. In a nutshell, IPsec is composed of two separate protocols:
Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP). AH
provides the authentication and integrity checking for data packets, and ESP
provides encryption services.
ExamAlert

IPsec relies on two underlying protocols: AH and ESP. AH provides
authentication services, and ESP provides encryption services.
Using both AH and ESP, data traveling between systems can be secured,
ensuring that transmissions cannot be viewed, accessed, or modified by those
who should not have access to them. It might seem that protection on an internal
network is less necessary than on an external network; however, much of the
data you send across networks has little or no protection, allowing unwanted
eyes to see it.
Note
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) created IPsec, which you can use
on both IPv4 and IPv6 networks.
IPsec provides three key security services:
 Data verification: Verifies that the data received is from the intended source
 Protection from data tampering: Ensures that the data has not been
tampered with or changed between the sending and receiving devices
 Private transactions: Ensures that the data sent between the sending and
receiving devices is unreadable by any other devices
IPsec operates at the network layer of the Open Systems Interconnect (OSI)
reference model and provides security for protocols that operate at the higher
layers. Thus, by using IPsec, you can secure practically all TCP/IP-related
communications.
SSL/TLS/DTLS
Security is often provided by working with the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)
protocol and the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol. SSL VPN, also
marketed as WebVPN and OpenVPN, can be used to connect locations that
would run into trouble with firewalls and NAT when used with IPsec. It is
known as an SSL VPN whether the encryption is done with SSL or TLS.
Note
SSL was first created for use with the Netscape web browser and is used with

a limited number of TCP/IP protocols (such as HTTP and FTP). TLS is not
only an enhancement to SSL, but also a replacement for it, working with
almost every TCP/IP protocol. Because of this, TLS is popular with VPNs and
VoIP applications. Just as the term Kleenex is often used to represent any
paper tissue, whether or not it is made by Kimberly-Clark, SSL is often the
term used to signify the confidentiality function, whether it is actually SSL in
use or TLS (the latest version of which is 1.2).
The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) protocol is a derivation of
SSL/TLS by the OpenSSL project that provides the same security services but
strives to increase reliability.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) publishes the Guide
to 
SSL 
VPNs, 
which 
you 
can 
access 
at
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-113.pdf.
Site-to-Site and Client-to-Site
The scope of a VPN tunnel can vary, with the two most common variations
being site-to-site and client-to-site (also known as host-to-site). A third variation
is host-to-host, but it is really a special implementation of site-to-site. In a site-
to-site implementation, as the name implies, whole networks are connected
together. An example of this would be divisions of a large company. Because the
networks are supporting the VPN, each gateway does the work, and the
individual clients do not need to have any VPN.
In a client-to-site scenario, individual clients (such as telecommuters or
travelers) connect to the network remotely. Because the individual client makes a
direct connection to the network, each client doing so must have VPN client
software installed.
ExamAlert
Be sure that you understand that site-to-site and client-to-site are the two
most common types of VPNs.
HTTPS/Management URL
HTTP Secure (HTTPS) is the protocol used for “secure” web pages that users

should see when they must enter personal information such as credit card
numbers, passwords, and other identifiers. It combines HTTP with SSL/TLS to
provide encrypted communication. The default port is 443, and the URL begins
with https:// instead of http://.
This is the common protocol used for management URLs to perform tasks such
as checking server status, changing router settings, and so on.
Out-of-Band Management
When a dedicated channel is established for managing network devices, it is
known as out-of-band management. A connection can be established via a
console router, or modem, and this can be used to ensure management
connectivity independent of the status of in-band network connectivity (which
would include serial port connections, VNC, and SSH). Out-of-band
management lets the administrator monitor, access, and manage network
infrastructure devices remotely and securely, even when everything else is down.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following protocols is used in thin-client computing?
 A. RDP
 B. PPP
 C. PPTP
 D. RAS
2. Your company wants to create a secure tunnel between two networks over
the Internet. Which of the following protocols would you use to do this?
 A. PAP
 B. CHAP
 C. PPTP
 D. SLAP
3. Because of a recent security breach, you have been asked to design a
security strategy that will allow data to travel encrypted through both the
Internet and intranet. Which of the following protocols would you use?

 A. IPsec
 B. SST
 C. CHAP
 D. FTP
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. RDP is used in thin-client networking, where only screen, keyboard, and
mouse input is sent across the line. PPP is a dialup protocol used over serial
links. PPTP is a technology used in VPNs. RAS is a remote-access service.
2. C. To establish the VPN connection between the two networks, you can use
PPTP. PAP and CHAP are not used to create a point-to-point tunnel; they are
authentication protocols. SLAP is not a valid secure protocol.
3. A. IPsec is a nonproprietary security standard used to secure transmissions
both on the internal network and when data is sent outside the local LAN.
IPsec 
provides 
encryption 
and 
authentication 
services 
for 
data
communications. Answer B is not a valid protocol. Answer C, Challenge
Handshake 
Authentication 
Protocol 
(CHAP), 
is 
a 
remote-access
authentication protocol. Answer D is incorrect because FTP is a protocol
used for large data transfers, typically from the Internet.
What’s Next?
The primary goals of today’s network administrators are to design, implement,
and maintain secure networks. This is not always easy, and is the topic of
Chapter 10, “Network Security.” No network can ever be labeled “secure.”
Security is an ongoing process involving a myriad of protocols, procedures, and
practices.

CHAPTER 10
Network Security
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Summarize the purposes of physical security devices.
 Explain authentication and access controls.
 Given a scenario, secure a basic wireless network.
 Summarize common networking attacks.
 Given a scenario, implement network device hardening.
 Explain common mitigation techniques and their purposes.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5,
and 4.6. For more information on the official Network+ exam topics, see
the “About the Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
Network security is one of the toughest areas of IT to be responsible for. It seems
as if a new threat surfaces on a regular basis and that you are constantly needing
to learn new things just a half a step ahead of potential problems. This chapter
focuses on some of the elements administrators use to keep their networks as
secure as possible.
Physical Security and Device Hardening
 Summarize the purposes of physical security devices.
 Given a scenario, implement network device hardening.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.

1. True or false: All unnecessary services on a server should be disabled.
2. A system that uses any two items, such as smart cards and passwords,
for authentication is referred to as a _______ system.
3. True or false: Common passwords should be used on similar system
devices within the same geographic confines.
Answers
1. True. Unnecessary services serve no purpose and take up overhead. They
also represent extra possibilities for an attacker to exploit and use to gain
access to your system(s).
2. Two-factor authentication system.
3. False. Common passwords should be avoided at all cost because they
serve to weaken the security of the system.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
It does little good to have great network security if everything can be
compromised by someone walking in your office, picking up your server, and
walking out the front door with it. Physical security of the premises is equally
important to an overall security implementation.
Ideally, your systems should have a minimum of three physical barriers:
 The external entrance to the building, referred to as a perimeter, which is
protected by motion detection, burglar alarms, external walls, fencing,
surveillance, and so on. This should be used with an access list, which should
exist to specifically identify who can enter a facility and can be verified by a
security guard or someone in authority. A mantrap can be used to limit access
to only one or two people going into the facility at a time. A properly
developed mantrap includes bulletproof glass, high-strength doors, and

locks. In high-security and military environments, an armed guard, as well as
video surveillance (IP cameras and CCTVs), should be used at the mantrap.
After a person is inside the facility, additional security and authentication
may be required for further entrance.
 A locked door with door access controls protecting the computer center and
network closets; you should also rely on such items as ID badges, proximity
readers/key fobs, or keys to gain access. Biometrics, such as fingerprint or
retinal scans, can be used for authentication.
 The entrance to the computer room itself. This should be another locked
door that is carefully monitored and protected by keypads and cipher locks.
Although you try to keep as many intruders out with the other two barriers,
many who enter the building could be posing as someone they are not—
heating and air technicians, representatives of the landlord, and so on.
Although these pretenses can get them past the first two barriers, they should
still be stopped by the locked computer room door.
 Assets should have asset tracking tags attached to them that have unique
identifiers for each client device in your environment (usually just
incrementing numbers corresponding to values in a database) to help you
identify and manage your IT assets. Additionally, tamper detection devices
should be installed to protect against unauthorized chassis cover and
component removal.
The objective of any physical barrier is to prevent access to computers and
network systems. The most effective physical barrier implementations require
that more than one physical barrier be crossed to gain access. This type of
approach is called a multiple barrier system.
ExamAlert
Physical security is a recent addition to the Network+ exam. Be sure that
you are familiar with the topics discussed here.
Adding Physical Security to the Mix
Physical security is a combination of good sense and procedure. The purpose of
physical security is to restrict access to network equipment only to people who
need it.

The extent to which physical security measures can be implemented to protect
network devices and data depends largely on their location. For instance, if a
server is installed in a cabinet located in a general office area, the only practical
physical protection is to make sure that the cabinet door is locked and that access
to keys for the cabinet is controlled. It might be practical to use other antitheft
devices, but that depends on the location of the cabinet.
However, if your server equipment is located in a cupboard or dedicated room,
access restrictions for the room are easier to implement and can be more
effective. Again, access should be limited only to those who need it. Depending
on the size of the room, this factor might introduce a number of other factors.
Servers and other key networking components are those to which you need to
apply the greatest level of physical security. Nowadays, most organizations
choose to locate servers in a cupboard or a specific room.
Access to the server room should be tightly controlled, and all access doors must
be secured by some method, whether it is a lock and key or a retinal scanning
system. Each method of server room access control has certain characteristics.
Whatever the method of server room access, it should follow one common
principle: control. Some access control methods provide more control than
others.
Lock and Key
If access is controlled by lock and key, the number of people with a key should
be restricted to only those people who need access. Spare keys should be stored
in a safe location, and access to them should be controlled.
Following are some of the features of lock-and-key security:
 Inexpensive: Even a good lock system costs only a few hundred dollars.
 Easy to maintain: With no back-end systems and no configuration, using a
lock and key is the easiest access control method.
 Less control than other methods: Keys can be lost, copied, and loaned to
other people. There is no record of access to the server room and no way to
prove that the key holder is entitled to enter.
Tip

If you use a lock and key for security, make sure that all copies of the original
key are stamped DO NOT COPY. That way, it is more difficult for someone to
get a copy because reputable key cutters will not make copies of such keys.
Swipe Card and PIN Access
If budgets and policies permit, swipe card and PIN entry systems are good
choices for managing physical access to a server room. Swipe card systems use a
credit card-sized plastic card read by a reader on the outside of the door. To enter
the server room, you must swipe the card (run it through the reader), at which
point it is read by the reader, which validates it. Usually, the swipe card’s use to
enter the room is logged by the card system, making it possible for the logs to be
checked. In higher-security installations, it is common to have a swipe card
reader on the inside of the room as well so that a person’s exit can be recorded.
Although swipe card systems have relatively few disadvantages, they do need
specialized equipment so that they can be coded with users’ information. They
also have the same drawbacks as keys in that they can be lost or loaned to other
people. However, the advantage that swipe cards have over key systems is that
swipe cards are hard to copy.
PIN pads can be used alone or with a swipe card system. PIN pads have the
advantage of not needing any kind of card or key that can be lost. For the budget
conscious, PIN pad systems that do not have any logging or monitoring
capability and can be purchased for a reasonable price. Following are some of
the characteristics of swipe card and PIN pad systems:
 Moderately expensive: Some systems, particularly those with management
capabilities, are quite expensive.
 Enhanced controls and logging: Each time people enter the server room,
they must key in a number or use a swipe card. This process enables systems
to log who enters and when.
 Some additional knowledge required: Swipe card systems need special
software and hardware that can configure the cards. Someone has to learn
how to do this.
Biometrics
Although they might still seem like the realm of James Bond, biometric security
systems are becoming far more common: Biometric systems work by using

some unique characteristic of a person’s identity—such as a fingerprint, a palm
print, or a retina scan—to validate that person’s identity.
Although the price of biometric systems has been falling over recent years, they
are not widely deployed in small to midsized networks. Not only are the systems
themselves expensive, but also their installation, configuration, and maintenance
must be considered. Following are some of the characteristics of biometric
access control systems:
 Very effective: Because each person entering the room must supply proof-
of-person evidence, verification of the person entering the server area is as
close to 100% reliable as you can get.
 Nothing to lose: Because there are no cards or keys, nothing can be lost.
 Expensive: Biometric security systems and their attendant scanners and
software are still relatively expensive and can be afforded only by
organizations that have a larger budget; however, prices are sure to drop as
more people turn to this method of access control.
Two-Factor and Multifactor Authentication
When two or more access methods are included as part of the authentication
process, you’re implementing a multifactor system. A system that uses any two
items—such as smart cards and passwords—is referred to as a two-factor
authentication system. A multifactor system can consist of a two-factor system,
a three-factor system, and so on. As long as more than one factor is involved in
the authentication process, it is considered a multifactor system.
For obvious reasons, the two or more factors employed should not be from the
same category. Although you do increase difficulty in gaining system access by
requiring the user to enter two sets of username/password combinations, it is
preferred to pair a single username/password combination with a biometric
identifier or other check.
Note
Be sure that you understand that two-factor authentication is a subset of
multifactor authentication.
Secured Versus Unsecured Protocols

As you know, any network needs a number of protocols to function. This
includes both LAN and WAN protocols. Not all protocols are created the same.
Some are designed for secure transfer, and others are not. Table 10.1 lists several
protocols and describes their use.
TABLE 10.1 Protocol Summary
Protocol
Name
Description
FTP
File Transfer
Protocol
A protocol for uploading and downloading files to
and from a remote host. Also accommodates basic
file management tasks. FTP uses ports 20 and 21.
SFTP
Secure File
Transfer
Protocol
A protocol for securely uploading and downloading
files to and from a remote host. Based on SSH
security. SFTP uses port 22.
HTTP
Hypertext
Transfer
Protocol
A protocol for retrieving files from a web server.
Data is sent in clear text. HTTP uses port 80.
HTTPS
Hypertext
Transfer
Protocol
Secure
A secure protocol for retrieving files from a web
server. HTTPS uses SSL to encrypt data between
the client and host. HTTPS uses port 443.
Telnet
Telnet
Enables sessions to be opened on a remote host.
Telnet is not considered secure. Telnet uses port 23.
SSH
Secure Shell
A secure alternative to Telnet that enables secure
sessions to be opened on a remote host. SSH uses
port 22.
TLS
Transport
Layer
Security
A cryptographic protocol whose purpose is to
verify that secure communications between a
server and a client remain secure. TLS is an
enhancement/ replacement for SSL.
ISAKMP
Internet
Security
Association
and Key
Management
Protocol
Provides an independent framework for
authentication and key exchange. The actual
implementation is usually done by IPsec but could
be handled by any implementation capable of
negotiating, modifying, and deleting security
associations.

RSH
A UNIX
utility used
to run
command on
a remote
machine
Replaced by SSH because RSH sends all data in
clear text.
SCP
Secure Copy
Protocol
Enables files to be securely copied between two
systems. Uses SSH technology to provide
encryption services.
RCP
Remote
Copy
Protocol
Copies files between systems, but transport is not
secured.
SNMPv1/2
Simple
Network
Management
Protocol
versions 1
and 2
A network monitoring system used to monitor the
network’s condition. Both SNMPv1 and v2 are not
secured.
SNMPv3
Simple
Network
Management
Protocol
version 3
An enhanced SNMP service offering both
encryption and authentication services.
IPsec
IP security
Encrypts data during communication between two
computers.
SLIP
Serial Line
Interface
Protocol
Provides basic encapsulation of the IP protocol
over serial and modem connections.
ExamAlert
You will most certainly be asked questions on secure protocols and when
they might be used. Review Table 10.1 before taking the Network+ exam.

Additional Device Hardening
In addition to physically securing network devices and opting to run secure
protocols in favor of unsecured ones, some steps an administrator should take to
further hardening include the following:
 Change default credentials: The easiest way for any unauthorized
individual to access a device is by using the default credentials. Many
routers, for example, come configured with an “admin” account and a simple
value for the password (“admin,” “password,” and so on). Anyone owning
one of those routers knows those values and could use them to access any
other of the same make if the values have not been changed. To make it more
difficult for unauthorized users to access your devices, change those default
usernames and passwords as soon as you start using them.
 Avoid common passwords: It is a good thing to preach password security
to users, but often administrators are guilty of using too-simplistic passwords
on network devices such as routers, switches, and the like. Given the large
number of devices in question, sometimes the same passwords are also used
on multiple devices. Common sense tells every administrator that this is
wrong, but often it is done anyway with the hope that no miscreant will try to
gain unauthorized access. Don’t be that administrator: use complex
passwords and use a different password for each device, increasing the
overall security of your network.
 Upgrade firmware: There is a reason why each firmware update is written.
Sometimes, it is to optimize the device or make it more compatible with
other devices. Other times, it is to fix security issues and/or head off
identified problems. Keep firmware on your production machines current
after first testing the upgrades on lab machines and verifying that you’re not
introducing any unwanted problems by installing.
 Apply patches and updates: Just as firmware upgrades are intended to
strengthen or solve problems, patches and updates do the same with software
(including operating systems). Test each release on a lab machine(s) to make
sure you are not adding to network woes, and then keep your software
current to harden it.
 Verify file hashes: File hashing is used to verify that the contents of files are
unaltered. A hash is often created on a file before it is downloaded and then
hashed after the download so the two values can be compared to make sure
the contents are the same. When downloading files—particularly upgrades,

patches, and updates—check hash values and use this one test to keep from
installing those entities that have had Trojan horses attached to them.
 Disable unnecessary services: Every unnecessary service that is running on
a server is akin to another door on a warehouse that someone unauthorized
may choose to sneak in. Just as an effective way to secure a warehouse is to
reduce the number of doors to only those needed, so too is it recommended
that a server be secured by removing (disabling) services not in use.
 Generate new keys: Keys are used as a part of the encryption process,
particularly with public key encryption (PKI), to encrypt and decrypt
messages. The longer you use the same key, the longer the opportunity
becomes for someone to crack that key. To increase security, generate new
keys on a regular basis: The commands to do so will differ based on the
utility that you are creating the keys for.
 Disable unused ports: Disabling unnecessary services (mentioned
previously) increases security by removing doors that someone could use to
enter the server. Similarly, IP ports that are not needed for devices also
represent doors that could be used to sneak in. It is highly recommended that
unused ports be disabled to increase security along with device ports (both
physical and virtual ports).
ExamAlert
The items appearing in the bulleted list are the topics beneath objective
4.5; make sure you know them for the exam.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following is used to verify that the contents of files are
unaltered?
 A. Key generation
 B. File hashing
 C. Biometrics
 D. Asset tracking

2. Which of the following is a secure alternative to Telnet that enables secure
sessions to be opened on a remote host?
 A. SSH
 B. RSH
 C. IPsec
 D. RDP
3. Which of the following can be used to limit access to only one or two
people going into the facility at a time?
 A. Mantrap
 B. Min cage
 C. Tholian web
 D. Cloud minder
4. Which of the following systems use a credit card-sized plastic card that is
read by a reader on the outside of the door?
 A. Contiguity reader
 B. Key fob
 C. Swipe card
 D. Cipher lock
Cram Quiz Answers
1. B. File hashing is used to verify that the contents of files are unaltered.
2. A. SSH is a secure alternative to Telnet that enables secure sessions to be
opened on a remote host.
3. A. A mantrap can be used to limit access to only one or two people going
into the facility at a time.
4. C. Swipe card systems use a credit card-sized plastic card read by a reader
on the outside of the door. To enter the server room, you must swipe the card
(run it through the reader), at which point it is read by the reader, which
validates it.

Authentication and Access Controls
 Explain authentication and access controls.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. True or false: Filtering network traffic using a system’s MAC address
typically is done using an ACL.
2. True or false: LDAP is a protocol that provides a mechanism to access
and query directory services systems.
3. Which access control model uses an access control list (ACL) to
determine access?
Answers
1. True. Filtering network traffic using a system’s MAC address typically is
done using an ACL.
2. True. LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) is a protocol that
provides a mechanism to access and query directory services systems.
3. Discretionary access control (DAC) uses an access control list (ACL) to
determine access. The ACL is a table that informs the operating system of
the rights each user has to a particular system object, such as a file, a
folder, or a printer.
Access control describes the mechanisms used to filter network traffic to
determine who is and who is not allowed to access the network and network
resources. Firewalls, proxy servers, routers, and individual computers all can
maintain access control to some degree by protecting the edges of the network.
By limiting who can and cannot access the network and its resources, it is easy
to understand why access control plays a critical role in security strategy. Several
types of access control strategies exist, as discussed in the following sections.

Be sure that you can identify the purpose and types of access control.
Mandatory Access Control
Mandatory access control (MAC) is the most secure form of access control. In
systems configured to use mandatory access control, administrators dictate who
can access and modify data, systems, and resources. MAC systems are
commonly used in military installations, financial institutions, and, because of
new privacy laws, medical institutions.
MAC secures information and resources by assigning sensitivity labels or
attributes to objects and users. When users request access to an object, their
sensitivity level is compared to the object’s. A label is a feature applied to files,
directories, and other resources in the system. It is similar to a confidentiality
stamp. When a label is placed on a file, it describes the level of security for that
specific file. It permits access by files, users, programs, and so on that have a
similar or higher security setting.
Discretionary Access Control
Unlike mandatory access control, discretionary access control (DAC) is not
enforced from the administrator or operating system. Instead, access is
controlled by an object’s owner. For example, if a secretary creates a folder, he
decides who will have access to that folder. This access is configured using
permissions and an access control list (ACL).
DAC uses an ACL to determine access. The ACL is a table that informs the
operating system of the rights each user has to a particular system object, such as
a file, a folder, or a printer. Each object has a security attribute that identifies its
ACL. The list has an entry for each system user with access privileges. The most
common privileges include the ability to read a file (or all the files in a folder),
to write to the file or files, and to execute the file (if it is an executable file or
program).
Microsoft Windows servers/clients, Linux, UNIX, and Mac OS are among the
operating systems that use ACLs. The list is implemented differently by each
operating system.
In Windows Server products, an ACL is associated with each system object.
Each ACL has one or more access control entries (ACEs) consisting of the name
of a user or group of users. The user can also be a role name, such as “secretary”

or “research.” For each of these users, groups, or roles, the access privileges are
stated in a string of bits called an access mask. Generally, the system
administrator or the object owner creates the ACL for an object.
Note
A server on a network that has the responsibility of being a repository for
accounts (user/computer) is often referred to as a network controller. A good
example of this is a domain controller on a Microsoft Active Directory–based
network.
Rule-Based Access Control
Rule-based access control (RBAC) controls access to objects according to
established rules. The configuration and security settings established on a router
or firewall are a good example.
When a firewall is configured, rules are set up that control access to the network.
Requests are reviewed to see if the requestor meets the criteria to be allowed
access through the firewall. For instance, if a firewall is configured to reject all
addresses in the 192.166.x.x IP address range, and the requestor’s IP is in that
range, the request would be denied.
In a practical application, RBAC is a variation on MAC. Administrators
typically configure the firewall or other device to allow or deny access. The
owner or another user does not specify the conditions of acceptance, and
safeguards ensure that an average user cannot change settings on the devices.
Role-Based Access Control
Note
Note that both rule-based and role-based access control use the acronym
RBAC.
In role-based access control (RBAC), access decisions are determined by the
roles that individual users have within the organization. Role-based access
requires the administrator to have a thorough understanding of how a particular
organization operates, the number of users, and each user’s exact function in that

organization.
Because access rights are grouped by role name, the use of resources is restricted
to individuals who are authorized to assume the associated role. For example,
within a school system, the role of teacher can include access to certain data,
including test banks, research material, and memos. School administrators might
have access to employee records, financial data, planning projects, and more.
The use of roles to control access can be an effective means of developing and
enforcing enterprise-specific security policies and for streamlining the security
management process.
Roles should receive only the privilege level necessary to do the job associated
with that role. This general security principle is known as the least privilege
concept. When people are hired in an organization, their roles are clearly
defined. A network administrator creates a user account for a new employee and
places that user account in a group with people who have the same role in the
organization.
Least privilege is often too restrictive to be practical in business. For instance,
using teachers as an example, some more experienced teachers might have more
responsibility than others and might require increased access to a particular
network object. Customizing access to each individual is a time-consuming
process.
ExamAlert
Although a Security+ objective and concept, you might be asked about
the concept of least privilege. This refers to assigning network users the
privilege level necessary to do the job associated with their role—nothing
more and nothing less.
RADIUS and TACACS+
Among the potential issues network administrators face when implementing
remote access are utilization and the load on the remote-access server. As a
network’s remote-access implementation grows, reliance on a single remote-
access server might be impossible, and additional servers might be required.
RADIUS can help in this scenario.

ExamAlert
RADIUS is a protocol that enables a single server to become responsible
for all remote-access authentication, authorization, and auditing (or
accounting) services.
RADIUS functions as a client/server system. The remote user dials in to the
remote-access server, which acts as a RADIUS client, or network access server
(NAS), and connects to a RADIUS server. The RADIUS server performs
authentication, authorization, and auditing (or accounting) functions and returns
the information to the RADIUS client (which is a remote-access server running
RADIUS client software); the connection is either established or rejected based
on the information received.
Terminal Access Controller Access Control System (TACACS) is a security
protocol designed to provide centralized validation of users who are attempting
to gain access to a router or NAS. Like RADIUS, TACACS is a set of security
protocols designed to provide AAA of remote users. TACACS+ is a proprietary
version of TACACS from Cisco and is the implementation commonly in use in
networks today. TACACS+ uses TCP port 49 by default.
Although both RADIUS and TACACS+ offer AAA services for remote users,
some noticeable differences exist:
 TACACS+ relies on TCP for connection-oriented delivery. RADIUS uses
connectionless UDP for data delivery.
 RADIUS combines authentication and authorization, whereas TACACS+
can separate their functions.
ExamAlert
Both RADIUS and TACACS+ provide authentication, authorization, and
accounting services. One notable difference between TACACS+ and
RADIUS is that TACACS+ relies on the connection-oriented TCP,
whereas RADIUS uses the connectionless UDP.
Kerberos Authentication

Kerberos is an Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standard for providing
authentication. It is an integral part of network security. Networks, including the
Internet, can connect people from all over the world. When data travels from one
point to another across a network, it can be lost, stolen, corrupted, or misused.
Much of the data sent over networks is sensitive, whether it is medical, financial,
or otherwise. A key consideration for those responsible for the network is
maintaining the confidentiality of the data. In the networking world, Kerberos
plays a significant role in data confidentiality.
In a traditional authentication strategy, a username and password are used to
access network resources. In a secure environment, it might be necessary to
provide a username and password combination to access each network service or
resource. For example, a user might be prompted to type in her username and
password when accessing a database, and again for the printer, and again for
Internet access. This is a time-consuming process, and it can also present a
security risk. Each time the password is entered, there is a chance that someone
will see it being entered. If the password is sent over the network without
encryption, it might be viewed by malicious eavesdroppers.
Kerberos was designed to fix such problems by using a method requiring only a
single sign-on. This single sign-on enables a user to log in to a system and access
multiple systems or resources without the need to repeatedly reenter the
username and password. Additionally, Kerberos is designed to have entities
authenticate themselves by demonstrating possession of secret information.
Kerberos is one part of a strategic security solution that provides secure
authentication services to users, applications, and network devices by
eliminating the insecurities caused by passwords stored or transmitted across the
network. Kerberos is used primarily to eliminate the possibility of a network
“eavesdropper” tapping into data over the network—particularly usernames and
passwords. Kerberos ensures data integrity and blocks tampering on the network.
It employs message privacy (encryption) to ensure that messages are not visible
to eavesdroppers on the network.
For the network user, Kerberos eliminates the need to repeatedly demonstrate
possession of private or secret information.
ExamAlert
Kerberos is a nonproprietary protocol and is used for cross-platform

authentication. It’s the main authentication protocol used with Windows
servers.
Kerberos is designed to provide strong authentication for client/server
applications by using secret key cryptography. Cryptography is used to ensure
that a client can prove its identity to a server (and vice versa) across an unsecure
network connection. After a client and server have used Kerberos to prove their
identity, they can also encrypt all their communications to ensure privacy and
data integrity.
ExamAlert
Kerberos enables secure authentication over an unsecure network such as
the Internet.
The key to understanding Kerberos is to understand its secret key cryptography.
Kerberos uses symmetric key cryptography, in which both client and server use
the same encryption key to cipher and decipher data.
In secret key cryptography, a plain-text message can be converted into cipher
text (encrypted data) and then converted back into plain text using one key.
Thus, two devices share a secret key to encrypt and decrypt their
communications. Figure 10.1 shows the symmetric key process.
FIGURE 10.1 The symmetric key process

ExamAlert
Another cryptography method in use is asymmetric key cryptography, or
public key cryptography. In this method, a device has both a public and
private key. The private key is never shared. The public key is used to
encrypt the communication, and the private key is used for decrypting.
Kerberos authentication works by assigning a unique key, called a ticket, to each
client that successfully authenticates to a server. The ticket is encrypted and
contains the user’s password, which is used to verify the user’s identity when a
particular network service is requested. Each ticket is time stamped. It expires
after a period of time, and a new one is issued. Kerberos works in the same way
that you go to a movie. First, you go to the ticket counter, tell the person what
movie you want to see, and get your ticket. After that, you go to a turnstile and
hand the ticket to someone else, and then you’re “in.” In simplistic terms, that’s
Kerberos.
ExamAlert
You should know that the security tokens used in Kerberos are known as
tickets.
Local Authentication
Most of the time, the goal is to authenticate the user using a centralized
authentication server or service of some type. When that cannot be done—such
as when there is no Internet connectivity available—then authentication is done
locally by the operating system using values stored within it. In Windows, for
example, the Local Authentication Subsystem (LASS) performs this function
and allows users access to the system after their stored username and password
variables match.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) is a protocol that provides a
mechanism to access and query directory services systems. In the context of the
Network+ exam, these directory services systems are most likely to be UNIX

based or Microsoft Active Directory based. Although LDAP supports command-
line queries executed directly against the directory database, most LDAP
interactions are via utilities such as an authentication program (network logon)
or locating a resource in the directory through a search utility.
Using Certificates
A public key infrastructure (PKI) is a collection of software, standards, and
policies combined to enable users from the Internet or other unsecured public
networks to securely exchange data. PKI uses a public and private cryptographic
key pair obtained and shared through a trusted authority. Services and
components work together to develop the PKI. Some of the key components of a
PKI include the following:
 Certificates: A form of electronic credentials that validates users,
computers, or devices on the network. A certificate is a digitally signed
statement that associates the credentials of a public key to the identity of the
person, device, or service that holds the corresponding private key.
 Certificate authorities (CAs): CAs issue and manage certificates. They
validate the identity of a network device or user requesting data. CAs can be
either independent third parties, known as public CAs, or they can be
organizations running their own certificate-issuing server software, known as
private CAs.
 Certificate templates: Templates used to customize certificates issued by a
certificate server. This customization includes a set of rules and settings
created on the CA and used for incoming certificate requests.
 Certificate revocation list (CRL): A list of certificates that were revoked
before they reached the certificate expiration date. Certificates are often
revoked because of security concerns, such as a compromised certificate.
Auditing and Logging
Auditing is the process of monitoring occurrences and keeping a log of what has
occurred on a system. A system administrator determines which events should be
audited. Tracking events and attempts to access the system helps prevent
unauthorized access and provides a record that administrators can analyze to
make security changes as necessary. It also provides administrators with solid
evidence if they need to look into improper user conduct.

Caution
Be sure that you can identify the purpose of authentication, authorization, and
accounting.
The first step in auditing is to identify what system events to monitor. After the
system events are identified, in a Windows environment, the administrator can
choose to monitor the success or failure of a system event. For instance, if
“logon” is the event being audited, the administrator might choose to log all
unsuccessful logon attempts, which might indicate that someone is attempting to
gain unauthorized access. Conversely, the administrator can choose to audit all
successful attempts to monitor when a particular user or user group is logging
on. Some administrators prefer to log both events. However, overly ambitious
audit policies can reduce overall system performance.
Multifactor Authentication Factors
Previously in this chapter, multifactor authentication was defined as having two
or more access methods included as part of the authentication process; the
examples given were using smart cards and passwords. The factors used in
authentication systems or methods are based on one or more of these five
factors:
 Something you know, such as a password or PIN
 Something you have, such as a smart card, token, or identification device
 Something you are, such as your fingerprints or retinal pattern (often called
biometrics)
 Somewhere you are (based on geolocation)
 Something you do, such as an action you must take to complete
authentication
ExamAlert
Be able to identify the five types of factors used in multifactor
authentication.

Access Control
Today, there are many ways to establish access into networks. You could fill an
entire tome with a discussion of the possibilities. CompTIA has reduced the
topics associated with this subject to six: 802.1x, NAC, port security, MAC
filtering, captive portal, and access control lists. The last item was discussed
with discretionary access control at the beginning of this section; what follows
discusses each of the remaining five topics in order.
802.1X
The IEEE standard 802.1X defines port-based security for wireless network
access control. As such, it offers a means of authentication and defines the
Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) over IEEE 802, which is often known
as EAP over LAN (EAPOL). The biggest benefit of using 802.1X is that the
access points and the switches do not need to do the authentication but instead
rely on the authentication server to do the work.
Network Access Control (NAC)
Network access control (NAC) is a method to restrict access to the network based
on identity or posture (discussed later in this chapter). This was created by Cisco
to enforce privileges and make decisions on a client device based on information
gathered from it (such as the vendor and version of the antivirus software
running). If the wanted information is not found (such as that the antivirus
definitions are a year old), the client can be placed in a quarantine network area
to keep it from infecting the rest of the network. It can also be placed in a guest
network and/or allowed to run nonpersistent (versus persistent) agents.
A posture assessment is any evaluation of a system’s security based on settings
and applications found. In addition to looking at such values as settings in the
Registry or dates of files, NACs can also check 802.1X values—the group of
networking protocols associated with authentication of devices attempting to
connect to the network. 802.1X works with EAP (discussed later in this chapter).
ExamAlert
As you prepare for the exam, be sure that you can identify posture
assessment as any evaluation of a system’s security based on settings and
applications found.

Port Security
Port security works at level 2 of the OSI model and allows an administrator to
configure switch ports so that only certain MAC addresses can use the port. This
is a common feature on both Cisco’s Catalyst as well as Juniper’s EX Series
switches and essentially differentiates so-called dumb switches from managed
(or intelligent) switches. Similarly, Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI) works with
these and other smart switches to protect ports from ARP spoofing.
MAC Filtering
Another name for a network card or network adapter is a network controller.
Every controller has a unique MAC address associated with it. Filtering network
traffic using a system’s MAC address typically is done using an ACL. This list
keeps track of all MAC addresses and is configured to allow or deny access to
certain systems based on the list. As an example, look at the MAC ACL from a
router. Figure 10.2 shows the MAC ACL screen. Specific MAC addresses can be
either denied or accepted, depending on the configuration. It would be possible,
for example, to configure it so that only the system with the MAC address of 02-
00-54-55-4E-01 can authenticate to the router.

FIGURE 10.2 A MAC ACL
Note
When configuring security for wireless networks, filtering by MAC address is
a common practice. Typically, in MAC filtering security, MAC addresses can
be added to an “allow” ACL or “deny” ACL.
Captive Portal
Most public networks, including Wi-Fi hotspots, use a captive portal, which
requires users to agree to some condition before they use the network or Internet.
The condition could be to agree to the acceptable use policy, payment charges
for the time they are using the network, and so forth.
One of the most popular implementations of captive portals is a Cisco
application in its Identity Services Engine. However, there have been
vulnerabilities identified with it, which allow attackers to intercept clear-text
values.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following ports is used by TACACS+ by default?
 A. 49
 B. 51
 C. 53
 D. 59
2. Which of the following is the main authentication protocol used with
Windows servers?
 A. LDAP
 B. Kerberos
 C. L2TP
 D. TFTP

3. What are the security tokens used with Kerberos known as?
 A. Coins
 B. Vouchers
 C. Tickets
 D. Gestures
4. Which of the following is NOT one of the factors associated with
multifactor authentication?
 A. Something you like
 B. Something you are
 C. Something you do
 D. Something you have
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. TACACS+ uses TCP port 49 by default.
2. B. Kerberos is the main authentication protocol used with Windows servers.
3. C. The tokens used for security in Kerberos are known as tickets.
4. A. Something you like is not one of the five factors used in multifactor
authentication. The five legitimate possibilities are the following: something
you know, something you have, something you are, somewhere you are, and
something you do.
Securing Wireless Networks
 Given a scenario, secure a basic wireless network.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.

1. What can be used to secure an EAP tunnel by using a certificate on the
server side?
2. What does WPA mandate the use of?
3. What type of key does WPA2 Personal utilize?
Answers
1. PEAP can be used to secure an EAP tunnel by using a certificate on the
server side.
2. WPA mandates the use of TKIP.
3. WPA2 Personal uses a preshared key.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
Wireless systems transmit data through the air and can be much more difficult to
secure than those dependent on wires that can be physically protected. The
growth of wireless systems in every workplace and home creates many
opportunities for attackers looking for signals that can be easily intercepted. This
section discusses various types of wireless systems that you’ll likely encounter
and some of the security issues associated with this technology.
WPA, WPA2, TKIP-RC4, and CCMP-AES
The Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) and Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2)
technologies were designed to address the core, easy-to-crack problems of
earlier technologies, such as Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP). These
technologies were created to implement the 802.11i standard. The difference
between WPA and WPA2 is that the former implements most, but not all, of
802.11i in order to be able to communicate with older wireless devices that
might still need an update through their firmware to be compliant. WPA uses the

RC4 encryption algorithm with TKIP, whereas WPA2 implements the full
standard and is not compatible with older devices.
Although WPA mandates the use of TKIP, WPA2 requires Counter Mode with
Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP). CCMP
uses 128-bit AES encryption with a 48-bit initialization vector. With the larger
initialization vector, it increases the difficulty in cracking and minimizes the risk
of a replay attack. WPA (with TKIP) was used as an intermediate solution,
implementing a portion of the 802.11i standard. The ultimate solution, a full
implementation of the 802.11i standard, is WPA2 (with CCMP).
Wireless Authentication and Authorization
Choosing the correct authentication protocol for remote clients is an important
part of designing a secure remote-access strategy. After they are authenticated,
users have access to the network and servers. Extensible Authentication Protocol
(EAP) provides a framework for authentication that is often used with wireless
networks. Among the EAP types adopted by the WPA/WPA2 standard are PEAP,
EAP-FAST, and EAP-TLS. EAP was developed in response to an increasing
demand for authentication methods that use other types of security devices, such
as token cards, smart cards, and digital certificates.
To simplify network setup, a number of small office and home office (SOHO)
routers use a series of EAP messages to allow new hosts to join the network and
use WPA/WPA2. Known as Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS), this often requires the
user to do something to complete the enrollment process: press a button on the
router within a short time period, enter a PIN, or bring the new device close by
(so that near field communication can take place).
Cisco, RSA, and Microsoft worked together to create Protected Extensible
Authentication Protocol (PEAP). There is now native support for it in Windows
(which previously favored EAP-TLS). Although many consider PEAP and EAP-
TLS to be similar, PEAP is more secure because it establishes an encrypted
channel between the server and the client.
EAP-FAST (Flexible Authentication via Secure Tunneling) was designed by
Cisco to allow for the use of certificates to establish a TLS tunnel in which client
credentials are verified.
To put EAP implementations in a chronological order, think EAP-TLS, EAP-
FAST, and then PEAP. In between came EAP-TTLS, a form of EAP-TLS that

adds tunneling (Extensible Authentication Protocol—Tunneled Transport Layer
Security). Of all the choices, PEAP is the one with more vendors than just Cisco
and thus is currently favored for use today.
Shared, Preshared, and Open Keys
During the authentication process, keyed security measures are applied before
communication can take place. On many APs, authentication can be set to either
shared key authentication or open authentication. The default setting for older
APs typically is open authentication. Open authentication enables access with
only the SSID and/or the correct WEP key for the AP. The problem with open
authentication is that if you do not have other protection or authentication
mechanisms in place, your wireless network is totally open to intruders. When
set to shared key mode, the client must meet security requirements before
communication with the AP can occur.
Shared requires that a WEP key be configured on both the client system and the
AP. This makes authentication with WEP-Shared mandatory, so it is more secure
for wireless transmission. WPA-PSK, the acronym for Wi-Fi Protected Access
with Preshared Key, is a stronger form of encryption in which keys are
automatically changed and authenticated between devices after a specified
period of time or after a specified number of packets have been transmitted.
Note
One implementation of WPA is known as WPA2 Personal. This
implementation uses a preshared key, whereas WPA2 Enterprise needs an
authentication server.
MAC Filtering
To increase wireless security, some APs enable you to configure MAC address
filtering and guest access. MAC address filtering enables you to limit access to
only those specified hosts. Guest access uses a different password and network
name and enables visitors to use the Internet without having access to the rest of
the network (thus avoiding your data and computers).
ExamAlert

Make sure that you understand the purpose of MAC address filtering and
that this works the same whether the network is wired or wireless.
Geofencing
Any wireless technology, but usually GPS and sometimes RFID, can be used to
create a virtual geographic boundary. This boundary is called a geofence. After
that boundary is defined, software can be used to trigger a response when a
device enters or leaves that area. A section of a supermarket, for example, can be
configured to text a coupon code to iPhones for a percentage off milk purchases
to any phone coming within 10 feet of the dairy section.
Similar technology can be used to take attendance in a classroom, at a meeting
location, and so on. Because events can be triggered for not only entering a zone,
but also leaving it, it could be used to send a message to parents if a child leaves
the virtually defined neighborhood, and so on. Still in its infancy, geofencing
technology is expected to grow in acceptance and application over the next few
years.
ExamAlert
Remember that the goal of geofencing is to have a defined boundary and
then be able to respond to what either enters or leaves that area.
Cram Quiz
1. Both WPA and WPA2 were created to implement which 802.11 standard?
 A. x
 B. d
 C. i
 D. g
2. WPA uses which encryption algorithm?
 A. MD5
 B. RC4

 C. CCMP
 D. AES
3. Which of the following technologies can be used to create a virtual
perimeter for mobile devices?
 A. Polygon sites
 B. RADIUS zones
 C. Geofencing
 D. DMZ
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. The WPA and WPA2 technologies were created to implement the 802.11i
standard.
2. B. WPA uses the RC4 encryption algorithm with TKIP.
3. C. Geofencing can be used to create a virtual perimeter for mobile devices.
Common Networking Attacks
 Summarize common networking attacks.
CramSaver
1. What are software programs or code snippets called that execute when a
certain predefined event occurs?
2. What type of malware takes control of a system and demands that a third
party be paid before control is returned to the rightful owner?
Answers
1. Logic bombs are software programs or code snippets that execute when a
certain predefined event occurs.
2. Ransomware takes control of a system and demands that a third party be
paid before restoring control to the rightful party.

Malicious software, or malware, is a serious problem in today’s computing
environments. It is often assumed that malware is composed of viruses.
Although this typically is true, many other forms of malware by definition are
not viruses, but are equally undesirable. Although we commonly associate them
with coming from the outside, do not overlook the possibility for them to come
from inside threats as well (particularly malicious employees who feel slighted
because they did not get a raise or recognition they feel they deserve and have
now become an insider threat).
Malware encompasses many types of malicious software and all were intended
by their developer to have an adverse effect on the network. The following
sections look at some of the more malevolent types.
Denial-of-Service and Distributed Denial-of-
Service Attacks
Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks are designed to tie up network bandwidth and
resources and eventually bring the entire network to a halt. This type of attack is
done simply by flooding a network with more traffic than it can handle. When
more than one computer is used in the attack, it is technically known as a
distributed DoS (DDoS) attack. These typically use a botnet to launch a
coordinated attack through a traffic spike. Almost every attack of this type today
is DDoS, and we will use DoS to mean both.
A DoS attack is not designed to steal data but rather to cripple a network and, in
doing so, cost a company huge amounts of money. It is possible, in fact, for the
attack to be an unintentional, or friendly, DoS attack coming from the inside.
Just as with friendly fire in combat, it matters not that it was unintentional, it
does just as much damage.
The effects of DoS attacks include the following:
 Saturating network resources, which then renders those services unusable
 Flooding the network media, preventing communication between computers
on the network
 Causing user downtime because of an inability to access required services
 Causing potentially huge financial losses for an organization because of

network and service downtime.
Types of DoS Attacks
Several types of DoS attacks exist, and each seems to target a different area. For
instance, they might target bandwidth, network service, memory, CPU, or hard
drive space. When a server or other system is overrun by malicious requests, one
or more of these core resources breaks down, causing the system to crash or stop
responding. A permanent DoS attack continues for more than a short period of
time and requires you to change your routing, IP addresses, or other
configurations to get around it.
Fraggle
In a Fraggle attack, spoofed UDP packets are sent to a network’s broadcast
address. These packets are directed to specific ports, such as port 7 or port 19,
and, after they are connected, can flood the system.
Smurfing
The Smurf attack is similar to a Fraggle attack. However, a ping request is sent
to a broadcast network address, with the sending address spoofed so that many
ping replies overload the victim and prevent it from processing the replies.
Ping of Death
In a ping of death attack, an oversized Internet Control Message Protocol
(ICMP) datagram is used to crash IP devices that were manufactured before
1996.
SYN Flood
In a typical TCP session, communication between two computers is initially
established by a three-way handshake, referred to as a SYN, SYN/ACK, ACK.
At the start of a session, the client sends a SYN message to the server. The server
acknowledges the request by sending a SYN/ACK message back to the client.
The connection is established when the client responds with an ACK message.
In a SYN attack, the victim is overwhelmed with a flood of SYN packets. Every
SYN packet forces the targeted server to produce a SYN/ACK response and then
wait for the ACK acknowledgment. However, the attacker doesn’t respond with
an ACK, or spoofs its destination IP address with a nonexistent address so that
no ACK response occurs. The result is that the server begins filling up with half-

open connections. When all the server’s available resources are tied up on half-
open connections, it stops acknowledging new incoming SYN requests,
including legitimate ones.
Buffer Overflow
A buffer overflow is a type of DoS attack that occurs when more data is put into
a buffer (typically a memory buffer) than it can hold, thereby overflowing it (as
the name implies).
Distributed Reflective DoS
This type of attack is also called an amplification attack, and it targets public
UDP servers. Two of the most common protocols/servers that a distributed
reflective DoS (DRDoS) attack usually goes after are Domain Name Service
(DNS) and Network Time Protocol (NTP) servers, but Simple Network
Management Protocol (SNMP), NetBIOS, and other User Datagram Protocol
(UDP) protocols are also susceptible.
ExamAlert
As you study for the exam, be sure to know that reflective, amplified, and
distributed are varieties/characteristics of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks.
ICMP Flood
An ICMP flood, also known as a ping flood, is a DoS attack in which large
numbers of ICMP messages are sent to a computer system to overwhelm it. The
result is a failure of the TCP/IP protocol stack, which cannot tend to other
TCP/IP requests.
Other Common Attacks
This section details some of the more common attacks used today.
Social Engineering
Social engineering is a common form of cracking. It can be used by both
outsiders and people within an organization. Social engineering is a hacker term
for tricking people into revealing their password or some form of security
information. It might include trying to get users to send passwords or other

information over email, shoulder surfing, or any other method that tricks users
into divulging information. Social engineering is an attack that attempts to take
advantage of human behavior.
Logic Bomb
Software programs or code snippets that execute when a certain predefined event
occurs are known as logic bombs. Such a bomb may send a note to an attacker
when a user is logged on to the Internet and is accessing a certain application, for
example. This message could inform the attacker that the user is ready for an
attack and open a backdoor. Similarly, a programmer could create a program that
always makes sure his/her name appears on the payroll roster; if it doesn’t, then
key files begin to be erased. Any code that is hidden within an application and
causes something unexpected to happen constitutes a logic bomb.
Rogue Access Points and Evil Twins
A rogue access point describes a situation in which a wireless access point has
been placed on a network without the administrator’s knowledge. The result is
that it is possible to remotely access the rogue access point because it likely does
not adhere to company security policies. So, all security can be compromised by
a cheap wireless router placed on the corporate network. An evil twin attack is
one in which a rogue wireless access point poses as a legitimate wireless service
provider to intercept information users transmit.
Advertising Wireless Weaknesses
These attacks start with war driving—driving around with a mobile device
looking for open wireless access points with which to communicate and looking
for weak implementations that can be cracked (called WEP cracking or WPA
cracking). They then lead to war chalking—those who discover a way in to the
network leave signals (often written in chalk) on, or outside, the premise to
notify others that the vulnerability is there. The marks can be on the sidewalk,
the side of the building, a nearby signpost, and so on.
Phishing
Often users receive a variety of emails offering products, services, information,
or opportunities. Unsolicited email of this type is called phishing (pronounced
“fishing”). This technique involves a bogus offer sent to hundreds of thousands
or even millions of email addresses. The strategy plays the odds. For every 1,000

emails sent, perhaps one person replies. Phishing can be dangerous because
users can be tricked into divulging personal information such as credit card
numbers or bank account information. Today, phishing is performed in several
ways. Phishing websites and phone calls are also designed to steal money or
personal information.
Ransomware
With ransomware, software—often delivered through a Trojan horse—takes
control of a system and demands that a third party be paid. The “control” can be
accomplished by encrypting the hard drive, by changing user password
information, or via any of a number of other creative ways. Users are usually
assured that by paying the extortion amount (the ransom), they will be given the
code needed to revert their systems to normal operations.
DNS Poisoning
With DNS poisoning, the DNS server is given information about a name server
that it thinks is legitimate when it isn’t. This can send users to a website other
than the one to which they wanted to go, reroute mail, or do any other type of
redirection wherein data from a DNS server is used to determine a destination.
Another name for this is DNS spoofing, and fast flux is one of the most popular
techniques. It is used by botnets to hide the delivery sites behind a changing
network of compromised hosts that act as proxies.
ARP Cache Poisoning
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) poisoning tries to convince the network that
the attacker’s MAC address is the one associated with an IP address so that
traffic sent to that IP address is wrongly sent to the attacker’s machine.
Spoofing
Spoofing is a technique in which the real source of a transmission, file, or email
is concealed or replaced with a fake source. This technique enables an attacker,
for example, to misrepresent the original source of a file available for download.
Then he can trick users into accepting a file from an untrusted source, believing
it is coming from a trusted source.
Deauthentication
Deauthentication is also known as a disassociation attack. With this type of

attack, the intruder sends a frame to the AP with a spoofed address to make it
look like it came from the victim that disconnects the user from the network.
Because the victim is unable to keep a connection with the AP, it increases their
chances of choosing to use another AP—a rogue one or one in a hotel or other
venue that they have to pay extra to use. A number of hotels had suits filed
against them by the Federal Trade Commission for launching attacks of this type
and generating revenue by requiring their guests to pay for “premium” services
rather than being able to use the free Wi-Fi.
Brute Force
There are a number of ways to ascertain a password, but one of the most
common is a brute force attack in which one value after another is guessed until
the right value is found. Although that could take forever if done manually,
software programs can take lots of values in a remarkably short period of time.
WPS attacks, for example, have become much more common since the
technology (Wi-Fi Protected Setup) is susceptible to brute force attacks used to
guess the user’s PIN. When an attacker gains access, the attacker is then on the
Wi-Fi network.
VLAN Hopping
VLAN hopping, as the name implies, is an exploit of resources on a Virtual LAN
that is made possible because the resources exist on said Virtual LAN. There is
more than one method by which this occurs, but in all of them the result is the
same: An attacking host on a VLAN gains access to resources on other VLANs
that are not supposed to be accessible to them (becoming a compromised
system). Again, regardless of the method employed, the solution is to properly
configure the switches to keep this from happening.
ExamAlert
A compromised system is any that has been adversely impacted
(intentionally or unintentionally) by an untrusted source. The
compromise can relate to confidentiality, integrity, or availability.
Man-in-the-Middle Attacks
In a man-in-the-middle attack, the intruder places himself between the sending

and receiving devices and captures the communication as it passes by. The
interception of the data is invisible to those sending and receiving the data. The
intruder can capture the network data and manipulate it, change it, examine it,
and then send it on. Wireless communications are particularly susceptible to this
type of attack. A rogue access point, a wireless AP that has been installed
without permission, is an example of a man-in-the-middle attack. If the attack is
done with FTP (using the port command), it is known as an FTP bounce attack.
Exploits and Zero-Day Attacks
When a hole is found in a web browser or other software, and miscreants begin
exploiting it the very day it is discovered by the developer (bypassing the 1- to
2-day response time many software providers need to put out a patch after the
hole has been found), it is known as an exploit attack or zero-day attack. Zero-
day attacks are incredibly difficult to respond to. If attackers learn of the
weakness the same day as the developer, they have the ability to exploit it until a
patch is released. Often, the only thing you as a security administrator can do
between the discovery of the exploit and the release of the patch is to turn off the
service. Although this can be a costly undertaking in terms of productivity, it is
the only way to keep the network safe.
ExamAlert
Be ready to identify the types of attacks just described. You can expect
questions on the exam about these types of attacks.
Vulnerabilities and Prevention
The threat from malicious code is a real concern. You need to take precautions to
protect your systems. Although you might not eliminate the threat, you can
significantly reduce it.
One of the primary tools used in the fight against malicious software is
antivirus/antimalware software. Antimalware software (which includes antivirus
software and more) is available from a number of companies, and each offers
similar features and capabilities. You can find solutions that are host based,
cloud/server based, or network based. The following is a list of the common
features and characteristics of antivirus software:

 Real-time protection: An installed antivirus program should continuously
monitor the system looking for viruses. If a program is downloaded, an
application opened, or a suspicious email received, the real-time virus
monitor detects and removes the threat. The virus application sits in the
background, largely unnoticed by the user.
 Virus scanning: An antivirus program must scan selected drives and disks,
either locally or remotely. You can manually run scanning or schedule it to
run at a particular time.
 Scheduling: It is a best practice to schedule virus scanning to occur
automatically at a predetermined time. In a network environment, this
typically is off hours, when the overhead of the scanning process won’t
impact users.
 Live updates: New viruses and malicious software are released with
alarming frequency. It is recommended that the antivirus software be
configured to regularly receive virus updates.
 Email vetting: Emails represent one of the primary sources of virus
delivery. It is essential to use antivirus software that provides email scanning
for both inbound and outbound email.
 Centralized management: If used in a network environment, it is a good
idea to use software that supports managing the virus program from the
server. Virus updates and configurations need to be made only on the server,
not on each client station.
Managing the threat from viruses is considered a proactive measure, with
antivirus software only part of the solution. A complete security protection
strategy requires many aspects to help limit the risk of malware, viruses, and
other threats:
 Develop in-house policies and rules: In a corporate environment or even a
small office, you need to establish what information can be placed on a
system. For example, should users download programs from the Internet?
Can users bring in their own storage media, such as USB flash drives? Is
there a corporate BYOD policy restricting the use of personal smartphones
and other mobile devices?
 Monitoring virus threats: With new viruses coming out all the time, you
need to check whether new viruses have been released and what they are
designed to do.

 Educate users: One of the keys to a complete antivirus solution is to train
users in virus prevention and recognition techniques. If users know what to
look for, they can prevent a virus from entering the system or network. Back
up copies of important documents. It should be mentioned that no solution is
absolute, so care should be taken to ensure that the data is backed up. In the
event of a malicious attack, redundant information is available in a secure
location.
 Automate virus scanning and updates: You can configure today’s
antivirus software to automatically scan and update itself. Because such tasks
can be forgotten and overlooked, it is recommended that you have these
processes scheduled to run at predetermined times.
 Don’t run unnecessary services: Know every service that is running on
your network and the reason for it. If you can avoid running the service,
equate it with putting another lock on the door and do so.
 Keep track of open ports: Just as you don’t want unnecessary services
running, you don’t want unnecessary ports left open. Every one of them is an
unguarded door through which a miscreant can enter.
 Avoid unencrypted channels and clear-text credentials: The days when
these were acceptable have passed. Continuing to use them is tantamount to
inviting an attack.
 Shun unsecure protocols: Once upon a time, clear-text passwords were
okay to use because risks of anyone getting on your network who should not
were minimal. During those days, it was okay to use unsecure protocols as
well because the priority was on ease of use as opposed to data protection.
All of this went out of acceptance decades ago and you must—in the interest
of security—be careful with the following unsecure protocols: Telnet, HTTP,
SLIP, FTP, TFTP, and SNMP (v1 and v2). Secure alternatives—offering the
same functionality, but adding acceptable levels of security—are available
for each. Where possible, opt instead for SSH, SNMPv3, TLS/SSL, SFTP,
HTTPS, and IPsec.
 Patches and updates: All applications, including productivity software,
virus checkers, and especially the operating system, release patches and
updates often, designed to address potential security weaknesses.
Administrators must keep an eye out for these patches and install them when
they are released. Pay particular attention to unpatched/legacy systems and
keep them as secure as possible.

One of the best tools to use when dealing with problems is knowledge. In several
locations, CompTIA stresses that user education is important, but even more
important is that administrators know what is going on and keep learning from
what is going on now and what has gone on in the past. As an example,
TEMPEST is the name of a project commenced by the U.S. government in the
late 1950s that all administrators should be familiar with. TEMPEST was
concerned with reducing electronic noise from devices that would divulge
intelligence about systems and information. This program has become a standard
for computer systems certification. TEMPEST shielding protection means that a
computer system doesn’t emit any significant amounts of electromagnetic
interference (EMI) or radio frequency interference (RFI) (RF emanation). For a
device to be approved as a TEMPEST, it must undergo extensive testing, done to
exacting standards that the U.S. government dictates. Today, control zones and
white noise are used to accomplish the shielding. TEMPEST-certified equipment
often costs twice as much as non-TEMPEST equipment.
ExamAlert
Know some of the ways to prevent networking attacks and mitigate
vulnerabilities.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following is an attack in which a rogue wireless access point
poses as a legitimate wireless service provider to intercept information users
transmit?
 A. Zero day
 B. Phishing
 C. Evil twin
 D. Social engineering
2. Which of the following is a type of DoS attack that occurs when more data
is put into a buffer than it can hold?
 A. Dictionary attack
 B. Buffer overflow

 C. Worm
 D. Trojan horse
3. Which of the following is an attack in which something that appears as a
helpful or harmless program carries and delivers a malicious payload?
 A. Worm
 B. Phish
 C. Evil twin
 D. Trojan horse
4. Which of the following is an attack in which users are tricked into revealing
their passwords or some form of security information?
 A. Bluesnarfing
 B. Phishing
 C. Evil twin
 D. Social engineering
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. An evil twin attack is one in which a rogue wireless access point poses as
a legitimate wireless service provider to intercept information users transmit.
2. B. A buffer overflow is a type of DoS attack that occurs when more data is
put into a buffer than it can hold.
3. D. Trojan horses appear as helpful or harmless programs but, when
installed, carry and deliver a malicious payload.
4. D. Social engineering is a term for tricking people (users) into revealing
their passwords or some form of security information.
Mitigation Techniques
 Explain common mitigation techniques and their purposes.

CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. True or false: A honeypot is a trap that allows the intruder in but does
not allow access to sensitive data.
2. True or false: A root guard is used to prevent misuse of BPDU packets
on a switch.
Answers
1. True. A honeypot is a trap that allows the intruder in but does not allow
access to sensitive data.
2. True. A root guard is used to prevent misuse of BPDU packets on a
switch.
The previous section looked at some of the more common types of networking
attacks and concluded with a discussion of vulnerability prevention. This section
continues that discussion by focusing on mitigation techniques. Mitigation is
defined as the action of reducing the severity, seriousness, or painfulness of
something. When it comes to network security, mitigation is the actions,
techniques, and ways of reducing the possibility of an attack and the severity of
one that may occur. The focus of this section is on issues related to that topic.
Signature Management
Digital signatures are the electronic equivalent of a sealed envelope and are
intended to ensure that a file has not been altered in transit. Any file with a
digital signature is used to verify not only the publishers of the content or file,
but also to verify the content integrity at the time of download. On the network,
PKI enables you to issue certificates to internal developers/contractors and
enables any employee to verify the origin and integrity of downloaded
applications.

Device Hardening
The first section of this chapter looked at network device hardening. Know that
it is important to change default passwords, keep firmware current, and disable
unused elements (ports, services, and the like).
Change Native VLAN
On switches, the native VLAN is the only VLAN that is not tagged in a trunk.
This means that native VLAN frames are transmitted unchanged. By default, the
native VLAN is port 1, and that default represents a weakness in that it is
something known about your network that an attacker could use. To strengthen
security, albeit a small amount, you can change the native VLAN to another port.
The command(s) used to do so are dependent on the vendor and model of your
port but can be easily found online.
Switch and Port Protection
Switches and ports have been mentioned already, but it is worth bringing them
up again because they can represent quite a weakness. Be sure to secure
switches, disable unused ports, and be on the lookout or aware of the issues
discussed in the following sections.
ExamAlert
As you study for the exam, know that securing switches, disabling unused
ports, and using common-sense solutions can go far in improving network
security.
Spanning Tree
The Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) is defined as IEEE 802.1d and the more
recent Rapid Spanning Tree 802.1w. This protocol can be a godsend when it
comes to solving certain problems with switches. Loops, for example, can occur
when more than one bridge or switch is implemented on the network. In this
scenario, the devices can confuse each other by leading one another to believe
that a host is located on a certain segment when it is not. To combat the loop
problem, STP enables bridge/switch interfaces to be assigned a value that is then
used to control the learning process.

Flood Guards, BPDU Guards, and Root Guards
Because switches can be subject to DoS attacks, flood guards are used to look
for and prevent malicious traffic from bringing the switch to a halt. Whether it is
DoS in question, or DDoS, a flood guard is used as protection for a switch and
can be purchased as a standalone device or with another.
Similarly, a bridge protocol data unit (BPDU) guard prevents looping on a
switch. It protects the spanning tree domain from external influence by moving a
nontrunking port into an error state when a BPDU is received on that port.
BPDUs are data messages that are exchanged across the switches via spanning
tree protocol topology. These data packets contain information on ports,
addresses, priorities, and costs and ensure that the data ends up where it was
intended to go; the guard shuts down interfaces that receive BPDUs instead of
putting them into the spanning tree blocking state where they could cause
looping.
Root guards are similar to BPDU guards in that they are used to prevent
malicious exploitation of BPDU packets. The difference is that a root guard is
used to prevent another switch from becoming the BPDU superior. Root guard is
needed when you connect a network that you manage to one that you do not.
DHCP Snooping
Although it sounds like a bad thing, DHCP snooping is just the opposite. It is the
capability for a switch to look at packets and drop DHCP traffic that it
determines to be unacceptable based on the defined rules. The purpose of this is
to prevent rogue DHCP servers from offering IP addresses to DHCP clients.
Demilitarized Zones (Perimeter Network)
An important firewall-related concept is the demilitarized zone (DMZ),
sometimes called a perimeter network. A DMZ is part of a network where you
place servers that must be accessible by sources both outside and inside your
network. However, the DMZ is not connected directly to either network, and it
must always be accessed through the firewall. The military term DMZ is used
because it describes an area that has little or no enforcement or policing.
Using DMZs gives your firewall configuration an extra level of flexibility,
protection, and complexity. Figure 10.3 shows a DMZ configuration.

FIGURE 10.3 A DMZ configuration
By using a DMZ, you can create an additional step that makes it more difficult
for an intruder to gain access to the internal network. In Figure 10.3, for
example, an intruder who tried to come in through Interface 1 would have to
spoof a request from either the web server or proxy server into Interface 2 before
it could be forwarded to the internal network. Although it is not impossible for
an intruder to gain access to the internal network through a DMZ, it is difficult.
ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify the purpose of a DMZ.
VLAN Network Segmentation
By dividing one network into smaller subnetworks, it is possible to optimize it in
a number of ways. The segmentation is accomplished with switches and
VLANs, and the separation can be done to isolate such things as heavy load
systems or certain protocols. By moving those to their own subnetwork, the
result should be performance increases for other parts of the network.

Note
Popular today is using virtual machines (VMs) to segment or separate systems
(software) from the main OS (host versus guest) and the rest of the network
through virtual switches.
Privileged User Account
Enforcing user privileges can be fairly taxing. If the user does not have least
privileges (discussed earlier in this chapter), the user's escalated privileges could
allow them to access data to which they would not otherwise have access and
cause harm to it—intentional or not. Be cognizant of the fact that you won’t have
the same control over user accounts in the cloud as you do locally, and when
someone locks his account by entering the wrong password too many times in a
row, you or they could be at the mercy of the hours that the technical staff is
available at the provider.
You want to carefully monitor all privileged users accounts (admin, root, and so
on) and apply more protection to them than to any other accounts because of the
power they have. Give privileges to users only as needed, and try to limit
elevated permissions to being used only when needed (and then returning to
regular user permissions until elevated ones are needed again).
File Integrity Monitoring
File hashing was discussed earlier in terms of verifying that the files downloaded
are what you expect them to be. The same concept for files you may download
should be applied to files residing on your system. Use checksums and file
integrity systems to monitor your files and make certain the ones you are
backing up are unchanged and complete.
Role Separation
Separation of duties policies are designed to reduce the risk of fraud and to
prevent other losses in an organization. A good policy will require more than one
person to accomplish key processes. This may mean that the person who
processes an order from a customer isn’t the same person who generates the
invoice or deals with the billing.
Separation of duties helps prevent various problems, such as an individual

embezzling money from a company. To embezzle funds successfully, an
individual would need to recruit others to commit an act of collusion—that is, an
agreement between two or more parties established for the purpose of
committing deception or fraud. Collusion, when part of a crime, is also a
criminal act in and of itself.
In addition, separation-of-duties policies can help prevent accidents from
occurring in an organization. Suppose that you’re managing a software
development project. You want someone to perform a quality assurance test on a
new piece of code before it’s put into production. Establishing a clear separation
of duties prevents development code from entering production status until
quality testing is accomplished.
Many banks and financial institutions require multiple steps and approvals to
transfer money. This helps reduce errors and minimizes the likelihood of fraud.
Using ACLs to Restrict Access
Earlier in this chapter, the section “Authentication and Access Controls”
discussed access control lists. The main item to take away is that an ACL defines
who can access resources, and there must be an inherent understanding by the
system that unless permission has been explicitly granted, it is denied.
Honeypots and Honeynets
When talking about network security, honeypots and honeynets are often
mentioned. Honeypots are a rather clever approach to network security but
perhaps a bit expensive. A honeypot is a system set up as a decoy to attract and
deflect attacks from hackers. The server decoy appears to have everything a
regular server does—OS, applications, and network services. The attacker thinks
he is accessing a real network server, but he is in a network trap.
The honeypot has two key purposes. It can give administrators valuable
information on the types of attacks being carried out. In turn, the honeypot can
secure the real production servers according to what it learns. Also, the honeypot
deflects attention from working servers, allowing them to function without being
attacked.
A honeypot can do the following:
 Deflect the attention of attackers from production servers

 Deter attackers if they suspect their actions may be monitored with a
honeypot
 Allow administrators to learn from the attacks to protect the real servers
 Identify the source of attacks, whether from inside the network or outside
ExamAlert
Think of a honeypot as a trap that allows the intruder in but does not
allow access to sensitive data.
One step up from the honeypot is the honeynet. The honeynet is an entire
network set up to monitor attacks from outsiders. All traffic into and out of the
network is carefully tracked and documented. This information is shared with
network professionals to help isolate the types of attacks launched against
networks and to proactively manage those security risks. Honeynets function as
a production network, using network services, applications, and more. Attackers
don’t know that they are actually accessing a monitored network.
Penetration Testing
It is becoming more common for companies to hire penetration testers to test
their system’s defenses. Essentially, a penetration tester will use the same
techniques that a hacker would use to find any flaws in a system’s security.
These flaws may be discovered by means other than directly accessing the
system, such as collecting information from public databases, talking to
employees/partners, dumpster diving, and social engineering. This is known as
passive reconnaissance. In contrast to this, active reconnaissance directly
focuses on the system (port scans, traceroute information, network mapping, and
so forth) to identify weaknesses that could be used to launch an attack.
When doing penetration testing, it is important to have a scope document
outlining the extent of the testing that is to be done. It is equally important to
have permission from an administrator who can authorize such testing—in
writing—authorizing the testing to be conducted.
One weakness a good penetration test looks for is escalation of privilege; that is,
a hole created when code is executed with higher privileges than those of the
user running it. By breaking out of the executing code, the users are left with

higher privileges than they should have.
Three types of penetration testing are Black Box (the tester has absolutely no
knowledge of the system and is functioning in the same manner as an outside
attacker), White Box (the tester has significant knowledge of the system, which
simulates an attack from an insider—a rogue employee), and Gray Box (a
middle ground between the first two types of testing. In gray box testing, the
tester has some limited knowledge of the target system).
Note
With so many security-related topics now appearing on the Network+ exam,
you have a good head start on Security+ certification study after you
successfully finish taking this exam.
Cram Quiz
1. Which of the following is NOT one of the types of penetration testing?
 A. Black Box
 B. White Box
 C. Red Box
 D. Gray Box
2. Which of the following enables bridge/switch interfaces to be assigned a
value that is then used to control the learning process?
 A. LGH
 B. STP
 C. eDiscovery
 D. DTP
3. Which of the following is one step up from the honeypot?
 A. Geofence
 B. VLAN
 C. DMZ

 D. Honeynet
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. The three types of penetration testing are Black Box, White Box, and
Gray Box. The differences among them are based on how much knowledge
of the target system is provided to the tester.
2. B. STP enables bridge/switch interfaces to be assigned a value that is then
used to control the learning process.
3. D. One step up from the honeypot is the honeynet.
What’s Next?
The final chapter of this book focuses on all areas of network troubleshooting,
including troubleshooting best practices and some of the tools and utilities you
use to assist in the troubleshooting process.
No matter how well a network is designed and how many preventive
maintenance schedules are in place, troubleshooting is always necessary.
Because of this, network administrators must develop those troubleshooting
skills.

CHAPTER 11
Network Troubleshooting
This chapter covers the following official Network+ objectives:
 Explain the network troubleshooting methodology.
 Given a scenario, use the appropriate tool.
 Given a scenario, troubleshoot common network service issues.
This chapter covers CompTIA Network+ objectives 5.1, 5.2, and 5.5. For
more information on the official Network+ exam topics, see the “About
the Network+ Exam” section in the Introduction.
Many duties and responsibilities fall under the umbrella of network
administration. Of these, one of the most practiced is that of troubleshooting. No
matter how well a network is designed and how many preventive maintenance
schedules are in place, troubleshooting is always necessary. Because of this,
network administrators must develop those troubleshooting skills.
This chapter focuses on all areas of troubleshooting, including troubleshooting
best practices and some of the tools and utilities you can use to assist in the
troubleshooting process.
Troubleshooting Steps and Procedures
 Explain the network troubleshooting methodology.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What are the key sources from which you can gain information about a
computer problem?

2. What is the final step in the network troubleshooting methodology
CompTIA expects test takers to follow?
Answers
1. It is important to get as much information as possible about the problem.
You can glean information from three key sources: the computer (in the
form of logs and error messages), the computer user experiencing the
problem, and your own observation.
2. Document the findings, the actions, and the outcomes.
Regardless of the problem, effective network troubleshooting follows some
specific steps. These steps provide a framework in which to perform the
troubleshooting process. When you follow them, they can reduce the time it
takes to isolate and fix a problem. The following sections discuss the common
troubleshooting steps and procedures as identified by the CompTIA Network+
objectives:
1. Identify the problem.
 Gather information.
 Duplicate the problem, if possible.
 Question users.
 Identify symptoms.
 Determine if anything has changed.
 Approach multiple problems individually.
2. Establish a theory of probable cause.
 Question the obvious.
 Consider multiple approaches:
 Top-to-bottom/bottom-to-top OSI model.
 Divide and conquer.
3. Test the theory to determine the cause:
 After the theory is confirmed, determine the next steps to resolve the

problem.
 If the theory is not confirmed, reestablish a new theory or escalate.
4. Establish a plan of action to resolve the problem and identify potential
effects.
1. Implement the solution or escalate as necessary.
2. Verify full system functionality and, if applicable, implement preventive
measures.
3. Document findings, actions, and outcomes.
ExamAlert
You should expect questions asking you to identify the troubleshooting
steps in exact order.
Identify the Problem
The first step in the troubleshooting process is to establish exactly what the
problem is. This stage of the troubleshooting process is all about information
gathering, identifying symptoms, questioning users, and determining if anything
has changed. To get this information, you need knowledge of the operating
system used, good communication skills, and a little patience. You need to get as
much information as possible about the problem. You can glean information
from three key sources: the computer (in the form of logs and error messages),
the computer user experiencing the problem, and your own observation.
After you have listed the symptoms, you can begin to identify some of the
potential causes of those symptoms.
ExamAlert
You do not need to know where error messages are stored on an operating
system. You need to know only that the troubleshooting process requires
you to read system-generated log errors.
Identify Symptoms

Some computer problems are isolated to a single user in a single location; others
affect several thousand users spanning multiple locations. Establishing the
affected area is an important part of the troubleshooting process, and it often
dictates the strategies you use to resolve the problem.
ExamAlert
You might be provided with either a description of a scenario or a
description augmented by a network diagram. In either case, you should
carefully read the description of the problem, step by step. In most cases,
the correct answer is fairly logical, and the wrong answers can be easily
identified.
Problems that affect many users are often connectivity issues that disable access
for many users. Such problems often can be isolated to wiring closets, network
devices, and server rooms. The troubleshooting process for problems that are
isolated to a single user often begins and ends at that user’s workstation. The
trail might indeed lead you to the wiring closet or server, but that is probably not
where the troubleshooting process began. Understanding who is affected by a
problem can give you the first clues about where the problem exists. For
example, a change in Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) scope by a
new administrator might affect several users, whereas a user playing with the
TCP/IP settings of a single computer can affect only that person.
Determine Whether Anything Has Changed
Whether there is a problem with a workstation’s access to a database or an entire
network, they were working at some point. Although many people claim that
their computer “just stopped working,” that is unlikely. Far more likely is that
changes to the system or network have caused the problem. Look for newly
installed applications, applied patches or updates, new hardware, a physical
move of the computer, or a new username and password. Establishing any recent
changes to a system can often lead you in the right direction to isolate and
troubleshoot a problem.
Establish a Theory of Probable Cause

ExamAlert
When approaching a problem, start by questioning the obvious. If that
fails, consider ways to tackle the issue from multiple approaches.
Consider using a top-to-bottom or bottom-to-top model approach (such as
working through the OSI model stack) and assigning any co-workers you
have to divide and conquer the problem.
A single problem on a network can have many causes, but with appropriate
information gathering, you can eliminate many of them. When you look for a
probable cause, it is often best to look at the easiest solution first and then work
from there. Even in the most complex of network designs, the easiest solution is
often the right one. For instance, if a single user cannot log on to a network, it is
best to confirm network settings before replacing the network interface card
(NIC). Remember, though, that at this point you need to determine only the most
probable cause, and your first guess might be incorrect. It might take a few tries
to determine the correct cause of the problem.
ExamAlert
Avoid discounting a possible answer because it seems too easy. Many of
the troubleshooting questions are based on possible real-world scenarios,
some of which do have easy or obvious solutions.
Test the Theory to Determine Cause
After questioning the obvious, you need to establish a theory. After you
formulate a theory, you should attempt to confirm it. An example might be a
theory that users can no longer print because they downloaded new software that
changed the print drivers, or that they can no longer run the legacy application
they used to run after the latest service pack was installed.
If the theory can be confirmed, you must plot a course of action—a list of the
next steps to take to resolve the problem. If the theory cannot be confirmed (in
the example given, no new software was downloaded and no service pack was
applied), you must establish a new theory or consider escalating the problem.

Establish a Plan of Action
After identifying a cause, but before implementing a solution, you should
establish a plan for the solution. This is particularly a concern for server systems
in which taking the server offline is a difficult and undesirable prospect. After
identifying the cause of a problem on the server, it is absolutely necessary to
plan for the solution. The plan must include the details of when the server or
network should be taken offline and for how long, what support services are in
place, and who will be involved in correcting the problem.
Planning is an important part of the whole troubleshooting process and can
involve formal or informal written procedures. Those who do not have
experience troubleshooting servers might wonder about all the formality, but this
attention to detail ensures the least amount of network or server downtime and
the maximum data availability.
Tip
If part of an action plan includes shutting down a server or another similar
event that can impact many users, it is a best practice to let users know when
they will be shut out of the network. This allows them to properly shut off any
affected applications and not be frustrated by not being able to access the
network or other services.
With the plan in place, you should be ready to implement a solution—that is,
apply the patch, replace the hardware, plug in a cable, or implement some other
solution. In an ideal world, your first solution would fix the problem; however,
unfortunately this is not always the case. If your first solution does not fix the
problem, you need to retrace your steps and start again.
You must attempt only one solution at a time. Trying several solutions at once
can make it unclear which one corrected the problem.
Implement the Solution or Escalate
After the corrective change has been made to the server, network, or
workstation, you must test the results—never assume. This is when you find out
if you were right and the remedy you applied worked. Don’t forget that first
impressions can deceive, and a fix that seems to work on first inspection might

not have corrected the problem.
The testing process is not always as easy as it sounds. If you are testing a
connectivity problem, it is not difficult to ascertain whether your solution was
successful. However, changes made to an application or to databases you are
unfamiliar with are much more difficult to test. It might be necessary to have
people who are familiar with the database or application run the tests with you in
attendance.
Determine Whether Escalation Is Necessary
Sometimes the problems you encounter fall outside the scope of your
knowledge. Few organizations expect their administrators to know everything,
but organizations do expect administrators to fix any problem. To do this, you
often need additional help.
Note
System administration is often as much about knowing whom and what to
refer to in order to get information about a problem as it is about actually
fixing the problem.
Technical escalation procedures do not follow a specific set of rules; rather, the
procedures to follow vary from organization to organization and situation to
situation. Your organization might have an informal arrangement or a formal one
requiring documented steps and procedures to be carried out. Whatever the
approach, general practices should be followed for appropriate escalation.
Unless otherwise specified by the organization, the general rule is to start with
the closest help and work out from there. If you work in an organization that has
an IT team, talk with others on your team; every IT professional has had
different experiences, and someone else may know about the issue at hand. If
you are still struggling with the problem, it is common practice to notify a
supervisor or head administrator, especially if the problem is a threat to the
server’s data or can bring down the server.
Suppose that, as a server administrator, you notice a problem with a hard disk in
a RAID 1 array on a Linux server. You know how to replace drives in a failed
RAID 1 configuration, but you have no experience working with software RAID
on a Linux server. This situation would most certainly require an escalation of
the problem. The job of server administrator in this situation is to notice the

failed RAID 1 drive and to recruit the appropriate help to repair the RAID failure
within Linux.
Note
When you are confronted with a problem, it is yours until it has been solved
or passed to someone else. Of course, the passing on of an issue requires that
both parties know that it has been passed on.
Verify Full System Functionality
At times, you might apply a fix that corrects one problem but creates another.
Many such circumstances are hard to predict—but not always. For instance, you
might add a new network application, but the application requires more
bandwidth than your current network infrastructure can support. The result
would be that overall network performance would be compromised.
Everything done to a network can have a ripple effect and negatively affect
another area of the network. Actions such as adding clients, replacing hubs or
switches, and adding applications can all have unforeseen results. It is difficult to
always know how the changes you make to a network might affect the network’s
functioning. The safest thing to do is assume that the changes you make will
affect the network in some way and realize that you have to figure out how. This
is when you might need to think outside the box and try to predict possible
outcomes.
It is imperative that you verify full system functionality before you are satisfied
with the solution. After you obtain that level of satisfaction, you should look at
the problem and ascertain if any preventive measures should be implemented to
keep the same problem from occurring again.
Document the Findings, Actions, and Outcomes
Although it is often neglected in the troubleshooting process, documentation is
as important as any of the other troubleshooting procedures. Documenting a
solution involves keeping a record of all the steps taken during the fix—not
necessarily just the solution.
For the documentation to be of use to other network administrators in the future,
it must include several key pieces of information. When documenting a

procedure, you should include the following information:
 When: When was the solution implemented? You must know the date,
because if problems occur after your changes, knowing the date of your fix
makes it easier to determine whether your changes caused the problems.
 Why: Although it is obvious when a problem is being fixed why it is being
done, a few weeks later, it might become less clear why that solution was
needed. Documenting why the fix was made is important because if the same
problem appears on another system, you can use this information to reduce
the time needed to find the solution.
 What: The successful fix should be detailed, along with information about
any changes to the configuration of the system or network that were made to
achieve the fix. Additional information should include version numbers for
software patches or firmware, as appropriate.
 Results: Many administrators choose to include information on both
successes and failures. The documentation of failures might prevent you
from going down the same road twice, and the documentation of successful
solutions can reduce the time it takes to get a system or network up and
running.
 Who: It might be that information is left out of the documentation or
someone simply wants to ask a few questions about a solution. In both cases,
if the name of the person who made a fix is in the documentation, he or she
can easily be tracked down. Of course, this is more of a concern in
environments that have a large IT staff or if system repairs are performed by
contractors instead of company employees.
Cram Quiz
1. A user reports that she can no longer access a legacy database. What should
be one of the first questions you ask?
 A. What has changed since the last time you accessed that database?
 B. How many help calls have you placed in the past few months?
 C. Who originally installed or created that database?
 D. How long have you worked here?
2. You’ve spent 2 hours trying to fix a problem and then realize that it falls

outside of your area of expertise and ability to fix. What should you do in
most organizations?
 A. Let the user immediately know that she needs to call someone else;
then exit the scene so another person can help.
 B. Formulate a workaround; then document the problem and bring it up
at the next meeting.
 C. Escalate the issue with a supervisor or manager.
 D. Continue working on the problem, trying as many solutions as you
can find, until you solve the problem.
3. You get numerous calls from users who cannot access an application. Upon
investigation, you find that the application crashed. You restart the
application, and it appears to run okay. What is the next step in the
troubleshooting process?
 A. Email the users to let them know that they can use the application
again.
 B. Test the application to ensure that it operates correctly.
 C. Document the problem and the solution.
 D. Reload the application executables from the CD, and restart it.
4. A user tells you that she is having a problem accessing her email. What is
the first step in the troubleshooting process?
 A. Document the problem.
 B. Make sure that the user’s email address is valid.
 C. Discuss the problem with the user.
 D. Visit the user’s desk to reload the email client software.
5. You have successfully fixed a problem with a server and have tested the
application and let the users back on to the system. What is the next step in
the troubleshooting process?
 A. Document the problem.
 B. Restart the server.
 C. Document the problem and the solution.

 D. Clear the error logs of any reference to the problem.
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. Establishing any recent changes to a system can often lead you in the
right direction to isolate and troubleshoot a problem.
2. C. When a problem is outside of your ability to fix, you must escalate the
issue. Unless otherwise specified by the organization, the general rule is to
start with the closest help and work out from there. None of the other options
are acceptable choices.
3. B. After you fix a problem, you should test it fully to ensure that the
network operates correctly before you allow users to log back on. The steps
described in answers A and C are valid but only after the application has
been tested. Answer D is incorrect because you would reload the executable
only as part of a systematic troubleshooting process. Because the application
loads, it is unlikely that the executable has become corrupted.
4. C. Not enough information is provided for you to come up with a solution.
In this case, the next troubleshooting step would be to talk to the user and
gather more information about exactly what the problem is. All the other
answers are valid troubleshooting steps but only after the information
gathering has been completed.
5. C. After you have fixed a problem, tested the fix, and let users back on to
the system, you should create detailed documentation that describes the
problem and the solution. Answer A is incorrect because you must document
both the problem and the solution. You do not need to restart the server, so
Answer B is incorrect. Answer D would be performed only after the
system’s documentation has been created.
Hardware and Software Troubleshooting
Tools
 Given a scenario, use the appropriate tool.
CramSaver

If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What tools are used to attach twisted-pair network cable to connectors
within a patch panel?
2. What are the two parts of a toner probe?
Answers
1. Punchdown tools are used to attach twisted-pair network cable to
connectors within a patch panel.
2. A toner probe has two parts: the tone generator, or toner, and the tone
locator, or probe.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
A large part of network administration involves having the right tools for the job
and knowing when and how to use them. Selecting the correct tool for a
networking job sounds like an easy task, but network administrators can choose
from a mind-boggling number of tools and utilities.
Given the diverse range of tools and utilities available, it is unlikely that you will
encounter all the tools available—or even all those discussed in this chapter. For
the Network+ exam, you are required to have general knowledge of the tools
available and what they are designed to do.
Until networks become completely wireless, network administrators can expect
to spend some of their time using a variety of media-related troubleshooting and
installation tools. Some of these tools (such as the tone generator and locator)
may be used to troubleshoot media connections, and others (such as wire
crimpers and punchdown tools) are used to create network cables and

connections.
The Basic Tools
Although many costly, specialized networking tools and devices are available to
network administrators, the most widely used tools cost only a few dollars: the
standard screwdrivers we use on almost a daily basis. As a network
administrator, you can expect with amazing regularity to take the case off a
system to replace a network interface card (NIC) or perhaps remove the cover
from a hub or switch to replace a fan. Advanced cable testers and other
specialized tools will not help you when a screwdriver is needed.
Wire Crimpers, Strippers, and Snips
Wire crimpers are tools you might regularly use. Like many things, making your
own cables can be fun at first, but the novelty soon wears off. Basically, a wire
crimper is a tool that you use to attach media connectors to the ends of cables.
For instance, you use one type of wire crimper to attach RJ-45 connectors on
unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) cable. You use a different type of wire crimper to
attach British Naval Connectors/Bayonet Neill-Concelman (BNCs) to coaxial
cabling.
Tip
When making cables, always order more connectors than you need; a few
mishaps will probably occur along the way.
In a sense, you can think of a wire crimper as a pair of special pliers. You insert
the cable and connector separately into the crimper, making sure that the wires in
the cable align with the appropriate connectors. Then, by squeezing the
crimper’s handles, you force metal connectors through the cable’s wires, making
the connection between the wire and the connector.
When you crimp your own cables, you need to be sure to test them before
putting them on the network. It takes only a momentary lapse to make a mistake
when creating a cable, and you can waste time later trying to isolate a problem in
a faulty cable.

Two other commonly used wiring tools are strippers and snips. Wire strippers
come in a variety of shapes and sizes. Some are specifically designed to strip the
outer sheathing from coaxial cable, and others are designed to work best with
UTP cable. All strippers are designed to cleanly remove the sheathing from wire
to make sure a clean contact can be made.
Many administrators do not have specialized wire strippers unless they do a lot
of work with copper-based wiring. However, standard wire strippers are good
things to have on hand.
Wire snips are tools designed to cleanly cut the cable. Sometimes network
administrators buy cable in bulk and use wire snips to cut the cable into desired
lengths. The wire strippers are then used to prepare the cable for the attachment
of the connectors.
Note
Punchdown tools are used to attach twisted-pair network cable to connectors
within a patch panel. Specifically, they connect twisted-pair wires to the
insulation displacement connector (IDC).
Tone Generator and Probes
A toner probe is a device that can save a network installer many hours of
frustration. This device has two parts: the tone generator, or toner, and the tone
locator, or probe. The toner sends the tone, and at the other end of the cable, the
probe receives the toner’s signal. This tool makes it easier to find the beginning
and end of a cable. You might hear the tone generator and tone locator referred
to as the fox and hound.
As you might expect, the purpose of the tone probe is to generate a signal that is
transmitted on the wire you are attempting to locate. At the other end, you press
the probe against individual wires. When it makes contact with the wire that has
the signal on it, the locator emits an audible signal or tone.
The tone locator probe is a useful device, but it does have some drawbacks.
First, it often takes two people to operate one at each end of the cable. Of course,
one person could just keep running back and forth, but if the cable is run over
great distances, this can be a problem. Second, using the toner probe is time
consuming because it must be attached to each cable independently.

Note
Many problems that can be discovered with a tone generator are easy to
prevent by taking the time to properly label cables. If the cables are labeled at
both ends, you will not need to use such a tool to locate them.
Note
Toner probes are specifically used to locate cables hidden in floors, ceilings,
or walls and to track cables from the patch panels to their destinations.
Loopback Adapter
A number of items fall under the loopback umbrella, and all of them serve the
same purpose—they allow you to test a device/configuration/connectivity
component using a dummy. The most popular loopback is the address used with
ping (discussed later in this chapter), but Windows also includes a loopback
adapter, which is a dummy network card (no hardware) used for testing a virtual
network environment.
Various loopback adapters—actual hardware—can be purchased and used to test
Ethernet jacks, fiber jacks, and so on.
Protocol Analyzer
Protocol analyzers are used to do just that—analyze network protocols such as
TCP, UDP, HTTP, and FTP. Protocol analyzers can be hardware or software
based. In use, protocol analyzers help diagnose computer networking problems,
alert you to unused protocols, identify unwanted or malicious network traffic,
and help isolate network traffic-related problems.
Like packet sniffers, protocol analyzers capture the communication stream
between systems. But unlike the sniffer, the protocol analyzer captures more
than network traffic; it reads and decodes the traffic. Decoding allows the
administrator to view the network communication in English. From this,
administrators can get a better idea of the traffic that is flowing on the network.
As soon as unwanted or damaged traffic is spotted, analyzers make it easy to
isolate and repair. For example, if there is a problem with specific TCP/IP
communication, such as a broadcast storm, the analyzer can find the source of

the TCP/IP problem and isolate the system causing the storm. Protocol analyzers
also provide many real-time trend statistics that help you justify to management
the purchase of new hardware.
You can use protocol analyzers for two key reasons:
 Identify protocol patterns: By creating a historical baseline of analysis,
administrators can spot trends in protocol errors. That way, when a protocol
error occurs, it can be researched in the documentation to see if that error has
occurred before and what was done to fix it.
 Decoding information: Capturing and decoding network traffic allows
administrators to see what exactly is going on with the network at a protocol
level. This helps find protocol errors as well as potential intruders.
Caution
Protocol analyzers enable administrators to examine the bandwidth that a
particular protocol is using.
Media/Cable Testers
A media tester, also called a cable tester, defines a range of tools designed to test
whether a cable properly works. Any tool that facilitates the testing of a cable
can be deemed a cable tester. However, a specific tool called a media tester
enables administrators to test a segment of cable, looking for shorts, improperly
attached connectors, or other cable faults. All media testers tell you whether the
cable works correctly and where the problem in the cable might be.
Generically, the phrase line tester can be used for any device that tests a media
line. Although products are available that are Ethernet line testers, fiber line
testers, and so on, most often a “line tester” is used to check telephone wiring
and usually includes RJ-11 plugs as well as alligator clips.
A cable certifier is a type of tester that enables you to certify cabling by testing it
for speed and performance to see that the implementation will live up to the
ratings. Most stress and test the system based on noise and error testing. You
need to know that the gigabit cable you think you have run is actually providing
that speed to the network.
TDR and OTDR

A time domain reflectometer (TDR) is a device used to send a signal through a
particular medium to check the cable’s continuity. Good-quality TDRs can locate
many types of cabling faults, such as a severed sheath, damaged conductors,
faulty crimps, shorts, loose connectors, and more. Although network
administrators will not need to use a tool such as this every day, it could
significantly help in the troubleshooting process. TDRs help ensure that data sent
across the network is not interrupted by poor cabling that may cause faults in
data delivery.
Note
TDRs work at the physical layer of the OSI model, sending a signal through a
length of cable, looking for cable faults.
Because the majority of network cabling is copper based, most tools designed to
test cabling are designed for copper-based cabling. However, when you test
fiber-optic cable, you need an optical tester.
An optical cable tester performs the same basic function as a wire media tester,
but on optical media. The most common problem with an optical cable is a break
in the cable that prevents the signal from reaching the other end. Due to the
extended distances that can be covered with fiber-optic cables, degradation is
rarely an issue in a fiber-optic LAN environment.
Ascertaining whether a signal reaches the other end of a fiber-optic cable is
relatively easy, but when you determine that there is a break, the problem
becomes locating the break. That’s when you need a tool called an optical time
domain reflectometer (OTDR). By using an OTDR, you can locate how far along
in the cable the break occurs. The connection on the other end of the cable might
be the source of the problem, or perhaps there is a break halfway along the cable.
Either way, an OTDR can pinpoint the problem.
Unless you work extensively with fiber-optic cable, you are unlikely to have an
OTDR or even a fiber-optic cable tester in your toolbox. Specialized cabling
contractors will have them, though, so knowing they exist is important.
You can use a light meter to certify and troubleshoot fiber. A light source is
placed on one end and the light meter is used at the opposite end to measure loss.
Multimeter

One of the simplest cable-testing devices is a multimeter. By using the continuity
setting, you can test for shorts in a length of coaxial cable. Or if you know the
correct cable pinouts and have needlepoint probes, you can test twisted-pair
cable.
A basic multimeter combines several electrical meters into a single unit that can
measure voltage, current, and resistance. Advanced models can also measure
temperature.
A multimeter has a display, terminals, probes, and a dial to select various
measurement ranges. A digital multimeter has a numeric digital display, and an
analog has a dial display. Inside a multimeter, the terminals are connected to
different resistors, depending on the range selected.
Network multimeters can do much more than test electrical current:
 Ping specific network devices: A multimeter can ping and test response
times of key networking equipment, such as routers, DNS servers, DHCP
servers, and more.
 Verify network cabling: You can use a network multimeter to isolate cable
shorts, split pairs, and other faults.
 Locate and identify cable: Quality network multimeters enable
administrators to locate cables at patch panels and wall jacks using digital
tones.
 Documentation ability: Multimeter results can be downloaded to a PC for
inspection. Most network multimeters provide a means such as USB ports to
link to a PC.
Spectrum Analyzer
A spectrum analyzer measures the magnitude of an input signal versus frequency
within the full frequency range of the instrument and can be used for a wide
range of signals. Today, they are commonly used with Wi-Fi to reveal Wi-Fi
hotspots and detect wireless network access with LED visual feedback. Such
devices can be configured to scan specific frequencies. When working with
802.11b/g/n/ac networks, you will most certainly require scanning for 2.4 GHz
or 5 GHz RF signals.
Such devices can be used in the troubleshooting process to see where and how
powerful RF signals are. Given the increase in wireless technologies, RF

detectors are sure to continue to increase in popularity.
Packet Sniffers
Packet sniffers, also referred to as packet/network analyzers, are commonly used
on networks. They are either a hardware device or software that basically
eavesdrops on transmissions traveling throughout the network and can be helpful
in performing packet flow monitoring. The packet sniffer quietly captures data
and saves it to be reviewed later. Packet sniffers can also be used on the Internet
to capture data traveling between computers. Internet packets often have long
distances to travel, going through various servers, routers, and gateways.
Anywhere along this path, packet sniffers can quietly sit and collect data. Given
the capability of packet sniffers to sit and silently collect data packets, it is easy
to see how they could be exploited.
Note
As the name implies, a packet sniffer is a program that targets packets of data
transmitted over the Internet and looks for data within them. One of the
dangers that disgruntled employees pose is that they are already allowed on
your network and thus they have the ability to use a packet sniffer on the
network. Through packet sniffing, they can intercept data far beyond what
they would or should have access to.
You should use two key defenses against packet sniffers to protect your network:
 Use a switched network, which most today are. In a switched network, data
is sent from one computer system and is directed from the switch only to
intended targeted destinations. In an older network using traditional hubs, the
hub does not switch the traffic to isolated users but to all users connected to
the hub’s ports. This shotgun approach to network transmission makes it
easier to place a packet sniffer on the network to obtain data.
 Ensure that all sensitive data is encrypted as it travels. Ordinarily, encryption
is used when data is sent over a public network such as the Internet, but it
may also be necessary to encrypt sensitive data on a LAN. Encryption can be
implemented in a number of ways. For example, connections to web servers
can be protected using the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol and HTTPS.
Communications to mail servers can also be encrypted using SSL. For public
networks, the IPsec protocol can provide end-to-end encryption services.

Port Scanner
Port scanners are software-based security utilities designed to search a network
host for open ports on a TCP/IP-based network. As a refresher, in a TCP/IP-
based network, a system can be accessed through one of 65,535 available port
numbers. Each network service is associated with a particular port.
Note
Chapter 3, “Addressing, Routing, and Switching,” includes a list of some of
the most common TCP/IP suite protocols and their port assignments.
Many of the thousands of ports are closed by default; however, many others,
depending on the OS, are open by default. These are the ports that can cause
trouble. Like packet sniffers, port scanners can be used by both administrators
and hackers. Hackers use port scanners to try to find an open port that they can
use to access a system. Port scanners are easily obtained on the Internet either
for free or for a modest cost. After it is installed, the scanner probes a computer
system running TCP/IP, looking for a UDP or TCP port that is open and
listening.
When a port scanner is used, several port states may be reported:
 Open/listening: The host sent a reply indicating that a service is listening on
the port. There was a response from the port.
 Closed or denied or not listening: No process is listening on that port.
Access to this port will likely be denied.
 Filtered or blocked: There was no reply from the host, meaning that the
port is not listening or the port is secured and filtered.
Note
Sometimes, an Internet service provider (ISP) takes the initiative and blocks
specific traffic entering its network before the traffic reaches the ISP’s
customers, or after the traffic leaves the customers and before it exits the
network. This is done to protect customers from well-known attacks.
Because others can potentially review the status of our ports, it is critical that
administrators know which ports are open and potentially vulnerable. As

mentioned, many tools and utilities are available for this. The quickest way to
get an overview of the ports used by the system and their status is to issue the
netstat -a command from the command line. The following is a sample of
the output from the netstat -a command and active connections for a
computer system:
Click here to view code image
Proto   Local Address          Foreign Address     State
TCP    0.0.0.0:135            mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:10114          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:10115          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:20523          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:20943          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:49152          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:49153          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:49154          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:49155          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:49156          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    0.0.0.0:49157          mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    127.0.0.1:5354         mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    127.0.0.1:27015        mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    127.0.0.1:27015        mike-PC:49187       ESTABLISHED
TCP    127.0.0.1:49187        mike-PC:27015       ESTABLISHED
TCP    192.168.0.100:49190    206.18.166.15:http  CLOSED
TCP    192.168.1.66:139       mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:135               mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:445               mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:2869              mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:5357              mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:10115             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:20523             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:49152             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:49153             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:49154             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:49155             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:49156             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
TCP    [::]:49157             mike-PC:0           LISTENING
UDP    0.0.0.0:123            *:*
UDP    0.0.0.0:500            *:*
UDP    0.0.0.0:3702           *:*
UDP    0.0.0.0:3702           *:*
As you can see from the output, the system has many listening ports. Not all
these suggest that a risk exists, but the output does let you know that there are
many listening ports and that they might be vulnerable. To test for actual
vulnerability, you use a port scanner. For example, you can use a free online

scanner to probe the system. Many free online scanning services are available.
Although a network administrator might use these free online tools out of
curiosity, for better security testing, you should use a quality scanner.
Caution
Administrators use the detailed information revealed from a port scan to
ensure network security. Port scans identify closed, open, and listening ports.
However, port scanners also can be used by people who want to compromise
security by finding open and unguarded ports.
Wi-Fi Analyzer
As more networks go wireless, you need to pay special attention to issues
associated with them. Wireless survey tools can be used to create heat maps
showing the quantity and quality of wireless network coverage in areas. They
can also allow you to see access points (including rogues) and security settings.
These can be used to help you design and deploy an efficient network, and they
can also be used (by you or others) to find weaknesses in your existing network
(often marketed for this purpose as Wi-Fi analyzers).
Bandwidth Speed Tester and Looking Glasses
Two types of websites that can be invaluable when it comes to networking are
speed test sites and looking-glass sites. Speed test sites, as the name implies, are
bandwidth speed testers that report the speed of the connection that you have to
them and can be helpful in determining if you are getting the rate your ISP has
promised.
Looking-glass sites are servers running looking-glass (LG) software that allow
you to see routing information. The servers act as a read-only portal giving
information about the backbone connection. Most of these servers will show
ping information, trace (tracert/traceroute) information, and Border
Gateway Protocol (BGP) information.
ExamAlert
Think of a looking-glass site as a graphical interface to routing-related
information.

Environmental Monitors
When discussing environmental monitoring, you often refer to the temperature
of the server and network equipment rooms. In general, the heat tolerance range
for computer equipment is surprisingly wide. For example, consider a typical
server system, which can happily operate in a range between 50°F and 93°F (10°
and 33.8° Celsius). That is a spread of 43°F (23.8°C), plenty of room in a normal
heated environment. But the problem is that if you maintain a computer room at
either the upper or lower end of these levels, the equipment will run, but for how
long, no one knows.
Although no specific figures relate to the recommended temperature of server
rooms, the accepted optimum is around 70° to 72°F (21° to 22°C). At this
temperature, the equipment in the room should be able to operate, and those
working in the room should not get too cold. Human beings generally require a
higher temperature than computer equipment, which is why placing servers in an
office space with staff is not ideal.
Many people assume that the biggest problem with servers and network
equipment is overheating. To some extent, this is true; servers in particular
generate a great deal of heat and can overheat to the point where components
fail. But this is only one heat-related issue. A more significant, and more
gradual, problem is that of temperature consistency.
Heat causes components to expand, and cooling causes them to contract. Even
the slightest temperature shift causes the printed circuit boards and chips to shift,
and if they shift too much or too often, the chance of their becoming separated
from their connections is greatly increased. This is known as chip creep.
Keeping the heat at a moderate and constant level reduces the expansion and
contraction of the boards and increases the components’ reliability.
ExamAlert
Never wedge open a door to an environmentally controlled room, no
matter how cold you get. An open door not only defeats the purpose of the
controlled environment, it can damage air conditioning units.
Environmental monitors are part of how administrators keep their equipment

rooms at the right temperature. The environmental monitor sits in the equipment
room and constantly documents changes in room temperature and humidity. If
radical changes in temperature are detected, an alert is sent to the administrator.
This can sometimes occur if someone leaves a door to the server room open, the
air conditioning breaks, or some piece of network hardware is producing a lot of
heat. Although network environmental monitors might not often be needed, just
having them installed gives administrators peace of mind.
Keeping It Cool
Fortunately, the solution to the heat problem is relatively simple. You use an air
conditioning unit. The only problem is, you cannot use just any old A/C unit.
Having a late-1960s window unit might be better than nothing, but you need
high-quality protection.
High-quality air conditioning systems fall under the domain of industrial
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment. Server
environment-specific air conditioning units are designed to maintain a constant
temperature. High-quality units guarantee an accuracy of plus or minus 1° F.
Most units have an audible alarm, but some also can communicate with
management systems so that the server room temperature can be monitored
remotely. Although the icy blast of a server room air conditioning system might
not be welcomed by those who have to work in it for an extended period of time,
the discomfort is far outweighed by the benefit to the server equipment.
Calculating the correct size and type of air conditioning unit can be a tricky
proposition. Air conditioning systems are rated on how many cubic feet they can
cool. Using this figure, and estimating the increase in temperature caused by the
hardware in the room, you will have the basic information you need to choose an
A/C unit. However, the calculation should take into account potential future
growth. In some cases, a standby A/C unit is also installed. Whether such a
system is required depends on how much fault tolerance you need and are
willing to pay for.
Cram Quiz
1. While you were away, an air conditioning unit malfunctioned in a server
room, and some equipment overheated. Which of the following would have

alerted you to the problem?
 A. Multimeter
 B. Environmental monitor
 C. TDR
 D. OTDR
2. What tool would you use when working with an IDC?
 A. Wire crimper
 B. Media tester
 C. OTDR
 D. Punchdown tool
3. As a network administrator, you work in a wiring closet where none of the
cables have been labeled. Which of the following tools are you most likely
to use to locate the physical ends of the cable?
 A. Toner probe
 B. Wire crimper
 C. Punchdown tool
 D. ping
4. You are installing a new system into an existing star network, and you need
a cable that is 45 feet long. Your local vendor does not stock cables of this
length, so you are forced to make your own. Which of the following tools do
you need to complete the task?
 A. Optical tester
 B. Punchdown tool
 C. Crimper
 D. UTP splicer
Cram Quiz Answers
1. B. Environmental monitors are used in server and network equipment rooms

to ensure that the temperature does not fluctuate too greatly. In the case of a
failed air conditioner, the administrator is alerted to the drastic changes in
temperature. Multimeters, TDRs, and OTDRs are used to work with copper-
based media.
2. D. You use a punchdown tool when working with an IDC. All the other
tools are associated with making and troubleshooting cables; they are not
associated with IDCs.
3. A. The toner probe tool, along with the tone locator, can be used to trace
cables. Crimpers and punchdown tools are not used to locate a cable. The
ping utility would be of no help in this situation.
4. C. When attaching RJ-45 connectors to UTP cables, the wire crimper is the
tool you use. None of the other tools listed are used in the construction of
UTP cable.
Command-Line Troubleshooting Tools
 Given a scenario, use the appropriate tool.
CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What TCP/IP command can be used to troubleshoot DNS problems?
2. What is the Linux, Mac OS, and UNIX equivalent of the ipconfig
command?
3. What utility is the part of the TCP/IP suite and has the function of
resolving IP addresses to MAC addresses?
Answers
1. The nslookup command is a TCP/IP diagnostic tool used to
troubleshoot DNS problems. On Linux, UNIX, and Mac OS systems, you
can also use the dig command for the same purpose.

2. The ifconfig command is the Linux, Mac OS, and UNIX equivalent
of the ipconfig command.
3. The function of arp is to resolve IP addresses to MAC addresses.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
For anyone working with TCP/IP networks, troubleshooting connectivity is
something that must be done. This section describes the tools used in the
troubleshooting process and identifies scenarios in which they can be used.
You can use many utilities when troubleshooting TCP/IP. Although the utilities
available vary from platform to platform, the functionality between platforms is
quite similar. Table 11.1 lists the TCP/IP troubleshooting tools covered on the
Network+ exam, along with their purpose.
TABLE 11.1 Common TCP/IP Troubleshooting Tools and Their Purposes
Tool
Description
tracert/traceroute
Used to track the path a packet takes as it travels
across a network. tracert is used on Windows
systems; traceroute is used on UNIX, Linux,
and Mac OS systems.
tracert -6
traceroute6
traceroute -6
Performs the same function as
tracert/traceroute, but using the IPv6
protocol in place of IPv4.
ping
Used to test connectivity between two devices on a
network with IPv4.
ping6/ping -6
Used to test connectivity between two devices on a
network using the IPv6 protocol in place of IPv4.
pathping
A Windows-based utility that combines the

functionality of ping and tracert to test
connectivity between two devices on a network.
arp
Used to view and work with the IP address to MAC
address resolution cache.
arp ping
Uses ARP to test connectivity between systems
rather than using Internet Control Message Protocol
(ICMP), as done with a regular ping.
netstat
Used to view the current TCP/IP connections on a
system.
iptables
Used to configure Linux kernel firewall.
ipconfig
Used to view and renew TCP/IP configuration on a
Windows system.
ifconfig
Used to view TCP/IP configuration on a UNIX,
Linux, or Mac OS system.
nslookup/dig
Used to perform manual DNS lookups. nslookup
can be used on Windows, UNIX, Mac OS, and
Linux systems. dig can be used on UNIX, Linux,
and Mac OS systems.
tcpdump
A Linux-based packet analyzer.
route
Used to view and configure the routes in the
routing table.
nmap
A popular vulnerability scanner.
The following sections look in more detail at these utilities and the output they
produce.
Note
Many of the utilities discussed in this chapter have a help facility that you can
access by typing the command followed by /? or -?. On a Windows system,
for example, you can get help on the netstat utility by typing netstat
/?. Sometimes, using a utility with an invalid switch also brings up the help
screen.

ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify what tool to use in a given scenario. Remember,
there might be more than one tool that could be used. You will be
expected to pick the best one for the situation described.
You will be asked to identify the output from a command, and you should be
able to interpret the information provided by the command. In a performance-
based question, you may be asked to enter the appropriate command for a given
scenario.
The 
Trace 
Route 
Utility
(tracert/traceroute)
The trace route utility does exactly what its name implies—it traces the route
between two hosts. It does this by using ICMP echo packets to report
information at every step in the journey. Each of the common network operating
systems provides a trace route utility, but the name of the command and the
output vary slightly on each. However, for the purposes of the Network+ exam,
you should not concern yourself with the minor differences in the output format.
Table 11.2 shows the traceroute command syntax used in various operating
systems.
Note
The phrase trace route utility is used in this section to refer generically to the
various route-tracing applications available on common operating systems. In
a live environment, you should become familiar with the version of the tool
used on the operating systems you are working with.
TABLE 11.2 Trace Route Utility Commands
Operating System
Trace Route Command Syntax
Windows systems
tracert IP address
tracert -6 IP address
Linux/UNIX/Mac OS
traceroute IP address

traceroute6 IP address
traceroute -6 IP address
ExamAlert
Be prepared to identify the IP tracing command syntax used with various
operating systems for the exam. Review Table 11.2 for this information.
traceroute provides a lot of useful information, including the IP address of
every router connection it passes through and, in many cases, the name of the
router (although this depends on the router’s configuration). traceroute also
reports the length, in milliseconds, of the round-trip the packet made from the
source location to the router and back. This information can help identify where
network bottlenecks or breakdowns might be. The following is an example of a
successful tracert command on a Windows system:
Click here to view code image
C:\> tracert 24.7.70.37
Tracing route to c1-p4.sttlwa1.home.net [24.7.70.37]
over a maximum of 30 hops:
1 30 ms 20 ms 20 ms 24.67.184.1
2 20 ms 20 ms 30 ms rd1ht-ge3-0.ok.shawcable.net
[24.67.224.7]
3 50 ms 30 ms 30 ms rc1wh-atm0-2-1.vc.shawcable.net
[204.209.214.193]
4 50 ms 30 ms 30 ms rc2wh-pos15-0.vc.shawcable.net
[204.209.214.90]
5 30 ms 40 ms 30 ms rc2wt-pos2-0.wa.shawcable.net
[66.163.76.37]
6 30 ms 40 ms 30 ms c1-pos6-3.sttlwa1.home.net [24.7.70.37]
Trace complete.
Similar to the other common operating systems covered on the Network+ exam,
the tracert display on a Windows-based system includes several columns of
information. The first column represents the hop number. You may recall that
hop is the term used to describe a step in the path a packet takes as it crosses the
network. The next three columns indicate the round-trip time, in milliseconds,
that a packet takes in its attempts to reach the destination. The last column is the
hostname and the IP address of the responding device.

However, not all trace route attempts are successful. The following is the output
from a tracert command on a Windows system that does not manage to get
to the remote host:
Click here to view code image
C:\> tracert comptia.org
Tracing route to comptia.org [216.119.103.72]
over a maximum of 30 hops:
1 27 ms 28 ms 14 ms 24.67.179.1
2 55 ms 13 ms 14 ms rd1ht-ge3-0.ok.shawcable.net
[24.67.224.7]
3 27 ms 27 ms 28 ms rc1wh-atm0-2-1.shawcable.net
[204.209.214.19]
4 28 ms 41 ms 27 ms rc1wt-pos2-0.wa.shawcable.net
[66.163.76.65]
5 28 ms 41 ms 27 ms rc2wt-pos1-0.wa.shawcable.net
[66.163.68.2]
6 41 ms 55 ms 41 ms c1-pos6-3.sttlwa1.home.net
[24.7.70.37]
7 54 ms 42 ms 27 ms home-gw.st6wa.ip.att.net
[192.205.32.249]
8 * * * Request timed out.
9 * * * Request timed out.
10 * * * Request timed out.
11 * * * Request timed out.
12 * * * Request timed out.
13 * * * Request timed out.
14 * * * Request timed out.
15 * * * Request timed out.
In this example, the trace route request gets to only the seventh hop, at which
point it fails. This failure indicates that the problem lies on the far side of the
device in step 7 or on the near side of the device in step 8. In other words, the
device at step 7 is functioning but might not make the next hop. The cause of the
problem could be a range of things, such as an error in the routing table or a
faulty connection. Alternatively, the seventh device might be operating at 100%,
but device 8 might not be functioning at all. In any case, you can isolate the
problem to just one or two devices.
Note
In some cases, the owner of a router might configure it to not return ICMP
traffic like that generated by ping or traceroute. If this is the case, the

ping or traceroute will fail just as if the router did not exist or was not
operating.
ExamAlert
Although we have used the Windows tracert command to provide
sample output in these sections, the output from traceroute on a
UNIX, Linux, or Mac OS system is extremely similar.
The trace route utility can also help you isolate a heavily congested network. In
the following example, the trace route packets fail in the midst of the tracert
from a Windows system, but subsequently they continue. This behavior can be
an indicator of network congestion:
Click here to view code image
C:\> tracert comptia.org
Tracing route to comptia.org [216.119.103.72]over a maximum of 30 ho
1 96 ms 96 ms 55 ms 24.67.179.1
2 14 ms 13 ms 28 ms rd1ht-ge3-0.ok.shawcable.net
[24.67.224.7]
3 28 ms 27 ms 41 ms rc1wh-atm0-2-1.shawcable.net
[204.209.214.19]
4 28 ms 41 ms 27 ms rc1wt-pos2-0.wa.shawcable.net
[66.163.76.65]
5 41 ms 27 ms 27 ms rc2wt-pos1-0.wa.shawcable.net
[66.163.68.2]
6 55 ms 41 ms 27 ms c1-pos6-3.sttlwa1.home.net [24.7.70.37]
7 54 ms 42 ms 27 ms home-gw.st6wa.ip.att.net
[192.205.32.249]
8 55 ms 41 ms 28 ms gbr3-p40.st6wa.ip.att.net
[12.123.44.130]
9 * * * Request timed out.
10 * * * Request timed out.
11 * * * Request timed out.
12 * * * Request timed out.
13 69 ms 68 ms 69 ms gbr2-p20.sd2ca.ip.att.net
[12.122.11.254]
14 55 ms 68 ms 69 ms gbr1-p60.sd2ca.ip.att.net
[12.122.1.109]
15 82 ms 69 ms 82 ms gbr1-p30.phmaz.ip.att.net
[12.122.2.142]
16 68 ms 69 ms 82 ms gar2-p360.phmaz.ip.att.net

[12.123.142.45]
17 110 ms 96 ms 96 ms 12.125.99.70
18 124 ms 96 ms 96 ms light.crystaltech.com [216.119.107.1]
19 82 ms 96 ms 96 ms 216.119.103.72
Trace complete.
Generally speaking, trace route utilities enable you to identify the location of a
problem in the connectivity between two devices. After you determine this
location, you might need to use a utility such as ping to continue
troubleshooting. In many cases, as in the examples provided in this chapter, the
routers might be on a network such as the Internet and therefore not within your
control. In that case, you can do little except inform your ISP of the problem.
When dealing with IPv6, the same tools exist, but are followed with -6; so,
tracert becomes tracert -6, and traceroute becomes traceroute
-6.
ping
Most network administrators are familiar with the ping utility and are likely to
use it on an almost daily basis. The basic function of the ping command is to
test the connectivity between the two devices on a network. All the command is
designed to do is determine whether the two computers can see each other and to
notify you of how long the round-trip takes to complete.
Although ping is most often used on its own, a number of switches can be used
to assist in the troubleshooting process. Table 11.3 shows some of the commonly
used switches with ping on a Windows system.
TABLE 11.3 ping Command Switches
Option
Description
ping -t
Pings a device on the network until stopped
ping -a
Resolves addresses to hostnames
ping -n count
Specifies the number of echo requests to send
ping -r count
Records the route for count hops
ping -s count
Time stamp for count hops
ping -w
timeout
Timeout in milliseconds to wait for each reply

ping -6 or ping6
Pings a device on the network using IPv6 instead of
IPv4
ExamAlert
You will likely be asked about ping, its switches used, and how ping can
be used in a troubleshooting scenario.
ping works by sending ICMP echo request messages to another device on the
network. If the other device on the network hears the ping request, it
automatically responds with an ICMP echo reply. By default, the ping
command on a Windows-based system sends four data packets; however, using
the -t switch, a continuous stream of ping requests can be sent.
ping is perhaps the most widely used of all network tools; it is primarily used
to verify connectivity between two network devices. On a good day, the results
from the ping command are successful, and the sending device receives a reply
from the remote device. Not all ping results are that successful. To use ping
effectively, you must interpret the results of a failed ping command.
The Destination Host Unreachable Message
The “Destination Host Unreachable” error message means that a route to the
destination computer system cannot be found. To remedy this problem, you
might need to examine the routing information on the local host to confirm that
the local host is correctly configured, or you might need to make sure that the
default gateway information is correct. The following is an example of a ping
failure that gives the “Destination Host Unreachable” message:
Click here to view code image
Pinging 24.67.54.233 with 32 bytes of data:
Destination host unreachable.
Destination host unreachable.
Destination host unreachable.
Destination host unreachable.
Ping statistics for 24.67.54.233:
Packets: Sent = 4, Received = 0, Lost = 4 (100% loss),
Approximate round trip times in milli-seconds:
Minimum = 0ms, Maximum = 0ms, Average = 0ms

The Request Timed Out Message
The “Request Timed Out” error message is common when you use the ping
command. Essentially, this error message indicates that your host did not receive
the ping message back from the destination device within the designated time
period. Assuming that the network connectivity is okay on your system, this
typically indicates that the destination device is not connected to the network, is
powered off, or is not correctly configured. It could also mean that some
intermediate device is not operating correctly. In some rare cases, it can also
indicate that the network has so much congestion that timely delivery of the ping
message could not be completed. It might also mean that the ping is being sent to
an invalid IP address or that the system is not on the same network as the remote
host, and an intermediary device is not correctly configured. In any of these
cases, the failed ping should initiate a troubleshooting process that might involve
other tools, manual inspection, and possibly reconfiguration. The following
example shows the output from a ping to an invalid IP address:
Click here to view code image
C:\> ping 169.76.54.3
Pinging 169.76.54.3 with 32 bytes of data:
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Ping statistics for 169.76.54.3:
Packets: Sent = 4, Received = 0, Lost = 4 (100%
Approximate round trip times in milli-seconds:
Minimum = 0ms, Maximum = 0ms, Average = 0ms
During the ping request, you might receive some replies from the remote host
that are intermixed with “Request Timed Out” errors. This is often the result of a
congested network. An example follows; notice that this example, which was
run on a Windows system, uses the -t switch to generate continuous pings:
Click here to view code image
C:\> ping -t 24.67.184.65
Pinging 24.67.184.65 with 32 bytes of data:
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=55ms TTL=127
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=54ms TTL=127

Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=27ms TTL=127
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Request timed out.
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=69ms TTL=127
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=28ms TTL=127
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=28ms TTL=127
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=68ms TTL=127
Reply from 24.67.184.65: bytes=32 time=41ms TTL=127
Ping statistics for 24.67.184.65:
Packets: Sent = 11, Received = 8, Lost = 3 (27% loss),
Approximate round trip times in milli-seconds:
Minimum = 27ms, Maximum = 69ms, Average = 33ms
In this example, three packets were lost. If this continued on your network, you
would need to troubleshoot to find out why packets were dropped.
The Unknown Host Message
The “Unknown Host” error message is generated when the hostname of the
destination computer cannot be resolved. This error usually occurs when you
ping an incorrect hostname, as shown in the following example, or try to use
ping with a hostname when hostname resolution (via DNS or a HOSTS text
file) is not configured:
Click here to view code image
C:\> ping www.comptia.ca
Unknown host www.comptia.ca
If the ping fails, you need to verify that the ping is sent to the correct remote
host. If it is, and if name resolution is configured, you have to dig a little more to
find the problem. This error might indicate a problem with the name resolution
process, and you might need to verify that the DNS or WINS server is available.
Other commands, such as nslookup or dig, can help in this process.
The Expired TTL Message
The Time To Live (TTL) is a key consideration in understanding the ping
command. The function of the TTL is to prevent circular routing, which occurs
when a ping request keeps looping through a series of hosts. The TTL counts
each hop along the way toward its destination device. Each time it counts one
hop, the hop is subtracted from the TTL. If the TTL reaches 0, it has expired, and

you get a message like the following:
Click here to view code image
Reply from 24.67.180.1: TTL expired in transit
If the TTL is exceeded with ping, you might have a routing problem on the
network. You can modify the TTL for ping on a Windows system by using the
ping -i command.
Troubleshooting with ping
Although ping does not completely isolate problems, you can use it to help
identify where a problem lies. When troubleshooting with ping, follow these
steps:
1. Ping the IP address of your local loopback using the command ping
127.0.0.1. If this command is successful, you know that the TCP/IP protocol
suite is installed correctly on your system and is functioning. If you cannot
ping the local loopback adapter, TCP/IP might need to be reloaded or
reconfigured on the machine you are using.
ExamAlert
The loopback is a special function within the TCP/IP protocol stack that
is supplied for troubleshooting purposes. The Class A IP address 127.x.x.x
is reserved for the IPv4 loopback. Although convention dictates that you
use 127.0.0.1, you can use any address in the 127.x.x.x range, except for
the network number itself (127.0.0.0) and the broadcast address
(127.255.255.255). You can also ping by using the default hostname for the
local system, which is called localhost (for example, ping localhost). The
same function can be performed in IPv6 by using the address ::1.
2. Ping the assigned IP address of your local network interface card (NIC). If
the ping is successful, you know that your NIC is functioning on the network
and has TCP/IP correctly installed. If you cannot ping the local NIC, TCP/IP
might not be correctly bound to the NIC, or the NIC drivers might be
improperly installed.
3. Ping the IP address of another known good system on your local network.
By doing so, you can determine whether the computer you are using can see

other computers on the network. If you can ping other devices on your local
network, you have network connectivity.
If you cannot ping other devices on your local network, but you could ping
the IP address of your system, you might not be connected to the network
correctly.
4. After you confirm that you have network connectivity for the local network,
you can verify connectivity to a remote network by sending a ping to the IP
address of the default gateway.
5. If you can ping the default gateway, you can verify remote connectivity by
sending a ping to the IP address of a system on a remote network.
ExamAlert
You might be asked to relate the correct procedure for using ping for a
connectivity problem. A performance-based question may ask you to
implement the ping command to test for connectivity.
Using just the ping command in these steps, you can confirm network
connectivity on not only the local network, but also on a remote network. The
whole process requires as much time as it takes to enter the command, and you
can do it all from a single location.
If you are an optimistic person, you can perform step 5 first. If that works, all the
other steps will also work, saving you the need to test them. If your step 5 trial
fails, you can go to step 1 and start the troubleshooting process from the
beginning.
Note
All but one of the ping examples used in this section show the ping
command using the IP address of the remote host. It is also possible to ping
the Domain Name Service (DNS) name of the remote host (for example,
ping www.comptia.org, ping server1). However, you can do this only
if your network uses a DNS server. On a Windows-based network, you can
also ping by using the Network Basic Input/Output System (NetBIOS)
computer name.

When dealing with IPv6, the same tools exist, but are followed with 6 or -6; so,
ping becomes ping6 or ping -6.
pathping
As great as ping is, at times you might wish for the additional information and
functionality provided by tracert. To address that need on a Windows
system, you can use pathping. It combines the features of the other two tools
into one.
ARP
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is used to resolve IP addresses to MAC
addresses. This is significant because on a network, devices find each other
using the IP address, but communication between devices requires the MAC
address.
ExamAlert
Remember that the function of ARP is to resolve IP addresses to Layer 2
or MAC addresses.
When a computer wants to send data to another computer on the network, it
must know the MAC address (physical address) of the destination system. To
discover this information, ARP sends out a discovery packet to obtain the MAC
address. When the destination computer is found, it sends its MAC address to
the sending computer. The ARP-resolved MAC addresses are stored temporarily
on a computer system in the ARP cache. Inside this ARP cache is a list of
matching MAC and IP addresses. This ARP cache is checked before a discovery
packet is sent to the network to determine whether there is an existing entry.
Entries in the ARP cache are periodically flushed so that the cache does not fill
up with unused entries. The following code shows an example of the arp
command with the output from a Windows system:
Click here to view code image
C:\> arp -a
Interface: 24.67.179.22 on Interface 0x3
Internet Address Physical Address Type

24.67.179.1 00-00-77-93-d8-3d dynamic
As you might notice, the type is listed as dynamic. Entries in the ARP cache can
be added statically or dynamically. Static entries are added manually and do not
expire. The dynamic entries are added automatically when the system accesses
another on the network.
As with other command-line utilities, several switches are available for the arp
command. Table 11.4 shows the available switches for Windows-based systems.
TABLE 11.4 arp Switches
Switch
Description
-a or -g
Displays both the IP and MAC addresses and whether they are
dynamic or static entries
inet_addr
Specifies a specific Internet address
-N
if_addr
Displays the ARP entries for a specified network interface
eth_addr
Specifies a MAC address
if_addr
Specifies an Internet address
-d
Deletes an entry from the ARP cache
-s
Adds a static permanent address to the ARP cache
arp ping
Earlier in this chapter we talked about the ping command and how it is used to
test connectivity between devices on a network. Using the ping command is
often an administrator’s first step to test connectivity between network devices.
If the ping fails, it is assumed that the device you are pinging is offline. But this
may not always be the case.
Most companies now use firewalls or other security measures that may block
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) requests. This means that a ping
request will not work. Blocking ICMP is a security measure; if a would-be
hacker cannot hit the target, he may not attack the host.
ExamAlert

One type of attack is called an ICMP flood attack (also known as a ping
attack). The attacker sends continuous ping packets to a server or
network system, eventually tying up that system’s resources, making it
unable to respond to requests from other systems.
If ICMP is blocked, you have still another option to test connectivity with a
device on the network: the arp ping. As mentioned, the ARP utility is used to
resolve IP addresses to MAC addresses. The arp ping utility does not use the
ICMP protocol to test connectivity like ping does; rather, it uses the ARP
protocol. However, ARP is not routable, and the arp ping cannot be routed to
work over separate networks. The arp ping works only on the local subnet.
Just like with a regular ping, an arp ping specifies an IP address; however,
instead of returning regular ping results, the arp ping responds with the MAC
address and name of the computer system. So, when a regular ping using ICMP
fails to locate a system, the arp ping uses a different method to find the
system. With arp ping, you can directly ping a MAC address. From this, you
can determine whether duplicate IP addresses are used and, as mentioned,
determine whether a system is responding.
arp ping is not built in to Windows, but you can download a number of
programs that allow you to ping using ARP. Linux, however, has an arp ping
utility ready to use.
ExamAlert
arp ping is not routable and can be used only on the local network.
The netstat Command
The netstat command displays the protocol statistics and current TCP/IP
connections on the local system. Used without any switches, the netstat
command shows the active connections for all outbound TCP/IP connections. In
addition, several switches are available that change the type of information
netstat displays. Table 11.5 shows the various switches available for the
netstat utility.
TABLE 11.5 netstat Switches

Switch
Description
-a
Displays the current connections and listening ports
-e
Displays Ethernet statistics
-n
Lists addresses and port numbers in numeric form
-p
Shows connections for the specified protocol
-r
Shows the routing table
-s
Lists per-protocol statistics
interval
Specifies how long to wait before redisplaying statistics
ExamAlert
You can use the netstat and route print commands to show the
routing table on a local or remote system.
The netstat utility is used to show the port activity for both TCP and UDP
connections, showing the inbound and outbound connections. When used
without switches, the netstat utility has four information headings.
 Proto: Lists the protocol being used, either UDP or TCP
 Local address: Specifies the local address and port being used
 Foreign address: Identifies the destination address and port being used
 State: Specifies whether the connection is established
In its default use, the netstat command shows outbound connections that
have been established by TCP. The following shows sample output from a
netstat command without using any switches:
Click here to view code image
C:\> netstat
Active Connections
Proto Local Address Foreign Address State
TCP laptop:2848 MEDIASERVICES1:1755 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:1833 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:2858 194.70.58.241:80 ESTABLISHED

TCP laptop:2860 194.70.58.241:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:2354 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:2361 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:1114 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:1959 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:1960 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:1963 www.dollarhost.com:80 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:2870 localhost:8431 TIME_WAIT
TCP laptop:8431 localhost:2862 TIME_WAIT
TCP laptop:8431 localhost:2863 TIME_WAIT
TCP laptop:8431 localhost:2867 TIME_WAIT
TCP laptop:8431 localhost:2872 TIME_WAIT
As with any other command-line utility, the netstat utility has a number of
switches. The following sections briefly explain the switches and give sample
output from each.
netstat -e
The netstat -e command shows the activity for the NIC and displays the
number of packets that have been both sent and received. Here’s an example:
Click here to view code image
C:\WINDOWS\Desktop> netstat -e
Interface Statistics
Received Sent
Bytes 17412385 40237510
Unicast packets 79129 85055
Non-unicast packets 693 254
Discards 0 0
Errors 0 0
Unknown protocols 306
As you can see, the netstat -e command shows more than just the packets
that have been sent and received:
 Bytes: The number of bytes that the NIC has sent or received since the
computer was turned on.
 Unicast packets: Packets sent and received directly by this interface.
 Nonunicast packets: Broadcast or multicast packets that the NIC picked up.
 Discards: The number of packets rejected by the NIC, perhaps because they
were damaged.

 Errors: The errors that occurred during either the sending or receiving
process. As you would expect, this column should be a low number. If it is
not, this could indicate a problem with the NIC.
 Unknown protocols: The number of packets that the system could not
recognize.
netstat -a
The netstat -a command displays statistics for both Transport Control
Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Here is an example of the
netstat -a command:
Click here to view code image
C:\WINDOWS\Desktop> netstat -a
Active Connections
Proto Local Address Foreign Address State
TCP laptop:1027 LAPTOP:0 LISTENING
TCP laptop:1030 LAPTOP:0 LISTENING
TCP laptop:1035 LAPTOP:0 LISTENING
TCP laptop:50000 LAPTOP:0 LISTENING
TCP laptop:5000 LAPTOP:0 LISTENING
TCP laptop:1035 msgr-ns41.msgr.hotmail.com:1863 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:nbsession LAPTOP:0 LISTENING
TCP laptop:1027 localhost:50000 ESTABLISHED
TCP laptop:50000 localhost:1027 ESTABLISHED
UDP laptop:1900 *:*
UDP laptop:nbname *:*
UDP laptop:nbdatagram *:*
UDP laptop:1547 *:*
UDP laptop:1038 *:*
UDP laptop:1828 *:*
UDP laptop:3366 *:*
As you can see, the output includes four columns, which show the protocol, the
local address, the foreign address, and the port’s state. The TCP connections
show the local and foreign destination addresses and the connection’s current
state. UDP, however, is a little different. It does not list a state status because, as
mentioned throughout this book, UDP is a connectionless protocol and does not
establish connections. The following list further explains the information
provided by the netstat -a command:
 Proto: The protocol used by the connection.

 Local address: The IP address of the local computer system and the port
number it is using. If the entry in the local address field is an asterisk (*), the
port has not yet been established.
 Foreign address: The IP address of a remote computer system and the
associated port. When a port has not been established, as with the UDP
connections, *:* appears in the column.
 State: The current state of the TCP connection. Possible states include
established, listening, closed, and waiting.
netstat -r
The netstat -r command is often used to view a system’s routing table. A
system uses a routing table to determine routing information for TCP/IP traffic.
The following is an example of the netstat -r command from a Windows
system:
Click here to view code image
C:\WINDOWS\Desktop> netstat -r
Route table
====================================================================
====================================================================
Active Routes:
Network Destination Netmask Gateway Interface Metric
0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 24.67.179.1 24.67.179.22 1
24.67.179.0 255.255.255.0 24.67.179.22 24.67.179.22 1
24.67.179.22 255.255.255.255 127.0.0.1 127.0.0.1 1
24.255.255.255 255.255.255.255 24.67.179.22 24.67.179.22 1
127.0.0.0 255.0.0.0 127.0.0.1 127.0.0.1 1
224.0.0.0 224.0.0.0 24.67.179.22 24.67.179.22 1
255.255.255.255 255.255.255.255 24.67.179.22 2 1
Default Gateway: 24.67.179.1
====================================================================
Persistent Routes:
None
Caution
The netstat -r command output shows the same information as the
output from the route print command.

netstat -s
The netstat -s command displays a number of statistics related to the
TCP/IP protocol suite. Understanding the purpose of every field in the output is
beyond the scope of the Network+ exam, but for your reference, sample output
from the netstat -s command is shown here:
Click here to view code image
C:\> netstat -s
IP Statistics
Packets Received = 389938
Received Header Errors = 0
Received Address Errors = 1876
Datagrams Forwarded = 498
Unknown Protocols Received = 0
Received Packets Discarded = 0
Received Packets Delivered = 387566
Output Requests = 397334
Routing Discards = 0
Discarded Output Packets = 0
Output Packet No Route = 916
Reassembly Required = 0
Reassembly Successful = 0
Reassembly Failures = 0
Datagrams Successfully Fragmented = 0
Datagrams Failing Fragmentation = 0
Fragments Created = 0
ICMP Statistics
Received Sent
Messages 40641 41111
Errors 0 0
Destination Unreachable 223 680
Time Exceeded 24 0
Parameter Problems 0 0
Source Quenches 0 0
Redirects 0 38
Echos 20245 20148
Echo Replies 20149 20245
Timestamps 0 0
Timestamp Replies 0 0
Address Masks 0 0
Address Mask Replies 0 0
TCP Statistics

Active Opens = 13538
Passive Opens = 23132
Failed Connection Attempts = 9259
Reset Connections = 254
Current Connections = 15
Segments Received = 330242
Segments Sent = 326935
Segments Retransmitted = 18851
UDP Statistics
Datagrams Received = 20402
No Ports = 20594
Receive Errors = 0
Datagrams Sent = 10217
iptables
The iptables utility is used to configure the firewall in Linux. It requires
elevated/administrative/root privileges to run, and the executable itself is
installed in /usr/sbin/iptables.
ipconfig
The ipconfig command is a technician’s best friend when it comes to viewing
the TCP/IP configuration of a Windows system. Used on its own, the
ipconfig command shows basic information, such as the name of the local
network interface, the IP address, the subnet mask, and the default gateway.
Combined with the /all switch, it shows a detailed set of information, as
shown in the following example:
Click here to view code image
C:\> ipconfig /all
Windows IP Configuration
Host Name . . . . . . . . . . . . : server
Primary Dns Suffix . . . . . . . :
Node Type . . . . . . . . . . . . : Hybrid
IP Routing Enabled. . . . . . . . : No
WINS Proxy Enabled. . . . . . . . : No
DNS Suffix Search List. . . . . . : tampabay.rr.com
Ethernet adapter Local Area Connection:
Connection-specific DNS Suffix . : tampabay.rr.com
Description . . . . . . . . . . . : Broadcom NetLink (TM) Gigabit
Ethernet

Physical Address. . . . . . . . . : 00-25-64-8C-9E-BF
DHCP Enabled. . . . . . . . . . . : Yes
Autoconfiguration Enabled . . . . : Yes
Link-local IPv6 Address . . . . . : fe80::51b9:996e:9fac:7715%10
(Preferred)
IPv4 Address. . . . . . . . . . . : 192.168.1.119(Preferred)
Subnet Mask . . . . . . . . . . . : 255.255.255.0
Lease Obtained. . . . . . . . . . : Wednesday, January 28, 2018
6:00:54 AM
Lease Expires . . . . . . . . . . : Thursday, January 29, 2018
6:00:54 AM
Default Gateway . . . . . . . . . : 192.168.1.1
DHCP Server . . . . . . . . . . . : 192.168.1.1
DHCPv6 IAID . . . . . . . . . . . : 234890596
DHCPv6 Client DUID. . . . . . . . :
00-01-00-01-13-2A-5B-37-00-25-64-8C-9E-BF
DNS Servers . . . . . . . . . . . : 192.168.1.1
NetBIOS over Tcpip. . . . . . . . : Enabled
Connection-specific DNS Suffix Search List :
tampabay.rr.com
As you can imagine, you can use the output from the ipconfig /all
command in a massive range of troubleshooting scenarios. Table 11.6 lists some
of the most common troubleshooting symptoms, along with where to look for
clues about solving them in the ipconfig /all output.
Note
When looking at ipconfig information, you should be sure that all
information is present and correct. For example, a missing or incorrect default
gateway parameter limits communication to the local segment.
TABLE 11.6 Common Troubleshooting Symptoms that ipconfig Can
Help Solve
Symptom
Field to Check in the Output
The user cannot connect to any
other system.
Ensure that the TCP/IP address and subnet
mask are correct. If the network uses
DHCP, ensure that DHCP is enabled.
The user can connect to another
on the same subnet but cannot
connect to a remote system.
Ensure the default gateway is configured
correctly.

The user is unable to browse the
Internet.
Ensure the DNS server parameters are
correctly configured.
The user cannot browse across
remote subnets.
Ensure the WINS or DNS server
parameters are correctly configured, if
applicable.
ExamAlert
You should be prepared to identify the output from an ipconfig
command in relationship to a troubleshooting scenario.
Using the /all switch might be the most popular, but there are a few others.
These include the switches listed in Table 11.7.
ExamAlert
ipconfig and its associated switches are widely used by network
administrators and therefore should be expected to make an appearance
on the exam.
TABLE 11.7 ipconfig Switches
Switch
Description
?
Displays the ipconfig help screen
/all
Displays additional IP configuration information
/release
Releases the IPv4 address of the specified adapter
/release6
Releases the IPv6 address of the specified adapter
/renew
Renews the IPv4 address of a specified adapter
/renew6
Renews the IPv6 address of a specified adapter
/flushdns
Purges the DNS cache
/registerdns
Refreshes the DHCP lease and reregisters the DNS names
/displaydns
Used to display the information in the DNS cache

Tip
The ipconfig /release and ipconfig /renew commands work
only when your system is using DHCP.
ExamAlert
The ipconfig command on the Windows client and Windows Server
operating systems provides additional switches and functionality geared
toward Active Directory and Dynamic DNS. You do not need to be
concerned with these switches for the exam, but you can view information
on them by using the ipconfig /? command.
ifconfig
ifconfig performs the same function as ipconfig, but on a Linux, UNIX,
or Mac OS system. Because Linux relies more heavily on command-line utilities
than Windows, the Linux and UNIX version of ifconfig provides much more
functionality than ipconfig. On a Linux or UNIX system, you can get
information about the usage of the ifconfig command by using ifconfig
-help. The following output provides an example of the basic ifconfig
command run on a Linux system:
Click here to view code image
eth0 Link encap:Ethernet HWaddr 00:60:08:17:63:A0
inet addr:192.168.1.101 Bcast:192.168.1.255 Mask:255.255.255.0
UP BROADCAST RUNNING MTU:1500 Metric:1
RX packets:911 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0
TX packets:804 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0
collisions:0 txqueuelen:100
Interrupt:5 Base address:0xe400
lo Link encap:Local Loopback
inet addr:127.0.0.1 Mask:255.0.0.0
UP LOOPBACK RUNNING MTU:3924 Metric:1
RX packets:18 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 frame:0
TX packets:18 errors:0 dropped:0 overruns:0 carrier:0
collisions:0 txqueuelen:0
Although the ifconfig command displays the IP address, subnet mask, and

default gateway information for both the installed network adapter and the local
loopback adapter, it does not report DHCP lease information. Instead, you can
use the pump -s command to view detailed information on the DHCP lease,
including the assigned IP address, the address of the DHCP server, and the time
remaining on the lease. You can also use the pump command to release and
renew IP addresses assigned via DHCP and to view DNS server information.
nslookup
nslookup is a utility used to troubleshoot DNS-related problems. Using
nslookup, you can, for example, run manual name resolution queries against
DNS servers, get information about your system’s DNS configuration, or specify
what kind of DNS record should be resolved.
When nslookup is started, it displays the current hostname and the IP address
of the locally configured DNS server. You then see a command prompt that
allows you to specify further queries. This is known as interactive mode. Table
11.8 lists the commands you can enter in interactive mode.
TABLE 11.8 nslookup Switches
Switch
Description
All
Prints options, as well as current server and host
information
[no]debug
Prints debugging information
[no]d2
Prints exhaustive debugging information
[no]defname
Appends the domain name to each query
[no]recurse
Asks for a recursive answer to the query
[no]search
Uses the domain search list
[no]vc
Always uses a virtual circuit
domain=NAME
Sets the default domain name to NAME
srchlist=N1
[/N2/.../N6]
Sets the domain to N1 and the search list to N1, N2,
and so on
root=NAME
Sets the root server to NAME
Retry=X
Sets the number of retries to X

timeout=X
Sets the initial timeout interval to X seconds
Type=X
Sets the query type (for example, A, ANY, CNAME,
MX, NS, PTR, SOA, or SRV)
querytype=X
Same as type
Class=X
Sets the query class (for example, IN [Internet],
ANY)
[no]msxfr
Uses Microsoft fast zone transfer
ixfrver=X
The current version to use in an IXFR transfer
request
server NAME
Sets the default server to NAME, using the current
default server
Exit
Exits the program
Instead of using interactive mode, you can execute nslookup requests directly
at the command prompt. The following listing shows the output from the
nslookup command when a domain name is specified to be resolved:
Click here to view code image
C:\> nslookup comptia.org
Server: nsc1.ht.ok.shawcable.net
Address: 64.59.168.13
Non-authoritative answer:
Name: comptia.org
Address: 208.252.144.4
As you can see from the output, nslookup shows the hostname and IP address
of the DNS server against which the resolution was performed, along with the
hostname and IP address of the resolved host.
dig
dig is used on a Linux, UNIX, or Mac OS system to perform manual DNS
lookups. dig performs the same basic task as nslookup, but with one major
distinction: The dig command does not have an interactive mode and instead
uses only command-line switches to customize results.

dig generally is considered a more powerful tool than nslookup, but in the
course of a typical network administrator’s day, the minor limitations of
nslookup are unlikely to be too much of a factor. Instead, dig is often the tool
of choice for DNS information and troubleshooting on UNIX, Linux, or Mac OS
systems. Like nslookup, dig can be used to perform simple name resolution
requests. The output from this process is shown in the following listing:
Click here to view code image
; <<>> DiG 8.2 <<>> examcram.com
;; res options: init recurs defnam dnsrch
;; got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 4
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 1, AUTHORITY: 2, ADDITIONAL: 0
;; QUERY SECTION:
;; examcram.com, type = A, class = IN
;; ANSWER SECTION:
examcram.com. 7h33m IN A 63.240.93.157
;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
examcram.com. 7h33m IN NS usrxdns1.pearsontc.com.
examcram.com. 7h33m IN NS oldtxdns2.pearsontc.com.
;; Total query time: 78 msec
;; FROM: localhost.localdomain to SERVER: default - 209.53.4.130
;; WHEN: Sat Oct 16 20:21:24 2018
;; MSG SIZE sent: 30 rcvd: 103
As you can see, dig provides a number of pieces of information in the basic
output—more so than nslookup. Network administrators can gain information
from three key areas of the output: ANSWER SECTION, AUTHORITY
SECTION, and the last four lines of the output.
The ANSWER SECTION of the output provides the name of the domain or host
being resolved, along with its IP address. The A in the results line indicates the
record type that is being resolved.
The AUTHORITY SECTION provides information on the authoritative DNS
servers for the domain against which the resolution request was performed. This
information can be useful in determining whether the correct DNS servers are
considered authoritative for a domain.
The last four lines of the output show how long the name resolution request took
to process and the IP address of the DNS server that performed the resolution. It

also shows the date and time of the request, as well as the size of the packets sent
and received.
The tcpdump Command
The tcpdump command is used on Linux/UNIX systems to print the contents
of network packets. It can read packets from a network interface card or from a
previously created saved packet file and write packets to either standard output
or a file.
The route Utility
The route utility is an often-used and very handy tool. With the route
command, you display and modify the routing table on your Windows and Linux
systems. Figure 11.1 shows the output from a route print command on a
Windows system.
FIGURE 11.1 The output from a route print command on a Windows

system
Note
The discussion here focuses on the Windows route command, but other
operating systems have equivalent commands. On a Linux system, for
example, the command is also route, but the usage and switches are
different.
In addition to displaying the routing table, the Windows version of the route
command has a number of other switches, as detailed in Table 11.9. For
complete information about all the switches available with the route command
on a Windows system, type route at the command line. To see a list of the
route command switches on a Linux system, use the command route -
help.
TABLE 11.9 Switches for the route Command in Windows
Switch
Description
add
Enables you to add a static route to the routing table.
delete
Enables you to remove a route from the routing table.
change
Enables you to modify an existing route.
-p
When used with the add command, makes the route permanent. If
the -p switch is not used when a route is added, the route is lost
upon reboot.
print
Enables you to view the system’s routing table.
-f
Removes all gateway entries from the routing table.
nmap
nmap is a free download for Windows or Linux used to scan ports on machines.
Those scans can show what services are running as well as information about the
target machine’s operating system. The utility can be used to scan a range of IP
addresses or just a single IP address.

Cram Quiz
1. What command can you issue from the command line to view the status of
the system’s ports?
 A. netstat -p
 B. netstat -o
 C. netstat -a
 D. netstat –y
2. Which of the following tools can you use to perform manual DNS lookups
on a Linux system? (Choose two.)
 A. dig
 B. nslookup
 C. tracert
 D. dnslookup
3. Which of the following commands generates a “Request Timed Out” error
message?
 A. ping
 B. netstat
 C. ipconfig
 D. nbtstat
4. Which of the following commands would you use to add a static entry to the
ARP table of a Windows system?
 A. arp -a IP Address MAC Address
 B. arp -s MAC Address IP Address
 C. arp -s IP Address MAC Address
 D. arp -i IP Address MAC Address
5. Which command created the following output?

Click here to view code image
Server: nen.bx.ttfc.net Address: 209.55.4.155 Name: examcram.com Address:
63.240.93.157
 A. nbtstat
 B. ipconfig
 C. tracert
 D. nslookup
Cram Quiz Answers
1. C. Administrators can quickly determine the status of common ports by
issuing the netstat -a command from the command line. This command
output lists the ports used by the system and whether they are open and
listening.
2. A, B. Both the dig and nslookup commands can be used to perform
manual DNS lookups on a Linux system. You cannot perform a manual
lookup with the tracert command. There is no such command as
dnslookup.
3. A. The ping command generates a “Request Timed Out” error when it
cannot receive a reply from the destination system. None of the other
commands listed produce this output.
4. C. The command arp -s IP Address MAC Address would correctly add a
static entry to the ARP table. None of the other answers are valid ARP
switches.
5. D. The output was produced by the nslookup command. The other
commands listed produce different output.
Troubleshooting Common Network Service
Issues
 Given a scenario, troubleshoot common network service issues.

CramSaver
If you can correctly answer these questions before going through this
section, save time by skimming the Exam Alerts in this section and then
completing the Cram Quiz at the end of the section.
1. What one, hardcoded address must be unique on a network for
networking to function properly?
2. What can you try to do to handle DHCP exhaustion if you cannot
increase the scope?
3. A client has an incorrect gateway configured. What is the most likely
manifestation of this error?
Answers
1. The MAC address must be unique for each network interface card and
there can be no duplicates.
2. You can shorten the lease period for each client and, hopefully, recover
addresses sooner for issue to other clients.
3. With an incorrect gateway, the client will not be able to access
networking services beyond the local network.
ExamAlert
Remember that this objective begins with “Given a scenario.” That means
that you may receive a drag and drop, matching, or “live OS” scenario
where you have to click through to complete a specific objective-based
task.
You will no doubt find yourself troubleshooting networking problems much
more often than you would like to. When you troubleshoot these problems, a
methodical approach is likely to pay off.
ExamAlert

Wiring problems are related to the cable used in a network. For the
purposes of the exam, infrastructure problems are classified as those
related to network devices, such as hubs, switches, and routers.
Common Problems to Be Aware Of
In the eyes of CompTIA and the Network+ exam, you should be aware of some
problems more than others. Although subsequent sections look at problems in
particular areas, pay special attention to those that fall within this section as you
study for the exam.
Names Not Resolving
When the wrong Domain Name Service (DNS) values (typically primary and
secondary) are entered during router configuration, users cannot take advantage
of the DNS service. Depending on where the wrong values are given, name
resolution may not occur (if all values are incorrect), or resolution could take a
long time (if only the primary value is incorrect), thus giving the appearance that
the web is taking a long time to load.
Make sure the correct values appear for DNS entries in the router configuration
to avoid name resolution problems.
Incorrect Gateway
The default gateway configured on the router is where the data goes after it
leaves the local network. Although many routes can be built dynamically, it is
often necessary to add the first routes when installing/replacing a router. You can
use the ip route command on most Cisco routers to do this from the
command line, or most routers include a graphical interface for simplifying the
process.
When you have the gateways configured, use the ping and tracert/
traceroute utilities to verify connectivity and proper configuration.
ExamAlert
Know the tools to use to test connectivity.

Incorrect Netmask
When the subnet mask is incorrect, the router thinks the network is divided into
segments other than how it is actually configured. Because the purpose of the
router is to route traffic, a wrong value here can cause it to try to route traffic to
subnets that do not exist. The value of the subnet mask on the router must match
the true configuration of the network.
Duplicate IP Address
Every IP address on a network must be unique. This is true not only for every
host, but for the router as well, and every network card in general. The scope of
the network depends on the size of the network that the card is connected to; if it
is connected to the LAN, the IP address must be unique on that LAN, whereas if
it is connected to the Internet, it must be unique on it.
If there is a duplicate address, in the best scenario you will receive messages
indicating duplicate IP addresses, and in the worst scenario, network traffic will
become unreliable. In all cases, you must correct the problem and make certain
duplicate addresses exist nowhere on your network, including the routers.
Duplicate MAC Addresses
The MAC address is hardcoded into the NIC and cannot be changed. It consists
of two components—one identifying the vendor and the other a serial number so
that it will be unique. Of all things on the network, this is the one value that must
stay constant for ARP, RARP, and other protocols to be able to translate IP
addresses to machines and have communication across the network.
Given that, the only way for a MAC address to not be unique is for someone to
be trying to add a rogue device impersonating another (typically a server). If this
is the case, there will be serious problems on the network, and you must find—
and disable—the unauthorized device immediately.
Expired IP Address
DHCP leases IP addresses to clients and—when functioning properly—
continues to renew those leases as long at the client needs them. An expired
address can mean that the DHCP server is down or unavailable, and the client
will typically lose its address, rendering it unable to continue communicating on
the network.

Each system must be assigned a unique IP address so that it can communicate on
the network. Clients on a LAN have a private IP address and matching subnet
mask. Table 11.10 shows the private IP ranges. If a system has the wrong IP or
subnet mask, it cannot communicate on the network. If the client system has
misconfigured DHCP settings, such as an IP address in the 169.254.0.0 APIPA
range, the system is not connected to a DHCP server and is not able to
communicate beyond the network.
TABLE 11.10 Private Address Ranges
Class
Address Range
Default Subnet Mask
A
10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
255.0.0.0
B
172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
255.255.0.0
C
192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255
255.255.255.0
ExamAlert
You need to know the private address ranges in Table 11.10.
Rogue DHCP Server
A rogue DHCP server is any DHCP server on the network that was added by an
unauthorized party and is not under the administrative control of the network
administrators. It can be used to give false values or to set clients up for network
attacks, such as man in the middle.
Untrusted SSL Certificate
An untrusted SSL certificate is usually one that is not signed or that has expired.
Sometimes, this issue can be caused by a client using an older browser or one
that is not widely supported. As a general rule, though, users should be
instructed to stop attempting to visit a site if they see this error.
Incorrect Time
Incorrect time on a network can be more than just an annoyance, because
timestamps are important in the event of trying to document an attack. Most
network devices use Network Time Protocol (NTP) to keep the system time as

defined by a designated server. Make sure that server has the correct time on it
and is updated, patched, and secured just as you would any other network critical
server.
Exhausted DHCP Scope
The DHCP scope is the pool of possible IP addresses a DHCP server can issue. If
that pool becomes exhausted and not enough addresses are available for the
devices needing to connect, devices will not be given the values they need (many
will then resort to using APIPA addresses in the 169.254 range, as discussed
earlier.
The only solution is to increase the scope and/or decrease the lease time. If you
reduce the lease time from days to hours, more addresses should become
available as hosts leave the network at the end of their shifts, and those values
become available for use by others.
Blocked TCP/UDP Ports
As a security rule, only needed ports should be enabled and allowed on a
network. Unfortunately, you don’t always have a perfect idea of which ports you
need, and it is possible to inadvertently have some blocked TCP/UDP ports that
you need to use.
If you find your firewall is blocking a needed port, open that port (make an
exception) and allow it to be used.
Incorrect Firewall Settings
Incorrect firewall settings typically fall under the category of blocking ports that
you need open (previously addressed) or allowing ports that you don’t need.
From a security perspective, the latter situation is the worse because every open
port represents a door that an intruder could use to access the system or at least a
vulnerability. Be sure to know which ports are open, and close any that are not
needed.
Incorrect ACL Settings
The purpose of an Access Control List (ACL) is to define who/what can access
your system. Incorrect ACL settings could keep too many off, but typically the
error is allowing too many on. Used properly, an ACL can enable devices in your
network to ignore requests from specified users or systems or to grant them

certain network privileges. You may find that a certain IP address is constantly
scanning your network, and you can block this IP address. If you block it at the
router, the IP address will automatically be rejected anytime it attempts to use
your network.
Unresponsive Service
When a service does not respond, it could be due to overload, being down, or
bad configuration. The first order of business is to ascertain which of these three
the situation is and then decide what you need to do to fix it. If the server/service
is overloaded, look for a way to increase the capacity or balance the load. If the
server/service is down, investigate why and what needs to be done to bring it
back up again. If the server/service is misconfigured, make the necessary
changes to configure it properly.
Hardware Failure
If you are looking for a challenge, troubleshooting hardware infrastructure
problems is for you. It is often not an easy task and usually involves many
processes, including baselining and performance monitoring. One of the keys to
identifying the hardware failure is to know what devices are used on a particular
network and what each device is designed to do. Table 11.11 lists some of the
common hardware components used in a network infrastructure, as well as some
common problem symptoms and troubleshooting methods.
TABLE 11.11 Common Network Hardware Components, Their Functions,
and Troubleshooting Strategies
Networking
Device
Function
Troubleshooting and Failure Signs
Hub
Hubs are
used with a
star
network
topology
and UTP
cable to
connect
multiple
nodes.
Because hubs connect multiple network devices, if
many devices are unable to access the network, the
hub may have failed. When a hub fails, all devices
connected to it cannot access the network. In
addition, hubs use broadcasts and forward data to
all the connected ports, increasing network traffic.
When network traffic is high and the network is
operating slowly, it may be necessary to replace
slow hubs with switches.

Switch
Like hubs,
switches are
used with a
star
topology to
create a
central
connectivity
device.
The inability of several network devices to access
the network may indicate a failed switch. If the
switch fails, all devices connected to the switch
cannot access the network. Switches forward data
only to the intended recipient, allowing them to
manage data better than hubs.
Router
Routers are
used to
separate
broadcast
domains
and to
connect
different
networks.
If a router fails, network clients are unable to
access remote networks connected by the router.
For example, if clients access a remote office
through a network router, and the router fails, the
remote office is unavailable. You can test router
connectivity using utilities such as ping and
tracert.
Wireless
access point
Wireless
access
points
provide the
bridge
between the
wired and
wireless
network.
If wireless clients cannot access the wired
network, the AP may have failed. However, you
should check many configuration settings first.
ExamAlert
Be familiar with the devices listed in Table 11.11 and their failure signs.
For more information on network hardware devices and their functions, refer to
Chapter 4, “Network Components and Devices.”

Cram Quiz
1. Although many routes can be built dynamically, it is often necessary to add
the first routes when installing/replacing a router. Which of the following
commands can you use on most Cisco routers to do this from the command
line?
 A. ip route
 B. add route
 C. first route
 D. route change
2. Which of the following best describes the function of the default gateway?
 A. It converts hostnames to IP addresses.
 B. It converts IP addresses to hostnames.
 C. It enables systems to communicate with systems on a remote
network.
 D. It enables systems to communicate with routers.
3. Consider the following figure. Which of the following statements is true?

 A. The system cannot access the local network.
 B. The system cannot access remote networks.
 C. The system cannot have hostname resolution.
 D. The system has the wrong subnet mask.
4. Which of the following bits of IP information are mandatory to join the
network? (Choose two.)
 A. Subnet mask
 B. IP address
 C. DNS address
 D. Default gateway
Cram Quiz Answers
1. A. Although many routes can be built dynamically, it is often necessary to
add the first routes when installing/replacing a router. You can use the ip

route command on most Cisco routers to do this from the command line.
2. C. The default gateway enables the system to communicate with systems on
a remote network, without the need for explicit routes to be defined. The
default gateway can be assigned automatically using a DHCP server or can
be input manually.
3. B. The IP addresses of the client system and the default gateway are the
same. This error probably occurred when the IP address information was
input. In this configuration, the client system would likely access the local
network and resources but not remote networks because the gateway address
to remote networks is wrong. The DNS, IP, and subnet mask settings are
correct.
4. A, B. Configuring a client requires at least the IP address and a subnet mask.
The default gateway, DNS server, and WINS server are all optional, but
network functionality is limited without them.
What’s Next?
Congratulations! You finished the reading and are now familiar with all the
objectives on the Network+ exam. You are now ready for the practice exams.
There are two 100 multiple-choice question exams to help you determine how
prepared you are for the actual exam and which topics you need to review
further.

Glossary
Numbers and Symbols
10GBaseT A 2006 standard to provide 10 Gbps connections over unshielded
or shielded twisted pair cables, over distances up to 100 meters using category
6a (category 6 can reach 55 meters).
100BaseT The IEEE 802.3 specification for running Ethernet at 100 Mbps
over twisted-pair cabling. The maximum length of a 100BASET segment is 100
meters (328 feet).
1000BaseLX A standard for Gigabit Ethernet intended for use with long-
wavelength (LX) transmissions over long cable runs of fiber optic cabling.
1000BaseSX A fiber optic Gigabit Ethernet standard for operation over
multimode fiber.
1000BaseT An IEEE 802.3ab standard that specifies Gigabit Ethernet over
Category 5 or better UTP cable. The standard allows for full-duplex transmission
using four pairs of twisted cable up to 100 meters.
568A/568B 
standards Telecommunications 
standards 
from 
the
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry
Association (EIA). These 568 standards specify the pin arrangements for the RJ-
45 connectors on UTP or STP cables. The number 568 refers to the order in
which the wires within the UTP cable are terminated and attached to the
connector.
A
A An address record. This refers to one of three machines typically: the host
sending data, the host receiving data, or an intermediary between the two (the
next hop).
AAA Authentication, authorization, and accounting. Authentication is the
process to determine whether someone is authorized to use the network—if the
person can log on to the network. Authorization refers to identifying the
resources a user can access after the user is authenticated. Accounting refers to
the tracking methods used to identify who uses the network and what they do on
the network.

AAAA Authentication, authorization, accounting, and auditing. Authentication
is the process to determine whether someone is authorized to use the network—
if the person can log on to the network. Authorization refers to identifying the
resources a user can access after the user is authenticated. Accounting refers to
the tracking methods used to identify who uses the network and what they do on
the network. Auditing refers to the ability to associate actions with the
machine/user in question.
AAAA record The DNS record that maps a hostname to a 128-bit IPv6
address. This is also known as the IPv6 address record.
access point (AP) A transmitter and receiver (transceiver) device commonly
used to facilitate communication between a wireless client and a wired network.
Wireless APs are used with the wireless infrastructure network topology to
provide a connection point between WLANs and a wired Ethernet LAN.
ACK The acknowledgment message sent between two hosts during a TCP
session.
ACL (access control list) The list of trustees assigned to a file or directory. A
trustee can be any object available to the security subsystem. The term ACL is
also used with routers and firewall systems to refer to the list of permitted
computers or users.
Active Directory Used in Windows network environments, this is a directory
services system that enables network objects to be stored in a database. This
database can then be divided and distributed among different servers on the
network.
active hub A hub that has power supplied to it for the purposes of regenerating
the signals that pass through it.
ad hoc topology Defines a wireless network layout whereby devices
communicate directly among themselves without using an access point.
Sometimes called an unmanaged or peer-to-peer wireless topology.
address A set of numbers used to identify and locate a resource or device on a
network. An example is an IP address such as 192.168.2.1.
administrator  A person responsible for the control and security of the user
accounts, resources, and data on a network.
Administrator account On a Windows system, the default account that has
rights to access everything and to assign rights to other users on the network.
Unlike other user accounts, the Administrator account cannot be deleted.

ADSL (asymmetric digital subscriber line) A service that transmits digital
voice and data over existing (analog) phone lines.
AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) An encryption algorithm for securing
sensitive networks used by U.S. government agencies. Has become the
encryption standard for corporate networks.
AH (Authentication Header) One of the two separate protocols IPsec
consists of (the other being ESP). AH provides the authentication and integrity
checking for data packets.
antivirus software A software application that detects and removes viruses.
AP (wireless access point) A network device that offers connectivity between
wireless clients and (usually) a wired portion of the network.
APC (angle polished connector) A connector commonly used with fiber
cables—usually single mode—to keep the signal from bouncing back down the
line.
APIPA (Automatic Private IP Addressing) A technology implemented on
certain Windows platforms through which a system assigns itself an IP address
in the absence of a DHCP server. Addresses are assigned from the 169.254.x.x
address range.
application layer Layer 7 of the OSI model, which provides support for end
users and for application programs using network resources.
application-level firewall  Application-layer firewalls operate at the
application layer of the OSI model. Application layer firewalls can inspect data
packets traveling to or from an application.
application log A log file on a Windows system that provides information on
events that occur within an application.
APT (Advanced Persistent Tool)  Although CompTIA uses Tool, most use
Threat as the last word of the acronym. In either case, it is an unauthorized
person in a network, undetected, for an exceedingly long period of time.
archive bit A flag that is set on a file after it has been created or altered. Some
backup methods reset the flag to indicate that it has been backed up.
ARIN (American Registry for Internet Numbers) The regional Internet
registry responsible for managing both IPv4 and IPv6 IP number distribution.
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)  A protocol in the TCP/IP suite used to
resolve IP addresses to MAC addresses. Specifically, the ARP command returns

a Layer 2 address for a Layer 3 address.
ARP ping The ARP utility that resolves IP addresses to MAC addresses. The
ARP ping utility tests connectivity by pinging a MAC address directly.
ARP table A table of entries used by ARP to store resolved ARP requests.
Entries can also be manually stored.
array A group of devices arranged in a fault-tolerant configuration. See also
RAID.
AS (autonomous system) A collection of connected IP routing prefixes under
the control of a network administrator or entity that offers a common and defined
routing policy to the Internet.
ASIC (application-specific integrated circuit) An integrated circuit designed
for a particular use instead of for general-purpose uses.
ASP (application service provider) A vendor who provides computer-based
services over the network.
attenuation The loss of signal experienced as data transmits over distance and
across the network medium.
ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode)  A packet-switching technology that
provides transfer speeds ranging from 1.544 Mbps to 622 Mbps.
AUP (acceptable use policy) A policy created by an organization defining
what is acceptable on their resources (network, computers, and so on).
authentication The process by which a user’s identity is validated on a
network. The most common authentication method is a username and password
combination.
B
B (bearer) channel In ISDN, a 64 Kbps channel that carries data. See also D
(delta) channel.
backbone A network segment that acts as a trunk between other network
segments. Backbones typically are high-bandwidth implementations, such as
fiber-optic cable.
backup schedule A document or plan that defines what type of backups are
made, when, and what data is backed up.
bandwidth The width of the range of electrical frequencies, or how many
channels the medium can support. Bandwidth correlates to the amount of data

that can traverse the medium at one time, but other factors determine the
maximum speed supported by a cable.
baseband A term applied to any medium that can carry only a single data
signal at a time. Compare with broadband.
baseline A measurement of performance of a device or system for the
purposes of future comparison. Baselining is a common server administration
task.
baud rate The speed or rate of signal transfer. Baud rate bandwidth is
measured in cycles per second, or hertz (Hz). The word baud is derived from the
name of French telegraphy expert J. M. Baudot.
BCP (business continuity plan)  The strategy for addressing potential threats
to a company and creation of systems to aid in the prevention of threats and
recovery from problems.
beaconing In a wireless network, beaconing refers to the continuous
transmission of small packets (beacons) that advertise the presence of a base
station (access point).
BERT (bit-error rate test) A test to see the number of received bits of a data
stream that has changed due to noise, interference, or other distortion.
BGP (Border Gateway Protocol)  Used between gateway hosts on the
Internet. BGP examines the routing table, which contains a list of known routers,
the addresses they can reach, and a cost metric associated with the path to each
router so that the best available route is chosen. BGP communicates between the
routers using TCP.
binary A base 2 numbering system used in digital signaling. It uses only the
numbers 1 and 0.
binding The process of associating a protocol with a NIC.
biometrics The science and technology of measuring and analyzing biological
data. Biometrics are used for security purposes to analyze and compare
characteristics such as voice patterns, retina patterns, and hand measurements.
BIOS (Basic Input/Output System)  A basic set of instructions that a device
needs to operate.
bit An electronic digit used in the binary numbering system. Bit is a
contraction of the terms binary and digit.
blackout A total loss of electrical power.

BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy) A form of Bluetooth networking tech-nology
that uses very little energy.
Bluetooth A low-cost, short-range RF technology designed to replace many of
the cords used to connect devices. Bluetooth uses 2.4 GHz RF and provides
transmission speeds up to 24 Mbps.
BNC (British Naval Connector/Bayonet Neill-Concelman) connector A
family of connectors typically associated with thin coaxial cabling and
10BASE2 networks. BNC connectors use a twist-and-lock mechanism to
connect devices to the network.
BOOTP (Bootstrap Protocol) A TCP/IP protocol used by a network device to
obtain an IP address and other network information, such as server address and
default gateway from a configuration server.
bound medium Describes any medium that has physical constraints, such as
coaxial, fiber-optic, and twisted pair. Compare with unbound medium.
boundless medium See unbound medium.
BPDU (bridge protocol data unit)  Identifies the status of ports and bridges
across the network. BPDUs are simple data messages exchanged between
switches. They contain information on ports and provide the status of those ports
to other switches.
BRI (Basic Rate Interface) An ISDN digital communications line that
consists of three independent channels: two B channels each at 64 Kbps and one
D channel at 16 Kbps. ISDN BRI is often referred to as 2B+D. See also ISDN
and PRI.
bridge A device that connects and passes packets between two network
segments that use the same communications protocol. Bridges operate at the data
link layer of the OSI model. A bridge filters, forwards, or floods an incoming
frame based on the packet’s MAC address.
bridging address table A list of MAC addresses that a bridge keeps and uses
when it receives packets. The bridge uses the bridging address table to determine
which segment the destination address is on before it sends the packet to the next
interface or drops the packet (if it is on the same segment as the sending node).
broadband A communications strategy that uses analog or digital signaling
over multiple communications channels.
broadcast A packet-delivery system in which a copy of a packet is transmitted
to all hosts attached to the network.

broadcast storm An undesirable condition in which broadcasts become so
numerous that they bog down the flow of data across the network.
brownout A short-term decrease in the voltage level, usually caused by the
startup demands of other electrical devices.
BSSID (basic service set identifier) The BSSID is the MAC address of the
wireless access point (AP).
buffer An area of memory in a device used to temporarily store data before it
is forwarded to another device or location.
bus topology A linear LAN architecture in which all devices connect to a
common cable, called a bus or backbone.
butt set The butt set is typically associated with telephony systems. It is used
to test and access the phone line using clip wires that attach to the phone cable.
BYOD (bring your own device)  A policy governing employees bringing
personally owned devices (laptops, smartphones, and the like) to the workplace
and the use of those devices to access company data.
byte A set of bits (usually 8) that operate as a unit to signify a character.
C
CaaS (Communication as a Service) A cloud computing model for providing
ubiquitous access to shared pools of configurable resources.
cable modem A device that provides Internet access over cable television
lines.
cable stripper A tool used to strip the sheathing from copper cabling.
cable tester A device used to check for electrical continuity along a length of
cable. Cable tester is a generic term that can be applied to devices such as
volt/ohm meters and TDRs.
caching-only server A type of DNS server that operates the same way as
secondary servers except that a zone transfer does not take place when the
caching-only server is started.
CAM (content addressable memory) A type of computer memory used in
high-speed searching applications.
CAN (campus-area network) A wide-area network (WAN) created to service
a campus area.

CARP (Common Address Redundancy Protocol) A protocol that enables
multiple hosts on the same network to share a set of IP addresses and thus
provides failover redundancy. It is commonly used with routers and firewalls and
can provide load balancing.
carrier A signal that carries data. The carrier signal is modulated to create
peaks and troughs, which represent binary bits.
CASB (cloud access security broker) Software that sits between cloud
service users and cloud applications to monitor all activity and enforce security
policies.
CAT (Computer and Telephone)  A designation of resources, usually wiring,
used to provide service to computers or telephones.
CAT3 Data-grade cable that can transmit data up to 10 Mbps with a possible
bandwidth of 16 MHz.
CAT5 Data-grade cable that typically was used with Fast Ethernet operating at
100 Mbps with a transmission range of 100 meters.
CAT5e Data-grade cable used on networks that run at 10/100 Mbps and even
up to 1000 Mbps. Category 5e cabling can be used up to 100 meters, depending
on the implementation and standard used. Category 5e cable provides a
minimum of 100 MHz of bandwidth.
CAT6 High-performance UTP cable that can transmit data up to 10 Gbps.
CAT6a Also called augmented 6. Offers improvements over Category 6 by
offering a minimum of 500 MHz of bandwidth. It specifies transmission
distances up to 100 meters with 10 Gbps networking speeds.
CAT7 Offers improvements over Category 6a by offering 600 MHz of
bandwidth and improved crosstalk suppression. It specifies transmission
distances up to 100 meters with 10 Gbps networking speeds.
CCTV (closed-circuit TV) An acronym for video cameras used to watch a
particular place and send (transmit) to a particular location.
CDMA (code division multiple access) A multiple-access channel method
used to provide bandwidth sharing.
change control A process in which a detailed record of every change made to
the network is documented.
channel A communications path used for data transmission.
CHAP (Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol) A protocol that

challenges a system to verify identity. CHAP is an improvement over Password
Authentication Protocol (PAP) in which one-way hashing is incorporated into a
three-way handshake. RFC 1334 applies to both PAP and CHAP.
checksum A basic method of error checking that involves calculating the sum
of bytes in a section of data and then embedding the result in the packet. When
the packet reaches the destination, the calculation is performed again to make
sure that the value is still the same.
CIDR (classless interdomain routing) An IP addressing scheme that enables
a single IP address to designate many unique IP addresses. CIDR addressing uses
an IP address followed by a / and the IP network prefix. An example of a CIDR
address is 192.168.100.0/16. CIDR is sometimes called supernetting.
circuit-level firewall A type of network security system whereby network
traffic is filtered based on specified session rules and may be restricted to
recognized computers only.
circuit switching A method of sending data between two parties in which a
dedicated circuit is created at the beginning of the conversation and is broken at
the end. All data transported during the session travels over the same path, or
circuit.
Class A network A TCP/IP network that uses addresses from 1 to 126 and
supports up to 126 subnets with 16,777,214 unique hosts each.
Class B network A TCP/IP network that uses addresses from 128 to 191 and
supports up to 16,384 subnets with 65,534 unique hosts each.
Class C network A TCP/IP network that uses addresses from 192 to 223 and
supports up to 2,097,152 subnets with 254 unique hosts each.
Class D network Class D network addresses within the range of 224.0.0.0 to
239.255.255.255 are used for multicasting data to multicast-capable hosts on a
network.
client A node that uses the services from another node on a network.
client/server networking A networking architecture in which front-end, or
client, nodes request and process data stored by the back-end, or server, node.
cloud computing The hosting, storage, and delivery of computing as a service
rather than a product. The end user accesses remotely stored programs and other
resources through the Internet without the need for expensive local networking
devices, services, and support. Various industry cloud computing concepts
include public, private, hybrid, and community cloud.

clustering A technology that enables two or more computers to act as a single
system to provide improved fault tolerance, load balancing, and failover
capability.
CNAME (canonical name) Specifies an alias or nickname for a canonical
hostname record in a Domain Name System (DNS) database. CNAME records
are used to give a single computer multiple names (aliases).
coaxial cable A data cable, commonly referred to as coax, that is made of a
solid copper core insulated and surrounded by braided metal and covered with a
thick plastic or rubber covering. Coax is the standard cable used in cable
television and in older bus topology networks.
cold site A disaster recovery site that provides office space, but the customer
provides and installs all the equipment needed to continue operations.
cold spare A redundant piece of hardware stored in case a component should
fail. Typically used for server systems.
collision The result of two frames simultaneously transmitting on an Ethernet
network and colliding, thereby destroying both frames.
collision domain A segment of an Ethernet network between managing nodes,
where only one packet can be transmitted at a time. Switches, bridges, and
routers can be used to segment a network into separate collision domains.
communication The transfer of information between nodes on a network.
concentrator A device that combines several communications channels into
one. It is often used to combine multiple terminals into one line.
connectionless communication  Packet transfer in which delivery is not
guaranteed.
connection-oriented communication Packet transfer in which delivery is
guaranteed.
connectivity The linking of nodes on a network for communication to take
place.
convergence When a change in the network routing is made, it takes some
time for the routers to detect and accommodate this change; this is known as
convergence.
copy backup Normally, a backup of the entire hard drive. A copy backup is
similar to a full backup, except that the copy backup does not alter the state of
the archive bits on files.

CoS (class of service) A parameter used in data and voice to differentiate the
types of payloads being transmitted.
cost A value used to encourage or discourage the use of a certain route through
a network. Routes that are to be discouraged are assigned a higher cost, and
those that are to be encouraged are assigned a lower cost. See also metric.
CPU (central processing unit) The main processor in a computing device.
cracker A person who attempts to break software code or gain access to a
system to which he or she is not authorized. See also hacker.
cracking The process of attempting to break software code, normally to defeat
copyright protection or alter the software’s functioning. Also the process of
attempting to gain unauthorized access to a computer system. See also hacker.
CRAM-MD5 A challenge-response authentication mechanism.
CRC (cyclical redundancy check)  A method used to check for errors in
packets that have been transferred across a network. A computation bit is added
to the packet and recalculated at the destination to determine whether the entire
content of the packet has been correctly transferred.
crimper A tool used to join connectors to the ends of network cables.
crossover cable A cable that can be used to directly connect two devices—
such as two computer systems—or as a means to expand networks that use
devices such as hubs or switches. A traditional crossover cable is a UTP cable in
which the wires are crossed for the purposes of placing the transmit line of one
device on the receive line of the other. A T1 crossover is used to connect two T1
CSU/DSU devices in a back-to-back configuration.
crosstalk Electronic interference caused when two wires are too close to each
other, and the adjacent cable creates interference.
CSMA/CA (carrier sense multiple access with collision avoidance) A
contention media access method that uses collision-avoidance techniques.
CSMA/CD (carrier sense multiple access with collision detection) A
contention media access method that uses collision-detection and retransmission
techniques.
CSU/DSU (channel service unit/data service unit) Acts as a translator
between the LAN data format and the WAN data format. Such a conversion is
necessary because the technologies used on WAN links are different from those
used on LANs.

cut-through packet switching A switching method that does not copy the
entire packet into the switch buffers. Instead, the destination address is captured
into the switch, the route to the destination node is determined, and the packet is
quickly sent out the corresponding port. Cut-through packet switching maintains
a low latency.
CVW (collaborative virtual workspace) An environment, often called a
CVE, used for collaboration and interaction of participants that may be spread
over large distances.
CWDM (course wave-division multiplexing) Contrary to the CompTIA
acronym, most in the industry use coarse for the C portion and it is a method of
multiplexing in which different signals operate at different speeds. The best
example of this is cable modems, allowing for different speeds of uploading and
downloading.
D
DaaS (Desktop as a Service)  Software that separates the desktop
environment and associated application software from the physical client device
that is used to access it.
data field In a frame, the field or section that contains the data.
data link layer Layer 2 of the OSI model, which is above the physical layer.
Data comes off the cable, goes through the physical layer, and goes into the data
link layer. The data link layer has two distinct sublayers: MAC and LLC.
datagram An information grouping transmitted as a unit at the network layer.
See also packet.
dB Decibels. A measurement.
DB-25 A 25-pin connector used for serial port or parallel port connection
between PCs and peripheral devices.
DB-9 A nine-pin connector used for serial port or parallel port connection
between PCs and peripheral devices.
D (delta) channel The channel used on ISDN to communicate signaling and
other related information. Use of the D channel leaves the B channels free for
data communication. See also B (bearer) channel.
DCS (distributed computer system) A system in which the whole is divided
into many parts. The best example of this is using multiple computers to work

together and appear to the user as a single entity.
DDNS (Dynamic Domain Name Service) A form of DNS that enables
systems to be registered and deregistered with DNS dynamically. DDNS is
facilitated by DHCP, which passes IP address assignments to the DNS server for
entry into the DNS server records. This is in contrast with the conventional DNS
system, in which entries must be manually made.
DDoS (distributed denial of service) attack A DoS attack that utilizes more
than one computer in the attack. See DoS (denial of service) attack.
dedicated line A dedicated circuit used in WANs to provide a constant
connection between two points.
default gateway Normally a router or a multihomed computer to which
packets are sent when they are destined for a host on a different network.
demarcation point The point at which communication lines enter a
customer’s premises. Sometimes shortened to simply demarc.
destination address The network address to which data is sent.
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol) A protocol that provides
dynamic IP addressing to DHCP-enabled workstations on the network.
dial-up networking Refers to the connection of a remote node to a network
using POTS.
differential backup A backup of only the data that has been created or
changed since the previous full backup. In a differential backup, the state of the
archive bits is not altered.
dig On a Linux, UNIX, or Mac OS system, you can use the dig command to
perform manual DNS lookups.
directory services A system that enables network resources to be viewed as
objects stored in a database. This database can then be divided and distributed
among different servers on the network. An example of directory services
includes LDAP or Microsoft Active Directory.
disaster recovery plan A plan for implementing duplicate computer services
if a natural disaster, a human-made disaster, or another catastrophe occurs. A
disaster recovery plan includes offsite backups and procedures to activate
information systems in alternative locations.
distance-vector routing A type of routing in which a router uses broadcasts to
inform neighboring routers on the network of the routes it knows about.

Compare with link-state routing.
DLC (data link control) The service provided by the data link layer of the
OSI model.
DLP (data leak prevention) Also commonly expressed as data loss
prevention, it is a system designed to detect and respond to potential breaches.
DLR (device level ring) A protocol that provides a means of detecting,
managing, and recovering from faults in a ring-based topology network.
DMZ (demilitarized zone) An area for placing web and other servers that
serve the general public outside the firewall, thereby isolating them from internal
network access.
DNAT (Destination Network Address Translation) A technique for
transparently changing the destination of an end route and performing the
inverse function for any replies.
DNS (Domain Name Service) A service/system/server used to translate
domain names, such as www.quepublishing.com, into IP addresses, such as
165.193.123.44. DNS uses a hierarchical namespace that enables the database of
hostname-to-IP address mappings to be distributed across multiple servers.
DOCSIS 
(Data-Over-Cable 
Service 
Interface 
Specification) A
telecommunications standard for transmitting high-speed data over existing
cable TV systems.
domain A logical boundary of an Active Directory structure on Windows
servers. Also, a section of the DNS namespace.
domain name server A server that runs application software that enables the
server to perform a role associated with the DNS service.
DoS (denial of service) attack A type of hacking attack in which the target
system is overwhelmed with requests for service, which keeps it from servicing
any requests—legitimate or otherwise.
downtime A period of time during which a computer system or network is
unavailable. This may be due to scheduled maintenance or hardware or software
failure.
DR (designated router) An OSPF router intended to reduce network traffic by
maintaining the complete routing database and then sending updates to the other
routers on the shared network segment.
DSCP (differentiated services code point) An architecture that specifies a

simple and coarse-grained mechanism for classifying and managing network
traffic and providing QoS on modern networks.
DSL (digital subscriber line) A public network technology that delivers high
bandwidth over conventional copper wiring over limited distances.
DSSS (direct sequence spread spectrum) A modulation technique in which
the transmitted signal takes up more than the information signal that modulates
the carrier or broadcast frequency.
DSU (data service unit) A network communications device that formats and
controls data for transmission over digital lines. A DSU is used with a CSU.
DTE (data terminal equipment)  A device used at the user end of a user
network interface that serves as a data source, a destination, or both. DTE
devices include computers, protocol translators, and multiplexers.
DWDM (dense wavelength-division multiplexing) A form of multiplexing
optical signals that replaces SONET/SDH regenerators with erbium doped fiber
amplifiers (EDFAs) and can also amplify the signal and allow it to travel a
greater distance. The main components of a DWDM system include a terminal
multiplexer, line repeaters, and a terminal demultiplexer.
dynamic routing A routing system that enables routing information to be
communicated between devices automatically and that can recognize changes in
the network topology and update routing tables accordingly. Compare with static
routing.
dynamic window A flow control mechanism that prevents the sender of data
from overwhelming the receiver. The amount of data that can be buffered in a
dynamic window varies in size, hence its name.
E
E1 (E-Carrier Level 1) An E1 link operates over two separate sets of wires,
typically twisted-pair cable, and carries data at a rate of 2.048 million bits per
second. E1 is the European equivalent of T1 used in the United States.
E3 (E-Carrier Level 3) An E3 link carries 16 E1 signals with a data rate of
34.368 million bits per second. E3 is the European equivalent of T3 used in the
United States.
EAP (Extensible Authentication Protocol) An extension of PPP that supports
authentication methods more secure than a standard username and password
combination. EAP is commonly used as an authentication protocol for token

cards, smart cards, and digital certificates.
EDNS (Extension Mechanisms for DNS) As specified by the Internet
Engineering Task Force as RFC 2671, EDNS increases the size of the flags
fields, return codes, and label types available in basic DNS.
EGP (exterior gateway protocol)  The exterior gateway protocol defines
distance-vector protocols commonly used between hosts on the Internet to
exchange routing table information. BGP is an example of an EGP. See BGP.
EIA/TIA The Electronic Industries Alliance/Telecommunications Industry
Association is a trade organization responsible for a number of communications
standards.
EIGRP (Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol) A protocol that
enables routers to exchange information more efficiently than earlier network
protocols. Routers configured to use EIGRP keep copies of their neighbors’
routing information and query these tables to help find the best possible route for
transmissions to follow.
EMI (electromagnetic interference)  External interference of electromagnetic
signals that causes a reduction in data integrity and increased error rates in a
transmission medium.
encapsulation A technique used by protocols in which header and trailer
information is added to the protocol data unit as it is passed down through the
protocol stack on a sending system. The reverse process, decapsulation, is
performed at the receiving system as the packet travels up through the protocol
suite.
encryption Modifying data for security purposes prior to transmission so that
the data cannot be read without the decryption method.
ESD (electrostatic discharge) A condition created when two objects of
dissimilar electrical charge come into contact with each other. The result is that a
charge from the object with the higher electrical charge discharges itself into the
object with the lower-level charge. This discharge can be harmful to computer
components and circuit boards.
ESP (Encapsulated Security Packets) One of the two separate protocols
IPsec consists of (the other being AH). ESP provides encryption services.
ESS (extended service set) The ESS refers to two or more basic service sets
(BSS) connected, therefore using multiple APs. The ESS is used to create
WLANs or larger wireless networks and is a collection of APs and clients.

ESSID (extended service set identifier) The terms ESSID and SSID are used
interchangeably, but they are different. The SSID is the name used with basic
service set (BSS) networks, and the ESSID is the network name used with an
ESS wireless network design. With an ESS, not all APs necessarily use the same
name.
Ethernet The most common LAN technology. Ethernet can be implemented
using coaxial, twisted-pair, or fiber-optic cable. Ethernet typically uses the
CSMA/CD media access method and has various implementation standards.
EUI (extended unique identifier)  A naming convention for MAC addresses.
Event Viewer A utility available on Windows server systems and client
systems. It is commonly used to gather systems information and also is used in
the troubleshooting process.
F
failover The automatic switching from one device or system to another.
Servers can be configured in a failover configuration so that if the primary server
fails, the secondary server automatically takes over.
Fast Ethernet The IEEE 802.3u specification for data transfers of up to 100
Mbps over twisted-pair cable. See also 100BASE-FX, 100BASE-T, and
100BASE-TX.
fault tolerance The capability of a component, system, or network to endure a
failure.
FC (Fibre Channel) See Fibre Channel.
FCoE (Fibre Channel over Ethernet) A technology that encapsulates Fibre
Channel frames over Ethernet networks allowing FC to use 10 Gigabit Ethernet
networks (or higher) while preserving the Fibre Channel protocol.
FCS (frame check sequence) A method of error detection added to a frame in
a communications protocol.
FDDI (Fiber Distributed Data Interface) A high-speed data transfer
technology designed to extend the capabilities of existing LANs by using a dual-
ring topology and a token-passing access method.
FDM (frequency-division multiplexing) A technology that divides the output
channel into multiple smaller-bandwidth channels, each of which uses a different
frequency range.

FHSS (frequency hopping spread spectrum) A multiple access method of
transferring radio signals in the frequency-hopping code division multiple access
(FH-CDMA) scheme.
fiber-optic cable Also known as fiber optics or optical fiber, a physical
medium that can conduct modulated light transmissions. Compared with other
transmission media, fiber-optic cable is more expensive, but it is not susceptible
to EMI or crosstalk, and it is capable of high data rates and increased distances.
Fibre Channel A technology that defines full gigabit-per-second (commonly
runs at 2-, 4-, 8-, and 16-gigabit per second data rates) data transfer over fiber-
optic cable. Commonly used with storage-area network (SAN) implementations.
firewall A program, system, device, or group of devices that acts as a barrier
between one network and another. Firewalls are configured to enable certain
types of traffic to pass while blocking others.
flow control A method of controlling the amount of data transmitted within a
given period of time. Different types of flow control exist. See also dynamic
window and static window.
FM 
(frequency 
modulation) One 
form 
of radio 
modulation, 
this
communication technique transmits information over a radio wave.
FQDN (fully qualified domain name)  The entire domain name. It specifies
the name of the computer, the domain in which it resides, and the top-level DNS
domain (for example, www.marketing.quepublishing.com).
fragment-free switching A switching method that uses the first 64 bytes of a
frame to determine whether the frame is corrupted. If this first part is intact, the
frame is forwarded.
frame A grouping of information transmitted as a unit across the network at
the data link layer of the OSI model.
Frame Length field In a data frame, the field that specifies the length of a
frame.
Frame Type field In a data frame, the field that names the protocol being sent
in the frame.
frequency The number of cycles of an alternating current signal over a unit of
time. Frequency is expressed in hertz (Hz).
FTP (File Transfer Protocol) A protocol that provides for the transfer of files
between two systems. FTP users authenticate using clear-text sign-in procedures,
making FTP an unsecure protocol. FTP is part of the TCP/IP suite and operates

at Layer 7 of the OSI model.
FTPS (File Transfer Protocol Security) A file transfer protocol that uses
SSL/TLS to add security.
F-type connecter A screw-type connector used with coaxial cable. In
computing environments, it is most commonly used to connect cable modems to
ISP equipment or incoming cable feeds.
full backup A backup in which files, regardless of whether they have been
changed, are copied to the backup medium. In a full backup, the files’ archive
bits are reset.
full duplex A system in which data simultaneously transmits in two directions.
Compare with half duplex.
G
gateway A hardware or software solution that enables communications
between two dissimilar networking systems or protocols. A gateway can operate
at any layer of the OSI model but is commonly associated with the application
layer.
Gb (gigabit) 1 billion bits, or 1000 Mb.
GBIC (gigabit interface converter)  A Gigabit Ethernet and Fibre Channel
transceiver standard.
Gbps (gigabits per second) The throughput of a given network medium in
terms of 1 billion bps.
Gigabit Ethernet An IEEE 802.3 specification that defines standards for data
transmissions of 1 Gbps. See also 1000BASE-T.
GLBP (Gateway Load Balancing Protocol) A proprietary Cisco protocol that
adds basic load-balancing functionality in an attempt to overcome the limitations
of existing redundant router protocols.
GPG (GNU Privacy Guard) An IETF RFC 4880-compliant alternative to the
PGP suite of cryptographic software.
GRE (generic routing encapsulation) A routing encapsulation method that
comes in a plain wrapper.
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications) A standard created by
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) used to describe
communication protocols for second-generation (2G) cellular networks and

devices. It has now become the default global standard for mobile
communications in more than 219 countries and territories.
guaranteed flow control A method of flow control in which the sending and
receiving hosts agree on a rate of data transmission. After the rate is determined,
the communication takes place at the guaranteed rate until the sender is finished.
No buffering takes place at the receiver.
H
HA (high availability) A system goal/attribute aimed at ensuring operational
uptime higher than normal.
hacker A person who carries out attacks on a computer software program. See
also cracker.
half duplex A connection in which data is transmitted in both directions but
not simultaneously. Compare with full duplex.
handshake The initial communication between two data communication
devices, during which they agree on protocol and transfer rules for the session.
hardware address The hardware-encoded MAC address burned into every
NIC.
hardware loopback A device plugged into an interface for the purposes of
simulating a network connection. This enables the interface to be tested as if it is
operating while connected.
HDLC (High-Level Data Link Control) An ISO developed bit-oriented
synchronous data link layer protocol used for point-to-point or point-to-
multipoint connections.
HDMI (High-Definition Multimedia Interface) An audio/video interface for
transferring data and compressed or uncompressed data to a monitor, projector,
television, or digital audio device.
HIDS (host intrusion detection system) A intrusion detection system that is
based at the host (rather than the network). It monitors and analyzes data coming
to and from the host.
HIPS (host intrusion prevention system) A intrusion prevention system that
is based at the host (rather than the network). It responds and reacts to threats
coming to and from the host.
hop The means by which routing protocols determine the shortest way to reach

a given destination. Each router constitutes one hop. If a router is four hops away
from another router, for example, three routers, or hops, exist between the first
router and the destination. In some cases, the final step is also counted as a hop.
horizontal cross-connect Ties the telecommunication room to the end user.
Specifically, the horizontal cabling extends from the telecommunications outlet,
or network outlet with RJ-45 connectors, at the client end. It includes all cable
from that outlet to the telecommunication room to the horizontal cross-connect.
The term horizontal cross-connect refers to the distribution point for the
horizontal cable.
host Typically refers to any device on the network that has been assigned an IP
address.
host firewall A firewall system installed and configured on and used for an
individual host. Contrast to a network firewall that provides firewall services for
all network nodes.
host ID An identifier used to uniquely identify a client or resource on a
network.
hostname A name assigned to a system for the purposes of identifying it on
the network in a more user-friendly manner than by the network address.
HOSTS file A text file that contains hostname-to-IP address mappings. All
commonly used platforms accommodate static name resolution using the
HOSTS file.
hot site A disaster recovery term used to describe an alternative network site
that can be immediately functional in the event of a disaster at the primary site.
hot spare In a RAID configuration, a drive that sits idle until another drive in
the RAID array fails, at which point the hot spare takes over the role of the failed
drive.
hotspot An area in which an access point provides public wireless broadband
network services to mobile visitors through a WLAN. Hotspots are often located
in heavily populated places such as airports, hotels, and coffee shops.
hot swap The removal and replacement of a component in a system while the
power is still on and the system is functioning.
HSPA (High-Speed Packet Access) A telephony protocol designed to increase
speeds over previous protocols by combining features from others.
HSRP (Hot Standby Router Protocol) A Cisco proprietary protocol used for
establishing redundant gateways.

HT (High Throughput) A feature of 802.11n for increased throughput on the
network. The newer Very High Throughput (VHT) 802.11ac standard further
increases network throughput.
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) A protocol used by web browsers to
transfer pages, links, and graphics from the remote node to the user’s computer.
HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) A protocol that performs the
same function as HTTP but does so over an encrypted link, ensuring the
confidentiality of any data that is uploaded or downloaded. Also referred to as S-
HTTP.
hub A largely obsolete hardware device that acts as a connection point on a
network that uses twisted-pair cable. It operates at the physical layer of the OSI
model and forwards signals to all ports. Also known as a concentrator or a
multiport repeater.
HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) A self-defining acronym.
Hz (hertz) Equivalent to cycles per second, hertz is the unit of frequency
defined as the number of cycles per second of a periodic phenomenon.
I
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service)  The most basic method of cloud service
computing; the users install everything from the operating system up.
IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) An organization responsible
for IP addresses, domain names, and protocol parameters. Some functions of
IANA, such as domain name assignment, have been devolved into other
organizations.
ICA (Independent Computer Architecture) Contrary to the CompTIA
acronym, the C is more correctly Computing, and this is a Cisco proprietary
protocol for application servers.
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) The
nonprofit organization responsible for coordinating domain names and
addresses.
ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) A network layer Internet
protocol documented in RFC 792 that reports errors and provides other
information relevant to IP packet processing. Utilities such as ping and tracert
use functionality provided by ICMP.

ICS (Internet connection sharing) The use of one device with access to the
Internet as an access point for other devices to connect.
ICS (industrial control system)  A general term used to describe industrial
control systems such as supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems.
IDF Some networks use multiple wiring closets. When this is the case, the
wiring closet, known as the main distribution frame (MDF), connects to
secondary wiring closets, or intermediate distribution frames (IDFs). See also
MDF.
IDS (intrusion detection system)  A software application or hardware device
that monitors a network or system for malicious or non-policy-related activity
and reports to a centralized management system.
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) A professional
organization that, among other things, develops standards for networking and
communications.
IEEE 1394 A standard that defines a system for connecting up to 63 devices
on an external bus. IEEE 1394 is used with consumer electronic devices such as
video cameras and MP3 players. IEEE 1394 is based on a technology developed
by Apple called FireWire. FireWire was subsequently replaced by Thunderbolt.
IEEE 802.1 A standard that defines the OSI model’s physical and data link
layers. This standard allows two IEEE LAN stations to communicate over a
LAN or WAN and is often called the internetworking standard.
IEEE 802.1X An IEEE security standard designed for authenticating wireless
devices. This standard uses Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) to provide
a central authentication server to authenticate each user on the network.
IEEE 802.3 A standard that specifies physical layer attributes, such as
signaling types, data rates, and topologies, as well as the media access method
used. It also defines specifications for the implementation of the physical layer
and the MAC sublayer of the data link layer, using CSMA/CD. This standard
also includes the original specifications for Fast Ethernet.
IEEE 802.11 The original IEEE wireless standard, which defines standards for
wireless LAN communication.
IEEE 802.11a A wireless networking standard operating in the 5 GHz band.
802.11a supports a maximum theoretical data rate of 54 Mbps. Depending on
interference, 802.11a could have a range of 150 feet at the lowest speed setting.

Higher-speed transmissions would see a lower range. 802.11a uses the
CSMA/CA media access method and is incompatible with 802.11b and 802.11g.
IEEE 802.11ac The 802.11ac wireless standard provides even higher
throughput for WLANs on the 5 GHz frequency range. The specifications goal is
at least 1 gigabit per second throughput for multistation WLANs and a single
station link throughput of at least 500 Mbps. It supports MIMO spatial streams
as well as the newer MU-MIMO technology. 802.11ac is backward compatible
with 802.11b, g, and n.
IEEE 802.11b A commonly deployed IEEE wireless standard that uses the 2.4
GHz RF range and offers speeds up to 11 Mbps. Under ideal conditions, the
transmission range can be as far as 75 meters.
IEEE 802.11g An IEEE wireless standard that is backward compatible with
802.11b. 802.11g offers a data rate of 54 Mbps. Like 802.11b, 802.11g uses the
2.4 GHz RF range.
IEEE 802.11n The 802.11n wireless standard significantly increased
throughput in both the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz frequency range. The baseline goal of
the standard reaches speeds of 100 Mbps, but given the right conditions, 802.11n
speeds can reach 600 Mbps. 802.11n is backward compatible with 802.11b and
g.
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) A group of research volunteers
responsible for specifying the protocols used on the Internet and the architecture
of the Internet.
ifconfig A command used on Linux- and UNIX-based systems to obtain
configuration for and configure network interfaces.
IGMP (Internet Group Management Protocol) A protocol used for
communication between devices within the same multicast group. IGMP
provides a mechanism for systems to detect and make themselves aware of other
systems in the same group.
IGP The interior gateway protocol (IGP) identifies the protocols used to
exchange routing information between routers within a LAN or interconnected
LANs. See EGP.
IGRP (Interior Gateway Routing Protocol) A distance vector interior
gateway protocol (IGP) developed by Cisco.
IKE (Internet Key Exchange) An IPsec protocol that uses X.509 certificates
for authentication.

IMAP4 (Internet Message Access Protocol version 4) A protocol that
enables email to be retrieved from a remote server. It is part of the TCP/IP suite,
and it is similar in operation to POP3 but offers more functionality.
incremental backup A backup of only files that have been created or changed
since the last backup. In an incremental backup, the archive bit is cleared to
indicate that a file has been backed up.
infrared A wireless data communication method that uses light pulses in the
infrared range as a carrier signal.
infrastructure topology A wireless topology that defines a wireless network
composed of an access point connected to a wired LAN. Wireless devices
communicate with the wired LAN through the access point (AP).
inherited rights The file system or directory access rights valid at a given
point as a result of those rights being assigned at a higher level in the directory
structure.
intelligent hub/switch A hub or switch that contains some management or
monitoring capability.
intelligent UPS A UPS that has associated software for monitoring and
managing the power provided to the system. For information to be passed
between the UPS and the system, the UPS and system must be connected, which
normally is achieved through a serial or USB connection.
interface A device, such as a card or plug, that connects pieces of hardware
with a computer so that information can be moved from place to place (for
example, between computers and printers, hard drives, and other devices, or
between two or more nodes on a network). Also, the part of an application or
operating system that the user sees.
interference Anything that can compromise a signal’s quality. On bound
media, crosstalk and EMI are examples of interference. In wireless
environments, atmospheric conditions that degrade a signal’s quality would be
considered interference.
internal loopback address  Functionality built in to the TCP/IP stack that
enables you to verify the correct functioning of the stack. You can ping any IPv4
address in the 127.x.x.x range, except the network address (127.0.0.0) or the
broadcast address (127.255.255.255). The address 127.0.0.1 is most commonly
used. In IPv6, the localhost (loopback) address is 0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1 or can also be
expressed as ::1.

Internet domain name The name of an area of the DNS namespace. The
Internet domain name normally is expressed along with the top-level domain to
which it belongs (for example, comptia.org).
Internet layer In the TCP/IP architectural model, the layer responsible for
addressing, packaging, and routing functions. Protocols that operate at this layer
are responsible for encapsulating packets into Internet datagrams. All necessary
routing algorithms are run here.
internetwork A group of networks connected by routers or other connectivity
devices so that the networks function as one network.
InterNIC (Internet Network Information Center) Now known just as NIC
(Network Information Center), this is the organization that was primarily
responsible for domain name allocation.
intrusion detection The process or procedures that warn you about successful
or failed unauthorized access to a system.
IoT (Internet of Things) A network of physical devices embedded with
software, sensors, actuators, and network connectivity that enable these objects
to collect and exchange data.
IP (Internet Protocol) A network layer protocol, documented in RFC 791,
that offers a connectionless internetwork service. IP provides features for
addressing, packet fragmentation and reassembly, type-of-service specification,
and security.
IP address The unique address used to identify the network number and node
address of a device connected to a TCP/IP network. IPv4 addresses typically are
expressed in dotted-decimal format, such as 192.168.1.1. A typical IPv6 address
looks like 2001:0:4137:9e76:18d1:2094:b980:a30.
IPS (intrusion prevention system)  A network device that continually scans
the network, looking for inappropriate activity.
ipconfig A Windows command that provides information about the
configuration of the TCP/IP parameters, including the IP address.
IPsec (IP Security) A protocol used to provide strong security standards for
encryption and authentication on virtual private networks.
IPv4 (Internet Protocol version 4)  A suite of protocols used for
communication on a local area network and for accessing the Internet.
IPv6 (Internet Protocol version 6)  The newer version of IP, which has a
larger range of usable addresses than IPv4, and enhanced security.

IrDA A wireless networking technology that uses infrared beams to send data
transmissions between devices.
ISAKMP (Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol) 
Defined by RFC 2408, ISAKMP is a protocol typically used by IKE for key
exchange.
iSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface) An IP-based networking
storage standard for linking and managing data storage facilities. iSCSI allows
SCSI commands to be sent over IP networks, including LANs, WANs, and the
Internet.
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) An internationally adopted
standard for providing end-to-end digital communications between two points.
ISDN is a dialup technology allowing data, voice, and other source traffic to be
transmitted over a dedicated link.
ISDN terminal adapter A device that enables communication over an ISDN
link.
IS-IS (Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System) A link-state protocol
that discovers the shortest path for data to travel using the shortest path first
(SPF) algorithm. IS-IS routers distribute topology information to other routers,
allowing them to make the best path decisions.
ISO (International Organization for Standardization) A voluntary
organization founded in 1946 that is responsible for creating international
standards in many areas, including communications and computers. This also
includes the development of the OSI model.
ISP (Internet service provider)  A company or organization that provides
facilities for clients to access the Internet.
IT (information technology) A fascinating field of study and career choice.
ITS (intelligent transportation system) A traffic management system
intended for use in creating smart transportation networks.
IV (initialization vector) A fixed-size input used in cryptography. The larger
initialization vector, the more it increases the difficulty in cracking and
minimizes the risk of replay.
K
Kb (kilobit) 1000 bits.

Kbps (Kilobits per second) A measurement of the number of kilobits
transmitted, or capable of being transmitted, in a second.
KB (kilobyte) 1000 bytes.
Kerberos A network authentication protocol designed to ensure that the data
sent across networks is encrypted and safe from attack. Its primary purpose is to
provide authentication for client/server applications.
KVM (keyboard video mouse) A device that allows one keyboard, one
mouse, and one monitor to be used with multiple devices.
L
L2TP (Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol) A VPN protocol that defines its own
tunneling protocol and works with the advanced security methods of IPsec.
L2TP enables PPP sessions to be tunneled across an arbitrary medium to a home
gateway at an ISP or corporation.
LACP (Link Aggregation Control Protocol) An IEEE specification that
provides a control method of bundling several physical ports into one single
channel.
LAN (local-area network) A group of connected computers located in a
single geographic area—usually a building or office—that shares data and
services.
latency The delay induced by a piece of equipment or device used to transfer
data.
LC (local connector) A media connector used with fiber-optic cabling.
LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) A protocol used to access
and query compliant directory services systems, such as Microsoft Active
Directory.
learning bridge A bridge that builds its own bridging address table instead of
requiring someone to manually enter information. Most modern bridges are
learning bridges. Also called a smart bridge.
LEC (local exchange carrier) A regulatory term used in telephony to
represent the local telephone provider.
LED (light-emitting diode) A type of semiconductor that emits light and is
commonly used in displays.
legacy An older computer system or technology.

line conditioner A device used to stabilize the flow of power to the connected
component. Also known as a power conditioner or voltage regulator.
link light An LED on a networking device, such as a hub, switch, or NIC. The
illumination of the link light indicates that, at a hardware level, the connection is
complete and functioning.
link-state routing A dynamic routing method in which routers tell neighboring
routers of their existence through packets called link-state advertisements
(LSAs). By interpreting the information in these packets, routers can create maps
of the entire network. Compare with distance-vector routing.
Linux A UNIX-like operating system kernel created by Linus Torvalds. Linux
is distributed under an open-source license agreement, as are many of the
applications and services that run on it.
LLC (logical link control) layer A sublayer of the data link layer of the OSI
model. The LLC layer provides an interface for network layer protocols and the
MAC sublayer.
LLDP (Link Layer Discovery Protocol) A protocol used by network devices
for advertising on an IEEE 802 local area network.
logical addressing scheme  The addressing method used in providing
manually assigned node addressing.
logical topology The appearance of the network to the devices that use it, even
if in physical terms the layout of the network is different. See also physical
topology.
loop A continuous circle that a packet takes through a series of nodes in a
network until it eventually times out.
loopback plug A device used for loopback testing.
loopback testing A troubleshooting method in which the output and input
wires are crossed or shorted in a manner that enables all outgoing data to be
routed back into the card.
LSA (link state advertisements)  A method of OSPF communication in which
the router sends the local routing topology to all other local routers in the same
OSPF area.
LTE (Long-Term Evolution) A wireless communication standard more
commonly referred to as 4G LTE.
LWAPP (Lightweight Access Point Protocol) More commonly known as

Lightweight, this is a protocol simplifying communication with multiple access
points at the same time.
M
MaaS (Mobility as a Service)  Also known as Transportation as a Service,
this is a shift toward mobility solutions that are consumed as a service as
opposed to personal vehicles.
MAC (Media Access Control) address A six-octet number, described in
hexadecimal, that uniquely identifies a host on a network. It is a unique number
burned into the network interface.
MAC layer In the OSI model, the lower of the two sublayers of the data link
layer. It is defined by the IEEE as being responsible for interaction with the
physical layer.
MAN (metropolitan-area network)  A network that spans a defined
geographic location, such as a city or suburb.
master name server The supplying name server that has authority in a DNS
zone.
Mb (megabit) 1 million bits. Used to rate transmission transfer speeds.
Mbps (megabits per second)  A measurement of the number of megabits sent,
or capable of being sent, in a second.
MB (megabyte) 1 million bytes. Usually refers to file size.
MBps (megabytes per second)  A measurement of the number of megabytes
sent in a second.
MDF The main distribution frame is a type of wiring closet. The primary
wiring closet for a network typically holds the majority of the network gear,
including routers, switches, wiring, servers, and more. This is also typically the
wiring closet where outside lines run into the network. This main wiring closet is
known as the MDF. One of the key components in the MDF is a primary patch
panel. The network connector jacks attached to this patch panel lead out to the
building for network connections. See also IDF.
MDI (medium-dependent interface)  A type of port found on Ethernet
networking devices, such as hubs and switches, in which the wiring is straight
through. MDI ports are sometimes called uplink ports. They are intended for use
as connectivity points to other hubs and switches.

MDIX (media dependent interface crossover) A type of port found on
Ethernet networking devices in which the wiring is crossed so that the transmit
line of one device becomes the receive line of the other. MDI-X is used to
connect hubs and switches to client computers.
media converter Network media converters are used to interconnect different
types of cables within an existing network. For example, the media converter can
be used to connect newer Gigabit Ethernet technologies with older 100BASE-T
networks.
media tester Defines a range of software or hardware tools designed to test a
particular media type.
mesh A type of network topology in which each node connects to every other
node. The mesh network provides a high level of redundancy because it provides
alternative routes for data to travel should a single route become unavailable.
metric A value that can be assigned to a route to encourage or discourage the
use of the route. See also cost.
MGCP (Media Gateway Control Protocol) A protocol for controlling IP-
based media gateways through the public switched telephone networks (PSTNs).
MIB (Management Information Base) A data set that defines the criteria that
can be retrieved and set on a device using SNMP.
microsegmentation The process of using switches to divide a network into
smaller segments.
microwaves A wireless technology sometimes used to transmit data between
buildings and across vast distances.
MIMO (multiple input, multiple output) The use of multiple antennas—
often at both the transmitter and receiver—to improve communications in IEEE
802.11n and 802.11ac Wi-Fi networks.
MLA (master license agreement)  The main contract defining services to be
offered by a provider.
MMF (multimode fiber) A type of fiber in which many beams of light travel
through the cable, bouncing off the cable walls. This strategy actually weakens
the signal, reducing the length and speed at which the data signal can travel. See
also SMF.
modem (modulator-demodulator)  A device used to modulate and
demodulate the signals that pass through it. It converts the direct current pulses
of the serial digital code from the controller into the analog signals compatible

with the telephone network.
MOA (memorandum of agreement) An agreement expressing a convergence
of will between the parties and indicating an intended common line of action.
MOU (memorandum of understanding) An agreement (bilateral or
multilateral) between parties defining terms and conditions of an agreement.
MPLS (multiprotocol label switching) A technology designed to speed up
network traffic flow by moving away from the use of traditional routing tables.
Instead of routing tables, MPLS uses short labels to direct packets and forward
them through the network.
MS-CHAP (Microsoft Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol) An
implementation of CHAP specific to Microsoft operating systems and commonly
offered in both server and desktop operating systems.
MSA (master service agreement)  A contract between parties, in which the
parties agree to most of the terms that will govern future transactions or future
agreements.
MSDS (material safety data sheet)  A document defining the hazards of
working with a chemical or compound, safety precautions, and guidelines for
dealing with spills or accidents.
MT-RJ connector A media connector used with fiber-optic cabling.
MTBF (mean time between failures)  The predicted time between inherent
failures of a system.
MTTR (mean time to recovery)  The average time that a device will take to
recover from a failure.
MTU (maximum transmission unit)  The largest data size that a
protocol/layer can transmit.
multicast A single-packet transmission from one sender to a specific group of
destination nodes.
multihomed A term used to refer to a device that has more than one network
interface.
multimeter A tool used to measure voltage, current, and resistance.
multiplatform A term used to refer to a programming language, technology,
or protocol that runs on different types of CPUs or operating systems.
multiplexing A technique of combining multiple channels over a transmission
path and then recovering or demultiplexing the separate channels at the receiving

end. Examples include FDM, TDM, CDM, and WDM.
MU-MIMO (multiuser multiple input, multiple output) A set of advanced
MIMO technologies included with IEEE 802.11ac that dramatically enhances
wireless throughput.
MX (Mail Exchanger) A DNS record entry used to identify the mail server.
N
NAC (Network Access Control) A computer networking security solution
that uses a set of network protocols with the goal to unify endpoint security
solutions such as antivirus, vulnerability assessment, and authentication.
name server A server that contains a database of name resolution information
used to resolve network names to network addresses.
NAS (network-attached storage)  An array of disks providing network
storage capacity to the users on the network. It is a specialized file-level
computer storage device connected to a network.
NAT (Network Address Translation)  A standard that enables the translation
of IP addresses used on one network to a different IP address that is acceptable
for use on another network. This translation enables multiple systems to access
an external network, such as the Internet, through a single IP address.
NCP (Network Control Protocol)  A protocol used to define control between
network protocols or layers.
NDR (non-delivery receipt) A message informing the sender that a previous
message has not been delivered because a delivery problem occurred.
NetBEUI (NetBIOS Extended User Interface) A nonroutable, Microsoft
proprietary networking protocol designed for use in small networks.
NetBIOS (Network Basic Input/Output System) A software application that
enables different applications to communicate between computers on a LAN.
netstat A Windows operating system command-line utility that displays
protocol statistics and current TCP/IP network connections.
network card See NIC.
network ID The part of a TCP/IP address that specifies the network portion of
the IP address. The network ID is determined by the class of the address, which
in turn is determined by the subnet mask used.
network interface layer The bottom layer of the TCP/IP architectural model,

which is responsible for sending and receiving frames.
network layer Layer 3 of the OSI model, which is where routing based on
node addresses (IP addresses) occurs.
network operating system An operating system that runs on the servers on a
network. Network operating systems include Windows Server, UNIX, and
Linux.
NFC (near field communication)  Any protocol that enables two electronic
devices to establish communication by bringing them within 1.6 inches of each
other. This is gaining in popularity for use with a smartphone and electronic
payment systems.
NFS (Network File System) A file sharing and access protocol most
commonly associated with UNIX and Linux systems.
NGFW (Next Generation Firewall) Combining a traditional firewall with any
other network device (such as an intrusion prevention system) to get additional
functionalities.
NIC (network interface card) A hardware component that serves as the
interface, or connecting component, between a network and the node. It has a
transceiver, a MAC address, and a physical connector for the network cable.
Also called a network adapter or network card.
NIDS (network intrusion detection system) An intrusion detection system
that analyzes and monitors at the network level rather than the host level.
NIPS (network intrusion prevention system) A network security system that
monitors, blocks, and reports malicious network activity.
NIU (network interface unit)  A generic term for a network interface device
(NID) or point of demarcation.
nm (nanometer) A measurement equal to one billionth of a meter.
NMS (network management system) An application that acts as a central
management point for network management. Most NMS systems use SNMP to
communicate with network devices. See also SNMP.
NNTP (Network News Transfer Protocol) An Internet protocol that controls
how news articles are to be queried, distributed, and posted. NNTP uses port
119.
noise Another name for EMI. See also EMI.
nslookup Windows and Linux/UNIX command-line utility used to query

Domain Name System (DNS) servers and clients to obtain DNS information.
NTP (Network Time Protocol)  A protocol used to communicate time
synchronization information between devices on the network. NTP is part of the
TCP/IP suite. NTP uses port 123.
O
OCSP (online certificate status protocol) A protocol used for obtaining the
revocation status of an X.509 digital certificate.
OCx (Optical Carrier) A set of standards used for digital signals with
SONET fiber networks.
OS (operating system) The main computer program that manages and
integrates all the applications running on a computer. The OS handles all
interactions with the processor.
OSI (Open Systems Interconnect) reference model A seven-layer model
created by the ISO to standardize and explain the interactions of networking
protocols.
OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) A link-state routing protocol used on
TCP/IP networks. Compare with distance-vector routing.
OTDR (optical time-domain reflectometer) A tool used to locate problems
with optical media, such as cable breaks.
OUI (Organizationally Unique Identifier) A 24-bit number that uniquely
identifies a vendor, a manufacturer, or other organization globally or worldwide.
P
PaaS (Platform as a Service) A cloud computing service model in which the
provider supplies the operating system and the user is responsible for the stack
above it.
packet A packet refers to a unit of data that travels in communication
networks.
packet filtering A firewall method in which each packet that attempts to pass
through the firewall is examined to determine its contents. The packet is then
allowed to pass, or it is blocked, as appropriate.
packet sniffer A device or application that enables data to be copied from the
network and analyzed. In legitimate applications, it is a useful network

troubleshooting tool.
PAN (personal-area network) A network layout whereby devices work
together in close proximity to share information and services, commonly using
technologies such as Bluetooth or infrared.
PAP (Password Authentication Protocol) A simple authentication protocol in
which the username and password are sent to the remote-access server in clear
text, making it possible for anyone listening to network traffic to steal both. PAP
typically is used only when connecting to older UNIX-based remote-access
servers that do not support any additional authentication protocols.
passive hub A hub that has no power and therefore does not regenerate the
signals it receives. Compare with active hub.
password A set of characters used with a username to authenticate a user on a
network and to provide the user with rights and permissions to files and
resources.
PAT (Port Address Translation) A variation on NAT (Network Address
Translation). With PAT, all systems on the LAN are translated into the same IP
address, but with a different port number assignment. See also NAT.
patch A fix for a bug in a software application. Patches can be downloaded
from the Internet to correct errors or security problems in software applications.
patch cable A cable, normally twisted pair, used to connect two devices.
Strictly speaking, a patch cable is the cable that connects a port on a hub or
switch to the patch panel, but today people commonly use the term to refer to
any cable connection.
patch panel A device in which the cables used in coaxial or twisted-pair
networks converge and are connected. The patch panel is usually in a central
location.
PC (personal computer) A general-purpose computer intended for use by
individual users.
PCM (phase change memory) A type of nonvolatile random-access memory
(RAM).
PDoS (permanent denial of service) A Denial of Service type attack that
damages a system so badly that it requires replacement or reinstallation of
hardware.
PDU (protocol data unit) Data that contains control information, such as
address information and user information.

peer-to-peer networking A network environment that does not have dedicated
servers, where communication occurs between similarly capable network nodes
that act as both clients and servers.
permissions Authorization provided to users that allows them to access
objects on a network. Network administrators generally assign permissions.
Permissions are slightly different from but are often used with rights.
PGP (Pretty Good Privacy)  A popular encryption/decryption program used
for cryptography.
physical address The MAC address on every NIC. The physical address is
applied to a NIC by the manufacturer. Except for rare occurrences, it is never
changed.
physical layer Layer 1 of the OSI model, where all physical connectivity is
defined.
physical network diagram A diagram that displays the physical layout of a
network, including placement of systems and all network cabling.
physical topology The actual physical layout of the network. Common
physical topologies include star, bus, mesh, and ring. Compare with logical
topology.
ping A TCP/IP stack utility that works with ICMP and that uses echo requests
and replies to test connectivity to other systems.
PKI (public key infrastructure) A collection of software, standards, and
policies combined to enable users from the Internet or other unsecured public
networks to securely exchange data. PKI uses a public and private cryptographic
key pair obtained and shared through a trusted authority.
plenum The space between the structural ceiling and a drop-down ceiling. It is
commonly used for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems and to run
network cables.
plug and play An architecture designed to enable the operating system to
detect hardware devices and for the driver to be automatically loaded and
configured.
PoE (Power over Ethernet) A technology that enables electrical power to be
transmitted over twisted-pair Ethernet cable. The power is transferred, along
with data, to provide power to remote devices.
policies and procedures  Policies refer to an organization’s documented rules
regarding what is to be done, or not done, and why. Network procedures differ

from policies in that they identify the way in which tasks are to be performed.
polling The media access method for transmitting data in which a controlling
device is used to contact each node to determine whether it has data to send.
POP3 (Post Office Protocol version 3) A protocol that is part of the TCP/IP
suite used to retrieve mail stored on a remote server. The most commonly used
version of POP is POP3. POP3 is an application layer protocol.
port In physical networking terms, a pathway on a networking device that
enables other devices to be connected. In software terms, a port is the entry point
into an application, a system, or a protocol stack.
port mirroring A process by which two ports on a device, such as a switch,
are configured to receive the same information. Port mirroring is useful in
troubleshooting scenarios.
POTS (plain old telephone system) The current analog public telephone
system. See also PSTN.
PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol) A common dial-up networking protocol that
includes provisions for security and protocol negotiation. Provides host-to-
network and switch-to-switch connections for one or more user sessions.
PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet) An Internet connection
authentication protocol that uses two separate technologies, Ethernet and PPP, to
provide a method for multiple users to share a common digital subscriber line
(DSL), cable modem, or wireless connection to the Internet.
PPTP (Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol) A protocol that encapsulates
private network data in IP packets. These packets are transmitted over
synchronous and asynchronous circuits to hide the Internet’s underlying routing
and switching infrastructure from both senders and receivers.
presentation layer Layer 6 of the OSI model, which prepares information to
be used by the application layer.
PRI (Primary Rate Interface)  A high-level network interface standard for
use with ISDN. PRI is defined as having a rate of 1.544 Mbps, and it consists of
a single 64 Kbps D channel plus 23 T1 B channels for voice or data. See also
BRI and ISDN.
primary name server The DNS server that offers zone data from files stored
locally on the machine.
private network A network to which access is limited, restricted, or
controlled. Most corporate networks are private networks. Compare with public

network.
proprietary A standard or specification created by a single manufacturer,
vendor, or other private enterprise.
protocol A set of rules or standards that control data transmission and other
interactions between networks, computers, peripheral devices, and operating
systems.
protocol analyzer Protocol analyzers can be hardware- or software-based,
with their primary function being to analyze network protocols such as TCP,
UDP, HTTP, FTP, and more.
proxy A device, application, or service that acts as an intermediary between
two hosts on a network, eliminating the capability for direct communication.
proxy server A server that acts as a go-between for a workstation and the
Internet. A proxy server typically provides an increased level of security,
caching, NAT, and administrative control.
PSK (pre-shared key) A value (key) shared with another party so that they
can encrypt messages to then be securely sent.
PSTN (public switched telephone network) A term that refers to all the
telephone networks and services in the world. The same as POTS, PSTN refers
to the world’s collection of interconnected public telephone networks that are
both commercial and government owned. All the PSTN is digital, except the
connection between local exchanges and customers (which is called the local
loop or last mile), which remains analog.
PTP (Point-to-Point) More commonly referenced as PPP, this protocol is used
to establish a direct connection between two nodes.
PTR (pointer) A DNS record used to map an IP address to a hostname.
PUA (privileged user agreement) Established, and agreed upon, rules of
behavior that define what privileged users can and cannot do with their elevated
permissions.
public network A network, such as the Internet, to which anyone can connect
with the most minimal of restrictions. Compare with private network.
punchdown block A device used to connect network cables from equipment
closets or rooms to other parts of a building. Connections to networking
equipment such as hubs or switches are established from the punchdown block.
Also used in telecommunications wiring to distribute phone cables to their
respective locations throughout the building.

punchdown tool A hand tool that enables the connection of twisted-pair wires
to wiring equipment such as a patch panel.
PVC (permanent virtual circuit)  A permanent dedicated virtual link shared
in a Frame Relay network, replacing a hardwired dedicated end-to-end line.
Q–R
QoS (quality of service) Describes the strategies used to manage and increase
the flow of network traffic. QoS features enable administrators to predict
bandwidth use, monitor that use, and control it to ensure that bandwidth is
available to the applications that need it.
QSFP (quad small factor pluggable) A compact, hot-pluggable transceiver
used for data communications.
RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service) A security standard
that employs a client/server model to authenticate remote network users. Remote
users are authenticated using a challenge-and-response mechanism between the
remote-access server and the RADIUS server.
RARP (Reverse Address Resolution Protocol) A protocol, part of the TCP/IP
suite, that resolves MAC addresses to IP addresses. Its relative ARP resolves IP
addresses to MAC addresses. RARP resides on the network layer of the OSI
model.
RAS (Remote Access Service) A Windows service that enables access to the
network through remote connections.
RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol)  A presentation layer protocol that supports
a Remote Desktop Connection between an RDP client (formerly known as
“Windows Terminal Client”) and a server.
regulations Regulations are actual legal restrictions with legal consequences.
remote control In networking, having physical control of a remote computer
through software.
remote node A node or computer connected to a network through a remote
connection. Dialing in to the Internet from home is an example of the remote
node concept.
repeater A device that regenerates and retransmits signals on a network.
Repeaters usually are used to strengthen signals going long distances.
resolver A system that requests the resolution of a name to an IP address. This

term can be applied to both DNS and WINS clients.
restore To transfer data from backup media to a server. The opposite of
backup.
RF (radio frequency) A rate of oscillation used by radio waves and radio
signals.
RFC (Request For Comments) The process by which standards relating to
the Internet, the TCP/IP suite, and associated technologies are created,
commented on, and approved.
RFI (radio frequency interference)  Interference that affects radio frequency
communication.
RFP (request for proposal) A document that solicits proposals, often through
a bidding process.
RG (Radio Guide) More frequently used as Radio Grade, this is a
specification commonly used with connection types.
RG-6/59 Designations for the coaxial cable used in thin coaxial networks that
operate on the Ethernet standard.
rights An authorization provided to users that allows them to perform certain
tasks. The network administrator generally assigns rights. Slightly different from
but often used with the term permissions.
RIP (Routing Information Protocol) A protocol that uses hop count as a
routing metric to control the direction and flow of packets between routers on an
internetwork.
RJ (Registered Jack) A specification for a family of cable connectors.
RJ-11 connector A connector used with telephone systems. Can have up to six
conductors.
RJ-45 connector A connector used with twisted-pair cable. Can support eight
conductors for four pairs of wires.
route The entire path between two nodes on a network.
router A device that works at the network layer of the OSI model to control
the flow of data between two or more network segments.
RPO (recovery point objective)  The maximum acceptable period in which
data might be lost from a major incident.
RSA An algorithm for public-key cryptography. Can be used for encryption

purposes. RSA is used as a secure solution for e-commerce.
RSH (Remote Shell) A protocol, and corresponding application, used to
remotely run a shell across an IP-based network.
RSTP (Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol) The default protocol for preventing
loops on Ethernet networks.
RTO (recovery time objective) The acceptable duration of time within which
a business process must be restored after a disaster to avoid unacceptable
consequences associated with a break in business continuity.
RTP (Real-Time Transport Protocol) The Internet-standard protocol for the
transport of real-time data, including audio and video.
RTSP (Real-Time Streaming Protocol) A protocol used for establishing and
maintaining communications with a media server.
RTT (Round Trip Time or Real Transfer Time) A measurement of the
length of time it takes for data to be sent and returned.
S
SA (security association) The establishment of shared security attributes
between two entities on a network to support secure communications between
them.
SaaS (Software as a Service) A cloud computing service model in which a
user runs everything supplied by the provider.
sag A momentary drop in the voltage provided by a power source.
SC (Standard Connector) A type of connector used with fiber cabling.
SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) A system operating with
coded signals to remotely control a device or equipment.
SCP (Secure Copy Protocol) A basic file-copying protocol that uses Secure
Shell (SSH) technology to provide security to the transfer.
SDLC (software development life cycle) The life cycle of software
development.
SDN (software defined network) An approach to networking that allows
network administrators to programmatically manage network behavior
dynamically via open interfaces and provide abstraction of lower-level
functionality.

SDP (Session Description Protocol)  A format of streaming media
initialization parameters.
SDSL (symmetrical digital subscriber line) A DSL implementation that
offers the same speeds for uploads and downloads. It is not widely implemented
in the home/small business environment and cannot share a phone line.
secondary name server A type of DNS server that gets its zone data from
another DNS name server that has authority in that zone.
Security log A log located in the Windows Event Viewer that provides
information on audit events that the administrator has determined to be security-
related. These events include logons, attempts to log on, attempts to access areas
that are denied, and attempts to log on outside normal hours.
segment A physical section of a network.
server A network node that fulfills service requests for clients. Usually
referred to by the type of service it performs, such as file server, communications
server, or print server.
server-based application An application run from a network share rather than
from a copy installed on a local computer.
server-based networking  A network operating system dedicated to providing
services to workstations, or clients. See also client/server networking.
service pack A software update that fixes multiple known problems and in
some cases provides additional functionality to an application or operating
system.
session How long the dialog remains open between two nodes.
session layer Layer 5 of the OSI model, which establishes, manages, and
terminates sessions between applications on different nodes.
SFP (small form-factor pluggable) A line of small optical transceivers that
have recently become available.
SFTP (Secure File Transfer Protocol)  An implementation of File Transfer
Protocol (FTP) that uses Secure Shell (SSH) technology to provide additional
authentication and encryption services for file transfers.
SGCP (Simple Gateway Control Protocol) A communication protocol used
with VoIP.
SHA (Secure Hash Algorithm) A cryptographic hash algorithm used in
security and defined by the United States National Security Agency.

shared system The infrastructure component routed directly into an
internetwork’s backbone for optimal systems access. It provides connectivity to
servers and other shared systems.
SIEM (Security Information and Event Management) Any of a family of
products that combine security information management and event management
to achieve a more holistic approach to security.
SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) An application layer protocol designed to
establish and maintain multimedia sessions such as Internet telephony calls.
SLA (service level agreement) An agreement between a customer and
provider detailing the level of service to be provided on a regular basis and in the
event of problems.
SLIP (Serial Line Internet Protocol) An antiquated IP-based protocol for
modem connections and serial ports.
SMB (server message block)  An application-layer network protocol used
primarily for providing shared access to files, printers, and ports as well as
miscellaneous communications between nodes.
SMF (single-mode fiber) A type of fiber that uses a single direct beam of
light, thus allowing for greater distances and increased transfer speeds. See also
MMF.
SMS (Short Message Service) A text-based communication service for
phones, web, and other devices.
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) An Internet protocol used for the
transfer of email messages and attachments.
SNAT (Static NAT) A simple form of NAT. SNAT maps a private IP address
directly to a static unchanging public IP address. See also NAT.
SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol) Provides network devices
with a method to monitor and control network devices; manage configurations,
statistics collection, performance, and security; and report network management
information to a management console. SNMP is part of the TCP/IP suite.
SNMP agent A software component that enables a device to communicate
with, and be contacted by, an SNMP management system.
SNMP trap An SNMP utility that sends an alarm to notify the administrator
that something within the network activity differs from the established threshold,
as defined by the administrator.

SNTP (Simple Network Time Protocol) An IP-based protocol used to
coordinate time among devices across the network.
SOA (start of authority) A record of information containing data on DNS
zones and other DNS records. A DNS zone is the part of a domain for which an
individual DNS server is responsible. Each zone contains a single SOA record.
SOHO (small office/home office) A small network typically serving 1 to 10
users.
SONET (Synchronous Optical Network) A U.S. standard for data
transmission that operates at speeds up to 2.4 Gbps over optical networks
referred to as OC-x, where x is the level. The international equivalent of SONET
is Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH).
SOP (standard operating procedure) The normal, accepted way that
business is conducted.
source address The address of the host that sent the frame. The source address
is contained in the frame so that the destination node knows who sent the data.
source-route bridge A bridge used in source-route bridging to send a packet
to the destination node through the route specified by the sending node.
SOW (statement of work) A formal document that defines work activities to
be performed for a client.
SPB (Shortest Path Bridging)  Defined in IEEE 802.1aq, this is a standard
defining a routing (Layer 2) protocol.
SPI (stateful packet inspection) A type of firewall that works at the network
layer and keeps track of the state of active connections.
spike An instantaneous, dramatic increase in the voltage input to a device.
Spikes are responsible for much of the damage done to network hardware
components.
SPS (standby power supply) A type of power supply in which the SPS
monitors the power line and switches to battery power as soon as it detects a
problem. During the time it takes to switch to battery power, the computer does
not receive any power and may power down. This is in contrast to an online
UPS, which constantly provides battery power.
SSH (Secure Shell) An application, such as Telnet, that enables a session to be
opened on a remote host. SSH differs from Telnet in that it provides additional
authentication methods and encryption for data as it traverses the network. SSH
uses TCP/IP port 22.

SSID (service set identifier) A unique client identifier sent over the WLAN
that acts as a simple password used for authentication between a wireless client
and an access point. The SSID is used to differentiate between networks.
Therefore, the client system and the AP must use the same SSID.
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) A method of securely transmitting information to
and receiving information from a remote website. SSL is implemented through
HTTPS. SSL operates at the presentation layer of the OSI model and uses
TCP/IP port 443.
ST (Straight Tip or Snap Twist) A type of connector used with cabling.
STA (Spanning Tree Algorithm) A standard defined by IEEE 802.1 as part of
STP to eliminate loops in an internetwork with multiple paths.
star A type of physical network design in which all nodes connect to a
centralized device—in most cases a network switch.
static IP address An IP address manually assigned to a network device, as
opposed to dynamically via DHCP.
static routing A routing method in which all routes must be entered into a
device manually and in which no route information is exchanged between
routing devices on the network. Compare with dynamic routing.
static window A mechanism used in flow control that prevents the sender of
data from overwhelming the receiver. The amount of data that can be buffered in
a static window is configured dynamically by the protocol.
ST connector ST refers to a type of fiber connector.
storage-area network (SAN) A subnetwork of storage devices, usually found
on high-speed networks and shared by all servers on a network.
store-and-forward A fast-packet-switching method that produces higher
latency than other switching methods because the entire contents of the packet
are copied into the switch’s onboard buffers. CRC calculations are performed
before the packet can be passed on to the destination address.
STP (shielded twisted-pair)  Twisted-pair network cable that has shielding to
insulate the cable from EMI.
STP (Spanning Tree Protocol) A protocol developed to eliminate the loops
caused by the multiple paths in an internetwork. STP is defined in IEEE 802.1.
subdomain A privately controlled segment of the DNS namespace that exists
under other segments of the namespace as a division of the main domain.

Sometimes also called a child domain.
subnet A logical division of a network, based on the address to which all the
devices on the network are assigned.
subnet mask A 32-bit address used to mask, or screen, a portion of an IP
address to differentiate the part of the address that designates the network and
the part that designates the host.
subnetting The process of using parts of the node portion of an assigned IP
address to create more network IDs. Although subnetting increases the number
of network IDs, it decreases the number of node addresses available for each
network ID.
supernetting The process of aggregating IP network addresses and using them
as a single network address range.
surge A voltage increase that is less dramatic than that of a spike but can last
much longer. Sometimes called a swell. The opposite of a brownout.
surge protector An inexpensive and simple device placed between a power
outlet and a network component to protect the component from spikes and
surges. Also known as a surge suppressor.
SVC (switched virtual circuit)  A virtual circuit dynamically established on
demand to form a dedicated link. It is broken when transmission is complete.
switch A Layer 2 networking device that forwards frames based on destination
addresses.
SYN A message sent to initiate a TCP session between two devices. The full
term is synchronization packet.
synchronous transmission A digital signal transmission method that uses a
precise clocking method and a predefined number of bits sent at a constant rate.
syslog (system log) A log, accessed through Event Viewer on Windows Server
platforms, that provides information and warnings on events logged by operating
system components and hardware devices. These events include driver failures,
device conflicts, read/write errors, timeouts, and bad block errors.
T
T1/E1 T1 lines are a form of T-Carrier lines that offer transmission speeds of
1.544 Mbps. E1 refers to the European equivalent of T1. See also T-carrier.
T1 crossover See crossover cable.

T3/E3 T3 carrier lines offer transmission speeds of up to 44.736 Mbps, using
672 64 Kbps B channels. E3 refers to the European equivalent of T3. See also T-
carrier.
TA (terminal adaptor) Also known as adapter, this is a device that connects a
node to an ISDN network.
TACACS (Terminal Access Controller Access-Control System) A family of
related protocols handling remote authentication and related services for
networked access control through a centralized server.
TACACS+ (Terminal Access Controller Access Control System Plus) A
security protocol designed to provide centralized validation of users who are
attempting to gain access to a router or network access server (NAS). TACACS+
is a set of security protocols designed to provide authentication, authorization,
and accounting (AAA) of remote users. TACACS+ uses TCP port 49 by default.
T-carrier (terrestrial carrier)  T-carrier lines are high-speed dedicated digital
lines that can be leased from telephone companies. T-carrier lines can support
both voice and data transmissions and are often used to create point-to-point
private networks.
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) A connection-oriented, reliable data
transmission communication service that operates at the transport layer of the
OSI model. TCP is part of the TCP/IP suite.
TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) A suite of
protocols that includes TCP and IP. TCP/IP was originally designed for use on
large internetworks but has now become the de facto protocol for networks of all
sizes.
TCP/IP socket A socket, or connection to an endpoint, used in TCP/IP
communication transmissions.
TDM (time-division multiplexing)  Divides a single communication channel
into multiple channels, enabling data signals to be transferred simultaneously as
subchannels in one communication channel. Despite being only a single channel,
data signals take turns sending data.
TDR (time-domain reflectometer)  A device used to test copper cables to
determine whether and where a break is on the cable. For optical cables, an
optical TDR is used.
Telco (telephone company) A slang term for the telephone provider in
question.

Telnet A standard terminal emulation protocol in the TCP/IP stack. Telnet is
used to perform terminal emulation over TCP/IP via remote terminal
connections, enabling users to log in to remote systems and use resources as if
they were connected to a local system. Telnet has been replaced in most
instances by the more secure SSH.
temperature monitor A device used to monitor temperature typically in a
server room or wiring closet.
Terminal Services A service on Windows Server platforms that enables clients
to connect to the server as if it were a multiuser operating system. All the
processing for the client session is performed on the server. Only screen updates
and user input are transmitted across the network connection. Window Server
2008 R2 and later versions have replaced Terminal Services with Remote
Desktop Services (RDS).
TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol) A simplified version of FTP that
enables file transfers but does not offer any security or file management
capabilities. TFTP uses TCP/IP port 69.
throughput tester A device used to test the actual data throughput of a
network cable.
TIA (Telecommunications Industry Association) An organization that, along
with the Electronic Industries Association (EIA), develops standards for
telecommunications technologies.
TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity Protocol) Designed to address the
shortcomings of the WEP security protocol. TKIP is an encryption protocol
defined in IEEE 802.11i.
T-line A digital communication line used in WANs. Commonly used T
designations are T1 (Trunk Level 1) and T3 (Trunk Level 3). It is also possible
to use only part of a T1 line, which is known as fractional T1. T1 lines support a
data transmission rate of up to 1.544 Mbps.
TLS (Transport Layer Security) A security protocol designed to ensure
privacy between communicating client/server applications. When a server and
client communicate, TLS ensures that no one can eavesdrop and intercept or
otherwise tamper with the data message. TLS is the successor to SSL.
TMS (transportation management system) A software module that sits
between warehouse management and an ERP system.
token A frame that provides controlling information. In a token ring network,

the node that possesses the token is the one that is allowed to transmit next.
tone generator A device used with a tone locator to locate and diagnose
problems with twisted-pair cabling. Commonly referred to as fox and hound.
toner probe A network tool used to locate the ends of a run of network cable.
topology The shape or layout of a physical network and the flow of data
through the network. See also logical topology and physical topology.
ToS (Type of Service) A field in an IPv4 header that defines such things as the
priority of the packet.
TPM (trusted platform module) A secure cryptoprocessor standard that
employs a dedicated microcontroller to secure hardware by integrating
cryptographic keys into the device.
trace route A function of the TCP/IP suite, implemented in utilities such as
traceroute and tracert, which enables the entire path of a packet to be tracked
between source and destination hosts. It is used as a troubleshooting tool.
tracert A Windows command-line utility used to track the route a data packet
takes to get to its destination.
transmit To send data using light, electronic, or electric signals. In
networking, this is usually done in the form of digital signals composed of bits.
transparent bridging A situation in which the bridges on a network tell each
other which ports on the bridge should be opened and closed, which ports should
be forwarding packets, and which ports should be blocking packets—all without
the assistance of any other device.
transport layer Layer 4 of the OSI model. Protocols at this layer perform
functions such as segmenting data so that it can be sent over the network and
then reassembling the segmented data on the receiving end. The transport layer
also deals with some of the errors that can occur in a stream of data, such as
dropped and duplicated packets.
transport protocol A communications protocol responsible for establishing a
connection and ensuring that all data has arrived safely. It is defined in Layer 4
of the OSI model.
Trojan A type of program that appears legitimate but performs some illicit
activity when it is run.
TTL (Time To Live) A value assigned to a packet of data to prevent it from
moving around the network indefinitely. The TTL value is decremented each

time the packet crosses a router, until it reaches 0, at which point it is removed
from the network.
TTLS (Tunneled Transport Layer Security) An extension of TLS that adds
tunneling and is often combined with EAP.
twisted pair A type of cable that uses multiple twisted pairs of copper wire.
U
UC (unified communications) A combination of real-time (instant messaging,
VoIP, and so on) with non-real-time (email, SMS, and so on) communications on
the same platform.
UDP (User Datagram Protocol)  A communications protocol that provides
connectionless, unreliable communication services and operates at the transport
layer of the OSI model. It requires a network layer protocol such as IP to guide it
to the destination host.
unbound medium (or boundless medium) Any medium that does not have
physical constraints. Examples of unbound media are infrared, wireless, and
microwave. Compare with bound medium.
UNC (Universal Naming Convention) An industry-naming standard for
computers and resources that provides a common syntax that should work in
most systems, including Windows and UNIX. An example of a UNC name is
\\servername\sharename.
unicast Communication that takes place over a network between a single
sender and a single receiver.
UPC (Ultra Polished Connector) A type of connector used with fiber
networks.
UPS (uninterruptible power supply) A system that provides protection
against power surges and power outages. During blackouts, a UPS gives you
time to shut down systems or devices on the network before the temporary
power interruption becomes permanent. A UPS is also called battery backup.
uptime How long a device has been on and operating.
URL (uniform resource locator) A name used to identify a website and
subsequently a page on the Internet. An example of a URL is
www.quepublishing.com/products.
USB (universal serial bus) A type of interface between a computer system

and peripheral devices. The USB interface enables you to add or remove devices
without shutting down the computer. USB supports up to 127 devices. USB also
supports autodetection and plug and play.
UTM (unified threat management)  An approach to threat management that
combines multiple security-related products (antivirus software, IPS, and so on)
into a single management console.
UTP (unshielded twisted-pair)  A type of cable that uses multiple twisted
pairs of copper wire in a casing that does not provide much protection from
EMI. The most common network cable in Ethernet networks, UTP is rated in
categories including Category 1 through Category 7, as well as Category 5e and
Category 6a.
V
VDSL (variable digital subscriber line) An asymmetric version of DSL that
supports high-bandwidth applications such as VoIP and HDTV. It is the fastest
available form of DSL and uses fiber-optic cabling.
vertical cross-connect The main or vertical cross-connect is the location
where outside cables enter the building for distribution. This may include
Internet and phone cabling.
virus A software program designed specifically to adversely affect a system or
network. A virus is usually designed to be passed on to other systems with which
it comes in contact.
VLAN (virtual LAN) A group of devices located on one or more LAN
segments, whose configuration is based on logical instead of physical
connections. This enables the devices to operate as if they were connected to the
same physical switch, regardless of whether they are connected to the same
switch.
VNC (virtual network connection)  Enables remote login, in which clients
can access their own desktops while being physically away from their
computers.
VoIP (Voice over IP) Any of a number of technologies that enable voice
communication across the Internet Protocol.
volume set Multiple disks or partitions of disks that have been configured to
read as one drive.
VPN (virtual private network) A network that uses a public network such as

the Internet as a backbone to connect two or more private networks. A VPN
provides users with the equivalent of a private network in terms of security.
VPNs can also be used as a means of establishing secure remote connectivity
between a remote system and another network.
VRF (virtual routing and forwarding) A technology that allows multiple
instances of a routing table to coexist within the same router at the same time.
VRRP (Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol) An IP-based routing protocol
that automatically assigns available routers to participating hosts.
VTC (video teleconference) Any combination of audio and video real-time
technologies.
VTP (VLAN Trunking Protocol)  A Cisco proprietary protocol that manages
the addition, deletion, and renaming of VLANs for the entire network.
Information about changes to a VLAN or the addition of a new VLAN to a
network is distributed to all switches on the network simultaneously and does
not need to be done one at a time.
W
WAF (web application firewall) A firewall that filters, monitors, and blocks
HTTP traffic to and from a web application; this differs from a regular firewall
in that the WAF is able to filter the content of specific web applications.
WAN (wide-area network) A data communications network that serves users
across a broad geographic area. WANs often use transmission devices such as
modems or CSUs/DSUs to carry signals over leased lines or common carrier
lines.
WAP (Wireless Application Protocol / Wireless Access Point) A protocol for
wireless mobile access (now outdated) and the devices that make it possible for
hosts to connect (widely used).
warm site A disaster recovery site offering most equipment and applications.
Compare to a cold site that refers to a disaster recovery site with limited
hardware and typically only a reserved location. A hot site is one with duplicate
hardware and software and can be operational within minutes of a disaster.
web server A server that runs an application and makes the contents of certain
directories on that server, or other servers, available to clients for download, via
a protocol such as HTTP.
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy)  A data encryption method used to protect

the transmission between 802.11 wireless clients and access points. WEP
security has come under scrutiny because it uses an insufficient key length and
provides no automated method for distributing the keys.
Wi-Fi A voluntary standard that manufacturers can adhere to, which aims to
create compatibility between wireless devices. Wi-Fi is an abbreviation for
wireless fidelity.
WINS (Windows Internet Name Service) A NetBIOS name-to-IP address
resolution service that runs on Windows Server platforms.
WINS database A dynamically built database of NetBIOS names and IP
addresses used by WINS.
wire crimper A tool used to create networking cables. The type of wire
crimping tool used depends on the cable being made.
wireless channel The band of frequency used for wireless communications.
Each IEEE wireless standard specifies the channels that can be used.
wireless networking Networking that uses any unbound media, such as
infrared, microwave, or radio waves.
wiring schematics Network documentation designed to show the physical
wiring of a network. The wiring schematic can often be used in the
troubleshooting process.
WLAN (wireless LAN) A local-area network created using wireless
transmission methods, such as radio or infrared, rather than traditional wired
solutions.
WMS (warehouse management system) A software module that is used to
provide management tools for warehouse operations.
workstation A client computer on a network that does not offer any services
of its own but that uses the services of the servers on the network.
worm A self-replicating program that can perform destructive acts to a single
computer or across a network, both wired and wireless.
WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access) A data encryption method used on 802.11
wireless LANs. WPA is an industry-supported standard designed to address
WEP’s security shortcomings.
WPA2 (Wi-Fi Protected Access v2)  A secure wireless data encryption
method based on 802.11i that replaces WPA.
WPS (Wi-Fi Protected Setup) A security standard created by the Wi-Fi

Alliance to increase security features of networks. The most visible
manifestation of this is the button on some home routers that must be pressed to
allow a new device to connect to the network within a short time period.
Currently, WPS is not considered secure because flaws in the WPS PIN feature
have been identified.
WWN (World Wide Name) A unique identifier assigned to a manufacturer by
the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). It is hard-coded into
a Fibre Channel (FC) device.
WWW (World Wide Web) A service running on the Internet that has become
so successful that it is often mistaken for the Internet itself.
X–Z
XDSL (extended digital subscriber line) All the variations of DSL available
are lumped together under the label XDSL.
XML (Extensible Markup Language) A set of rules for the encoding of
documents in a machine-readable format.
Zeroconf (zero configuration) A set of tools and tricks/techniques that exist
within TCP/IP with the goal of allowing devices to connect and configure
without an administrator needing to manually configure anything.
zone transfer The passing of DNS information from one name server to a
secondary name server.

Index
Symbols
# (hash symbol), 66
4to6, 99–100
6to4, 99–100
10BASE2, 200–201
10GBaseT, 223
66 blocks, 220
100Base-T, 221–222
110 blocks, 220
568A/568B wiring standards, 211–212
802.1Q standard, 119–120
802.1x standard, 369
802.11 standards, 23–29
802.11a, 24, 27
802.11ac, 25–26, 27
802.11b, 24, 27
802.11g, 25, 27
802.11n, 25–26, 27
comparison of, 28
DSSS (direct-sequence spread-spectrum), 28–29
FHSS (frequency-hopping spread-spectrum), 28
OFDM (orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing), 29
summary of, 26–27
1000BaseLX, 224
1000BaseSX, 224
1000BaseT, 223
1000BASE-TX, 223
A
A (IPv4 Address) field, 71
AAA (authentication, accounting, and authorization), 126

AAAA (IPv6 Address) field, 71
AAA/RADIUS servers, 154
absorption, 260–261
acceptable use policies (AUPs), 306, 315
access controls
802.1x, 369
ACEs (access control entries), 361
ACLs (access control lists), 131, 153, 361, 394, 456
captive portals, 371
DAC (discretionary access control), 361
definition of, 360
MAC (media access control), 360–361, 370–371
NAC (network access control), 369–370
port security, 370
RADIUS, 363–364
role-based, 362–363
rule-based, 362
TACACS+, 363–364
access points. See APs (access points)
ACEs (access control entries), 361
ACLs (access control lists), 131, 153, 361, 394, 456
active hubs, 136, 141
ad hoc wireless topology, 8–9
address (A) records, 70
address pools, 72–73
A (address) record, 70
address resolution (DNS), 65–67
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), 35, 60–62, 382
addressing. See also IP (Internet Protocol) addressing
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol), 35, 60–62
DNAT (Destination Network Address Translation), 101
MAC (media access control), 60–61
identifying, 97–99
MAC address table, 128–129
MAC address-based VLANs (virtual LANs), 122
MAC reservations, 73

troubleshooting, 454
NAT (Network Address Translation), 99–100, 155, 181
PAT (Port Address Translation), 100–101, 155
SNAT (Static Network Address Translation), 101
administrative distance, 118
ADSL (asymmetric digital subscriber line), 176
advanced network devices
AAA/RADIUS servers, 154
content filters, 156
IDS (intrusion detection system), 150–151
IPS (intrusion prevention system), 150–151
load balancers, 150
multilayer switches, 149
NGFW (Next Generation Firewalls), 154–156
proxy servers, 151–153
UTM (Unified Threat Management) appliances, 154–156
VoIP gateways, 156
VoIP PBX, 156
VPN concentrators, 153–154
wireless controllers, 149–150
agents (SNMP), 55
aggregation
link, 121, 126
port, 120, 314
algorithms
DUAL (Diffusing Update Algorithm), 112
SPF (shortest path first) algorithm, 114
STA (Spanning Tree Algorithm), 124
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 272
American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), 36
amplification attacks, 380
angle polished connector (APC), 207
Ant+, 21
antennas, wireless, 243–246
anycast addresses, 92–93
APC (angle polished connector), 207

APIPA (automatic private IP addressing), 96–97
application layer (OSI model), 36–37
application logs, 332–333
APs (access points), 7, 142–143. See also WAPs (wireless access points)
coverage, 261–262
rogue access points, 381
WAPs (wireless access points), 458
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol), 35, 60–62, 382
arp command, 61–62, 435–437
.arpa domain, 69
ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange), 36
ASNs (autonomous system numbers), 115
association, 247
asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL), 176
asymmetric key cryptography, 366
ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), 35, 168–169
attacks, 378
ARP cache poisoning, 382
brute force, 383
DDoS (distributed DoS) attacks, 378
deauthentication, 383
DNS poisoning, 382
DoS (denial-of-service) attacks, 378–380
evil twins, 381
logic bombs, 381
man-in-the-middle attacks, 384
mitigation techniques, 389, 390–391
ACLs (access control lists), 394
device hardening, 350–354, 356–358
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 391–392
file integrity monitoring, 393
honeypots/honeynets, 394–395
native VLANs, changing, 390
penetration testing, 395
privileged user accounts, 393
role separation, 393–394

signature management, 389
switch port protection, 390–391
VLAN network segmentation, 392–393
phishing, 382
prevention of, 384–387
ransomware, 382
rogue access points, 381
social engineering, 381
spoofing, 383
VLAN hopping, 383–384
war chalking, 381–382
war driving, 381–382
zero-day exploits, 384
attenuation, 200–201, 227–228, 256
auditing, 368
AUPs (acceptable use policies), 306, 315
authentication
auditing, 368
certificates, 367
Kerberos, 364–366
local, 366–368
multifactor, 354, 368
port, 127
SNMPv3, 57
two-factor, 354
wireless, 247–248, 252, 374–375
authentication, accounting, and authorization (AAA), 126
authorization, wireless, 374–375
automatic private IP addressing (APIPA), 96–97
autonomous system numbers (ASNs), 115
AWS (Amazon Web Services), 272
B
B (bearer) channels, 161
backoff period, 116
backups, 307–310, 337

bad cables, 210
bad ports, 231–232
bandwidth, 155
bandwidth speed testers, 420
dedicated local bandwidth, 180
definition of, 118, 196
shared bandwidth, 180
bare metal hypervisors, 274
baseband transmissions, 195
baselines, 293–294
Basic Rate Interface (BRI) ISDN, 161–162
basic service set (BSS), 247
BCP (business continuity planning), 306–307
backups, 307–310
cold recovery sites, 312–313
HA (high availability), 313–315
hot recovery sites, 312–313
UPSs (uninterruptible power supplies), 307–312
warm recovery sites, 312–313
bearer (B) channels, 161
behavior-based systems, 151
bent pins, 233
BGP (Border Gateway Protocol), 36–37, 115
bidirectional transceivers, 210
binary numbers, converting to decimal, 81
binding, port, 120
biometrics, 353–354
bits per second (bps), 326
black holes, 231
blocking ports, 124
Bluetooth, 21–22
Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG), 21
BNC connectors, 204
BOOTP, 96
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), 36–37, 115
botnets, 378

bottlenecks, 233–234
bouncing signals, 257
BPDUs (bridge protocol data units), 124, 391
bps (bits per second), 326
BRI (Basic Rate Interface) ISDN, 161–162
bridges, 142, 246–247
bring your own device (BYOD) policies, 253, 295, 315
broadband transmissions, 195
broadband wireless access (BWA), 28
broadcast addresses, 88
broadcast domains, 83
broadcast traffic, 252
brute force, 383
BSS (basic service set), 247
buffer overflows, 380
buffering, 35
bus topology, 2–3
business continuity planning. See BCP (business continuity planning)
BWA (broadband wireless access), 28
BYOD (bring your own device) policies, 253, 295, 315
C
CaaS (Communication as a Service), 270
cable broadband
dedicated local bandwidth, 180
security, 181–182
shared bandwidth, 180
troubleshooting, 180–181
UTP (unshielded twisted pair), 179
cable certifiers, 414
cable modems, 179
cable testers, 414
cabling
568A/568B wiring standards, 211–212
bad cables, 210
baseband transmissions, 195

broadband transmissions, 195
cable broadband
dedicated local bandwidth, 180
security, 181–182
shared bandwidth, 180
troubleshooting, 180–181
UTP (unshielded twisted pair), 179
cable certifiers, 414
cable testers, 414
coaxial cables, 200–201
copper, 169–170
crossover cables, 212–214
data transmission rates, 196–197
dialog modes, 196
documentation of, 287–290
Ethernet standards
10GBaseT, 223
100Base-T, 221–222
1000BaseLX, 224
1000BaseSX, 224
1000BaseT, 223
fiber, 169–170
fiber-optic technology, 201–203
hub and switch cabling, 140–141
loopback cables, 214–215
mismatches, 210
plenum, 203
PVC cables, 203
rollover cables, 214–215
straight-through cables, 212–214
troubleshooting
attenuation, 227–228
bad ports, 231–232
bent pins, 233
bottlenecks, 233–234
crosstalk, 229

damaged cables, 233
duplex/speed mismatch, 232
EMI (electromagnetic interference), 230
incorrect cable type, 231
incorrect pin-outs, 231
jitter, 229
latency, 228
LED status indicators, 235
open/short faults, 230
transceiver mismatches, 232
TX/RX reversed, 232
VLAN mismatches, 234–235
twisted-pair, 197–200
UTP (unshielded twisted pair), 230
wiring distribution components, 215
FDP (fiber distribution panels), 220
horizontal cabling, 216
IDF (intermediate distribution frame) closets, 220–221
MDF (main distribution frame) closets, 220–221
network cross-connects, 215–216
patch panels, 218–219
type 66/type 110 blocks, 220
vertical cabling, 217–218
caching, 152
canonical name (CNAME) records, 70
CANs (Campus Area Networks), 17–18
captive portals, 371
capturing, 294
carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance (CSMA/CA), 23–24,
117–118
carrier sense multiple access/collision detection (CSMA/CD), 116–118
CAs (certificate authorities), 367
CASB (Cloud Access Security Broker), 266
Category 3 twisted-pair cable, 198
Category 5 twisted-pair cable, 198–199
Category 5e twisted-pair cable, 199

Category 6 twisted-pair cable, 199
Category 6a twisted-pair cable, 199
Category 7 twisted-pair cable, 199
CBFs (critical business functions), 313
CCMP (Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol),
374
CDMA (code division-multiple access), 171, 242
cells (ATM), 168
cellular access, 242
certificate authorities (CAs), 367
certificate revocation list (CRL), 367
certificates, 367, 455
Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP), 170–171
change management documentation, 300–301
channel service unit/data service unit (CSU/DSU), 189
channels
bearer (B) channels, 161
channel bonding, 26
delta channels, 161
wireless, 238–241, 248
CHAP (Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol), 170–171
chromatic dispersion, 227–228
CIDR (classless interdomain routing), 86
Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol (CCMP),
374
circuits. See also routing and switching
DCE (data circuit-terminating equipment), 167
PVCs (permanent virtual circuits), 167
class of service (CoS), 130
classes
IP address classes, 81–82
subnet mask assignment, 82–83
subnetting, 83–84
classful addresses, 92
classless addresses, 92
classless interdomain routing (CISR), 86

clients (DNS), 66–67
client-to-client VPNs, 346
closets, wiring, 220–221
Cloud Access Security Broker. See CASB (Cloud Access Security Broker)
cloud computing, 265–266. See also virtualization
CaaS (Communication as a Service), 270
cloud bursting, 271
Cloud DNS, 71
connectivity methods, 271–272
DaaS (Desktop as a Service), 270
hybrid clouds, 271
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), 268–269
MaaS (Mobility as a Service), 270
PaaS (Platform as a Service), 268
private clouds, 270
public clouds, 270
relationship between resources, 272–273
SaaS (Software as a Service), 267
SANs (storage-area networks), 277–278
FC (Fibre Channel), 279
FCoE (Fiber Channel over Ethernet), 279
InfiniBand, 279–280
iSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface), 278
jumbo frames, 278–279
NAS (network-attached storage), 279
security of, 272
Cloud DNS, 71
clustering, 314
CNAME (canonical name) records, 70
coarse wavelength-division multiplexing (CWDM), 166
coaxial cables, 200–201
code division-multiple access (CDMA), 171, 242
cold recovery sites, 312–313
collision detection, 116–118
collision domains, 83
.com domain, 69

commands, 424–426
arp, 61–62, 435–437
dig, 447–448
Get, 55
Get Next, 55
ifconfig, 98, 178, 445–446
ipconfig, 98, 178, 240, 443–445
iptables, 443
iwconfig, 240
netstat, 437–442
nmap, 450
nslookup, 446–447
pathping, 435
ping, 430–435
route, 449–450
route add, 107–108
route print, 106
Set, 55
sh int interface name, 98
tcpdump, 449
traceroute, 231, 426–430
tracert, 111, 231, 426–430
Trap, 56
Walk, 56
Communication as a Service (CaaS), 270
communities (SNMP), 56
configuration
configuring backups, 337
documentation of, 301
interfaces, 125–126
stateful, 92
stateless, 92
wireless connections, 249–253
connection dependence, 64
connection reliance, 64
connectionless protocols, 42

connection-oriented protocols, 42
connectivity methods, 271–272
connectors
BNC, 204
fiber, 206–208
F-type, 206
mismatches, 210
RJ-11, 204–205
RJ-45, 205
RS-232, 208
transceivers, 209–210
USB, 209
consent to monitoring policies, 315
content filters, 131, 155, 156
continuity. See BCP (business continuity planning)
convergence, 113
cooling equipment, 421
coordinated attacks, 378
copper technology, 169–170
CoS (class of service), 130
critical assets, 314
critical business functions (CBFs), 313
critical nodes, 314
CRL (certificate revocation list), 367
cross-connects, 215–216
crossover cables, 212–214
crosstalk, 229
cryptography, 365
CSMA/CA (carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance), 23–24,
117–118
CSMA/CD (carrier sense multiple access/collision detection), 116–118
CSU/DSU (channel service unit/data service unit), 189
cut-through switching environment, 140
CWDM (coarse wavelength-division multiplexing), 166
cyberattacks. See attacks

D
DaaS (Desktop as a Service), 270
DAC (discretionary access control), 361
DAI (Dynamic ARP Inspection), 370
damaged cables, 233
data circuit-terminating equipment (DCE), 167
data flow control, 35
data link layer (OSI model), 34
data rate, 242–243
data terminal equipment (DTE), 167
data transmission rates, 196–197
datagram packet switching, 109
Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS), 346
dB loss, 228
DCE (data circuit-terminating equipment), 167
DDNS (Dynamic DNS), 67
DDoS (distributed DoS) attacks, 378
.de domain, 69
deauthentication, 383
decimal-to-binary conversions, 81
dedicated local bandwidth, 180
default gateways, 86–88, 105
default port assignments, 58–60
default VLANs, 125
Delivery Traffic Indication Message (DTIM), 252
delta channels, 161
demarcation points, 188–189
demilitarized zone (DMZ), 128, 250, 391–392
denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, 293, 378–380
dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM), 165
density, 259
Desktop as a Service (DaaS), 270
“Destination Host Unreachable” error message, 431
Destination Network Address Translation (DNAT), 101
devices (network), 135–136

AAA/RADIUS servers, 154
bridges, 142
content filters, 156
device hardening, 350–352
biometrics, 353–354
guidelines for, 356–358
lock-and-key security, 352
multifactor authentication, 354
PIN access, 353
secured versus unsecured protocols, 354–356
swipe cards, 353
two-factor authentication, 354
firewalls, 136–137
hubs, 136, 141
IDS (intrusion detection system), 150–151
IPS (intrusion prevention system), 150–151
load balancers, 150
mapping to OSI model, 38–39
media converters, 143–144
modems, 142
multilayer switches, 149
NGFW (Next Generation Firewalls), 154–156
proxy servers, 151–153
routers, 137–138
summary of, 145–146
switches, 139–141
UTM (Unified Threat Management) appliances, 154–156
VoIP endpoints, 145
VoIP gateways, 156
VoIP PBX, 156
VPN concentrators, 153–154
WAPs (wireless access points), 142–143
wireless controllers, 149–150
wireless range extenders, 144–145
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol), 143, 180
DHCP snooping, 391

DHCPDISCOVER packet, 74
DHCPREQUEST packet, 74–75
DHCPv6, 96
dynamic addressing, 94–96
explained, 72–74
leases, 72–73
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 60
process, 74–75
relays, 75
reservations, 73
rogue DHCP servers, 455
scope, 456
scopes, 72–73
suffixes, 75
in system logs, 333
DHCPDISCOVER packet, 74
DHCPREQUEST packet, 74–75
diagrams, network, 290–293
dialog modes, 196
dial-up Internet access, 182–184
differential backups, 308
Diffserv (differentiated services code point), 130
Diffusing Update Algorithm (DUAL), 112
dig command, 447–448
digital subscriber line. See DSL (digital subscriber line)
direct-sequence spread-spectrum (DSSS), 28–29
disabling ports, 124
disaster recovery, 306–307
backups, 307–310
cold recovery sites, 312–313
HA (high availability), 313–315
hot recovery sites, 312–313
UPSs (uninterruptible power supplies), 307–312
warm recovery sites, 312–313
discovery, 93

discretionary access control (DAC), 361
distance, administrative, 118
distance limitations, 261
distance-vector routing, 111–114
distributed reflective DoS (DRDoS) attacks, 380
distributed switching, 108
DKIM (DomainKeys Identified Mail), 71
DMVPN (Dynamic Multipoint Virtual Private Network), 171
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 128, 250, 391–392
DNAT (Destination Network Address Translation), 101
DNS (Domain Name System), 62, 95
clients, 66–67
Cloud DNS, 71
DDNS (Dynamic DNS), 67
DNS poisoning, 382
external DNS, 71
namespace, 68–69
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 59
practical implementation, 71–72
records, 70–71
resolution process, 65–67
reverse lookup, 69
suffixes, 75
troubleshooting, 453
types of entries, 70
UDP port assignment, 60
documentation, 284–287
baselines, 293–294
change management, 300–301
configuration, 301
disaster recovery, 306
labeling, 302
network diagrams, 290–293
policies, 294–298
procedures, 299–300

regulations, 301–302
in troubleshooting process, 406–407
wiring and port locations, 287–290
Domain Name System. See DNS (Domain Name System)
DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM), 71
domains
broadcast domains, 83
collision domains, 83
DoS (denial-of-service) attacks, 293, 378–380
downgrading, 336
DRDoS (distributed reflective DoS) attacks, 380
driver updates, 335
DSL (digital subscriber line)
ADSL (asymmetric digital subscriber line), 176
definition of, 176
HDSL (high bit rate DSL), 177
HDSL (high-rate digital subscriber line), 176
IDSL (ISDN DSL), 176
RADSL (rate-adaptive DSL), 177
SDSL (symmetric DSL), 176
speed of, 177–178
troubleshooting, 178–179
VHDSL (very high bit rate DSL), 177
VHDSL (very high-rate digital subscriber line), 176
DSSS (direct-sequence spread-spectrum), 28–29
DTE (data terminal equipment), 167
DTIM (Delivery Traffic Indication Message), 252
DTLS (Datagram Transport Layer Security), 346
DUAL (Diffusing Update Algorithm), 112
dual power supplies, 312
dual stack, 94
duplex/speed mismatch, 232
DWDM (dense wavelength-division multiplexing), 165
dynamic addressing, 94–96
Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI), 370
Dynamic DNS (DDNS), 67

Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol. See DHCP (Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol)
Dynamic Multipoint Virtual Private Network (DMVPN), 171
dynamic routing, 35
definition of, 111
distance-vector routing, 111–114
hybrid routing protocols, 115
link-state routing, 114–115
route redistribution, 111
E
EAP-FAST (Flexible Authentication via Secure Tunneling), 375
EAPOL (EAP over LAN), 369
EBCDIC (Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code), 36
E-carriers, 163
ECP (Encryption Control Protocol), 170–171
EDFAs (erbium doped fiber amplifiers), 165
.edu domain, 69
EGPs (exterior gateway protocols), 115
EIA/TIA (Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industry
Association), 198
EIGRP (Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol), 112
Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industry Association
(EIA/TIA), 198
EMI (electromagnetic interference), 230, 260
encryption, 57, 170–171
endpoints (VoIP), 145
endurance testing, 329
Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (EIGRP), 112
environmental monitors, 322, 420–421
erbium doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs), 165
error messages
“Destination Host Unreachable”, 431
expired TTL, 433
“Request Timed Out”, 431–432
“Unknown Host”, 433

escalation procedures, 404–405
ESS (extended service set), 247
Ethernet standards
10GBaseT, 223
100Base-T, 221–222
1000BaseLX, 224
1000BaseT, 223
EUI48, 99
EUI64, 99
event logs, 330–337, 368
application logs, 332–333
history logs, 334
log management, 334
security logs, 331–332
syslogs, 333
system logs, 333–334
evil twins, 381
exclusions (IP), 73
expired IP addresses, 454–455
expired TTL (Time io Live), 433
exploits, 384
Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code (EBCDIC), 36
extended service set (ESS), 247
extended unique identifiers, 99
exterior gateway protocols (EGPs), 115
external DNS, 71
F
Far End Crosstalk (FEXT), 229
fault tolerance, 314
FC (Fibre Channel), 279
FCoE (Fiber Channel over Ethernet), 279
FDM (frequency-division multiplexing), 195
FDP (fiber distribution panels), 220
FEXT (Far End Crosstalk), 229
FHSS (frequency-hopping spread-spectrum), 28

fiber-optic technology, 164–166, 169–170, 201–203
fiber connectors, 206–208
fiber type mismatches, 210
file integrity monitoring, 393
File Transfer Protocol. See FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
files
HOSTS, 66
LMHOSTS, 72
filters
content filters, 155, 156
URL filtering, 155
firewalls, 136–137
NGFW (Next Generation Firewalls), 154–156
troubleshooting, 456
firmware updates, 335
flood guards, 391
flow monitoring, 416–417
fox and hound, 412–413
FQDNs (fully qualified domain names), 68. See also DNS (Domain Name
System)
fractional T, 163
Fraggle attacks, 379
fragment-free switching, 140
Frame Relay, 166–168
frames, jumbo, 278–279
frequency-division multiplexing (FDM), 195
frequency-hopping spread-spectrum (FHSS), 28
friendly DoS attacks, 379
FTP (File Transfer Protocol), 341–342
explained, 45–46
FTP bounce attacks, 384
FTPS (FTP over SSL), 341–342
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 59
FTPS (FTP over SSL), 341–342
F-type connectors, 206

full backups, 307
full mesh networks, 6
full system functionality, verifying, 406
full-duplex mode, 196
fully qualified domain names (FQDNs), 68. See also DNS (Domain Name
System)
G
gain values, 244–245
Garmin, 21
gateways
default, 86–88, 105
troubleshooting, 453
VoIP (Voice over IP), 156
GBIC (gigabit interface converter) modules, 209
Gbps (gigabits per second), 196, 326
geofencing, 376
Get command, 55
Get Next command, 55
GHz (gigahertz), 239
gigabit interface converter (GBIC) modules, 209
gigabits per second (Gbps), 196, 326
gigahertz (GHz), 239
Global Positioning System (GPS), 52
Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM), 171, 242
global unicast addresses, 91
.gov domain, 69
GPS (Global Positioning System), 52
graphing, 293
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications), 171, 242
guest networks, 369
guests, 275
H
H.323

explained, 53
port assignment, 60
HA (high availability), 313–315
half-duplex mode, 196
hardware failures, troubleshooting, 457–458
hardware firewalls, 137
hardware/software tools, 410–411
bandwidth speed testers, 420
environmental monitors, 420–421
HVAC equipment, 421
LG (looking-glass) software, 420
loopback adapters, 413
media/cable testers, 414
multimeters, 415–416
OTDR (optical time domain reflectometer), 414–415
packet sniffers, 416–417
port scanners, 417–419
protocol analyzers, 413–414
spectrum analyzers, 416
TDR (time domain reflectometer), 414–415
toner probes, 412–413
wire crimpers, strippers, and snips, 411–412
wireless survey tools, 419
hash symbol (#), 66
HDLC (High-Level Data Link Control), 34
HDSL (high-rate digital subscriber line), 176, 177
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment, 421
helpers (IP), 75
hertz (Hz), 239
HIDS (host-based intrusion detection system), 151
hierarchical name tree, 56, 324–325
high availability (HA), 313–315
high bit rate DSL (HDSL), 177
high throughput (ht), 243
high-density devices, 141
High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC), 34

high-rate digital subscriber line (HDSL), 176
HIPS (host-based intrusion prevention system), 151
history logs, 334
Home ID, 21
honeynets, 394–395
honeypots, 394–395
hop counts, 118
hops, 111
horizontal cabling, 216
horizontal cross-connects, 216
host-based intrusion detection system (HIDS), 151
host-based intrusion prevention system (HIPS), 151
hosted hypervisors, 274
hosts, 80, 275
HOSTS file, 66
hot recovery sites, 312–313
hotspots, 187
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), 48
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
explained, 48
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 59
HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure), 48–49, 347
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 60
hubs, 4–5, 140–141, 457
HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) equipment, 421
hybrid clouds, 271
hybrid routing protocols, 115
hybrid topologies, 11
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), 48
Hypertext Transfer Protocol. See HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure. See HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer
Protocol Secure)
hypervisors, 274
Hz (hertz), 239

I
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), 268–269
IB (InfiniBand), 279–280
IBSS (independent basic service set), 247
ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol), 35, 51, 379
IDC (insulation displacement connector), 219
IDF (intermediate distribution frame) closets, 220–221
IDS (intrusion detection system), 150–151
IDSL (ISDN DSL), 176
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), 1
802.1Q, 119–120
802.1x standard, 369
802.11 standards, 23–29
MAC address assignment, 98
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force), 43, 364
ifconfig command, 98, 178, 445–446
IGPs (interior gateway protocols), 115
IIS (Internet Information Services), 48–49
IMAP (Internet Message Access Protocol), 36–37, 49, 60
in-band management, 129
incremental backups, 308–309
independent basic service set (IBSS), 247
independent routing, 108
InfiniBand, 279–280
infrared (IR), 22–23
Infrared Data Association (IrDA), 22
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 268–269
infrastructure wireless topology, 7–8
inside threats, 378
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. See IEEE (Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers)
insulation displacement connector (IDC), 219
Integrated Services Digital Network. See ISDN (Integrated Services Digital
Network)
Intelligent Platform Management Interface (IPMI), 129
interface configuration, 125–126

interference, 259–260
interior gateway protocols (IGPs), 115
intermediate cross-connects, 216
intermediate distribution frame (IDF) closets, 220–221
Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System (IS-IS), 35, 114
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 31, 56, 121, 324–325
Internet access technologies, 175
cable broadband
dedicated local bandwidth, 180
security, 181–182
shared bandwidth, 180
troubleshooting, 180–181
UTP (unshielded twisted pair), 179
dial-up, 182–184
DSL (digital subscriber line)
ADSL (asymmetric digital subscriber line), 176
definition of, 176
HDSL (high bit rate DSL), 177
HDSL (high-rate digital subscriber line), 176
IDSL (ISDN DSL), 176
RADSL (rate-adaptive DSL), 177
SDSL (symmetric DSL), 176
speed of, 177–178
troubleshooting, 178–179
VHDSL (very high bit rate DSL), 177
VHDSL (very high-rate digital subscriber line), 176
PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network ), 184–185
satellite Internet access, 185–186
wireless Internet access, 186–187
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), 35, 51, 379
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 43, 364
Internet Information Services (IIS), 48–49
Internet Message Access Protocol. See IMAP (Internet Message Access
Protocol)
Internet of Things. See IoT (Internet of Things)
Internet Protocol. See IP (Internet Protocol) addressing

Internet service providers (ISPs), 71, 85
Internet Small Computer System Interface (iSCSI), 278
intrusion detection system (IDS), 150–151
intrusion prevention system (IPS), 150–151
IoT (Internet of Things), 20
802.11 standards, 23–29
802.11a, 24, 27
802.11ac, 25–26, 27
802.11b, 24, 27
802.11g, 25, 27
802.11n, 25–26, 27
comparison of, 28
DSSS (direct-sequence spread-spectrum), 28–29
FHSS (frequency-hopping spread-spectrum), 28
OFDM (orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing), 29
summary of, 26–27
Ant+, 21
Bluetooth, 21–22
IR (infrared), 22–23
NFC (near field communication), 22
RFID, 23
Z-Wave, 20–21
IOUs (organizational unique identifiers), 98
IP (Internet Protocol) addressing, 35, 42–43, 80–81
address assignment, 94
APIPA (automatic private IP addressing), 96–97
BOOTP, 96
dynamic addressing, 94–96
static addressing, 94
IP exclusions, 73
IP helpers, 75
IPAM (IP Address Management), 76
IPv4
broadcast addresses, 88
CIDR (classless interdomain routing), 86
compared to IPv6, 93–94

decimal-to-binary conversions, 81
default gateways, 86–88
IP address classes, 81–82
multicast addresses, 88–89
private networks, 84–86
public networks, 84–85
subnet mask assignment, 82–83
subnetting, 83–84
unicast addresses, 88
VIP (virtual IP address), 88
IPv6, 89
address structure, 89–91
advantages of, 89
anycast addresses, 92–93
compared to IPv4, 93–94
multicast addresses, 92
neighbor discovery, 93
unicast addresses, 91–92
resolving FQDNs to IP addresses. See DNS (Domain Name System)
troubleshooting, 454–455
IPAM (IP Address Management), 76
ipconfig command, 98, 178, 240, 443–445
IPMI (Intelligent Platform Management Interface), 129
IPS (intrusion prevention system), 150–151
IPsec (IP Security), 35, 344–345
iptables command, 443
IPv4 Address (A) field, 71
IPv6 Address (AAAA) field, 71
IR (infrared), 22–23
IrDA (Infrared Data Association), 22
iSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface), 278
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network), 110, 160–162
ISDN DSL (IDSL), 176
IS-IS (Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System), 35, 114
ISO (International Organization for Standardization), 31, 56, 121, 324–325
isotropic antennas, 244

ISPs (Internet service providers), 71, 85
iwconfig command, 240
J
J-carriers, 163
jitter, 229
jumbo frames, 278–279
K
Kbps (kilobits per second), 326
Kerberos, 364–366
keys
open, 375
preshared, 375
shared, 375
KHz (kilohertz), 239
kilobits per second (Kbps), 326
kilohertz (KHz), 239
L
L2TP (Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol), 34
labeling rules, 302
LACP (Link Aggregation Control Protocol), 121
LANs (local-area networks). See VLANs (virtual LANs); WLANs (wireless
LANs)
LASS (Local Authentication Subsystem), 366–367
latency, 118, 129, 185, 186, 228
Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP), 34
Layer 3 addresses, 121
layers (OSI model)
application layer, 36–37
compared to TCP/IP model, 38
data link layer, 34
mapping network devices to, 38–39
network layer, 34–35

physical layer, 34
presentation layer, 36
session layer, 36
summary of, 37
transport layer, 35
LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol), 52–53, 60, 366–368
LDAPS (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol over SSL), 52–53, 60
learning state (ports), 125
lease time, 72–73
leased lines, 162–164
leases, 72–73
least privilege concept, 362–363
LED status indicators, 235
LEDs (light-emitting diodes), 218
LG (looking-glass) software, 420
light meters, 415
Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP), 257
line testers, 414
line-of-sight, 186
link aggregation, 121, 126
Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP), 121
link-local addresses, 92
link-state advertisements (LSAs), 114
link-state routing, 114–115
listening state (ports), 125
LLC (Logical Link Control) layer, 34
LMHOSTS file, 72
load balancing, 150, 314
load tests, 329
local authentication, 366–368
Local Authentication Subsystem (LASS), 366–367
local-area networks. See networks; VLANs (virtual LANs); WLANs
(wireless LANs)
lock-and-key security, 352
logic bombs, 381
Logical Link Control (LLC) layer, 34

logical network diagrams, 290–293
logical topology, 2
logical unit numbers (LUNs), 278
logs. See event logs
looking-glass (LG) software, 420
looking-glass sites, 420
loopback adapters, 413
loopback cables, 214–215
LSAs (link-state advertisements), 114
LUNs (logical unit numbers), 278
LWAPP (Lightweight Access Point Protocol), 257
M
MaaS (Mobility as a Service), 270
MAC (media access control), 60–61, 360–361, 375
identifying, 97–99
layers (OSI model), 34
MAC address table, 128–129
MAC address-based VLANs (virtual LANs), 122
MAC reservations, 73
troubleshooting, 454
Mail Exchange (MX), 70, 71
MAM (mobile application management), 253, 295, 315
managed switches, 129
Management Information Bases (MIBs), 55–56
managers (SNMP), 53–55
man-in-the-middle attacks, 384
MANs (metropolitan-area networks), 17, 197
mapping network devices to OSI model, 38–39
master license agreements (MLAs), 315
maximum transmission unit (MTU), 43, 118, 231
Mbps (megabits per second), 196, 326
MDF (main distribution frame) closets, 220–221
MDI (Medium-Dependent Interface) ports, 136, 140–141
MDI-X (Medium-Dependent Interface Crossed), 136, 140–141, 179
MDM (mobile device management), 253, 295, 315

mean time between failures (MTBF), 314
mean time to recovery (MTTR), 314
media. See network media
media access control. See MAC (media access control)
media converters, 143–144, 210–211
media testers, 414
megabits per second (Mbps), 196, 326
megahertz (MHz), 239
memorandums of understanding (MOUs), 315
metrics, performance, 118–119, 330
Metro-Ethernet, 172
metropolitan-area networks (MANs), 17, 197
MHz (megahertz), 239
MIBs (Management Information Bases), 55–56, 324–325
.mil domain, 69
MIMO (multiple input, multiple output), 25–26, 239, 243
Miredo, 100
mirroring, port, 125, 127
mismatches, 210
duplex/speed mismatch, 232
transceiver mismatches, 232
VLANs (virtual LANs), 234–235
mitigation techniques, 389
ACLs (access control lists), 394
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 391–392
file integrity monitoring, 393
honeypots/honeynets, 394–395
native VLANs, changing, 390
penetration testing, 395
privileged user accounts, 393
role separation, 393–394
switch port protection, 390–391
VLAN network segmentation, 392–393
MLAs (master license agreements), 315
mobile application management (MAM), 253, 295, 315
mobile device management (MDM), 253, 295, 315

Mobility as a Service (MaaS), 270
modems, 142, 179
monitoring performance. See performance monitoring
MOUs (memorandums of understanding), 315
MPLS (Multiprotocol Label Switching), 35, 171
MSAUs (multistation access units), 4
MTBF (mean time between failures), 314
MTTR (mean time to recovery), 314
MTU (maximum transmission unit), 43, 118, 231
multicast addresses
IPv4, 88–89
IPv6, 92
multicast traffic, 252
multifactor authentication, 354, 368
multilayer switches, 149
Multilink PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol), 171
multimeters, 415–416
multimode fiber, 202
multiple input, multiple output (MIMO), 25–26, 239, 243
multiplexing
CWDM (coarse wavelength-division multiplexing), 166
DWDM (dense wavelength-division multiplexing), 165
FDM (frequency-division multiplexing), 195
TDM (time-division multiplexing), 195
Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS), 35, 171
multistation access units (MSAUs), 4
MU-MIMO (multiuser MIMO), 25–26, 243
MX (Mail Exchange), 70, 71
N
NAC (network access control), 369–370
Name Server (NS) records, 70
namespaces, 68–69
narrowband transmission, 27
NAS (network-attached storage), 279
NASs (network access servers), 154, 363

NAT (Network Address Translation), 99–100, 155, 181, 276–277
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 266, 346
native VLANs, 125, 390
NDAs (Non Disclosure Agreements), 296
NDP (Neighbor Discovery Protocol), 93
Near End Crosstalk (NEXT), 229
near field communication (NFC), 22
neighbor discovery, 93
Nessus, 328
.net domain, 69
NetBIOS (Network Basic Input/Output System), 72
netmasks, 454
netstat command, 437–442
network access control (NAC), 369–370
network access servers (NASs), 154, 363
Network Address Translation (NAT), 99–100, 155, 181, 276–277
network analyzers, 416–417
Network Basic Input/Output System (NetBIOS), 72
network controllers, 361
network cross-connects, 215–216
network devices. See devices (network)
network diagrams, 290–293
network documentation. See documentation
Network File System (NFS), 36
network interface cards (NICs), 178
network interface devices (NIDs), 189
network layer (OSI model), 34–35
network management system (NMS), 53
network management systems (NMSs), 54, 323
network media. See also cabling
connectors
BNC, 204
fiber, 206–208
F-type, 206
RJ-11, 204–205
RJ-45, 205

RS-232, 208
transceivers, 209–210
USB, 209
media converters, 210–211
network operating systems (NOSs), 137, 293
network services. See services (network)
Network Time Protocol. See NTP (Network Time Protocol)
network traffic, 115–118
network-attached storage (NAS), 279
network-based intrusion detection system (NIDS), 151
network-based intrusion prevention system (NIPS), 151
networks, 1, 15–16, 390. See also documentation; network media; security;
troubleshooting
CANs (Campus Area Networks), 17–18
devices, 135–136
AAA/RADIUS servers, 154
bridges, 142
content filters, 156
firewalls, 136–137
hubs, 136, 141
IDS (intrusion detection system), 150–151
IPS (intrusion prevention system), 150–151
load balancers, 150
mapping to OSI model, 38–39
media converters, 143–144
modems, 142
multilayer switches, 149
NGFW (Next Generation Firewalls), 154–156
proxy servers, 151–153
routers, 137–138
summary of, 145–146
switches, 139–141
troubleshooting, 457–458
UTM (Unified Threat Management) appliances, 154–156
VoIP endpoints, 145
VoIP gateways, 156

VoIP PBX, 156
VPN concentrators, 153–154
WAPs (wireless access points), 142–143
wireless controllers, 149–150
wireless range extenders, 144–145
disaster recovery, 306–307
backups, 307–310
cold recovery sites, 312–313
HA (high availability), 313–315
hot recovery sites, 312–313
UPSs (uninterruptible power supplies), 307–312
warm recovery sites, 312–313
documentation, 284–287
baselines, 293–294
change management, 300–301
configuration, 301
labeling, 302
network diagrams, 290–293
policies, 294–298
procedures, 299–300
regulations, 301–302
wiring and port locations, 287–290
hosts, 80
Internet access technologies, 175
cable broadband, 179–182
dial-up, 182–184
DSL (digital subscriber line), 176–179
PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network), 184–185
satellite Internet access, 185–186
wireless Internet access, 186–187
IoT (Internet of Things), 20
802.11 standards, 23–29
Ant+, 21
Bluetooth, 21–22
IR (infrared), 22–23
NFC (near field communication), 22

RFID, 23
Z-Wave, 20–21
MANs (metropolitan-area networks), 17, 197
nodes, 80
OSI (Open Systems Interconnect) networking model, 32–33
application layer, 36–37
compared to TCP/IP model, 38
data link layer, 34
mapping network devices to, 38–39
network layer, 34–35
physical layer, 33–34
presentation layer, 36
session layer, 36
summary of, 37
transport layer, 35
PANs (personal-area networks), 18
performance monitoring, 319–320
event logs, 330–337
load tests, 329
packet sniffers, 325
performance metrics, 330
performance tests, 328–329
port scanners, 327
reasons for, 320–323
SNMP monitors, 323–325
stress tests, 329–330
throughput testing, 326–327
vulnerability scanners, 328
private networks, 84–86
public networks, 84–85
remote access, 340–342
HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure), 347
out-of-band management, 347
VPNs (virtual private networks), 342–346
routing and switching, 105
ACLs (access control lists), 131

circuit switching, 109–110
default gateways, 105–106
distributed switching, 108
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 128
dynamic routing, 111–115
interface configuration, 125–126
MAC address table, 128–129
network traffic, 115–118
packet switching, 108–110
PoE (Power over Ethernet), 127–128
port authentication, 127
port mirroring, 127
QoS (Quality of Service), 129–130
routing metrics, 118–119
routing tables, 106–107
SDN (software-defined networking), 111
static routing, 107–108
STP (Spanning Tree Protocol), 124–125
switch management, 125–126, 129
traffic shaping, 130–131
trunking, 126–127
VLANs (virtual LANs), 119–123
SANs (storage-area networks), 18, 277–278
TCP/IP model, 38
topologies
ad hoc wireless, 8–9
bus, 2–3
definition of, 2
hybrid, 11
infrastructure wireless, 7–8
logical, 2
physical, 2
ring, 3–4
star, 4–5
wired mesh, 6–7
wireless mesh, 9–11

traffic shaping, 130–131
VLANs (virtual LANs), 34
advantages of, 118–120
default VLANs, 125
LACP (Link Aggregation Control Protocol), 121
MAC address-based, 122
membership, 121–122
native VLANs, 125
native VLANs, changing, 390
port aggregation, 120
port binding, 120
port-based, 121
protocol-based, 121
segmentation, 122–123, 392–393
VLAN pooling, 149–150
VLAN trunking, 126–127
VTP (VLAN Trunking Protocol), 120, 126–127
WANs (wide-area networks), 1, 159–160. See also Internet access
technologies
ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), 168–169
CDMA (code division-multiple access), 171
copper technology, 169–170
CWDM (coarse wavelength-division multiplexing), 165
definition of, 17
DMVPN (Dynamic Multipoint Virtual Private Network), 171
DWDM (dense wavelength-division multiplexing), 165
EDFAs (erbium doped fiber amplifiers), 165
fiber technology, 169–170
fiber-optic technology, 164–166
Frame Relay, 166–168
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications), 171
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network), 160–162
leased lines, 162–164
Metro-Ethernet, 172
MPLS (Multiprotocol Label Switching), 171
Multilink PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol), 171

OCx (Optical Carrier) levels, 164–166
OLT (optical line termination), 165
ONUs (optical network units), 165
PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol), 170–171
PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet), 171
SDH (Synchronous Digital Hierarchy), 165
SIP trunking, 172
SONET (Synchronous Optical Network), 164–166
termination points, 188–191
WLANs (wireless LANs), 16, 142
bridges, 246–247
cellular access, 242
channel bonding, 243
communications between devices, 246–249
roaming clients, 247
security, 248
site surveys, 246
throughput and data rate, 242–243
troubleshooting, 255–262
WAPs (wireless access points), 7, 142–143, 257, 261–262
wireless antennas, 243–246
wireless channels, 238–241, 248
wireless connections, configuring, 249–253
NEXT (Near End Crosstalk), 229
Next Generation Firewalls (NGFW), 154–156
“next hop”, 114
NFC (near field communication), 22
NFS (Network File System), 36
NGFW (Next Generation Firewalls), 154–156
NICs (network interface cards), 178, 215
NIC teaming, 314
virtual NICs, 277
NIDs (network interface devices), 189
NIDS (network-based intrusion detection system), 151
NIPS (network-based intrusion prevention system), 151
NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology), 266, 346

nmap command, 450
NMSs (network management systems), 53, 54, 323
nodes, 80
Non Disclosure Agreements (NDAs), 296
nonpersistent agents, 369
NOSs (network operating systems), 137, 293
NS (Name Server) records, 70
nslookup command, 446–447
NTP (Network Time Protocol), 36–37, 51–52, 59, 76
O
octets, 81
OCx (Optical Carrier) levels, 164–166
OFDM (orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing), 26, 29
OFDMA (orthogonal frequency-division multiple access), 29
offboarding, 295
OLT (optical line termination), 165
omnidirectional antennas, 245–246
onboarding, 295
one-to-one NAT method, 99–100
one-way satellite systems, 170, 185
ONUs (optical network units), 165
open authentication, 247–248
open keys, 375
Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), 35, 114
Open Systems Interconnect model. See OSI (Open Systems Interconnect)
networking model
open/short faults, 230
OpenVAS, 328
Optical Carrier (OCx) levels, 164–166
optical line termination (OLT), 165
optical network units (ONUs), 165
optical time domain reflectometer (OTDR), 414–415
.org domain, 69
organizational unique identifiers (OUIs), 98
orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA), 26, 29

orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), 29
OSI (Open Systems Interconnect) networking model, 32–33
application layer, 36–37
compared to TCP/IP model, 38
data link layer, 34
mapping network devices to, 38–39
network layer, 34–35
physical layer, 33–34
presentation layer, 36
summary of, 37
transport layer, 35
OSPF (Open Shortest Path First), 35, 114
OTDR (optical time domain reflectometer), 414–415
out-of-band management, 129, 347
P
PaaS (Platform as a Service), 268
packet assembler/disassembler (PAD), 166
packet flow monitoring, 325
packet sniffers, 325, 416–417
packet switching, 108–110, 168. See also routing and switching
PAD (packet assembler/disassembler), 166
PANs (personal-area networks), 18
partial mesh networks, 6
passive hubs, 136, 141
passive optical network (PON), 165
password policies, 296–298
PAT (Port Address Translation), 100–101, 155
patch management, 334–337
patch panels, 218–219
pathping command, 435
PBX, 156
PEAP (Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol), 374
penetration testing, 314–315, 395
performance metrics, 330
performance monitoring, 319–320. See also troubleshooting

event logs, 330–337
application logs, 332–333
history logs, 334
log management, 334
security logs, 331–332
syslogs, 333
system logs, 333–334
load tests, 329
packet sniffers, 325
patch management, 334–337
performance metrics, 330
performance tests, 328–329
port scanners, 327
reasons for, 320–323
SNMP monitors, 323–325
stress tests, 329–330
throughput testing, 326–327
vulnerability scanners, 328
performance tests, 328–329
perimeter networks, 128, 350–351, 391–392
permanent cables, 216
permanent virtual circuits (PVCs), 167
personal-area networks (PANs), 18
phishing, 382
physical addresses. See MAC (media access control)
physical layer (OSI model), 33–34
physical network diagrams, 290–293
physical security, 350–352
biometrics, 353–354
guidelines for, 356–358
lock-and-key security, 352
multifactor authentication, 354
PIN access, 353
secured versus unsecured protocols, 354–356
swipe cards, 353
two-factor authentication, 354

physical topology, 2
PIN access, 352
ping command, 430–435
ping of death attacks, 379
pin-outs, troubleshooting, 231
PKI (public key infrastructure), 367
plain old telephone service (POTS), 170–171, 174, 182–184
plan of action, establishing, 404
Platform as a Service (PaaS), 268
plenum, 203
plugs, 215
PoE (Power over Ethernet), 127–128
pointer (PTR) records, 69, 70
Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet (PPPoE), 171
Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), 34, 170–171, 342
Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP), 34
poisoning
ARP cache poisoning, 382
DNS poisoning, 382
poison reverse, 113
polarization, 246
policies, 294–298
PON (passive optical network), 165
pooling (VLAN), 149–150
POP3 (Post Office Protocol version 3)
explained, 49
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 59
Port Address Translation (PAT), 100–101, 155
port scanners, 327, 417–419
port-based VLANs (virtual LANs), 121
ports
aggregation, 120
authentication, 127
bad ports, 231–232
binding, 120

blocking, 124
default port assignments, 58–60
disabling, 124
documentation of, 287–290
forwarding, 101, 124, 231
learning state, 125
listening state, 125
MDI (Medium-Dependent Interface) ports, 136, 140–141
MDI-X (Medium-Dependent Interface Crossed), 136, 140–141, 179
mirroring, 125, 127
PAT (Port Address Translation), 100–101
port aggregation, 314
port forwarding, 101, 124
port scanners, 327, 417–419
RI (ring-in) port, 4
RO (ring-out) port, 4
RX (receiver port), 210
security, 370
switch port protection, 390–391
troubleshooting, 456
well-known ports, 60
Post Office Protocol version 3. See POP3 (Post Office Protocol version 3)
posture assessments, 369
POTS (plain old telephone service), 170–171, 174, 182–184
power generators, 312
power monitoring tools, 323
Power over Ethernet (PoE), 127–128
power threats, 311–312. See also UPSs (uninterruptible power supplies)
PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol), 34, 170–171, 342
PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet), 171
PPTP (Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol), 34
presentation layer (OSI model), 36
preshared keys, 375
preventing attacks, 384–387
PRI (Primary Rate Interface) ISDN, 161–162
private clouds, 270

private networks, 84–86
private ranges, 85
privileged user accounts, 393
probable cause, 403
problem identification, 401–402
procedures, 299–300
propagation time, 186
Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol (PEAP), 374
protocol analyzers, 413–414
protocol-based VLANs (virtual LANs), 121
protocols. See individual protocol names
proximity readers, 23
proxy servers, 151–153
PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network), 110, 184–185
PTR (pointer) records, 69, 70
public clouds, 270
public key cryptography, 366
public key infrastructure (PKI), 367
public networks, 84–85
punchdown tools, 219
PVC cables, 203
PVCs (permanent virtual circuits), 167
Q
QoS (Quality of Service), 129–130, 271
QSFP (Quad Small Form-factor Pluggable), 210
quarantine networks, 369
R
Radio Frequency Identification. See RFID (Radio Frequency Identification)
radio frequency (RF), 16, 238–241, 260
RADIUS, 154, 363–364
RADSL (rate-adaptive DSL), 177
rain fade, 186
ransomware, 382

RARP (Reverse Address Resolution Protocol), 35, 62
rate-adaptive DSL (RADSL), 177
RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol), 58, 60, 340
RDS (Remote Desktop Services), 58, 340
Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP), 36–37
re-association, 247
receiver port (RX), 210
records (DNS), 70–71
redundancy, 6, 312
reflection, 260–261
refraction, 260–261
regulations, 301–302
relays (DHCP), 75
reliability of wireless mesh topology, 10
remote access, 340–342
HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure), 347
out-of-band management, 347
VPNs (virtual private networks), 342–346
Remote Desktop Protocol. See RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol)
Remote Desktop Services (RDS), 58, 340
Remote Switched Port Analyzer (RSPAN), 125
Request For Comments (RFCs), 43
“Request Timed Out” error message, 431–432
reservations (DHCP), 73
resolution process
DNS (Domain Name System), 65–67
NetBIOS (Network Basic Input/Output System), 72
resolvers, 66–67
resolving FQDNs to IP addresses. See DNS (Domain Name System)
Retina, 328
Reverse Address Resolution Protocol (RARP), 35, 62
reverse lookup, 69
reverse proxy servers, 153
RF (radio frequency), 16, 238–241, 260
RFCs (Request For Comments), 43
RFID (Radio Frequency Identification), 22, 23

RG-6 cables, 201
RG-59 cables, 201
RI (ring-in) port, 4
ring topology, 3–4
ring-in (RI) port, 4
ring-out (RO) port, 4
RIP (Routing Information Protocol), 35, 112
RJ-11 connectors, 204–205
RJ-45 connectors, 205
RO (ring-out) port, 4
roaming, 247
rogue access points, 381
rogue DHCP servers, 455
role separation, 393–394
role-based access control, 362–363
rollover cables, 214–215
root guards, 391
route command, 449–450
route add, 107–108
route print, 106
route redistribution, 111
route selection, 34
routing and switching, 4–5, 34, 105, 137–138, 139–141, 458. See also
addressing
CIDR (classless interdomain routing), 86
circuit switching, 109–110
default gateways, 105
distributed switching, 108
DMZ (demilitarized zone), 128
dynamic routing
definition of, 111
distance-vector routing, 111–114
hybrid routing protocols, 115
link-state routing, 114–115
route redistribution, 111
hub and switch cabling, 140–141

interface configuration, 125–126
MAC address table, 128–129
multilayer switches, 149
network traffic, 115–118
packet switching, 108–110
PoE (Power over Ethernet), 127–128
port authentication, 127
port mirroring, 127
QoS (Quality of Service), 129–130
routing metrics, 118–119
routing tables, 106–107
SDN (software-defined networking), 111
SOHO (small office/home office) routers, 250
static routing, 107–108
STP (Spanning Tree Protocol), 124–125
switch management, 125–126, 129
switch port protection, 390–391
traffic shaping, 130–131
troubleshooting, 457
trunking, 126–127
virtual routers and switches, 276
virtual switches, 276
VLANs (virtual LANs), 118–120
Routing Information Protocol (RIP), 35, 112
routing tables, 106–107
RS-232 connectors, 208
RSPAN (Remote Switched Port Analyzer), 125
RTP (Real-time Transport Protocol), 36–37
rule-based access control, 362
RX (receiver port), 210
S
SaaS (Software as a Service), 267
SAINT, 328
SANs (storage-area networks), 18, 277–278
FC (Fibre Channel), 279

FCoE (Fiber Channel over Ethernet), 279
InfiniBand, 279–280
iSCSI (Internet Small Computer System Interface), 278
jumbo frames, 278–279
NAS (network-attached storage), 279
satellite Internet access, 185–186
scalability of wireless mesh topology, 10
scanners
port scanners, 327
virus scanning, 155
vulnerability scanners, 328
schematics, 287–290
scope, 72–73, 456
SCP (Secure Copy), 342
SCSI (Small Computer System Interface), 278
SDH (Synchronous Digital Hierarchy), 165
SDN (software-defined networking), 111
SDSL (symmetric DSL), 176
Secure Copy (SCP), 342
Secure File Transfer Protocol. See SFTP (Secure File Transfer Protocol)
Secure Shell. See SSH (Secure Shell)
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), 325
security
access controls
802.1x, 369
captive portals, 371
DAC (discretionary access control), 361
definition of, 360
MAC (media access control), 360–361, 370–371
NAC (network access control), 369–370
port security, 370
RADIUS, 363–364
role-based, 362–363
rule-based, 362
TACACS+, 363–364
attacks, 378

ARP cache poisoning, 382
brute force, 383
DDoS (distributed DoS) attacks, 378
deauthentication, 383
DNS poisoning, 382
DoS (denial-of-service) attacks, 378–380
evil twins, 381
logic bombs, 381
man-in-the-middle attacks, 384
mitigation techniques, 389–395
phishing, 382
prevention of, 384–387
ransomware, 382
rogue access points, 381
social engineering, 381
spoofing, 383
VLAN hopping, 383–384
war chalking, 381–382
war driving, 381–382
zero-day exploits, 384
authentication
auditing, 368
certificates, 367
Kerberos, 364–366
local, 366–368
multifactor, 368
cable broadband, 181–182
cloud computing, 272
password policies, 296–298
physical security, 350–352
biometrics, 353–354
guidelines for, 356–358
lock-and-key security, 352
multifactor authentication, 354
PIN access, 353
secured versus unsecured protocols, 354–356

swipe cards, 353
two-factor authentication, 354
secured protocols, 354–356
security logs, 331–332
security policies, 315
wireless networks, 373–376
WLANs (wireless LANs), 248
security information and event management (SIEM) products, 322
security logs, 331–332
segmentation, 35, 122–123, 392–393
Sender Policy Framework (SPF), 71
Server Message Block. See SMB (Server Message Block)
servers
AAA/RADIUS, 154
proxy, 151–153
reverse proxy, 153
rogue DHCP, 455
Service Locator (SRV) records, 70
service set identifiers (SSIDs), 187, 248, 251
service-level agreements (SLAs), 315
services (network), 65. See also DNS (Domain Name System)
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol)
explained, 72–74
leases, 72–73
process, 74–75
relays, 75
reservations, 73
scopes, 72–73
suffixes, 75
IPAM (IP Address Management), 76
NTP (Network Time Protocol), 76
WINS (Windows Internet Name Service), 72
Session Initiation Protocol. See SIP (Session Initiation Protocol)
session layer (OSI model), 36
Set command, 55
SFP (small form-factor pluggable) modules, 209–210

SFTP (Secure File Transfer Protocol), 46–47, 50, 59, 341–342
sh int interface name command, 98
shaping traffic, 130–131
shared bandwidth, 180
shared keys, 247–248, 375
shielded twisted-pair (STP) cabling, 197–198
shortest path bridging (SPB), 119
shortest path first (SPF) algorithm, 114
SIEM (security information and event management), 322
signal loss, 256
signal-to-noise ratio, 256
signatures, 151, 155, 389
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. See SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
Simple Network Management Protocol. See SNMP (Simple Network
Management Protocol)
simplex mode, 196
single point of failure (SPOF), 313
single sign-on, 364–365
single-mode fiber, 202
SIP (Session Initiation Protocol)
explained, 57–58
OSI model and, 36–37
port assignment, 60
SIP trunking, 172
UDP port assignment, 60
site surveys, 246
site-local addresses, 92
site-to-site VPNs, 346
SLAs (service-level agreements), 315
slash, 86
Small Computer System Interface (SCSI), 278
small form-factor pluggable (SFP) modules, 209–210
small office/home office (SOHO) routers, 137, 250
smart jacks, 189
SMB (Server Message Block), 36–37, 58, 60
SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol), 36–37, 47, 59, 149

Smurf attacks, 379
snapshots, 309
SNAT (Static Network Address Translation), 101
sniffers, packet, 325
SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol), 53
agents, 55
communities, 56
components of, 53–54
management systems, 54–55
MIBs (Management Information Bases), 55–56
OSI model and, 38
port assignment, 60
SNMP monitors, 323–325
SNMPv3, 57
switch management, 129
SOA (Start of Authority) records, 70
social engineering attacks, 381
Software as a Service (SaaS), 267
software tools. See commands; hardware/software tools
software-defined networking (SDN), 111
SOHO (small office/home office) routers, 137, 250
solution implementation, 404–405
SONET (Synchronous Optical Network), 164–166
SOWs (statements of work), 315
SPAN (Switched Port Analyzer), 125
Spanning Tree Algorithm (STA), 124
Spanning Tree Protocol (STP), 34, 124–125, 390
SPB (shortest path bridging), 119
spectrum analyzers, 416
speed test sites, 420
SPF (Sender Policy Framework), 71
SPF (shortest path first) algorithm, 114
split horizon, 113
SPOF (single point of failure), 314
spoofing, 383
spread spectrum

definition of, 27
DSSS (direct-sequence spread-spectrum), 28–29
FHSS (frequency-hopping spread-spectrum), 28
OFDM (orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing), 29
SRV (Service Locator) records, 70
SSH (Secure Shell), 36–37, 50, 59, 340, 345–346
SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), 341–342
SSIDs (service set identifiers), 187, 248, 251
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer), 325, 455
STA (Spanning Tree Algorithm), 124
star topology, 4–5
Start of Authority (SOA) records, 70
stateful configuration, 92
stateless configuration, 92
statements of work (SOWs), 315
static addressing, 94
Static Network Address Translation (SNAT), 101
static routing, 35, 107–108
station (STA), 246–247
storage-area networks. See SANs (storage-area networks)
store-and-forward switching environment, 140
STP (shielded twisted-pair) cabling, 197–198
STP (Spanning Tree Protocol), 34, 124–125, 390
straight-through cables, 212–214
stress tests, 329–330
structure cables, 216
subnet masks, 82–83
subnetcalculator.com, 86
subnetting, 82–84
suffixes (DHCP), 75
SVCs (switched virtual circuits), 167
swipe cards, 353
Switched Port Analyzer (SPAN), 125
switched virtual circuits (SVCs), 167
switching. See routing and switching
symmetric DSL (SDSL), 176

symmetric key cryptography, 365
SYN flood attacks, 380
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH), 165
Synchronous Optical Network (SONET), 164–166
syslogs, 333
system logs, 333–334
T
T connectors, 2
T1 lines, 162
T2 lines, 162
T3 lines, 162, 164
T4 lines, 162
T568A/T568B wiring standards, 211–212
tables
MAC address table, 128–129
routing tables, 106–107
TACACS+, 363–364
tagging, 120
taps, 2
T-carrier lines, 162–164
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), 35, 43–44, 59–60
tcpdump command, 449
TCP/IP model, 38
TCP/IP routing. See routing and switching
TDM (time-division multiplexing), 195
TDMA (time-division multiple access), 242
TDR (time domain reflectometer), 414–415
Telnet, 50, 59
TEMPEST shielding protection, 387
templates, certificate, 367
Teredo, 100
Terminal Access Controller Access Control System (TACACS), 363–364
termination points, 188–191
CSU/DSU (channel service unit/data service unit), 189
demarcation points, 188–189

NIDs (network interface devices), 189
smart jacks, 189
verifying, 190–191
testing, 403
load tests, 329
penetration testing, 314–315, 395
performance tests, 328–329
stress tests, 329–330
throughput, 326–327
Text (TXT) field, 71
TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol), 47, 60, 342
theory of probable cause, 403
thick access points, 257
thicknet, 200–201
thin access points, 257
thin client computing, 58, 340
Things, Internet of. See IoT (Internet of Things)
thinnet, 200–201
throughput, 242–243, 326–327
TIA website, 200
tickets, 366
time domain reflectometer (TDR), 414–415
Time to Live (TTL), 51, 433
time-division multiple access (TDMA), 242
time-division multiplexing (TDM), 195
timestamps, troubleshooting, 455
TKIP-RC4, 374
TLS (Transport Layer Security), 36, 345–346
tone generators, 412–413
tone locators, 412–413
toner probes, 412–413
tools. See commands
top-level domains, 69
topologies
ad hoc wireless, 8–9
bus, 2–3

definition of, 2
hybrid, 11
infrastructure wireless, 7–8
logical, 2
physical, 2
ring, 3–4
star, 4–5
wired mesh, 6–7
wireless mesh, 9–11
traceroute command, 231, 426–430
tracert command, 111, 231, 426–430
tracking event logs. See event logs
traffic (network), 115–118. See also routing and switching
traffic shaping, 130–131
traffic spikes, 378
transceiver mismatches, 232
transceivers, 209–210
Transmission Control Protocol. See TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
transmitter port (TX), 210
transport layer (OSI model), 35
Transport Layer Security. See TLS (Transport Layer Security)
Trap command, 56
trap managers, 53–54, 323
triggered updates, 113
Trivial File Transfer Protocol. See TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol)
troubleshooting. See also documentation; performance monitoring
cable broadband, 180–181
cabling
attenuation, 227–228
bad ports, 231–232
bent pins, 233
bottlenecks, 233–234
crosstalk, 229
damaged cables, 233
duplex/speed mismatch, 232
EMI (electromagnetic interference), 230

incorrect cable type, 231
incorrect pin-outs, 231
jitter, 229
latency, 228
LED status indicators, 235
open/short faults, 230
transceiver mismatches, 232
TX/RX reversed, 232
VLAN mismatches, 234–235
commands, 424–426
arp, 435–437
dig, 447–448
ifconfig, 445–446
ipconfig, 443–445
iptables, 443
netstat, 437–442
nmap, 450
nslookup, 446–447
pathping, 435
ping, 430–435
route, 449–450
tcpdump, 449
traceroute, 426–430
tracert, 426–430
dial-up, 183–184
DSL (digital subscriber line), 178–179
of full system functionality, 406
hardware failure, 457–458
hardware/software tools, 410–411
bandwidth speed testers, 420
environmental monitors, 420–421
HVAC equipment, 421
LG (looking-glass) software, 420
loopback adapters, 413
media/cable testers, 414
multimeters, 415–416

OTDR (optical time domain reflectometer), 414–415
packet sniffers, 416–417
port scanners, 417–419
protocol analyzers, 413–414
spectrum analyzers, 416
TDR (time domain reflectometer), 414–415
toner probes, 412–413
wire crimpers, strippers, and snips, 411–412
wireless survey tools, 419
methodology, 400–401
documentation, 406–407
escalation, 404–405
plan of action, 404
problem identification, 401–402
solution implementation, 404–405
testing, 403
theory of probable cause, 403
verification of full system functionality, 406
network services, 452–457
networks, 452–457
satellite Internet access, 186
WLANs (wireless LANs)
absorption, 260–261
AP coverage, 261–262
interference, 259–260
reflection, 260–261
refraction, 260–261
review checklist, 255–259
trunking
SIP trunking, 172
VLAN trunking, 120, 126–127
TTL (Time to Live), 51, 433
tunneling
4to6, 99–100
6to4, 99–100
twisted-pair cabling, 197–200

two-factor authentication, 354
two-way satellite systems, 170, 185
TX (transmitter port), 210
TX/RX reversed, 232
TXT (Text) field, 71
Type I hypervisors, 274
Type II hypervisors, 274
U
UDP (User Datagram Protocol), 35, 44–45, 60
ultra polished connector (UPC), 207
unicast addresses
IPv4, 88
IPv6, 91–92
unidirectional antennas, 245–246
Unified Threat Management (UTM) appliances, 154–156
uniform resource locators (URLs), 48, 152
unintentional DoS attacks, 379
uninterruptible power supplies (UPSs), 127–128, 307–312
universal LAN MAC addresses, 98
Universal Serial Bus (USB) connectors, 209
“Unknown Host” error message, 433
unmanaged switches, 129
unresponsive services, 457
unsecured protocols, 354–356
unshielded twisted pair (UTP), 179, 197–198, 230
untagged VLANs, 120
untrusted SSL certificates, 455
UPC (ultra polished connector), 207
updates (software), 334–337
UPSs (uninterruptible power supplies), 127–128, 307–312
URLs (uniform resource locators), 48, 152, 155
USB (Universal Serial Bus) connectors, 209
use cases, 148
User Datagram Protocol. See UDP (User Datagram Protocol)
utilities. See commands

UTM (Unified Threat Management) appliances, 154–156
UTP (unshielded twisted pair), 179, 197–198, 230
V
vampire taps, 2
Variable Length Subnet Masking (VLSM), 84
VCs (virtual consoles), 126
vertical cabling, 217–218
vertical cross-connects, 216
VFs (virtual firewalls), 276–277
VHDSL (very high bit rate DSL), 176, 177
VIP (virtual IP address), 88
Virtual Network Computing (VNC), 340
virtualization, 274. See also VLANs (virtual LANs)
guests, 275
hosts, 275
hypervisors, 274
NICs (network interface cards), 277
VCs (virtual consoles), 126
VFs (virtual firewalls), 276–277
VIP (virtual IP address), 88
virtual private networks. See VPNs (virtual private networks)
virtual routers, 276
virtual routers and switches, 276
virtual switches, 276
virtual terminals, 126
virtual-circuit packet switching, 109
VMs (virtual machines), 393
VNICs (virtual network interface cards), 275
virus scanning, 155
VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP), 120, 126–127
VLANs (virtual LANs), 34
advantages of, 118–120
default VLANs, 125
LACP (Link Aggregation Control Protocol), 121
MAC address-based, 122

membership, 121–122
mismatches, 234–235
native VLANs, 125, 390
port aggregation, 120
port binding, 120
port-based, 121
protocol-based, 121
segmentation, 122–123, 392–393
VLAN hopping, 383–384
VLAN pooling, 149–150
VLAN trunking, 120, 126–127
VLSM (Variable Length Subnet Masking), 84
VMs (virtual machines), 393
VNC (Virtual Network Computing), 340
VNICs (virtual network interface cards), 275
VoIP (Voice over IP), 57, 127
endpoints, 145
gateways, 156
PBX, 156
volume testing, 329
VPN concentrators, 153–154
VPNs (virtual private networks), 342–346
vt (virtual terminal), 126
VTP (VLAN Trunking Protocol), 120, 126–127
vulnerability patches, 336
vulnerability scanners, 314–315, 328
W
Walk command, 56
WANs (wide-area networks), 1, 159–160
ATM (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), 168–169
CDMA (code division-multiple access), 171
copper technology, 169–170
CWDM (coarse wavelength-division multiplexing), 165
definition of, 17
DMVPN (Dynamic Multipoint Virtual Private Network), 171

DWDM (dense wavelength-division multiplexing), 165
EDFAs (erbium doped fiber amplifiers), 165
fiber technology for, 164–166, 169–170
Frame Relay, 166–168
GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications), 171
Internet access technologies, 175
cable broadband, 179–182
dial-up, 182–184
DSL (digital subscriber line), 176–179
PSTN (Public Switched Telephone Network), 184–185
satellite Internet access, 185–186
wireless Internet access, 186–187
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network), 160–162
leased lines, 162–164
Metro-Ethernet, 172
MPLS (Multiprotocol Label Switching), 171
Multilink PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol), 171
OCx (Optical Carrier) levels, 164–166
OLT (optical line termination), 165
ONUs (optical network units), 165
PPP (Point-to-Point Protocol), 170–171
PPPoE (Point-to-Point Protocol over Ethernet), 171
SDH (Synchronous Digital Hierarchy), 165
SIP trunking, 172
SONET (Synchronous Optical Network), 164–166
termination points, 188–191
CSU/DSU (channel service unit/data service unit), 189
demarcation points, 188–189
NIDs (network interface devices), 189
smart jacks, 189
verifying, 190–191
WAPs (wireless access points), 7, 142–143, 257, 261–262, 458
war chalking, 381–382
war driving, 381–382
warm recovery sites, 312–313
well-known ports, 60

WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy), 373–374
wide-area networks. See WANs (wide-area networks)
Wi-Fi analyzers, 419
Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 (WPA2), 373–374
Wi-Fi Protected Access with Pre-Shared Key (WPA-PSK), 252
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), 373–374
Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS), 374
windowing, 35
WINS (Windows Internet Name Service), 72
wire crimpers, 411–412
wire snips, 411–412
wire strippers, 411–412
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), 373–374
wired mesh topology, 6–7
wired topologies
bus, 2–3
definition of, 2
logical, 2
physical, 2
ring, 3–4
star, 4–5
wireless mesh, 9–11
wireless access points (WAPs), 7, 142–143, 257, 261–262
wireless analyzers, 323
wireless antennas, 243–246
wireless bridges, 142
wireless channels, 238–241, 248
wireless controllers, 149–150
wireless Internet access, 186–187
wireless mesh topology, 9–11
wireless personal-area networks (WPANs), 18
wireless range extenders, 144–145
wireless survey tools, 323, 419
wireless topologies
ad hoc wireless, 8–9
infrastructure wireless, 7–8

wireless mesh, 9–11
wiring distribution components, 215
FDP (fiber distribution panels), 220
horizontal cabling, 216
IDF (intermediate distribution frame) closets, 220–221
MDF (main distribution frame) closets, 220–221
network cross-connects, 215–216
patch panels, 218–219
type 66/type 110 blocks, 220
vertical cabling, 217–218
WLANs (wireless LANs), 16, 142
bridges, 246–247
cellular access, 242
channel bonding, 243
communications between devices, 246–249
roaming clients, 247
security, 248, 373–376
site surveys, 246
throughput and data rate, 242–243
troubleshooting
absorption, 260–261
AP coverage, 261–262
interference, 259–260
reflection, 260–261
refraction, 260–261
review checklist, 255–259
WAPs (wireless access points), 7, 142–143, 257, 261–262
wireless antennas, 243–246
wireless channels, 238–241, 248
wireless connections, configuring, 249–253
WLANs (wireless LANs), 16, 142
WMI (Windows Management Instrumentation), 129
workgroup hubs, 141
WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access), 373–374
WPA2 (Wi-Fi Protected Access 2), 373–374
WPANs (wireless personal-area networks), 18

WPA-PSK (Wi-Fi Protected Access with Pre-Shared Key), 252
WPS (Wi-Fi Protected Setup), 374
X-Y-Z
X.25, 166–168
xDSL, 176–177
zero-day exploits, 336, 384
Z-Wave, 20–21


REGISTER 
YOUR 
PRODUCT 
at
PearsonITcertification.com/register
Access Additional Benefits and SAVE 35% on Your Next Purchase
• Download available product updates.
• Access bonus material when applicable.
• Receive exclusive offers on new editions and related products. (Just check
the box to hear from us when setting up your account.)
• Get a coupon for 35% for your next purchase, valid for 30 days. Your code
will be available in your PITC cart. (You will also find it in the Manage
Codes section of your account page.)
Registration benefits vary by product. Benefits will be listed on your account
page under Registered Products.
PearsonITcertification.com–Learning Solutions for Self-Paced Study,
Enterprise, and the Classroom Pearson is the official publisher of Cisco
Press, IBM Press, VMware Press, Microsoft Press, and is a Platinum
CompTIA 
Publishing 
Partner–CompTIA’s 
highest 
partnership
accreditation. At PearsonITcertification.com you can • Shop our books,
eBooks, software, and video training.

• 
Take 
advantage 
of 
our 
special 
offers 
and 
promotions
(pearsonitcertifcation.com/promotions).
• 
Sign 
up 
for 
special 
offers 
and 
content 
newsletters
(pearsonitcertifcation.com/newsletters).
• Read free articles, exam profiles, and blogs by information technology
experts.
• Access thousands of free chapters and video lessons.
Connect with PITC – Visit pearsonITcertifcation.com/community
Learn about PITC community events and programs.

To receive your 10% off
Exam Voucher, register
your product at:
www.pearsonitcertification.com/register
and follow the instructions.

Code Snippets














