www.allitebooks.com

Compiere 3
An essential and concise guide to understanding and 
implementing Compiere
Andries L Pretorius
  BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Compiere 3
Copyright © 2010 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of 
the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold 
without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, Packt Publishing, 
nor its dealers or distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged 
to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: June 2010
Production Reference: 1220610 
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
32 Lincoln Road
Olton
Birmingham, B27 6PA, UK.
ISBN 978-1-849510-84-4
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Faiz Fattohi (faizfattohi@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Andries L Pretorius
Reviewer
Yves Sandfort
Acquisition Editor
Steven Wilding
Development Editor
Wilson D'Souza
Technical Editor
Pallavi Kachare
Indexer
Hemangini Bari
Editorial Team Leader
Akshara Aware
Project Team Leader
Priya Mukherji
Project Coordinator
Prasad Rai
Proofreaders
Dirk Manuel
Chris Smith
Production Coordinator 
Melwyn D'sa
Cover Work
Melwyn D'sa
www.allitebooks.com

About the author
Andries L Pretorius, CA(SA) ACMA(UK), an accountant by training who 
understands programming, is founder of Astidian Systems a leading Compiere 
and professional open source applications development and consulting house, 
which is a pioneer in deploying Compiere within its market for more than the last 
seven years. 
He has led many Compiere implementations as well as SAP R/3 and Great Plains 
(now MS Dynamics) implementations both from a consulting and business owner 
perspective. He has been the lead architect in many custom Compiere enhancements 
and has over 15 years of experience in ERP and CRM applications. 
His experience includes CFO and COO of leading South African retail, wholesale, 
and distribution enterprises, financial manager at a telecoms provider in Singapore 
as well as being articled at Deloitte Johannesburg and New York offices.
You can reach him on his blog on www.astidian.com/blog.
To my wife Erika and family who had the patience for endless 
weekends of stolen time.

Thanks to Jorg and Kathy for architecting the next generation ERP, 
Ashley G Ramdass, Neil Gordon, Steven Wilding for his patience, 
Prasad Rai and Wilson D'Souza at Packt Publishing. 
www.allitebooks.com

About the reviewer
Yves Sandfort is a veteran in the Internet business and a well known and 
respected commercial open source evangelist. He combines in-depth technical 
knowledge with the ability to quickly adopt real business demand. Especially his 
good understanding of national and international financial relations and how to 
build, maintain and successfully rollout financial solutions (CRM/ERP/BI) 
make him an expert you don't want to miss on your project.
Yves Sandfort has implemented commercial open source applications like Compiere, 
Pentaho or SugarCRM in companies of all sizes around the world (Europe, USA, 
Hong Kong, Australia). The comdivision group, which he founded in 1996, is 
proud partner of many commercial open source projects and shows that there is 
the possibility of commercial success in the open source industry.
I would like to thank some open source veterans and investors 
like Andre Boisvert, Larry Augustin, and Jorg Janke who always 
supported my work and helped me to build a successful business 
around the open source ecosystem. Without these people I would 
not be in the position to work around the globe and review books 
like this one.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Evaluating the Compiere System	
5
When do you look at CompiereCompiere's core ERP functionality	
6
Compiere system administration	
7
Sales cycle to accounts receivable	
8
Purchasing cycle to accounts payable	
8
Business partner management	
8
Financial Accounting Management	
9
Cash management	
9
Customer Relationship Management	
9
Inventory and material management	
10
Light Production	
10
Integrated advanced ERP functionality	
10
Critical ERP decision factors	
11
Budget	
11
Up-front functional design and data relationships	
12
Static out-of-the-box versus dynamic flexible ERP	
12
Internal learning curve and time availability	
12
Enterprise readiness	
13
Technology	
13
Personal career aspirations	
13
Brand Loyalty	
14
Do you evaluate Compiere differently because it is open source?	
14
It must meet your functional needs	
14
It must offer the Assurance Support Levels to suit your needs	
14
Community-supported edition	
14
Paid-for enterprise editions	
15
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
It must provide an open source advantage	
15
Compiere editions	
16
Getting more information	
16
Getting Compiere	
17
Summary	
17
Chapter 2: The Initial Compiere Setup	
19
Compiere Terminology	
20
Compiere setup overview	
21
Starting and stopping the Application Server	
22
Launching Compiere and logging in	
22
Desktop launch	
22
Web launch	
23
The Compiere menu and windows	
24
The Compiere menu	
24
Compiere transaction window	
26
Initial set-up process	
28
Defining the account elements (Chart of Accounts) import	
28
Setting up a tenant	
30
Defining the calendar, year, and periods	
32
Setting up your organizations	
32
Setting up your warehouses and locators	
33
Set up and verify your account element tree	
34
Setting up and verify your accounting schema rules	
36
Accounting Schema overview	
36
Account Combinations and aliases	
39
Understanding Unit of Measures (UOM) and conversions	
40
Document sequences	
42
Creating a user	
43
Set up roles	
44
Creating a role	
45
Summary	
47
Chapter 3: Customers and the Sales Process	
49
The Sales Overview	
49
Defining your business partners	
51
Proxy business partners	
51
Linked organization business partners	
51
Credit management	
56
Entering leads and converting to business partners	
57
Sales order to invoice processing	
59
Sales order delivery rules	
62
Sales order invoicing rules	
62
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Manually generating invoices from orders	
63
Batch generation of invoices	
63
Document status and actions	
64
Reporting on open orders	
66
Finding sales order documents	
66
Zoom on field names	
67
Order info view	
67
Order and invoicing reports	
68
User list reporting with or without querying	
69
Return Material Authorization (RMA)	
69
RMA category	
70
Return policies	
70
Customer RMA (Return Material Authorizations)	
70
Return credit memo	
70
Distribution runs	
70
Sales processing accounting consequences	
71
Default accounts	
71
Receivables accounts	
71
Revenue accounting	
71
Cost of sales accounting	
71
Tax accounting	
72
Summary of the accounts posting	
72
Summary	
74
Chapter 4: Product and Material Management	
75
The product definition	
75
Describing a product	
76
Setting up a Product	
77
Price Lists	
79
Pricing logic flow	
79
Illustrating a price list increase	
82
Pricing Decimal Precisions	
84
Managing Products as Services	
85
Material Management	
85
Warehouse Overview	
85
Adjusting Product Quantities	
86
Physical Inventory Entry	
87
Internal Use Inventory	
88
Moving Inventory	
89
Material Shipments to Customers	
89
Material Receipts from Vendors	
91
Internal Inventory Move	
92
Product Replenishment	
94
Product Costing and Accounting	
96
Typical Accounting of product warehouse transactions	
97
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Basic Product Reports Available	
98
Product Info Window	
98
Summary	
99
Chapter 5: Procurement Management	
101
The Procurement flow	
102
Requisition documents	
103
The Purchase Order	
104
Capturing the Purchase Order	
105
Material Receipt	
107
Capturing the Material Receipt	
107
Accounts Payable (AP) invoice	
109
Capturing the AP invoice	
109
Invoices for expense items (charges)	
111
Matching the Purchase Order, Receipt, and Invoice	
111
Manually matching lines	
113
Vendor payments	
114
Batch processing	
114
Manual selection of invoices for payment	
117
Returns to vendors	
118
Compiere accounting for Procurement	
119
Procurement reports	
121
Summary	
122
Chapter 6: Compiere Financial Management	
123
Accounting terminology in Compiere	
124
Understanding the accounting entry	
125
Accounting setup flow	
126
Calendar year and period	
126
Account elements	
129
Accounting schema and information dimensions	
130
General Ledger (GL) document types	
131
Rules in processing accounting documents	
131
Accounting info view	
133
Open item management	
134
Payment selection—Paying vendors	
135
Accounts Receivable and Payable Ledger Reconciliation	
136
Cash management and banking reconciliation	
137
The Bank in transit account reconciliation	
140
Posting General Ledger journals (GL journals)	
141
Unposted documents	
142
Financial reporting	
144
Financial reporting hierarchy	
145

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Running the financial report	
146
Other available financial reports	
148
Summary	
151
Chapter 7: Advanced Aspects	
153
The Compiere Application Dictionary (AD)	
153
Table and columns	
155
System elements	
156
Validation rules	
157
Reference	
158
Windows, Tabs, and Fields	
159
Forms	
160
Info windows	
161
Report Views	
161
Reports and processes	
162
Setting up a Compiere menu item	
163
Adding a new field to a window and database	
164
Adding our custom field to the Order window	
169
Setting up a basic approval workflow	
170
Illustrative workflow example	
171
Defining a custom node in a workflow	
172
Testing the workflow	
175
Summary	
177
Chapter 8: Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond	
179
Managing people (and the project) for success	
179
Finish with the people you start with	
180
The people you start with are not necessary the people you end-up with	 180
Project communication and follow up	
180
Project documentation control	
181
Technical and infrastructure go-live	
182
Hardware and environment for development and testing	
182
Hardware and environment for production	
182
Hosted versus on-premise installation	
183
Stress testing and performance tuning	
183
Network and security environment	
184
Backup-strategy	
184
The go-live milestone	
185
The technical go-Live	
185
The functional go-live	
185
A Compiere standard implementation project plan	
186
The Compiere pre-implementation project plan	
186
The implementation project plan	
187
The go-live milestone project plan	
191

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Post implementation	
192
Finishing off the project and closure	
192
Change management of production environments	
192
Supplier Service Level Agreement (SLA) management	
193
Keeping up-to-date: Compiere migration	
194
What is migration?	
195
How does migration work?	
195
Application Dictionary (AD) changes	
196
Keeping AD changes after the migrate	
196
Planning for the migration	
198
Summary	
200
Index	
201

Preface
In its simplest form a business entity is the legal or otherwise manifestation of the 
entrepreneurial spirit of human beings. Information is required in order to record, 
control, analyze, and predict the entrepreneurial process. Information systems 
supporting these activities have greatly evolved in the last 40 years from the very 
basic to the very complex. By its very nature information systems have been required 
to constantly change to keep up with the entrepreneurial spirit. ERP (Enterprise 
Resource Planning) systems as they have come to be known evolved from the 
eventual requirement to have an integrated system across the entire business process 
(end to end).
Celebrating and maturing from an open source project to a leading edge competitor 
in the ERP space, Compiere offers best-of-class functionality on a model-driven 
architecture, the latest enterprise platform-independent web technologies (GWT, 
Java, JBoss, Oracle / Postgress), while maintaining open standards, value, flexibility, 
scalability, and most of all an integrated ERP platform that can be extended with ease. 
Compiere is widely regarded as the top Open Source ERP and its name was derived 
from the Italian word for to fulfill / deliver.
In this book we will introduce you to understanding Compiere functionality by 
exploring the different essential business processes. We will cover the setup, the 
processes of Sales, Purchasing, Inventory, and Financial Management as well as 
the advanced aspects like Workflow, project planning, and migration.
Every chapter is illustrated by example so as to facilitate quick, concise, and practical 
reading. The book's aim is to take your basic knowledge of the ERP environment 
and ensure that you gain a practical understanding of the critical functional aspects 
during the process of evaluating or implementing Compiere.

Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Evaluating the Compiere System aims to highlight to the reader aspects 
related to evaluating the Compiere ERP system as well as the differences in 
product editions.
Chapter 2, The Initial Compiere Setup introduces Compiere terminology as well as 
initial setup of the organizations, account elements, documents, and users.
Chapter 3, Customers and Sales Process deals with the aspects of setting up your 
customers and detailing the sales process from Sales Order to Invoicing. 
Chapter 4, Product and Material Management explains the concepts of a products, price 
lists, and discount schemas. It also illustrates concepts of Material Management, 
which controls the aspects of quantity through standard warehousing control.
Chapter 5, Procurement Management covers Procurement Management with regards 
to the processes from Request for Quotation, through Purchase Orders, Invoicing, 
and Material Receipt, to the Payment of vendors.
Chapter 6, Compiere Financial Management… aims to explain the accounting 
and financial aspects of the system as in the end businesses must rely on 
accounting information. 
Chapter 7, Advanced Aspects covers an overview of the Application Dictionary 
(AD) as well as examples of creating custom fields and setting up a basic 
document workflow.
Chapter 8, Project Planning for Go-live and Beyond highlights the aspects related to 
project planning from people, functional, and technical points of view. We will also 
relate aspects regarding post-go live and migration.
What you need for this book
For this book you will need a basic understanding of accounting and ERP 
systems. The Compiere Evaluation software can be downloaded from: 
http://www.compiere.com/wstore (contact support@compiere.com for 
an evaluation license) or the Community Editions are available from 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/compiere/files/ (the latest being version 
3.3). Installation instructions (Windows or Linux) are included in the download but 
can also be obtained from http://www.compiere.com/support/installation.
php. Wiki support is available from http://wiki.compiere.com. The required 
databases can be obtained from either Oracle.com (Oracle 11g) or Enterprisedb.
com (EDB 8.3R2). The required Sun Java Development Kit (JDK version) can be 
obtained from http://java.sun.com/javase/downloads/index.jsp (update 5 
or later).

Preface
[ 3 ]
Who this book is for
If you are considering Compiere or want to easily implement Compiere in your 
organization, this book is for you. This book will also be beneficial to system users 
and administrators who wish to implement an ERP system. No previous knowledge 
of Compiere is required.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "It is found under your main installation 
directory as c:\Compiere2\RUN_setup.bat (Windows) or /home/Compiere2/RUN_
setup.sh (Linux):".
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Select the 
Initial Tenant Setup from the menu and enter your tenant details as follows:".
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send us 
a note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or e-mail 
suggest@packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text 
or the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you 
can save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions 
of this book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.
packtpub.com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the let us know link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Evaluating the Compiere 
System
Managing an integrated business that requires an ERP system is a challenge in itself, 
so the defining question when one starts to look at an ERP system is: will an ERP add 
value to the business and be worth the investment? ERP systems costs money, they 
require new skills, they require employees and business to adapt, and, ultimately, 
they take a lot of management time to implement.
Most notably, an ERP system has the purpose of providing management with an 
integrated information and transaction processing environment. This will provide 
the required financial and non-financial data and information for insightful reports 
that inform and underwrite decision making. Information systems must measure 
the effective and optimum use of enterprise resources, whether they are defined as 
people, products, services, or assets.
This chapter deals with assisting you in evaluating the Compiere system. In this 
chapter we shall:
• 
Give you a list of the core functionalities of the Compiere system
• 
Indicate which critical decision factors you must use in evaluating the system
• 
Present an understanding of the different Compiere product editions
• 
Show you where to get more information on Compiere

Evaluating the Compiere System
[ 6 ]
When do you look at Compiere
The Compiere system is certainly suitable in the following 
organizational circumstances:
Circumstance
Compiere advantage
Outgrowing existing system
The business is outgrowing its existing 
systems. Generally, the business was doing 
fine on a small accounting package, but 
now requires additional functionality. It 
may also require a more scalable enterprise 
database, or the number of users and the 
complexity of the business is expanding.
Compiere's technology stack offers a 
growing company the enterprise scalability 
platform required. Functionality and 
transactions volumes can be scaled based on 
specific user needs.
Existing system is old technology
The existing system is so old that support 
cannot be easily obtained and the 
technology is just hanging by a thread. This 
is usually the case with long-standing or 
older generation management. For example, 
a family business that has been in existence 
for many years and the legacy system has 
just always worked, but finally a decision 
has to be made as to a new system.
Compiere offers the current Java and web 
technology platform , which is based on 
open architecture and standards, throughout 
its offering.
Dynamic system requirement
More progressive and dynamic 
management where the underlying 
technology is as important to the business 
as the business itself. 
Due to its open source nature, Compiere 
offers a flexible and transparent technology 
platform.
Value proposition
Large businesses that are evaluating ERP 
vendor systems and are analyzing the costs 
versus return.
Compiere provides a competitive licensing 
model up to large-scale Enterprise levels.
Compiere's core ERP functionality
In differentiating the Compiere product offering from the traditional ERP offering, 
Compiere is known for its multi's:

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
• 
Multi-language for Documents and User Interface
• 
Multi-currency for transacting in or reporting in foreign currencies
• 
Multi-tax, supporting different tax systems (Sales, VAT, and combinations)
• 
Multi-costing in parallel (for example, Standard Costing, Average, and Lifo)
• 
Multi-accounting for legal reporting using different accounting principles 
(selecting Cash, Accrual, or International GAAP principles)
• 
Multi-Tenant and Multi-Organization for different branches, and legal 
entities, reporting and dimensional structures
The Compiere Core Functionality includes a rich dynamic business functionality 
framework, and we shall cover some of these aspects in detail in later chapters.
Compiere system administration
System administration functions are the normal administrator functions that you 
would expect in a system. These functions include:
• 
User administration: Manages the users that can log on to the system, 
password management, date control, and user preferences.
• 
Role management: What users can do in the system, who can access which 
windows and processes, and ultimately what users can see into the system.
• 
Tenant setup: Managing the detail of the main legal entities, departments, 
cost centers, and sales regions.
• 
Document settings: Document formats, document types, and document 
sequences.
• 
System utilities: Back-up and restore of critical system settings, although 
mostly this is handled through external database scripts.
• 
System settings and parameters: Includes database location, licensing, user 
defined control parameters, and formats.
• 
Functional settings: Set-up includes Tax, currencies, units of measure, and 
payment terms.
• 
The Compiere Application Dictionary (AD): The application dictionary refers 
to meta-data in the application that determines the context and behavior of 
windows and data elements across all aspects of the Compiere application. 
For the non-programmer, this meta-driven model greatly reduces application 
core program-level customization requirements, and also gives system 
administrators the power to interact on a business logic point of view.
www.allitebooks.com

Evaluating the Compiere System
[ 8 ]
Sales cycle to accounts receivable
Typical sales cycle functionality includes:
• 
Preparing quotations and sales orders
• 
Sales order to customer invoicing
• 
Sales order to delivery (shipment to customer)
• 
Batch invoicing and printing
• 
Preparing purchase orders from sales orders
• 
Payment receipts at the time of ordering or invoicing
Purchasing cycle to accounts payable
Typical purchasing cycle functionality includes:
• 
Preparing requisitions and purchase orders
• 
Purchase order to vendor invoicing
• 
Purchase order to material receiving
• 
Vendor invoicing (including expense creditors)
• 
Processing payments to suppliers
Business partner management
Business partners include customers, vendors, and employees. Typical 
functionalities include:
• 
Creating and editing business partners
• 
Classifying and grouping business partners
• 
Creating locations, contacts, and banking information
• 
Credit limit management
• 
Allocating different types of discount schemas to business partners

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Financial Accounting Management
Typical functionalities include:
• 
Setting up and maintaining multiple accounting schemas and currencies
• 
Creating, editing, and grouping account elements, and general  
ledger management
• 
Posting actual and budget entries to accounts through journal entries
• 
Running financial reports, trial balances, and accounts details
• 
Account at various activity and low-level cost detail
Cash management
Typical functionalities of cash management include:
• 
Allocating payments and receipts to accounts receivable / accounts payable 
orders or invoices
• 
Processing cash journal entries
• 
Managing, correcting, and viewing historic allocations
• 
Open item reporting and aging
• 
Accounting for actual bank statement transactions
• 
Reconciling system entries to the bank statement
• 
Dunning (statement) processing
Customer Relationship Management
Typical functionalities of CRM management include:
• 
Capturing leads and sales opportunities
• 
Opportunity reporting
• 
Converting leads to business partners
• 
Processing requests to action for sales representatives

Evaluating the Compiere System
[ 10 ]
Inventory and material management
Products are anything in the system that you can purchase or sell and that has a 
price. Typical functionalities of material management include:
• 
Creating and editing of product and service items
• 
Grouping of products
• 
Managing product pricing and discount schemas
• 
Transactional listing reporting
• 
Serializing of products (lot control)
• 
Creating additional product attributes (size, length)
• 
Costing products to warehouse locations
• 
Accounting for various costing methods (standard, average, and LIFO)
• 
Inventory moves, adjustments, valuations, and write-offs
• 
Auto generation of replenishment orders
Light Production
Typically functionalities of light production include:
• 
Defining and editing Bills of Materials
• 
Creating or editing kits
• 
Processing production work orders
Integrated advanced ERP functionality
Due to its open source nature, all modules or components of Compiere are 
seamlessly integrated and are available separately or as part of the entire offering:
Advanced Functionality
 Description
Request Management
Services Request Management is an integral part of the system. 
Workflow
Compiere includes document level and process level workflow 
at its core.
eCommerce / WebStore 
integration
An integrated Java JSP webstore is included in the core release.
Data and SOA 
Integration
Transacting with different systems than your own through 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) or Web Services. Compiere 
offers this as part of its Enterprise Edition release, and his 
functionality can also be purchased through the Compiere 
Exchange.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Advanced Functionality
 Description
In-house Programming 
and Customization
Usually, an end-user has to pay for the privilege of doing in-
house programming on their purchased ERP systems. Being 
open source, this is given with Compiere.
Advanced Material 
Resources Planning 
(MRP / MRP II)
This is an additional paid-for Compiere component and offers 
an integrated MRP process. Functionalities including, route 
planning, resource scheduling, standard operations, and multi 
level Bills of Materials.
Advanced Warehousing 
and Distribution
This is an additional paid-for Compiere component and 
encompasses advanced warehousing and distribution systems.
Human Resources
This is an additional paid-for Partner component. 
Government ERP
Fund Management is an additional paid-for Partner 
component.
Where applicable, the partner components contact details can be 
obtained from Compiere directly, or from the Compiere Exchange 
at the following web address: http://www.compiere.com/
partners/compiere-exchange.
Critical ERP decision factors
One of the most critical components in an Enterprise decision process is to ensure 
that all factors are considered in the evaluation process.
Such factors must include the following:
Budget
Does the enterprise have an allocated budget for the ERP system? Does this budget 
include licensing, implementation, training, first year support, and, most importantly, 
up-front pre-evaluation functionality and scope design. Does the enterprise 
understand what is available in the market prior to setting this budget, and including 
management scope risks in this process?
What does the ERP budget mean to the organization? Is it a target cost or a strategic 
fund allocation?

Evaluating the Compiere System
[ 12 ]
Is the budget agreed with your implementation partner? Usually, if the scope is 
well-defined with good functional definition, then consulting partners will be happy, 
and budget should not be a concern. If management is under pressure from a budget 
point of view, quality may be compromised, and inevitably corners will be cut 
during the implementation.
Make sure you spend money to save money!
Up-front functional design and data 
relationships
Don't purchase an ERP system if you have not created a Functional Design of how 
you want your business to work, or have at least documented how it currently 
works. Scope creep is usually a major risk factor in any implementation. The reason 
for this is poor up-front investigation and understanding by management—not of 
the ERP system, but of the business processes itself.
An Enterprise is measured according to data information and relationships. 
Document your data relationship entities in as much detail as possible. This 
does not require a database analyst but will at least ensure that most critical data 
relationships are identified up-front. Later in the book we will describe the entity 
relationships in Compiere.
Static out-of-the-box versus dynamic 
flexible ERP
ERP systems that are more out-of-the-box are usually less flexible. More flexible 
systems are less out-of-the box.
How important is flexibility now, and what is the experience of the company in 
its historical systems? Owner-managed businesses require much more immediate 
flexibility in their systems purely because there is less bureaucracy in the decision-
making process and their ground level understanding are much higher. "Safe" 
decision makers will require a more out-of-the-box solution since this offers a 
perceived level of comfort.
Internal learning curve and time availability
Managing the internal learning curve is one of the most important aspects of 
the implementation. The more experienced management is in ERP systems, the 
easier it will be to manage the learning curve. What is usually quite interesting is that 

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
inexperienced management in this area will pay for the system but only want to see the 
results of the system and not understand what is under the hood.
"Hands-off management" should be aware that the implementation runs a huge risk 
of failure. It is quite surprising that management will outsource the entire process 
of implementation and only try to get involved in the end of the project, when the 
hand-over needs to happen. This is usually too late, and by then the expectation 
level runs the risk of being out of sync between the ERP implementer and the client.
If senior management don't have the time or inclination to be involved then 
no matter what system it is, it is going to have its internal political and project 
challenges throughout the process.
Enterprise readiness
Although ERP changes affect the entire organization, in most circumstances, change 
is effected through the organization through simple, fast, clear, constant, and concise 
management decisions and communications.
Employees look up to their management, and key management or owners who have 
buy-in to the process are worth 100 times more than employee hand-holding sessions.
If the key management is change averse, then simply don't implement an ERP System.
Technology
One of the drivers of the new age is technology. Investing in an ERP system is 
usually a significant investment. If you are going to invest in a technology , then 
you should make sure that you understand the underlying technologies of the 
systems that are going to run those systems.
Technology and proprietary platforms can become out of date or be difficult or even 
impossible to upgrade or integrate into other systems. Ultimately, the average career 
for employees is shorter than the technology that is going to be around. In your next 
organization, you are going to be stuck with the decisions of prior management, and 
the same truth will prevail about your legacy.
Personal career aspirations
Personal aspirations and career ambitions form quite an interesting dynamic in the 
entire decision process, and must not be discounted. Employees can be very biased 
towards their own personal ambitions in terms of technology. Independent thinking 
should prevail wherever possible.

Evaluating the Compiere System
[ 14 ]
Brand Loyalty
Take note that most existing brands have been in existence for almost 40 years and 
in most cases are the sum of diverse acquisitions, and the agility of these brands 
to adapt to changes in the technology space is recognized to be a major challenge. 
Evaluate brand loyalty for its emotional or real value context.
Prioritize the selection factors and make sure that you get 
buy-in from all stakeholders.
Do you evaluate Compiere differently 
because it is open source?
In evaluating Compiere the question is—should it be evaluated differently because it is 
open source? In short the answer is: No! However, in understanding the environment, 
there are many deciding factors and risks to consider when evaluating open source 
systems in general. Here are some areas to assess:
It must meet your functional needs
Functionally, the ERP software must meet your needs, and must at least have passed 
your evaluation criteria through either proof of concept or proven functionalities.
It must offer the Assurance Support Levels to 
suit your needs
Compiere offers traditional open source General Public License (GPL) software as 
well as commercially licensed and supported versions of the application. The user 
thus has a choice.
Community-supported edition
Compiere offers a GPL version of their software as a community edition. In its 
simplistic form it is a form of distribution and exposure of the product to the 
world at large. In its complex form it is a collaborative, distributed, and transparent 
development environment. Community editions are good for evaluation, and  
small-to-medium environments until larger product support and upgrade assurances 
are required. Because the core of the product editions are the same, this book will 
cover both the community and paid-for editions.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Paid-for enterprise editions
The enterprise versions of Compiere are certified to be standards-compliant from 
a software, database, and operating system point of view. Managed by seasoned 
executives, Compiere invested more into these Enterprise editions for commercial 
operational acceptance and they are the true, supported versions of the software:
• 
You can purchase support assurance for such versions, including certified 
upgrades and maintenance, from the software vendor
• 
You can rely on the stability and roadmap of the technology stack
• 
You can manage the responsiveness of the vendor contractually
• 
You can find certified local support and experience
• 
You can find training and documentation
• 
You can still benefit both from the community editions and input
• 
You can have indemnity against possible patent infringements
It must provide an open source advantage
As the open source market is maturing, and while the open source evangelists and the 
proprietary shareholders each have their stake in the ground, when it comes to sound 
commercial and risk management decisions the technology environment is now about 
long term freedom of use, architecture and platform, and not about "free" software.
Within the Compiere environment, the underlying core source code and Java 
technology is open to inspect and expand upon. Compared to other environments, 
it is also easy to find developers and support within the Java and Oracle/
Postgress database environment. It is impossible to cover the Java J2EE framework 
environment in conjunction with this book, but is regarded as one of the most 
prolific and matured development environments available today, and forms the core 
to technology companies like IBM and Oracle.
The business benefit is that the underlying business logic source code is transparent 
and it is possible to understand and match it to the precise business functional process.
No integration process is easy, but open source systems provide a dynamic integration 
with other systems purely from the fact that it is transparent from the technology stack 
point of view.

Evaluating the Compiere System
[ 16 ]
Compiere editions
The different licensing options available to end users are as follows:
Edition
Overview
Compiere Community
• 
Core ERP functionality
• 
Model-driven Application Platform
• 
Platform-independent client-server architecture
• 
GPL v2 open source license
Compiere Standard
• 
Stable and supported versions with quality support, 
bug fixes, and service packs
• 
Automated migration to latest versions
• 
Traditional Client/Server presentation
• 
Commercial license
Compiere Professional
• 
Advanced rich internet web UI architecture
• 
Additional enterprise-level functionality
• 
Premium support services
• 
EULA with indemnification protection
• 
Commercial license
Compiere Enterprise
• 
Multi server support
• 
Visual Editor and Management Dashboards
• 
RESTful Webservices
• 
Commercial license
Additional Paid-for Features: Compiere Cloud Editions, Compiere Manufacturing, 
Compiere Warehouse, and Distribution.
In all editions, source code is supplied under different license agreements.
Getting more information
Compiere has an extensive partner eco-system across the world, with up to 40 
countries listed, across all continents. Partners provide a localized contact and 
support system for the Compiere system. The main aim of the partner community 
is to provide the following services:

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
• 
Sales
• 
Solution design
• 
Customization
• 
Implementation
• 
Ongoing support, maintenance, and upgrades
• 
System integration
• 
Industry specialization
A comprehensive list of partners available per country is available in the online 
partner directory, at: http://www.compiere.com/partners/partner-directory.
Getting Compiere
To review purchasing options and download Compiere, you can go to 
http://www.compiere.com/products/compare-editions/ for a comprehensive 
overview. To download Compiere Community, refer to http://sourceforge.net/
projects/compiere/files/. For help on installing Compiere, and documentation 
on Compiere, please refer to: http://wiki.compiere.com/. For a trial version 
of the professional or enterprise editions please contact your local partner or 
Consona Corporation (www.consona.com) directly.
Summary
Compiere emerged as a premier and leading open source ERP and a competitor 
to the traditional ERPs in the market due its technology stack and sound design 
principles. We covered the following in this chapter:
• 
The list of core functionalities in the Compiere system, as well as the 
advanced functionalities that are available.
• 
Evaluation criteria that you should use for the Compiere system. We 
highlighted the fact that you should prioritize these accordingly to your 
specific needs.
• 
Presented an understanding of the Compiere product offering options.
• 
Where to get more information, should you require in.
In the next chapter, we will illustrate the applicable setups required during initial 
implementation of a new tenant.
www.allitebooks.com


The Initial Compiere Setup
Understanding the initial set-up process for an instance of Compiere is essential, 
because it forms the platform for the future use of the system. 
In this chapter, we will illustrate the following:
• 
Introducing Compiere terminology and providing a set-up overview
• 
Creating an initial tenant
• 
Setting up the initial accounting elements (chart of accounts) and the 
accounting schema, which will form the basis for future document 
accounting
• 
Loading organizations and the applicable warehouses
• 
How to set up the document numbering sequences
• 
Highlight how to set up different unit of measure conversions
• 
How to create users and roles in the system

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 20 ]
Compiere Terminology
For purposes of the initial installation it is important to note the following 
terminology meanings:
Terminology
Meaning
Tenant
A Tenant or client refers to the main instance name. You are 
not limited in the number of tenants, but you cannot share data 
between tenants. An example would be a GardenWorld Group 
instance.
Organization
Organization refers to the legal entities, Cost or Profit Centers, 
Departments, Divisions, or Top level Summary Organizations that 
may be applicable. You can share data between organizations. An 
example would be a head office and multiple stores.
Business Partners
This refers to customers, vendors, or employees with which the 
organization transacts.
Products
Products are stocked or non-stocked inventory items, expense 
items, or service items that you purchase and sell or track.
Accounting Schema
These are the default accounts that define the default accounting 
posting rules per Tenant or Organization. These include, for 
example, currency and costing rules.
Account Element
This defines the natural account key, number/Reference, and 
name that you will use as your accounting posting entry and that 
makes up the Chart of Accounts. This is, for example, account 
6500-Telephone Expense.
Role
A role defines the window, process, and data access of users in 
the system. This could, for example, be a Sales Department Role.
Users
Users either have roles—in which case they are system users—or 
if they do not have a role they are referred to as contacts.
Representatives
Representatives are used on Compiere sales and purchasing 
documents, and the term refers to users that are defined as 
employees in the system.
Warehouse or Service 
Point
Warehouses are used for materials management, and an 
organization must have a warehouse assigned to it if inventory 
tracking is applicable.

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Compiere setup overview
The instructions for the file installation process are detailed in the installation guides 
that can be obtained from http://www.compiere.com/support/installation.php.
After installing the database, Java run time, and Compiere, the Compiere 
environment setup can be started by running the program RUN_setup. This can be  
found under your main installation directory, as c:\Compiere2\RUN_setup.bat 
(Windows) or /home/Compiere2/RUN_setup.sh (Linux):

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 22 ]
Should you experience problems with the above, the following common faults and 
solutions may be identified:
Fault
Description
Resolution
Java Home
The system cannot find the 
fully qualified Java JDK path.
Check your Java installation and 
ensure that it is listed in your System 
Environment Variables. Make sure 
there is a JAVA_HOME entry pointing 
to the correct path. 
Compiere Home
The system is not finding the 
Compiere instance path. 
Check your System Environment 
Variables. Make sure there is a 
COMPIERE_HOME entry with the 
fully-qualified directory path.
Application 
Server and 
Database Server
The system is not resolving 
the application or database 
server. 
Do not use direct IP references (i.e. 
10.0.0.1) and must be qualified in 
your DNS or system's host file.
Conflicting Ports
Ports are conflicting with 
existing services or processes
Try using different ports, and check 
possible restrictions on the firewall.
Starting and stopping the Application Server
The Compiere JBoss, Tomcat application server (required for your web interface, 
accounting, alert, and request server) is started through the command file, namely 
C:\Compiere2\utils\RUN_Server2.bat file (.sh for Linux). Stopping the server is 
done through the c:\Compiere2\utils\RUN_Server2Stop.bat file (.sh for Linux). 
Generally, this should take less than a minute. It is recommended that you set up a 
schedule in Windows or a cron job in Linux to start this automatically each time the 
server starts up.
Launching Compiere and logging in
There are two ways to log into the system:
Desktop launch
On the server or workstation itself, as either the  System Administrator or a user, 
this is traditionally done through a launch file in your Compiere directory—namely  
C:\Compiere2\RUN_Compiere2.bat (Windows) or .sh (Linux). After the initial log 
in, the user has a choice to create an icon shortcut on the desktop linking to this 
file for future use. In this method Compiere itself needs to be installed on 
the Desktop.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
Web launch
The recommended method for remote client/server login, where Compiere installation 
files need not be installed on the desktop is to run Compiere through the Java Webstart 
from an Internet browser launch page after you have started the Compiere Application 
Server. The access web page is accessed through http:// < server name > : < web 
port > /admin, where <server name> is your actual server name and <web port> is 
the web port defined in the RUN_Setup process followed by the /admin directory. An 
example of this would be http://compiere-server.gardenworld.com:5000/admin. 
Compiere will download the run-time files to the user desktop for use, and will always 
be of the latest instance avoiding possible version or maintenance conflict.
Click on the Webstart button to launch the Swing User Interface (UI) application 
(Community and Standard Editions), or access the Web User Interface (UI) through 
the Compiere Web Application Login selection (Professional and Enterprise Editions):
Enter your System Administrator username and password (refer to the installation 
documentation for the defaults) for the Swing version, as shown below:

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 24 ]
Enter your System Administrator username and password (refer installation 
documentation for the default), for the Web UI version:
The Compiere menu and windows
The Compiere menu launches the transactional aspects of the system and we will 
describe the different components as follows:
The Compiere menu
Depending on your login credentials and role access, you will be presented with the 
main menu in Compiere. This menu lists your roles and actions that you may perform.
The Swing Menu (Community and Standard Editions) is illustrated as follows:

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
The Web User Interface (Professional and Enterprise Editions) is as follows:
1.	 Toolbar and Menu Shortcuts: These provide available predefined shortcuts, 
commands, and preferences.
2.	 Menu Tab: These are available context menus or functions, such as 
performance dashboards, menu, workflow activities

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 26 ]
3.	 Shortcuts and Favorites: Shortcuts are quick launch options, and are added 
to the shortcut area by right-clicking on the select menu item.
4.	 Menu items access your work areas, including windows, process, reports, 
views, and Dashboards.
5.	 Menu Search: This is where the user can search for menu items.
Compiere transaction window
Windows are used for data capture and processing, and have a consistent look 
and feel throughout the application. The menu toolbar and icons are also located 
in standard positions and have consistent functionality based on the context of the 
contents of the window.
The Swing user interface window (Community and Standard Edition) is as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
The web user interface window (Professional and Enterprise Edition) is as shown in 
the following screenshot:
• 
Toolbar: The toolbar list shortcuts to commands and other windows, 
preferences, and set-up actions.
• 
Menu icons: The menu icons in Compiere launch commands in context to 
the contents of the window, for instance create new record, delete record, 
refresh, lookup, next record, previous record, and close window.
• 
Header and Tabs: A header is the first main view in a window, whereas 
tabs are contextualized to the header or preceding tab. For instance, an 
Order Header will have an Order Lines tab, and Order Lines will have 
Order Tax lines.
• 
Fields: Fields capture the contents of a document, may be mandatory and 
may be editable, depending on context.
• 
Window References: Creates a context of fields on a window. If pressed, 
shortens the window.
• 
Process buttons: These buttons perform actions and processes depending 
on the context. For instance, on and order you may process a payment type 
against it or complete a document.

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 28 ]
Initial set-up process
The following basic steps apply to setting up a Compiere instance:
• 
Define the initial Chart of Accounts (account elements) template for 
the tenant. 
°°
Create the tenant instance to hold your Compiere data.
°°
Define your calendar year and periods.
°°
Populate and define the data structures of the following:
°°
Organizations, Warehouses, Bank, Cash Books, and Unit 
of measures.
°°
Accounting schema, account elements, currencies, 
and charges.
°°
Accounting set-ups of Business Partner Groups, Product 
Categories, Tax, Projects, Works Orders, bank accounts, 
cash books, and warehouses.
°°
Document types, Document Sequences, Payment Terms, 
and Sales Regions
°°
Define system users and access roles.
Defining the account elements (Chart of 
Accounts) import
Prior to setting up a new tenant, the account elements (Chart of Accounts) must 
be defined as per the import template provided. The standard account elements 
template can be found in the C:\Compiere2\data\import directory. The template 
used as the default during the installation process is named AccountingUS.xls, and 
the default import file template is named AccountingUS.csv (note that there may be 
other localized templates defined for other countries). The process is that you could 
edit either the .xls file or the.csv file, but it is the .csv format layout that is used 
for the import process.
The following columns are defined in the Account Element Template, and although 
they are defined vertically here. these must be defined horizontally in your import 
file. This may be imported before or after an initial tenant is created. Do plan 
these fields carefully, as this is a structure used for Financial Reporting and your 
accounting reports.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
Column 
No
Name
Description
1
Account Value
Account Values are the numeric numbering of your 
accounts. You should adopt some sequential logic as this 
will benefit you greatly in reporting and structure down 
the line: I propose the following numbering sequence, 
based on IFRS reporting:
000..999 Use these for your Summary levels
10000...19999 Assets
20000...29999 Liabilities
30000...39999 Owners Equity and Reserves
40000...49999 Revenue 
50000...59999 Cost Of Sales
60000...69999 Staff related Expenses
70000....79999 Operating Expenses
80000....89999 Taxation and Shareholders Expense
90000....99999 Miscellaneous
An example of this would be:
4-Trade Revenue
480-Revenue Other  [ being a summary level ]
48000-Revenue Other account 1
48010-Revenue Other account 2
2
Account Name
This is the name of the account or Summary Level Account 
3
Account 
Description
A further description of the account 
4
Account Type
Compiere defines five standard account types:
Assets, Liabilities, Owner's Equity, Revenue, Expenses
5
Account Sign
The account sign, namely Positive, Negative, or Neutral. 
Use Neutral if you are unsure.

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 30 ]
Column 
No
Name
Description
6
Account 
Document
Yes/No indicating if the account is document controlled, 
in which case journal entries may not be posted to this 
account. Certain system control accounts , such as 
bank-in-transfer and Accounts Receivable/Payable, 
should be indicated as document controlled.
7
Account 
Summary
Yes/No indicating whether the account is a summary level 
account or not. Summary level accounts are used for roll-
up reporting.
8
Default Account
Indicates that this is a default account used for the 
accounting schema rules. Generally, these can be 
understood from their name and there is a predefined list 
of accounts within the import template. Compiere will 
release a new template if these accounts changes.
9
Account Parent
This indicates the account parent number of the account 
line.
For instance, if 4 is defined as the Revenue summary 
account then an account 4000 Revenue Trade would be 
parented by 4, which in itself may be a parent of another 
account.
Setting up a tenant
To setup the initial tenant you have to log into the system with the SuperUser 
username, and select the role of System Administrator:

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Select the Initial Tenant Setup from the menu, and enter your tenant details 
as follows:

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 32 ]
Now that you have set up a tenant, the following system items are created through 
this process (these can be easily edited):
• 
Initial organizational admin and user roles: In the above example, this is 
Newco Company Group Admin and Newco Company Group User. The 
admin role so created will be the administrator for the tenant.
• 
Accounting Schema and Account Elements.
• 
An Initial Campaign, Business Partner, Business Partner Group, Product, 
Product Category, Tax, Representative (Admin and User), Project, and 
Cash book.
• 
Document types applicable to the system, together with standard 
numbering sequences.
After you have run the initial Tenant Setup in the System 
Administration role, log out and log back into the system 
using the particular new tenant credentials.
Defining the calendar, year, and periods
A calendar and periods define the reporting and posting dimension of the system 
entries. An initial calendar, a year, and periods are created, and may be edited. This 
information is set up through the Calendar, Year, and Period menu item, and is 
covered in Chapter 6.
Setting up your organizations
Organizations can be defined according to your business and reporting line 
requirements. Organizations can be used for security purposes as well, for instance 
having a separate 'accounts' organization for accounting data that may not be 
accessed by sales organization staff , but never used for organizational reporting. 
One of the powerful features of Compiere is that these organizations and hierarchy 
may be changed at any time, with future reporting trees or roll-ups reflected in the 
new set-up. In more advanced reporting scenarios, a specific Reporting Hierarchy 
may be set up which can be use for Financial Reporting (covered in Chapter 6).
Setting up your organization:
1.	 Select the Organization window from the main menu tree.
2.	 Enter your Organization's Search key, Name, and Description. These can be the 
same if there is no reason to distinguish between them for future reporting.
3.	 Enter your Organization, and flag it at Summary level if that is applicable.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
4.	 Move the Organizations around with your mouse to indicate the correct 
parent-child relationship in the tree. You can have multiple reporting 
summary levels under each other, and are not limited in the depth of 
this tree.
5.	 Validate the Organization, in order to create the appropriate costing records 
for the organization.
Setting up your warehouses and locators
Warehouses are used for the inventory management of stock items. Warehouses are 
a central control point for:
• 
Material Receipt from a Vendor, and Customer Shipment transactions
• 
Cost accounting for products is at warehouse level
• 
Replenishment of products in the system is at warehouse level

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 34 ]
You may have multiple warehouses per organization, and for each warehouse you 
may have multiple locators:
Set up and verify your account element tree
Before performing any document processing, make sure that you check your account 
element tree (hierarchy) structures, and ensure that these are properly defined. 
Although Compiere allows the element tree to be changed, it saves a lot of time 
down the line if it is correct from the start, so it is advised to do this up-front.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
This is done through the Account Element > Element Value window/tab:
The Account Elements tree is defined through the imported account parent, and 
within Compiere is manually changed or moved appropriately to its parent. Some 
important notes on the set-up of account elements are:
• 
Document Controlled: This means that General Journal entries (non 
document transactions) will not be able to be posted to this account.
• 
Bank Account: This flag indicates whether this account relates to a Bank 
account. A bank account must be selected for such accounts.
• 
Summary level: If the account element is a summary level account used for 
reporting purposes, then you cannot post to it.
• 
Post Actual / Budget / Statistical: These types of posting can be made to this 
account through Journal entries.

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 36 ]
As part of the initial set-up process you must set up a Bank 
account through the Bank window in Compiere. This is done 
through the Bank Window.
Setting up and verify your accounting schema 
rules
The accounting schema defines the rules set-up for default accounting principles. 
Most importantly, an accounting schema must be set up for each reporting currency, 
which is referred as the Accounted Currency. Should more than one reporting 
currency be applicable—for instance in multiple countries—then multiple accounting 
schemas must be set up. GAAP Accounting principles indicate that only one 
reporting currency is generally required per country, so then only one accounting 
schema is required. Managing multiple accounting schemas is a tricky process and 
not advisable unless you have such legal requirements.
Where there are multiple currencies, the accounting currency will be the currency 
defined in your Accounting Schema for transacting purposes (see below). Source 
currencies may vary, and all source currencies are converted through currency 
rates to the Accounted Currency. Currency rates are set up through the 
Currency Rate window.
Accounting Schema overview
The Accounting Schema defines the following:
• 
Accounting GAAP: Which Accounting GAAP in in place and the specific 
rules applicable to it. Contact your implementation partner for such custom 
requirements.
• 
Commitment type: With regards to commitment accounting—this would 
indicate the accounting for sales and purchase order commitments as 
accrued Revenue or Expenses. An implementation of this will require further 
customization from standard.
• 
Costing method: Various costing methods are available, including 
Standard Costing, Average PO, Average Invoice, Last Invoice, FIFO, LIFO, 
and Last PO price. Standard Costing and Average Invoice are the most 
commonly-used. Other options will require detailed customization.
• 
Costing level: Indicates at what level the costing method will be used, 
including Organization (thus Warehouse), Batch or Lot, or Tenant level 
(highest level).

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
• 
Currency: The accounting currency for this accounting schema.
• 
Automatic period control: This automatically opens a Period Control 
window period in the system for document processing, say 30 days prior and 
30 days after the current system date. 
• 
Tax correction: This defines the tax accounting correction level for write-off 
and discount entries during payment allocation. 
Account schema elements (Information Dimensions) tab
Accounting schema elements are derived from the transactional document. Where a 
particular transactional document has accounting consequences, the data needs to be 
populated based on the following available information dimensions:
• 
Organization
• 
Natural Account
• 
Product
• 
Business Partner
• 
Marketing Campaign
• 
Sales Region
• 
Project
www.allitebooks.com

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 38 ]
• 
Activity
• 
Location From / To
• 
Budget
• 
Sub Account
• 
User custom fields (2)
In its most basic form, an account element's debits and credits must balance at the 
Organizational level. Add or change additional elements in this window as required:
General Ledger tab
The General Ledger defaults lists the suspense and balancing account setups. Posting 
entries are automatically generated by the system for these types of transactions, i.e. 
a suspense balancing entry created to the default account where a contra account is 
not listed by the user. 
Defaults tab
These accounts are the tenant's default account elements used by the document 
transactions during processing, and when creating, for instance, business partners, 
products, warehouses, projects, and banks. As mentioned before, these accounts are 
populated during the import of the initial account elements template. 

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Changes that are made to the default accounts can be copied by the user through 
their affected related default accounts, as follows:
• 
Business Partner Groups are updated with the new default accounts
• 
Product Categories are updated with the new default accounts
• 
Bank account defaults are updated or overridden
• 
Cash journal defaults are updated or overridden
• 
In addition to the above, the default accounts for tax, projects, and works 
orders (manufacturing) is updated or overridden.
Account Combinations and aliases
Accounting Combinations are automatically generated account information about 
information dimension combinations, and by linking an alias to such combination, 
it can be used for faster entry during journal entries or accounting set-ups. In effect, 
you set up an alias that refers to a specific account combination for quick reference 
in the system.
Aliases for generated combinations can be manually created as follows, in the 
Account Combination window:

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 40 ]
An example of using an alias for the above combination in an account setup of a 
charge is as follows:
More detailed financial management aspects are covered in Chapter 6.
Understanding Unit of Measures (UOM) 
and conversions
While the system is initially populated with various unit of measures that are 
pre-defined it is quite critical to understand that unit of measures must be explicitly 
defined for your instance. Unit of measures can be grouped together to define a set 
of related UOMs, i.e. Each-6Pack-Box-Pallet. This is done through the UOM Group 
menu item.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
In the following example we are going to set up two additional unit of measures—
namely litres and gallons, in order to illustrate the conversion between the two, for a 
sample product we shall call Diesel. In order to do this:
• 
Select the Unit of Measure window:
• 
Create a UOM with a UOM code and Symbol of 'L' and a Name of Litre.
• 
Create a UOM with a UOM code and Symbol of 'gal' and a Name of Gallon.
• 
Create a product in the Product window named Diesel, with a unit of 
measure of 'litre'. 
• 
Return to edit the UOM Liter. On the Conversion tab, create a conversion 
from Litre to Gallon with a multiply rate of 0.264172 for product Diesel. 
The system automatically calculates the divide rate correctly.
Multiply rates and divide rates indicate the calculation to be used for the conversion 
between units of measure. It is important that they be explicitly defined. For 
example, if conversions from litres to gallons and litres to kilolitres exists, gallons 
to kilolitres will not be calculated by the system and must be defined in its own right.
During processing of this product in Sales, Purchasing, and Materials transactions 
you will then be able to select either of the unit of measures set up, and any quantity 
entered will be converted accordingly.

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 42 ]
For example, Litre selected for transaction (assuming a list price of 100 for a liter 
of diesel):
If the UOM is then changed to Gallon on the transaction, then the following values 
are used:
You will thus be able to transact in either of these two UOMs for this product, 
and Compiere will automatically convert the quantity and price to the applicable 
UOM selected.
Document sequences
Particular Document Types in Compiere have specific Document Sequences, 
which are created during initial tenant setup. You may wish to change or create 
new (advised) document sequences prior to any system documents being processed, 
in order to control these sequences for audit purposes. This is done as follows:
1.	 Select the Document Sequence window.
2.	 Find and select the applicable Document Sequence that you wish to change. 
For example, let's select the AR Invoice document type.
3.	 Select and change the document sequence by editing the Prefix field, and add 
the words INV to the document sequence number.
4.	 From version 3.6 of Compiere, a handy Gapless flag is provided which, if 
selected, allows for internal IDs to be in numerical sequence in all instances. 
If this field is not selected, then IDs may have sequence gaps.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Creating a user
During the initial phases of a Compiere installation, you will need to create user 
access roles and the user detail. Users may not necessarily have a User Role assigned 
to them. Such users are referred to as Contacts. If this field users have roles assigned 
to them they will be able to log in to the system and perform tasks that are allowed, 
as per their Role access level.
Users are created through the User menu item, which opens to the 
following window:

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 44 ]
The basic steps in creating a user are as follows:
1.	 Assign the user a login name. This must be unique.
2.	 Link to a Business Partner. Where users are employees of the company, it 
is suggested that you create a Business Partner with the same name, but 
defined as an Employee.
3.	 Assign the user a password.
4.	 Enter more informational details regarding the user, such as email address, 
phone, fax, and any other detail that may be required.
5.	 Assign a role to the user:
Set up roles
Setting up roles requires some planning in the system, as you would want to avoid 
too many inconsistent roles to manage. It is recommended that these closely match 
the organization's job description to a functional level. In normal circumstances, 
similar users with similar job functions will have access to the same roles in the 
system. Within role access management, you can define the following (see Role 
window below):
• 
Org Access tab: Roles may be used to manage the role's organizational 
access (Role window), or a user can be individually assigned in terms of 
their organizational access (User Window).
• 
User Assignment tab: You may define which Users have access to the Role.

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
• 
Window access: You may define, per window, what read and write access 
this role defines.
• 
Process access: Processes are items like reports or specific processes such as 
creating orders or invoices. This is done at the transactional level.
• 
Form access: There exist certain custom windows that are referred to as 
Forms in the system, because they are more complex. An example of this 
may be the payment allocation or the workflow activity form.
• 
Workflow access: You may define which users have access to 
which workflows.
• 
Task access: You may define which users have access to pre-defined tasks.
• 
Business View Layer (BVL) access: You may define the specific Business 
Views that users may have access to (Compiere Professional version 3 
and above).
• 
Dashboards and parameters access: You may define the specific 
management dashboards that users may have access to (Compiere Enterprise 
version 3.5 and above).
Creating a role
To create a role in the system you will have to perform the following:
1.	 Log into the system using the Organization's Admin role, as this role has 
the access rights to manage roles. In our example, this would be Newco 
Company AdminRole:

The Initial Compiere Setup
[ 46 ]
2.	 Select the Role window
3.	 Create an example Role called Purchase Order clerk, as follows:
4.	 Within the Role window, you can select the appropriate access level to 
windows, processes, Forms, Workflow, Tasks, and Business views:

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
The access levels of shared Business Partners, Products, and Users are 
set up by using the (*) Organization, and with the appropriate role 
access defined as such. Warehouses must belong to an Organization, 
and may not be shared in this manner.
We will be covering more advanced aspects of roles in Chapter 7.
Summary
Creating the Compiere Tenant is just the starting point, as this requires many other 
set-up steps that must be clarified before transaction processing can start. Such 
aspects include language packs, account charges, taxation, Business Partner Groups, 
and Product Categories.
During the initial installation process of Compiere you will have created a default 
database. This database contains the Compiere demo Tenant, data namely the Garden 
World Demo Company. We will be using this Tenant's data, and extending it for 
illustration purposes during subsequent chapters. 
In this chapter you have learned:
• 
Compiere terminology and setup
• 
How to set up an initial tenant in the system, load the Organization Tree, 
and define Warehouses
• 
How to load and set up account elements and the accounting schema
• 
How to change unit of measures and document sequences
• 
How to set up a basic user and role
In the next chapter, we will illustrate Customer Relationship Management through 
the document transactions of the Sales Cycle.


Customers and the Sales 
Process
Capturing your transactional relationships about and with Customers is a requirement 
for any successful sales organization. Managing your customer and sales process 
entails master data management, order fulfillment, invoicing, and linking to inventory 
shipment processes.
In this chapter we will illustrate the following:
• 
Defining Business Partners, credit management, and leads
• 
Overview of Sales Order to Invoice processing
• 
Dealing with different types of orders and their transactional implications
• 
How to generate Sales Invoices
• 
Open Orders, Invoice Inquiries, and Reporting on Sales
• 
Returns Management, and how commission calculations are facilitated
• 
Give an overview of the accounting consequences of Sales processing
The processes mentioned in this chapter are applicable to all versions of Compiere.
The Sales Overview
In order to make sales you require information about the entity that you are doing 
business with, and you need to ensure that your processes reflect an efficient and 
effective way of transacting with your customer.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 50 ]
A scenario within Compiere would be where customers capture their details sales 
transaction through the Compiere web store. This would be illustrated as follows:
In the above scenario, the customer would capture their own details through the self 
service web store, and create their own orders.
The most typical scenario would be where the Compiere user captures details about 
Leads, Business Partners, and starts transacting, as illustrated:

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
The Sales Cycle requires the following set-up flow:
• 
Business partners, Sales representatives, and optionally the Sales Region, 
Commission run, Marketing channel, and campaigns. Leads may also be 
captured and converted to Business Partners.
• 
Sales Order, Shipment, and Invoicing document types.
• 
In a new tenant setup with many new customers, Business Partners, and 
legacy Open Orders not yet fulfilled would be imported through import 
layouts. This process will not be covered in this book.
Defining your business partners
Business partners are your Customers, Vendors, and Employees (or any combination 
of the three). Similar Business Partners are grouped into Business Partner Groups. 
Business partners may have one or more locations, contacts, and users attached to 
them. Business partners may also have special relationships in the form of proxy and 
linked business partners.
Proxy business partners
This refers to proxy relationship scenarios where, for example, a store receives the 
goods and HQ gets invoiced and pays, or where the store receives the goods and is 
invoiced and HQ pays. This applies to both customers and vendors (material receipt) 
transactional scenarios.
Linked organization business partners
This is a special type of business partner that is explicitly linked to organizations 
within Compiere in order to facilitate counter document processing. Counter 
document processing involves inter-organization transactions generated by the 
system automatically between linked business partners. For example, a store 
(linked to a Store Organization) raises a purchase order on the head office 
(also a linked HQ Organization) and the head office automatically generates 
a sales order counter document to the store.
Business partners are maintained through the business partner window in Compiere.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 52 ]
Setting up a business partner requires the following information to be entered:
1.	 The Business Partner Group: This defines the Business Partner Group 
Names, accounting, and default parameters, including price lists, discount 
schemas, and return policies, as follows:
2.	 Payment terms: Payment terms indicate the expected cash flow timing for 
a Business Partner document. The following screenshot shows the definition 
of a 2%10 Days net 30 payment term:

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
3.	 Invoice schedule: This determines the timing schedule for summary 
invoices. For instance, invoices are generated weekly for the delivery 
shipments for the week. This is not required if not used.
4.	 Dunning (Statement letters): Defines the set-up of dunning runs 
(Statement letters) to customers for collection purposes.
5.	 Business Partner information: Set up Business Partner information through 
the Business Partner window, which can be your customers, vendors, or 
employees (or a combination of the three). Link locations and contacts to 
your Business Partners here, as well:

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 54 ]
A Business Partner is identified as a customer through the Customer tab:
A Business Partner is identified as a vendor through the Vendor tab:

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
A Business Partner is identified as an employee through the Employee tab. Set up 
Sales Representatives by selecting indicating the Sales Rep field as follows:
A Business Partner may have multiple address locations as follows:
• 
Pay-from: Indicating the address from where a customer pays, and to which 
dunning statements should be sent.
• 
Invoice address: The address that is used for invoicing.
• 
Ship to address: The address for shipping documents.
• 
Remit to address: The payment remittance address.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 56 ]
A Business Partner must always have at least one active location.
Credit management
Credit management relates to managing your credit exposure with your customer 
through the sales cycle, including orders, invoicing, and shipment limit exposure. 
Credit limits are set up through the Business Partner > Customer> Credit 
Limit field:
Credit limits set to zero (0) value will indicate unlimited credit. The 
set in code style field indicates the balance of open invoices (balance of 
invoices not yet allocated to receipts).
Credit management is activated through the Business Partner > Credit Status 
field:

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
The Credit Status field parameters indicate the following:
• 
Credit Hold: Automatically set by the system when the credit balance is 
larger than the credit limit. No customer orders or shipments will be allowed.
• 
Credit OK: Credit Management is active and credit is OK.
• 
Credit Stop: This is a manual setting and no invoicing will be allowed.
• 
Credit Watch: Credit Management is active and the credit balance used is 
less than xx percent of credit limit allowable. The credit watch percent is set 
in the Business Partner Group > Credit Watch field.
• 
No Credit Check: No Credit Management is in place. All orders, shipments, 
and invoices are allowed.
Entering leads and converting to business 
partners
The system allows for the entering of Sales Leads. Once a Sales Lead has been 
qualified, it can be converted into opportunities, contacts, and business partners 
(customers).
1.	 Enter Lead information through the Lead Window:

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 58 ]
2.	 In the Lead window, create the Contact, Business Partner, Location, and 
convert to an Opportunity:
3.	 After the generation of this additional tracking information, the Compiere 
window tabs are displayed as follows, from which further data relevant to 
this lead can be tracked:

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Sales order to invoice processing
When following general best practices, Sales Order processing entails Quotations, 
Sales Orders, and Invoicing, which links to the inventory process of the shipment of 
goods to the customer. The menu options for sales processing are accessed through 
the Order Management menu item in Compiere:
The Sales Order window is the originating Control Document in the sales process, 
from which other documents flow. An overview of the process is as follows:

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 60 ]
You can create a quote, copy or convert it to a Sales Order, and then generate the 
Shipment or Invoice individually or simultaneously. This all depends on the target 
document types selected during the processing. The standard document types that 
are created by the system are shown below:
Document
Document Type
Narrative
Proposal
Quotation
Non-Binding Offer
Binding Offer
Inventory is not reserved.
Inventory is reserved.
Sales Order
Standard Order
Warehouse Order
On Credit Order
POS Order
Prepayment
Web Order
Batch-driven order.
Shipment is auto-generated.
Shipment and Invoice are auto-generated.
Shipment and Invoice and Receipt are 
auto-generated.
With a Prepayment, the shipment is only 
affected after Receipt is captured for the order.
An order captured from the self-service 
webstore.
Invoice Customer
AR Invoice
AR Credit Note
Sales Invoice is generated based on the Invoice 
rule.
Sales Credit Notes are usually manually 
generated unless the Returns Management 
process is followed.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Document types are defined through the Document Type window. Here are the 
settings for the Standard Order document type:
Capturing the target Sales Order document types from the Sales Order window:

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 62 ]
Sales order delivery rules
Compiere allows for multiple shipments per order, depending on the delivery rules. 
Sales orders may have the following delivery rules selected:
• 
Availability: This is the default setting, and shipments are only generated 
when there is inventory available. Goods are automatically put on back-order 
if this option is selected, and this may lead to multiple shipments.
• 
Complete Line/Order: Only deliver based on the fulfillment of lines or a 
complete order.
• 
After Receipt: Only deliver after receipt of payment.
• 
Force: Force shipment even if it means negative stock on hand.
• 
Manual: Shipments will be manually captured. Products must, however, 
be set to exclude Auto Delivery.
Generating shipments can be by manual selection or through a batch process. 
Shipments are generated by the warehouse or by Business Partners, and can 
be consolidated. 
Generating shipments to customers is described in more detail in Chapter 4.
Sales order invoicing rules
Compiere allows for multiple invoices per order, and for certain order document 
types, invoices can be generated via a batch run or manually. These invoices are 
generated based on invoicing rules that are defined per sales order, as follows:
• 
After Delivery: This is the default, and refers to the fact that invoices will 
only be generated on completion of the shipment, per order line. 
• 
After delivery of complete Order: This means that the invoice will only be 
generated if the order is completely shipped.
• 
Customer Schedule after Delivery: Based on the invoicing schedule and the 
timing of the batch run, shipments are rolled up to consolidated invoices 
up to that point in time.
• 
Immediate: Regardless of shipment status, the invoice will be generated. 
The only requirement in this scenario would be that the order has been 
completed.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Manually generating invoices from orders
Manually generating invoices from Sales Orders is done through the Generate 
Invoices (Manual) window:
Only orders of document type Standard or Warehouse can be generated 
in this manner.
Batch generation of invoices
Invoices can be generated in batch through the Generate Invoice menu process:

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 64 ]
Only orders of document type Standard or Warehouse can be 
generated via the batch invoicing process.
Document status and actions
Every document in Compiere has a Document Status. Document Actions refer to 
the document process to change the status of orders, shipments, and invoices 
(for instance to change the status from Draft to Completed). Except for system 
workflow status changes, document statuses are updated by the user. The general 
workflow status for an order is from Drafted to Prepare to Complete, and for an 
invoice would be from Drafted to Completed status. Once Completed, the document 
can be processed by the accounting engine, and the journal posting entry will 
be created.
Status
Note
Sales Order
Shipment
Invoice
Draft
This is the most 
common state. 
Be careful of this 
document type as 
it is not a system 
processing state.
Edit state
Edit state
Edit state
Completed
Follow-on processing 
is allowed
Reserves Stock
Updates Stock 
values
Updates posting
Void
Not a recommended 
action as it reverses 
and nullifies the 
document
Nullify
Nullify
Nullify
Close
"Ends" the document 
for processing
Close
Close
Close
Reverse
Creates an opposite 
entry of the document
Reversal 
document 
generated
Reversal
Reversal
Re-activate
Only Completed 
documents can be 
re-activated
Editable
Editable
Editable

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
A Drafted document status can be processed as follows:
A Completed document status can be changed as follows:
The document type's calendar, year, and period must be open and active 
in order for the document action to be performed.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 66 ]
Reporting on open orders
Because Compiere allows for the unfulfillment (back order) of orders, the concept 
of open orders refers to sales orders that are not yet manifested—in other words the 
product line quantity ordered is not equal to the shipped quantity, and this is not 
equal to the invoiced quantity.
Follow up on open orders as follows:
• 
Manually capture or generate the applicable shipment or invoice.
• 
Close the document: This sets the quantity ordered to the quantity shipped.
• 
Void the document: Sets the ordered quantity to 0 thereby nullifying 
the document.
The open order report is accessed through the Open Orders menu item:
The report is generated as follows, and from this report investigations can be made 
to follow up on items, in order to invoice, or deliver or replenish from suppliers:
Finding sales order documents
Finding current and historical documents in the system is easy. Compiere facilitates 
this through the following processes:

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Zoom on field names
This process involves right-clicking on a document link and then zooming into 
the document.
Cross Document Zoom Reference
Because the Sales Order is the control document in the Sales process, from the sales 
order you can zoom across to your relevant document.
Order info view
Compiere provides an info view on the transactional documents of the system. These 
can be accessed from anywhere in the system and then viewed or zoomed into from 
the info view windows.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 68 ]
The displayed info view menu item is as shown in the following screenshot:
Order and invoicing reports
The Compiere system provides standard templates of order reports that can be used 
to find the relevant document. Standard reports in the system include:
• 
Open orders
• 
Order transactions
• 
Invoicing transactions
• 
Invoice detail
• 
Daily, weekly, monthly, and quarterly invoice summary reports

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
User list reporting with or without querying
List reporting in Compiere is a standard feature that allows the end user the 
flexibility to create and manage their own reports. This feature can be accessed from 
any header or line level in the document. Although possible, sub reporting and 
custom reporting can become quite a challenge. In the Professional and Enterprise 
Edition, this can easily be overcome with business views or custom reports based on 
third-party reporting. Print formats are set up through the Print Format window.
Return Material Authorization (RMA)
The Return Material Authorization (RMA) process facilitates the process of 
customer returns. Non-customer returns must be captured through physical 
inventory adjustment, which is covered in the next chapter. Compiere workflow 
in the RMA process can be illustrated as follows:

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 70 ]
RMA category
This allows the user to classify the reason for the return. It is not a required field for 
processing the return, but can be useful in analyzing reasons for returns.
Return policies
These set the rules that determine when returns will be accepted. Return policies 
refer to a time-based indicator during which it is allowed to return stock items. Such 
return policies can be set per product or per product category.
Customer RMA (Return Material Authorizations)
This refers to the actual items that the customer is returning. A customer RMA 
should be captured in reference to the original sales order or shipment on which 
it was sold. The system thus requires the RMA to be linked to the original sales 
document. RMA lines can also be linked to the sales order lines, either through 
manual selection or through the copy from process. It is essential that the customer 
RMA is returned to a locator for warehousing purposes. Inventory quantities are 
incremented once the document is completed.
Return credit memo
Return credit memos can also be generated in batch or manually (as per the Generate 
Invoice process described above). Depending on the Sales Order type (i.e. POS 
order or Credit Order) a Return Credit Memo will be automatically created upon 
completion of the RMA document.
Distribution runs
The system allows you to distribute products to your business partners based on a set 
minimum quantity or ratio of distribution. Distribution runs automatically create the 
Sales Orders associated with the distribution run. Orders will be created per business 
partner. Insufficient quantities to fulfill the distribution run rules will result in no 
orders being created (i.e where a minimum quantity is required for a run).
An example of this would be where available product is to be distributed to three 
business partners based on a 50:30:20 ratio. Following a distribution run process, 
the system would then generate three sales orders based on the product to those 
business partners.

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
Sales processing accounting consequences
Sales processing transactions have flexible yet intricate accounting consequences. 
The order of set up is thus quite important in order to avoid future re-posting, 
or misallocations in the accounts. The major accounting elements affecting sales 
accounting would be Receivables, Revenue, Cost of Sales, and Inventory. The 
main rule in terms of Compiere accounting is that individual set-ups override 
grouping set-ups, and where there are no grouping set-ups, Compiere refers to 
the default accounts.
Default accounts
The Accounting Schema determines the default accounts used. With the 
lack of appropriate detail set-up, the default accounts are referenced from the 
accounting schema.
Receivables accounts
Receivables accounts are defaulted from their Business Partner Group Accounting 
set-up. Business partner groups determine the default receivables accounting, and 
individual customer accounting can be setup through individual business partner's 
customer accounting setup. Receivable value is calculated at document level.
Revenue accounting
Revenue accounts are defaulted from their Product Category accounting set-up. 
Product Revenue accounts may also be individually edited. The revenue values 
are determined based on the invoice line values, and the posting is at line level.
Cost of sales accounting
Product Categories determine the cost of sales accounting in the same manner as 
Revenue accounting. The value of such a cost of sale is determined by the product's 
valuation rule and time of shipment. For example, an average costing, standard 
costing, or last invoice price valuation rule may apply. Especially in a newly-installed 
environment, the valuation method must be closely monitored as transactional 
history may be lacking in the product cost queue.
In circumstances where there is a  large volume of product lines, it is highly 
recommended that you manage revenue and cost of sale categories according to 
product categories and not by using individual product accounting rules. Care must 
be taken when product categories are changed, as changing the set-ups only affects 
new transactional processing and not historical transactions, unless explicitly re-posted 
in the system. Product Management is described in more detail in Chapter 4.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 72 ]
Tax accounting
Based on the tax set-up, a tax due to you (debit) or owed by you (credit) is accounted 
for at the document level, but can be calculated based on individual line totals 
or document totals. A separate tab in the invoice window shows the tax that has 
been calculated.
Summary of the accounts posting
The summary accounting for sales processing documents are as follows
Debit
Credit
Accounts Receivable Invoice
Receivable Asset (posted at 
the document level)
Revenue (line level) based 
on the Business Partner or 
Business Partner Group
Tax Due (document level)
Accounts Receivable Credit 
Memo
Revenue (line level)
Tax Due (document level)
Receivable Asset 
(Document level)
Click on the Posted button per document indicating the detail of the accounts posting.
Here is a list of accounting entries for this sales invoice:
Also refer to Chapter 6. Compiere Financial Management for more details on 
accounting processes.

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
Sales regions
Business partners may be allocated to Sales Regions. If entered, sales region 
dimensions are intricately associated with document processing.
Sales regions are determined through the business partner locations tab. Sales Regions 
can be set up in a reporting hierarchy and linked to Sales representatives. Sales 
representatives are required information fields for orders, shipments, and invoices.
Sales Regions are set up through the Sales Region window
Commissions
Document commission calculations are set up in the system to determine the value of 
commissions to be paid, for instance license or royalties to be paid based on periodic 
timing. Multiple commissions can be determined for the same order or invoice, 
and can be determined per sales representative at the document level, product, or 
product category level, or business partner grouping level. As mentioned, the basis 
of the calculation can be order, invoice, or receipt.

Customers and the Sales Process
[ 74 ]
• 
Commission window: Set up commission calculations.
• 
Commission run window: The commission run process determines 
the payables values and documents to be generated from the commission 
calculations.
• 
Commission run detail report: This is a report for the commission detail.
Summary
Sales processing is a complex process, and because Compiere is flexible in its 
processing there are many options available to the users, and it requires careful 
planning in the set-up and training of users of the system.
What we have learned in this chapter:
• 
How to define Business Partners, credit management, and how to enter leads
• 
Described the sales order to invoice process
• 
The meaning of different types of orders and their transactional implications
• 
How to generate sales invoices
• 
Reporting on Open Order, Invoice Inquiries, and Sales
• 
Described Returns Management and how commission calculations 
are facilitated
• 
Described the Accounting consequences of sales processing
In the next chapter, we will illustrate Product and Material management concepts.

Product and Material 
Management
Products are an integral part of the ERP transactional process, and thus require a 
detailed explanation in the setup process, not only from the master data point of 
view but also for transactional processes. Material transactions are warehousing and 
physical inventory processes and controls.
We will therefore describe how Compiere handles Product and Materials 
Management. In this chapter we shall:
• 
Give you an overview of the concept of a product
• 
Show you how to set up price lists and discount schemas
• 
Give you an overview of materials management in Compiere, including 
warehousing, product quantities, and moving inventory
• 
Describe how to set up the replenishment of a product
• 
Give you an understanding of costing and accounting principles
• 
Give you an overview of the standard reports and business reporting 
views available
The product definition
The concept of a product in Compiere is that it is something that you buy or sell and 
has a price. It would include:
• 
Inventory items (items that you store and track)
• 
Non-stock items (still items, but you do not store or track them)
• 
Services
• 
Resources
• 
Expense types

Product and Material Management
[ 76 ]
In addition to a product, Compiere allows for charges (account aliases), as well as 
customer assets on transactional lines.
When to use a charge and not a product: It's logical to use charges where a mere 
account entry is required and the many descriptions that a product requires are not 
required for the transaction. An example would be marketing or an admin expense.
When to use a customer asset and not a product: Customer assets are extended 
instances of a Compiere product. An example would be where a Desktop PC is 
sold or purchased and becomes an asset or equipment type that need to be tracked. 
Customer assets are therefore used for asset or equipment related business process 
information and are not covered as such in this book.
Products allow for many descriptive attributes in its master setup.
Describing a product
Product information and features can be extended and described in Compiere in the 
following manner:
• 
Basic Product Information: Basic product information includes search 
key values, Descriptions, Unit of Measure, UPC, EAN. Critical for basic 
product information are Product categories, which group products into 
related products.
• 
Product BOM (Bill of Material): More advanced products would 
include BOM kits that are made up of other products (referred to as BOM 
components).
• 
Substitute / Related Products: This refers to products that may be related to 
the product being searched for.
• 
Product Replenishment: This describes the rules of how a product would 
be replenished. This would, for instance, include minimum and maximum 
quantities to hold in stock.
• 
Product Purchasing information: This refers to the set-up around how a 
product is purchased—for instance the default vendor and the vendor's 
product code.
• 
Product Locator: Where products are currently located in the warehouse.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
• 
Product Business Partner: This describes additional information used when 
products are purchased.
• 
Product Price: A product may have multiple price lists attached to it, and 
depending on the Business Partner or transactional document this can be 
defaulted as required.
• 
Product Accounting: This describes which standard account elements are 
to be used for a transactional document. Usually, similar products have the 
same accounting rules and as such the accounting for Product Categories 
would be setup and maintained, rather than individual product categories.
• 
Product Unit of Measure conversions: Where applicable, products may have 
conversions applicable to them—for instance converting a 6-pack quantity 
sold to an, each, quantity during purchasing.
• 
Product Attributes: Attribute sets allow you to further extend the product 
information into, for example, instance sets such as lots and serial numbers.  
Non-instance sets are also catered for, such as colour or size sets that can be 
used for searching the products.
Setting up a Product
Prior to setting up a product, you should make sure that the following is set up:
• 
Warehouse and Locators: The system logic here is that a Product must be 
sold/delivered from somewhere within the organization. Make sure that you 
set up your warehouse and Locators first. Use virtual warehouse and locators 
where they are not physical.
• 
Units of Measure: Review the system standard units of measure and add 
your own units of measure if applicable.
• 
Product Categories: Define your groupings prior to setting up products since 
it will reduce data maintenance time.
• 
Tax Categories: Pre-define the applicable tax categories if they are 
product specific.
• 
Price lists: In order to use a product it must have a price which is set up 
through Price Lists (it includes sales and/or purchase price lists).
www.allitebooks.com

Product and Material Management
[ 78 ]
The above set-up is performed through the Product Setup menu items, which are 
grouped as follows in the main menu:
You start entering a product through the Product window:
The additional Product Descriptions (listed above) are added through the following 
tabs in the Product window:

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
Price Lists
In order for products to be used in the sales or purchasing cycle, they must have 
prices. A product can have the following three line prices set up:
• 
List Price: The list price before discounts of a product.
• 
Standard Price: The standard price of a product.
• 
Limit Price: The lowest price at which a product can be sold or purchased. 
Usually used by management as a pricing control limit for sales reps.
The product price information (in the context of the price list version) is accessed 
through the Product | Price window:
Pricing logic flow
Price lists determine the price to be used in the context of the transaction 
(sales / purchase) and the chosen Business Partner. The basic logic for 
determining the price is as follows:
• 
A price list has a version, and the latest version of a price list is used during 
sales or purchasing (or both).
• 
If a Business Partner (customer or vendor) is assigned a Price list, then this 
Price List is used to determine the price for the transaction.
• 
If a Business Partner is not assigned a price list, then the Business Partner 
Group's defined price lists is used.

Product and Material Management
[ 80 ]
• 
If the Business Partner Groups' price list is not defined, then the default 
sales or purchase price list is used (this is indicated throught the isDefault 
checkbox in the price list window header).
• 
If a product is not assigned the relevant price list, an error is given and the 
user cannot continue.
• 
The system also considers that a price list is Tenant and Organization specific.
In terms of price discounting, a product can be assigned to a Discount Schema. In 
such a case, the following discount schema options are available:
• 
Price lists: This is the normal type of discount calculation, and is based on the 
price list-that is—a discount off the list price based on a distributor or reseller 
price list.
• 
Flat Percentage: This refers to a flat percentage discount arrangement.
• 
Quantity Discount Breaks: This discount schema refers to quantity breaks, 
where items purchased at different quantity levels attract more discount-for 
example,—100/10% or 1000/20%.
Setting Up a Price List and version
As mentioned, a price list can have one or more versions, which are time based. This 
is set up as follows:
1.	 Enter a price list through the Price List window. Here, we enter a sales price 
list as follows:

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
A price list may be set up to be inclusive of tax. In this case 
the accounts posting on the document is adjusted to reflect the 
inclusive tax accounting.  Enforcing price limits ensures that the 
end-user cannot enter a price lower that the price lists, limit price 
for the product.
2.	 Create one or many price list versions through the Price List | Version tab, 
with the following options:
°°
Dicscount Schema: This specifies the discount rules to be 
applied when creating or updating the price list.
°°
Base Price List: This indicates a price list upon which to base 
the discount schema rules.
°°
Valid from date: The price list will be used for new order or 
invoice transactions from this date. Transactions prior to this 
date will not be affected.
A price list is either imported, manually entered, or updated 
based on another price list, through the discount schema.

Product and Material Management
[ 82 ]
Illustrating a price list increase
To illustrate the process of a applying a price list increase, we will create a new price 
list version with a 10 percent increase on the existing version.
1.	 One enters the discount schema detail through the Discount Schema 
window. We will select a PriceList discount type, as the calculation will be 
based on the price list values:
2.	 The next step is to create the Price List line calculation paramaters for the 
discount schema:

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
3.	 The pricing discount line for the increase is entered as follows:
a.	 Select the Price Base: This defines which price base is affected 
(List, / Standard / Limit).
b.	 Enter the List price Discount:  A discount is normally entered as a 
positive, but because we are performing a price increase we enter a 
negative amount.
c.	 List Price Rounding option: Compiere allows different rounding 
methods, and as illustrated we selected the Rounding to the nearest 
Ten (10,20,30) option, for pricing policy reasons.
4.	 Finally, we run the increase for the Price List version illustrated as follows:

Product and Material Management
[ 84 ]
Discount Breaks
Discount breaks are trade discounts applied through different quantity or value 
breaks/levels. Setting up a Discount Schema for discounts break based on a quantity 
sliding scale is entered through the Discount Schema window, as follows:
In a sliding scale discount break, Compiere applies the first discount break that 
meets the discount criteria, therefore for the example above, an order of 1000 or 
above would have a 40% discount, 500-999 would have 20% discount, an order of 
between 10 to 499 would have 4% discount, and 0-9 would have 0% discount.
Pricing Decimal Precisions
Compiere allows for different pricing decimal precisions, which may be a 
requirement in the enterprise during different transaction types:
• 
Unit of measure: You can define pricing decimal precisions for accounting 
and cost calculation separately
• 
Currency: You can define pricing decimal precisions for accounting and cost 
calculation separately
• 
 Price List: You can define the price precision

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
Managing Products as Services
Service items are not treated as stock and are usually not purchased. Service items 
are managed as non-stocked items and have different accounting entry implications, 
by default. Service items are set up through the Product window as follows:
Material Management
Material management within Compiere focuses on the physical side of storing and 
tracking items that are defined as being physically stocked. Central to this is the 
warehouse and its locators, into which and from where products are received, moved 
or shipped. In this section we will deal with Compiere standard functionality. An 
advanced Warehouse Management module with additional features is also available.
Warehouse Overview
Warehouses belong to Organizations, and it is recommended that you have a 
one-to-one relationship if user security role access is an issue, because roles are 
organization specific.  Warehouses can have multiple locators and one default 
locator is selected.

Product and Material Management
[ 86 ]
Warehouses and locators are set up through the Warehouse & Locators window:
On the Locator tab, the warehouse locators are defined as follows:
Adjusting Product Quantities
Product quantities are adjusted through the Physical Inventory and Internal Use 
inventory windows. Physical Inventory adjustments are made during inventory 
counts or ad hoc manual inventory quantity adjustments, while Internal Use 
Inventory adjustments are made when items are expensed directly to a specific 
charge account:

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
Physical Inventory Entry
Updating material item quantities is done through a physical inventory transaction. 
The book (system) values are updated to the applicable quantities counted, and the 
adjustment is passed to the product. An example of this would be for a product 
with a book quantity of 10 and a physical quantity of 20, where an adjustment of a 
positive quantity of 10 will be made.  We shall demonstrate the process of quantity 
counting to perform a physical adjustment.
1.	 Preparing a quantity count is done through the Physical Inventory window:
2.	 Create a count list of a Product Category:

Product and Material Management
[ 88 ]
Note that you can also set the Inventory Count to Zero, which would indicate a blind 
count. The correct count quantities need to be updated for each product and location, 
and the Physical Inventory transaction completed to correct the stock quantities:
Internal Use Inventory
Internal use inventory transactions are used for where products are written off or 
expensed, and not necessarily sold or shipped to customers.
The transaction window Internal Use Inventory is completed for this purpose:

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
In the example illustrated below, the Product Quantity is charged to Marketing 
Expenses, based on its default Unit of Measure on the Internal Use Inventory line, 
as follows:
Moving Inventory
There are two reasons for moving inventory:
• 
External: Material Shipments to Customers and Material Receipts 
from Vendors.
• 
Internal: Internal Warehouse movements within the warehouse.
Movements between warehouses are also regarded as external 
and explicit. Material shipment and receipt documents need 
to be created as such (also refer to the Compiere concept or 
Counter Documents (not covered in this book) where, in such 
cases, explicit inter-organization counter transactions can be 
automatically created, if this has been set up).
Material Shipments to Customers
Shipments are processed with reference to the Sales Order control document. We 
have previously explained that shipments occur based on the shipping rules defined 
in the Sales Order. Manual shipments are processed when the Standard Order sales 
order document type is used.

Product and Material Management
[ 90 ]
Processing a manual shipment (Generate Shipment from Order) is done through the 
Generate Shipments (manual) window:
A shipment with lines linked to the Sales Order lines will be created for this 
customer. This shipment can then be printed as a delivery note:

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
The default printed shipment document will look like the example shown in the 
following screenshot:
Material Receipts from Vendors
Material Receipt transactions adjust product quantities by entering inventory into 
the system. Materials must be received into a warehouse, and during this process 
they may not need a price. Ultimately, product Material Receipts need to be matched 
against Purchase Orders and Accounts Payable(AP) Invoices.  Costing entries are not 
adjusted until the Material Receipts are matched to accounts payable invoices.
Material Receipt transactions are processed through the Material Receipt window 
as follows:

Product and Material Management
[ 92 ]
The Create lines from button provides the ability to create receipt lines from another 
document and create an automatic link to the originating document:
Material Receipt Lines created are based on this information:
Once the Material Receipt line is completed, the product items are adjusted to the 
warehouse and locator as specified for each line.
Internal Inventory Move
Inventory move transactions facilitate the internal movement of products between 
locators in a warehouse. These are entered through the Inventory Move window:

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
The Inventory Move Lines tab indicates the product line information:
Here, a product is moved from a Default Store Locator to an FP-1-1-1-2 locator. On 
completion of this document, the material transaction is created to move the items 
from one locator to the other.

Product and Material Management
[ 94 ]
Product Replenishment
Product replenishment is done through pre-defined criteria, during the 
replenishment run. The pre-defined criteria in Compiere are the following:
• 
Reorder below minimum level: Product items will be re-ordered to 
their maximum level if their stock on hand goes below the minimum 
quantity level.
• 
Maintain Maximum level: Product items are re-ordered to their maximum 
level on each replenishment run.
• 
Manual: Manually set the quantity to order.
The product replenishment criteria are defined through the Product window > 
Replenishment tab:
Once the product's replenishment criteria have been defined, a replenishment run 
creates a replenishment report, and purchase orders to subsequently be raised.
The Stock Replenishment report menu item is selected as follows, in order to run 
the report and create the inventory move, purchase order, or requisition transaction:

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
The stock replenishment report would look something like the example shown in the 
following screenshot:
The user is by no means bound to the proposed replenishment quantity, and should 
the user choose to create a Replenishment document (Inventory Move, Purchase 
Order, or Requisition) the quantities can be changed because the document would 
be initially created in a drafted state.

Product and Material Management
[ 96 ]
Product Costing and Accounting
Products can be valued through various costing methods, including Average Invoice, 
Last PO, Last Invoice, Standard Costing, FiFo, LiFO, and Average PO. A Product's 
costing is only updated based on the matching process between Purchase Orders 
and/or Material Receipt and/or Accounts Payable Invoices, and depending on 
which costing method is required it will be calculated accordingly. A Purchase Order 
is not required for the Average Invoice, Last Invoice, Fifo, and Lifo costing methods.
A typical example of the Average Invoice costing method to be applied would mean 
that an AP Invoice has been matched to a material receipt for that product item. 
The Cost of Goods Sold accounting post entry value (in the Shipment (Customer) 
transaction) is thus dependent upon this product's cost having been created before 
the product has been sold.
Different costing methods may be used for different product categories. This is set up 
through the Product Category | Accounting window:
It is important to note that the Compiere system will give Posting Errors where a 
product is being used on a document but no costs have been defined (as a result of 
proper matching not being achieved, for instance).
You can display a product's costs through the Product Costs window:

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
Typical Accounting of product warehouse 
transactions
The normal accounting of a product using its current cost per costing method 
applicable would be as follows:
Debit
Credit
Material Receipt into 
warehouse
Product Asset
Not Invoiced Liability
Accounts Payable 
Invoice
Not Invoiced Liability
Accounts Payable Liability
Material Shipment to 
customer
Cost of Goods Sold Expense
Product Asset
Internal use Inventory
Charge Expense
Product Asset
Physical Inventory 
(inventory difference  – 
qty reduced)
Inventory Shrinkage
Product Asset
Inventory Move
Product Asset
Product Asset

Product and Material Management
[ 98 ]
The matched accounting entries are covered as a part of the purchasing process, in 
the next chapter.
Basic Product Reports Available
Compiere provides various reports as standard in the system. Some highlighted 
reports would include:
• 
Product list: A list of the products in the system.
• 
Inventory Valuation report: This is a report showing the valuation of 
product items per warehouse, based on a price list and valuation date.
• 
Product Storage Detail: By warehouse and locator, where products are 
stored, and their relevant quantities.
• 
Product movement detail: What products were moved, from where and 
to where, in a warehouse. You can select these movements based on a 
specific movement type.
• 
Material Receipt Details: Details of a material receipt.
• 
Receipts not matched to invoices: List of receipts not matched to invoices.
• 
Shipment Details: Details of a shipment to a customer.
Product Info Window
The Product Info window is a handy quick reference to get an overview of a 
product's pricing and quantity availability per warehouse.
The Product Info window is accessed through the View | Product Info menu item:

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
You can search based on search key, name, UPC/EAN, SKU and warehouse. A 
product must have a price list defined in order to be viewed in this window. 
Summary
We covered the following in this chapter:
• 
The basic characteristics of a product, and how to set up a product item
• 
How to set up and use price lists and discount schemas
• 
Material management principles, including how to create a warehouse, 
locators, and how to facilitate:
°°
Product Quantity management including physical inventory 
and internal 
use inventory
°°
Material Receipts into the warehouse
°°
Material Shipments out of the warehouse
°°
Inventory moves within the warehouse
• 
Description of the basic principle of product replenishment.
• 
Overview of costing methods and accounting principles
• 
Overview of basic reports available and the info view
In the next chapter, we will illustrate the procurement process.


Procurement Management
Procurement management is the process of managing the acquisition of goods, 
expense items, and services from an organization's suppliers (in Compiere, these 
suppliers are referred to as Vendors).
We will review how Compiere handles Procurement Management in this chapter, 
and shall:
• 
Give you an overview of the business flows in the Procurement 
transaction process
• 
Illustrate how Requisitions are captured and converted to Purchase Orders
• 
Show you how Purchase Orders are matched to Accounts Payable invoices
• 
Create Material Receipts from Purchase Orders or Invoices
• 
Match documents in the Procurement cycle
• 
Give you an overview of the accounting principles
• 
Explain in detail the standard reports available in the system

Procurement Management
[ 102 ]
The Procurement flow
In following best practice design, Compiere facilitates the Procurement flow as 
shown follows:
The specific entry point into the Procurement cycle is very flexible and documents 
do not initially have to link to each other. In effect, you do not require a Purchase 
Order to have an Accounts Payable (AP) Invoice or a Material Receipt. How the 
procurement cycle transactional document flow is linked and implemented for 
an organization is entirely flexible. In this process however, the Purchase Order is 
the control document and it is a best practice that as a minimum a Purchase Order 
always be created to start the procurement cycle, because this is the typical legal 
instruction required by a Vendor in order to commence a procurement transaction.
The transaction windows for this process in Compiere are found under the 
Procurement menu item:

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
Processing Products setup as items (stocked or non-stocked) and setting up Products 
as service items is exactly the same. The difference is that the quantity on hand 
cannot be tracked for such items.
Requisition documents
A Requisition is an organization's internal document that is used by staff or 
departments for procurement's pre-approval prior to the issue of a Purchase Order 
to a Vendor. Based on a parameter such as the actual required date, a Purchase 
Order is then generated. Separate Purchase Orders are created per the line Product's 
Purchasing Business Partners and where applicable these required Purchase Orders 
can be selected to be consolidated into one document.
A Requisition is entered through the menu Procurement > Requisition > 
Requisition window. The basic information required would be the employee, 
a description, date required, warehouse, and applicable price list:

Procurement Management
[ 104 ]
In order to generate a Purchase Order from the captured Requisition, use the 
Procurement > Requisition > Generate PO from Requisition process:
Once it has run, the Purchase Order(s) generated are listed:
Try setting up a Requisition approval workflow.
A good practice would be to set up a workflow for the approval of 
Requisitions prior to the Purchase Orders being generated. We cover 
the workflow process in Chapter 7, Advanced Aspects.
The Purchase Order
Purchase Orders are the commercial control document within the Procurement cycle 
and are generally accepted as indicating the organization's contractual obligation 
with a Vendor for the supply of goods or services, and the subsequent payment for 
these goods or services. It is, however, not a Compiere system-required document 
within the Procurement cycle.

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
The system provides various sources from which Purchase Orders can be 
automatically generated from:
• 
Replenishment Run: After an inventory replenishment run, Purchase Orders 
can be created.
• 
From Sales Orders: The system provides the ability to create Purchase 
Orders from Sales Orders.
• 
From Requisitions: As described above, Purchase Orders can be generated 
from requisitions.
• 
From Projects: Purchase Orders can be created from Projects.
• 
From Works Orders: Purchase Orders can be created from Works Orders.
Capturing the Purchase Order
Firstly, Purchase Order header information is entered into the Purchase Order 
window. The information that would be required are the Organization, Date 
Ordered, Vendor, Vendor location, Warehouse, Price List, and Representative:

Procurement Management
[ 106 ]
Secondly, purchase line level information is entered in the PO Lines tab. This would 
include the Product or Charge, Quantity required, and Price:
On the Purchase Order line, the line level Order Quantity controls are facilitated 
through the following:
• 
Quantity / Quantity Ordered: This is the Quantity Entered and Ordered for 
the line
• 
Quantity Reserved: Once an order has been created a product's quantity is 
reserved for purchase
• 
Quantity Delivered: A material receipt updates the quantity delivered, and 
Quantity Reserved is reduced
• 
Quantity Invoiced: The quantity invoiced increases as invoices are created
The requirement for the above is that documents should be matched on a line-by-line 
basis. We will review the Matching Purchase order to Invoice and Material Receipt 
process later in this chapter.

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
Closing a Purchase Order:
Once a Purchase Order has been closed, the Quantity Reserved is 
reset to zero. The purchase order cannot be used again.
Material Receipt
A Material Receipt is the system transaction document that updates quantities in 
inventory, and pertains to a warehouse location. It may or may not link to a Purchase 
Order, depending on the organization's business rules. Material receipts link to 
Purchase Orders and can be created from a Purchase Order without having to 
re-enter all of the lines. Once entered, the related Accounts Payable (AP) Invoice 
can be system-generated (created and linked) without having to re-enter all of 
the lines again. This not only speeds up the capturing process, but also ensures 
consistency in the matching at document line level.
Capturing the Material Receipt
First, we create a Material Receipt header through the Material Receipt window. 
In this example, we capture the Vendor, Movement Date, Warehouse, and then we 
create lines from a created Purchase Order:

Procurement Management
[ 108 ]
After clicking on the Create Lines From button in the Material Receipt window, the 
user must select the Purchase Order and the applicable lines that must be created:
A Material Receipt line must always be linked to a warehouse locator as follows:
An additional available process for Material Receipts is the Confirmation 
transaction. The Confirmation step provides an approval check to confirm 
the received quantities prior to making the quantities finally available in 
inventory. By enabling the Ship/Receipt confirmation in the document 
type window, this confirmation step will be a required check.

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
Accounts Payable (AP) invoice
AP invoices increase the purchasing accounting liability, and add the value 
(cost price) to the transaction. AP invoices can be created from Purchase Orders 
or Material Receipts. Also, if the AP invoice and supplier's delivery note are the 
same document, the Material Receipt can be generated from the AP invoice without 
having to re-capture any data.
AP invoices are linked to purchase price lists, and therefore pricing can be 
pre-determined by having a product item's price lists managed within the system.
Capturing the AP invoice
An AP invoice (or AP Credit Memo) is a document type created in the Invoice 
(Vendor) window. Capturing an AP invoice requires a Vendor Invoice number, 
date, Vendor, Vendor Location, Price List, and Representative:

Procurement Management
[ 110 ]
Once the basic information has been entered, you may capture the lines manually 
or, if the document is linked to a Purchase Order or Material Receipt, automatically 
create the invoice lines, as follows:
1.	 Create Lines from: Create the invoice document lines from Purchase Orders 
or Material Receipts:
2.	 Generate Receipt from Invoice: If the receipt and the invoice are the same, 
the user can generate the receipt from the invoice automatically.
The Material Receipt is generated, but to a drafted state. You will 
have to confirm the details of the Material Receipt, and complete 
the documents, manually.

Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
Invoices for expense items (charges)
Invoices for expenses are entered at the line-level, with reference to charges and not 
products. Charges will post directly to the accounting tables as debit expenses on 
an AP invoice document type. On the Invoice Line tab, select the Charge field and 
not the product, as follows:
Matching the Purchase Order, Receipt, 
and Invoice
Matching the Purchase Order, Material Receipt, and AP Invoice is a required process 
where product items are stocked and accurate information is required in terms of 
Quantities Ordered versus Delivered versus Invoiced, as well as for Product Costing 
Calculations and accounting. Because the Purchase Order is the control document, 
this is where the control of the respective statuses is displayed.
It is highly recommended that documents are matched automatically during 
processing by using the create from and generate process buttons in the Material 
Receipt and AP Invoice header documents.

Procurement Management
[ 112 ]
The matching tabs are displayed by selecting the Advanced Tabs 
checkbox in the Preferences window:
On the bottom of the invoice (vendor) window, the matching tabs, from where 
applicable documents can be followed through, are displayed:
After a document has been matched, a matching transaction is created. This can be 
found through the Matched Invoices window:

Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
A transaction for matched Purchase Orders is created. This can be accessed through 
the Matched Purchase Orders window:
Manually matching lines
Compiere provides a window that can be used to manually match the PO, Material 
Receipt, and AP Invoice. This transaction is accessed through the Matching-PO-
Receipt-Invoice window, in which you can select where to match from and to 
(i.e. invoice to receipt), and select the appropriate lines to match, as follows:

Procurement Management
[ 114 ]
If the quantities match, then clicking on the Process button will generate the 
appropriate Matched Invoices transaction as described above.
Not following matching disciplines (i.e. generate from or manual) in 
the system can lead to problematic and large variance and clearance 
accounts. Also, for product cost element calculations to work, 
matching must be applied in most circumstances.
Vendor payments
Compiere provides for the processing of payments for Vendor invoices either in 
batch or via a manual selection process.
Batch processing
Selecting invoices using batch-based criteria is done through the Payment Selection 
window. Enter a name and bank account for the batch, and then create payment 
selection lines as follows:

Chapter 5
[ 115 ]
1.	 Invoices for Payment Selection Lines are created in batch by clicking on the 
Create From button selection criteria:
2.	 If the user clicks on the Prepare Payment button, the Compiere system 
summarizes the invoices for payment into Payments to be generated.  
This is seen through the Prepared Payments tab. Herewith two payments 
are thus created:

Procurement Management
[ 116 ]
Finally, to print the payments and remittance advice, select the payment batch 
through the Payment Print/Export menu item and window:
The Payment print would produce the following payment document (which can be 
formatted for a check layout or payment list):

Chapter 5
[ 117 ]
Manual selection of invoices for payment
The manual selection of invoices for payment is handled through the Payment 
Selection (Manual) menu item and window. Select your Bank Account and 
Business Partner, and the system will display the invoices due for payment by 
clicking on the Search button:
In the above window, the user selects the invoices due for payment, and then clicks 
the Process button, from where the process for printing the payments and remittance 
advices as described above is started. 
In both batch selection and manual processing of the invoice, generated payments 
are automatically allocated for open item management purposes. This process is 
covered in more detail in Chapter 6, Compiere Financial Management.

Procurement Management
[ 118 ]
Returns to vendors
Returns to vendors have a basic process flow as follows, and processing is very 
similar to the processing of documents already mentioned above. The overview 
of the process is as follows:
• 
RMA Category: A basic description of the Return Material Authorization 
(RMA) categories, i.e. Damaged goods. 
• 
Return Policy: Defines the number in days within which returns are allowed, 
per product or per product category.
• 
Vendor RMA: This is required in an internal document to record the 
details of the authorization for a return to a vendor. It can be used for 
record keeping or as part of an internal or external approval workflow. 
In its simplest form it is the commercial opposite of a Purchase Order.
• 
Return to Vendor: This is the transactional document that records the 
quantities to return to the vendor from the warehouse. This is the opposite of 
a Material Receipt.
• 
Accounts Payable (AP) Credit Memo: Once a Return to Vendor document 
has been completed, a credit note can be generated, thus adding a value to 
the transaction. This is the opposite of an Accounts Payable (AP) Invoice.

Chapter 5
[ 119 ]
Compiere accounting for Procurement
Procurement documents have intricate accounting consequences. The order of 
set-up is thus quite important in order to avoid incorrect posting or misallocations 
in the accounting ledgers. The major accounting elements affecting Procurement 
accounting are Payables, Inventory, Variances, and Charges. The main rule 
in terms of Compiere accounting is that individual set-ups override Product 
Category or Business Partner Grouping set-ups, and where there are no grouping  
set-ups it refers to the default accounts:
• 
Default accounts: The Accounting Schema determines the default accounts 
used. When generating new categories or performing accounting set-up, the 
default accounts are referenced from the accounting schema.
• 
Payables accounts: Payables accounts are initially set up through the 
Business Partner Groups. Business Partner Groups determine the default 
payables accounting, and individual vendor accounting can be set up 
through individual business partner accounting.
• 
Inventory and Variance accounting: Product categories post to categorized 
inventory accounts, and products individually post per their individual 
product accounting set-up. Matching variance values are determined 
according to the invoice line values, and the posting is at line level.
• 
Charge accounting: Expense invoices' charges on AP invoices post to the 
relevant account indicated for such a charge.
Summary accounting of the accounting consequences
An accounts payable invoice posts at the invoice line level. When a Product is 
entered on the line, the following accounting will apply:
Debit / Credit 
Detail
DR Product Inventory Clearing 
(line level)
This is a debit entry that is made to the product 
inventory account for each invoice price line.
DR Tax Credit (document level)
Tax credit (receivable) at the document level
CR Payable (document level)
This is a Business Partner booking creating a credit to 
the Payables (Vendor) liability account per line.

Procurement Management
[ 120 ]
When an Accounts Payable Invoice is captured with a Charge selected on the line, 
the following accounting will apply:
Debit / Credit 
Detail
DR Charge Account (line level)
Per the charge accounting, a debit is made to the 
charge expense account.
DR Tax Credit (document level)
Tax credit (receivable) at the document level
CR Payable (document level)
Per the Business Partner accounting, this creates a 
credit to the Payables(Vendor) liability account.
Generally, a Material Receipt will have the following accounts postings:
Debit / Credit 
Detail
DR Product Asset 
Per line, a debit entry is made to the Product Asset 
account at the product's current cost
CR Not Invoiced Receipts
Per the Business Partner Group accounting, this 
creates a credit to the Not Invoiced Receipts account. 
The  Not invoiced Receipts accounts is cleared through 
the invoice matching entry.
The Matched Invoice accounts posting generates the following :
Debit / Credit 
Detail
DR Not Invoiced Receipts
Per the Business Partner Group accounting, this 
creates a debit to the Not Invoiced Receipts account 
at the product's current cost.
CR Product Inventory Clearing
Per line, a credit entry is made to the product 
inventory account at the product's invoice price.
DR / CR Invoice Price Variance
Based on the Standard Costing rule, the difference 
between an invoice price and a product's current 
cost is passed as a debit or credit variance entry 
based on the product accounting setup.
DR—if the invoice price is more than the 
current cost.
CR—if the invoice price is less than the current cost.

Chapter 5
[ 121 ]
Should the costing rule of Average PO or Last PO price be required, the Matched 
Purchase Order produces the following accounting entry:
Debit / Credit 
Detail
DR / CR  Purchase Price Variance
Based on the difference between the Purchase 
Order value and the product's current cost, a 
debit or credit variance entry is passed, based on 
the product accounting setup.
DR—if the Purchase Order price is more than the 
current cost.
CR—if the Purchase Order price is less than the 
current cost.
DR / CR Purchase Price Variance 
Offset
This is a contra variance account
In order to view the document's accounting consequences, click on the posted button 
for a document indicating the details of the accounts posting.
An example of the of an Accounts Payable (AP) invoice is as follows:
Procurement reports
Predefined reports are available in the system as standard within the procurement 
flow. These are as follows:
• 
Open Requisitions report: A report of all open requisitions in the system.
• 
Open Orders report: A report of all open Purchase Orders in the system. The 
Sales and Purchasing reports are generated from the same menu item. Refer 
to Chapter 3, Customers and Sales Process.
• 
Purchase Orders summary: A list of all purchase orders for a period in time.

Procurement Management
[ 122 ]
• 
Purchase Order detail: Shows line-level detail of what products or services 
were purchased, and from where.
• 
Material Receipts detail: Shows line-level detail of what products or services 
were received.
• 
Material Receipts not matched: This reports details of the material receipts 
that are not matched to invoices.
• 
Purchases by vendor detail: Report showing which items were purchased, 
per vendor.
• 
Purchases by invoice date: Showing the purchases by invoice date selection.
• 
Purchases by Product Category summary: Report selection by 
Product Category.
• 
Purchases by Product Category and vendor: Report selection by Category 
and Vendor.
• 
Compiere Enterprise Edition: Available Compiere executive dashboards are 
of the following types:
°°
Top 5 expenditures
°°
Top 5 vendors
°°
Purchases by region
°°
Purchases by period
°°
Purchases by period and representative
Summary
In its simplest form, procurement is the processing of a delivery note (material receipt) 
and Accounts Payable (AP) Invoice, where the process becomes more complex. It is 
thus critical for the enterprise to map out the steps in their procurement process and 
to match to the appropriate Compiere transactional documents.
We have covered the following in this chapter:
• 
The process flow of the Procurement cycle within the Compiere system
• 
Described the main transaction documents within the procurement cycle, 
namely Requisition, Purchase Order, Material Receipt, and Accounts 
Payable Invoices
• 
Given an overview of the returns to vendor process
• 
Describe the accounting entries of the various procurement documents
• 
Listed the various reports in the procurement process
In the next chapter we will illustrate the applicable processes involved in Financial 
Management and Accounting.

Compiere Financial 
Management
In a world measured by money, all business processes materialize as an event in 
the accounting department. As a minimum, a budget is allocated to processes, or 
the financial impact of a process needs to be recorded in an Information System 
(ERP). The true power of Compiere is reflected in the intricate, flexible, and 
integrated information layers of its accounting engine. In the previous chapters we 
have described the sales cycle, inventory and purchasing cycle, and the accounting 
consequences of the relevant documents. In this chapter we explain the accounting 
and financial aspects of the system, and will do the following:
• 
Give you an overview of the Compiere accounting terminology
• 
Explain how accounting entries are derived
• 
Show you the accounting set-up required
• 
Explain open item management and the reconciliation of Accounts 
Receivable and Accounts Payable ledgers
• 
Explain cash management reconciliation
• 
Show you how to follow up on unposted documents
• 
Give you an overview of, and set up the financial reporting
In this chapter, we assume that you have a basic knowledge of accounting, and 
a working knowledge of Compiere List Reporting functionality.

Compiere Financial Management
[ 124 ]
Accounting terminology in Compiere
In essence, Compiere adheres to the rule that accounting entries are at the lowest 
level, and an applicable document will have a derived accounting entry (fact). In 
order for you to understand the accounting process, there are Compiere accounting 
terms that must be clarified:
• 
Accounting schema: The set-up of the accounting schema defines the default 
rules and accounts of the Compiere tenant instance.
• 
Account elements: This refers to the natural account (debit or credit) used 
for the accounting balance entry (fact) posting. The posting to such elements 
can be actual, budget, or statistical. A chart of accounts is the listing of the 
account elements of the enterprise, which includes the account elements that 
make up the assets, liability, revenue, and expense accounts.
• 
Accounting fact: This refers to the accounting posting entry.
• 
Account combination: The account combination is a shortened reference 
(alias) to the accounting information dimension. For instance, telephone 
may refer to an account combination which would look like HQ-11100-
Telephone-_-_-_.
• 
Trail balance: A trail balance report indicates the debit or credit balances of 
the list of accounts.
• 
Financial report: A financial report is run by a user and includes rows and 
columns that make up, for instance, Profit/Loss statement and balance sheet 
(financial position) reports.
• 
Re-posting accounts: This describes the action of re-posting a transaction 
document based on a new rule or default account that changed.
• 
Unposted document: These are documents that are entered and may be in 
a drafted or completed state, but for which the accounting engine has not 
generated the accounting entry. This could be due to a closed period, or 
because the accounting processor is not yet run.
• 
Document date versus Accounting date: Compiere documents usually allow 
for a document date and a separate accounting date field to be used for the 
accounting entry.
• 
Calendar year and period: While a transaction will fall into a period, the 
calendar period is used for control and reporting purposes. There is no end 
of period or roll-over process as such in Compiere.

Chapter 6
[ 125 ]
Understanding the accounting entry
In essence, the accounting entry principle can be illustrated as follows:
The figure above describes that the final accounting entry is created from the 
accounting schema rules and the default accounts, through the particular document 
type, which determines the  accounting principle. Thus, an Accounts Receivable 
invoice will have a particular accounting entry that is different from, say, a Shipment 
or Accounts Payable document. The processes around these documents and their 
accounting entries have been described, when looking at the previous chapters in their 
respective business cycles.
The accounting processing engine of Compiere is separate from the document 
processing engine. Accounting entries are posted in the background, as a 
separate process. 
Because of the decoupled accounting engine, Compiere allows 
for multiple currencies, multiple calendars, multiple charts of 
account (for instance accounting versus tax reporting), multiple 
GAAP (accrual and cost), and multiple costing methods, in the 
same instance (Tenant based). It also allows for the re-posting of 
documents based on new rules or default accounts. 
Because accounting set-ups are an integral requirement of the initial system set-up, 
we have described the set-up of the Accounting Schema and Account Elements in 
detail, in Chapter 2.

Compiere Financial Management
[ 126 ]
Accounting setup flow
The recommended sequence of set-up of Compiere accounting can be illustrated 
as follows:
Calendar year and period
Depending on the requirements of the enterprise, the calendar year and period setup 
requires the definition of the calendar year (for instance 2010, 2011, or 2012) as well 
as the periods for that year (the financial reporting months). 
The default set-up is illustrated as follows, through the Calendar Year and Period 
menu item:

Chapter 6
[ 127 ]
Once a year has been defined the Create Periods process will create the standard 
calendar periods from January to December. The screenshot above shows the 2010 
year after the periods have been created. The user has to re-state calendar periods to 
the financial year and not be calendar-based.
Further to this is the important aspect of Period Document Control. Based on the 
system-defined document base types, a period can be opened or closed to allow or 
prevent a particular document type to be posted to that period. A typical example 
would be that Accounts Receivable (AR) invoices be closed for a past period but that 
General Ledger Journals (GL Journals) be allowed. It is critical within the enterprise 
that these rules are defined, and that monthly accounts department rules are set up to 
open and close these applicable periods.

Compiere Financial Management
[ 128 ]
Select a Period to see its control documents:
As from version 3 of Compiere, you can define different periods 
per organization.

Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
Account elements
As described in Chapter 2, Account elements are set up through the Account 
Elements menu item. In addition to defining the account, it's important to note that 
the tree level set-up of account elements define the core financial reporting structure:
In the above example, the expenses reporting hierarchy is made up as follows:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 130 ]
Accounting schema and information 
dimensions
As described in Chapter 2, the Accounting Schema determines the information 
dimensions (referred to as Accounting Schema Elements) of the Compiere accounting 
entries. The information is derived from the transaction document. For instance, if 
a Compiere Activity has a mandatory field, the posting will fail if this field is not 
populated, or if it has an optional field, it will be used in the accounting entry if 
populated in the transaction document.
In the screenshot below, we add additional Accounting Schema Element to the 
Accounting Schema:
The system will now allow documents to be captured and post to this information 
dimension in the accounting entry posting:
This additional information dimensional flexibility adds tremendous power to the 
reporting analysis within the enterprise.

Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
General Ledger (GL) document types
GL document base types determine the accounting entry principle to be used when 
posting the document. An Accounts Receivable (AR) accounting entry will be different 
from a physical inventory adjustment. The set-up is therefore that a Document Type 
(AR Invoice) is linked to an AR Invoice GL document type. This will thus determine 
the required accounting principles to be used per document transaction.
In the above example, the AR invoice document type and document base type are 
equivalent, but it is the base type that determines the actual accounting posting 
entry rule.
Rules in processing accounting documents
There are certain rules within Compiere that must be adhered to in order for 
accounting entries to be processed:
• 
The timing of account postings (batch processing mode) are managed 
through a schedule set-up, and linked to the Accounting Processor window. 
You may bypass batch posting by the accounting processor by setting up  
the tenant to post documents immediately. This is done through the 
Tenant window. 
• 
Transactions for accounting must be balanced. Where this fails, the balance 
is posted to a suspense balancing account set up through the accounting 
schema. If the suspense balancing is not allowed, the posting will be rejected 
with an error.

Compiere Financial Management
[ 132 ]
• 
Account elements must be active. If an account is not active, the booking is 
posted to a suspense account or is rejected, depending on the set-up.
• 
The currency conversion rate for the accounted currency (accounting schema) 
must be set up. If this fails, then the accounting entry will not be posted and 
is rejected by the system.
• 
The accounting periods must be open for the document type. If this fails, the 
document accounting is rejected, but can be re-submitted for posting. It is 
therefore critical that unposted documents be followed up on a regular basis. 
This is done through the Unposted Documents menu item.
• 
In a multi-organization implementation, the Accounting Schema > General 
Ledger's Due To and Due From accounts in the accounting schema are used 
to ensure accounting balance between organizations.
To view the accounting entry of a document, click on the Posted button on the 
document header, as follows:
A very handy feature in Compiere is the ability to re-post a 
document. This can be used where the underlying document values 
or account structures have changed and re-posting is necessary. 

Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
Accounting info view
The accounting info view is a handy view on the detail entries that make up an 
account balance.
To view the accounting info view, go to the View>Account Info menu item:
Enter your selection criteria, in order to view the accounting entries:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 134 ]
Open item management
Compiere is, by default, an open item management system. This means that customer 
invoices and receipts (Sales Cycle) and purchasing invoices and payments (Payment 
Cycle) need to be allocated in order for the open balance on a document to be correctly 
reflected. Account statements are thus shown for the document on an open amount 
basis and not on a balance brought forward basis. Thus, in terms of accuracy of open 
amounts on documents, this requires discipline in the accounts department and also 
from customers and vendor reconciliations in order to reflect the correct statement 
of account at any given time. If this is not practical then an automated oldest invoice 
allocation process can be followed, but unless this is normal business practice in your 
industry or region, it is suggested that it is legally agreed with your customer.
Capturing a receipt from a customer or payment to a vendor is done through the 
Payment window:
Allocating receipts or payments to invoices is done through the Payment 
Allocation window:

Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
Allocating payments (customer receipts or vendor payments) to vendors creates an 
explicit allocation document. You can view this document in the View Allocation 
menu item, or link through from the payment or invoice window's Allocations tab.
Payment selection—Paying vendors
Payment selection is the process of preparing the final payment remittances to 
suppliers. When the user selects the invoices to be paid, the system automatically:
• 
Allocates the payments to supplier invoices
• 
Prepares a remittance report showing which invoices are being paid
• 
Prepares an electronic file for bank upload (will need customization 
depending on bank requirements)
• 
Prepares a sequential check print where checks are used for payment

Compiere Financial Management
[ 136 ]
In Chapter 5 we saw a detailed review of the Payment to vendor process. The 
payment selection for individual vendor invoices is done through the Payment 
Selection (manual) menu item illustrated here:
Accounts Receivable and Payable Ledger 
Reconciliation
Because Compiere is document driven, the Accounts Receivable and Accounts 
Payable sub-ledgers are reconciled through the underlying document reports that 
make up those balances. In the open item environment, the open items balance to 
Accounts Receivable, and unallocated receipts and payments are separately reflected 
on the ledger. Prior to commencing any reconciliation process, make sure that you 
check all of the unposted documents, because an unposted document appearing on 
the report would not have an underlying accounting entry. This is done through the 
Unposted Documents menu item.
Accounts Receivable Ledger Account (This is the balance of open items receivable 
per customer documents):
1.	 Set up an Open Item report showing open item amounts (either group by 
business partner or by invoice listing). 
2.	 Select the Is Sales Transaction checkbox when running the report. Select the 
maximum and minimum periods that reflect all documents. 
3.	 The total of this report must balance to the Accounts Receivable ledger.

Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
Accounts Payable Ledger Account (This is the balance of open items payable per 
vendor document): 
1.	 Set up an Open Item report showing open item amounts (either per business 
partner or per invoice).
2.	 Do not select the Is Sales Transaction checkbox when running the report. 
Select the maximum and minimum periods that reflect all documents. 
3.	 The total of this report must balance to the Accounts Payable ledger account.
Unallocated receipts or payments (these are the receipts or payments not yet 
allocated to invoices):
1.	 Set up an unallocated payments report to split Unallocated Receipts and 
Payments (in the report select group by Document Type).
2.	 Make sure that you show the open payment amount total on the report.
3.	 Unallocated receipts will balance to the Unallocated Receipts Ledger 
Account, and unallocated payments will balance to the Payment Selection 
Ledger account.
In a multi-currency environment, make sure that you set up different 
ledger accounts for Accounts Receivable, Payable, and the unallocated 
receipts and payment selection accounts per currency. Balance these 
accounts by selecting a different currency each time for the above reports.
Cash management and banking 
reconciliation
To ensure that the bank general ledger account reflects the actual bank balance, 
Compiere specifies a specific document (bank statement) for each bank account. 
Bank reconciliation is the process of matching the actual bank statement to the 
system customer receipts and vendor payment entries. This must not be confused 
with allocations, which has a different purpose as described above.
There are two methods of capturing the actual bank statement:
1.	 Import the bank statement through the system import loader 
(recommended).
www.allitebooks.com

Compiere Financial Management
[ 138 ]
2.	 Recreate the bank statement for entries within the system (create lines from, 
or manual capturing of, bank statement lines).
A bank statement line matched to a payment is as follows:

Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
Cash Journals are similar to bank statements except that they reflect daily cash 
entries. These can be used for integrated daily point of sale takings, or for manual 
petty cash entries:
In order to deposit the daily takings into the bank a cash journal line needs to be 
captured, indicating the transfer from the cash ledger to the bank ledger:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 140 ]
The Bank in transit account reconciliation
The bank in transit account is the intermediatory control account for transactions 
between the actual bank account entries and the system entries. In short, this is the 
traditional bank reconciliation balance. Balances that are unreconciled are therefore 
items processed by the bank that are not in the system, or items in the system that 
have not been processed by the bank yet.
Run the Unreconciled Payment reports to reflect a list of such items:
The bank in transit account links intricately with the unreconciled payment or receipt 
items, as the accounting entries are as follows:
Bank statement accounting (AR Receipts):
Debit
Credit
Bank ledger account
DR (Receipts)
Bank in Transit Account
CR (Receipt in transit)
Payment accounting (AR Receipts):
Debit
Credit
Bank in Transit Account
DR (Receipts not yet 
reconciled)
Unallocated Receipts
CR (Receipt not yet 
allocated to invoices)
Bank statement accounting (AP Payments):
Debit
Credit
Bank in Transit Account 
DR (Payments in transit)
    Bank ledger account
CR (Payment)

Chapter 6
[ 141 ]
Payment accounting (AP Payments):
Debit
Credit
Payment selection 
DR (Payments not yet 
allocated to invoices)
Bank in transit account
CR (Payments not yet 
reconciled)
As can be seen from the above tables, care must be taken to ensure that bank 
statements are reconciled (matched) on a regular basis to the system entries, 
and that receipts and payments are allocated to the respective invoices. 
Posting General Ledger journals (GL journals)
Because Compiere is document driven, the posting of manual GL journals is 
recommended only where no other document process is available. Posting to the 
main ledger accounts, such as Accounts Receivable, Accounts Payable, and Inventory 
Assets, is not recommended, as reporting on such accounts will be out of sync with 
the underlying documents making up those balances. GL journals are recommended 
as part of the financial year end process or raising accruals or specific non-system 
document-driven transactions, such as salaries, interest, allocations, corrections, 
and depreciation.
GL journals are posted in batch or individually. Posting GL journals in batch is done 
through the GL Journal Batch window:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 142 ]
Journals make up batches that can be entered for different dates or currencies, 
depending on what is needed:
Adjusting the information layer reporting through Account Combinations on the 
entry lines is as follows:
Unposted documents
As part of the accounting department's monthly discipline, unposted documents 
should be resolved to posted status. The Unposted Documents window view will 
show documents that have not yet been processed by the accounting engine:

Chapter 6
[ 143 ]
1.	 Zoom on these documents to view the source document and perform a 
further document action (complete/void), or to see why the document was 
not posted automatically. 
2.	 Repost the document and ensure that the posting status has changed 
to Posted.
3.	 When finalized, the Calendar Periods may be closed to ensure that no 
documents are posted into closed or inactive periods.
To access the view of these documents, go to the Unposted Documents menu item:
Click on the Record Zoom button to view the corresponding record that has not yet 
been posted:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 144 ]
Where commitment accounting is not implemented, documents 
related to the C_Order table may be ignored. This includes 
Quotes, Sales Orders, and Purchase Orders, to name a few.
Financial reporting
Financial reporting creates the management or control reports for the business. 
These include Profit/Loss Statements, Balance Sheets, CashFlow statements, or just 
custom monthly reports that are required.
A Financial Report is made up of the following columns and row sets:
Col 0
Col -3
Col -2
Col -1
Col -4
Row 10
Row 40
Row 30
Row 20
Monthly Period Balances
Annual Year Balances
Prior Year period or Year
Per Hierarchy
Summary 
Detail
Organization
Account
Business Partner
Product
Activity
Sales Campaign
Project
In the Report Column Set, a report column can be defined as:
• 
Period balance: A balance for the calendar period
• 
Year balance: A balance for the calendar year to date
• 
Debit balance: The total of the debit balances
• 
Credit balance: The total of the credit balances
• 
Calculation: A calculation (addition or, subtraction of columns)
• 
Relative to report selection period (0 = indicating current period, [-1 ], [-2 
], [-3], etc. indicating a period before selected period, and [+1] [+2] [+3] etc. 
indicating a period after selected period)

Chapter 6
[ 145 ]
A Row Set is usually more complex than a Column Set and determines the lines and 
the source of the report. A line can be:
• 
A line segment type that refers to the Accounting Schema elements 
(meaning the Account or, in more complex circumstances, the information 
dimension such as Organization, Business Partner, Product, Campaign, etc )
• 
Calculation related to report variables
Financial reporting hierarchy
The reporting hierarchy in Compiere is determined in the following manner:
Organizational hierarchy: In a multi-organizational structure, the reporting 
entity can be at either the summary or detail level, and the relationship is through 
parent-child trees. Thus, in Financial Reporting, a report either can be at the detailed 
organization level or can be rolled up into the summary level:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 146 ]
Account element hierarchy: In the same way as can be done for an organization tree, 
the account elements roll up into summary levels. Therefore, care must be taken to 
set up the accounting elements hierarchy for ease of use:
Running the financial report
In running financial reports, the following process must be followed:
1.	 Make sure to run the process to Update Accounting Balances. This will 
update the reporting tables from the latest accounting entries:

Chapter 6
[ 147 ]
2.	 The Financial Report is run through the Financial Report menu item:
3.	 Define the report criteria for the financial report:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 148 ]
4.	 Review the report:
Other available financial reports
Compiere includes additional reports that can be used as a starting point for 
enterprise specific requirements:
• 
Transaction Detail by Account: A list of accounting entries by account
• 
Accounting entries by date: Selected accounting entries by date
• 
Profit and Loss Statement: A quick report on the financial performance.
• 
Trial Balance: A trial balance listing
• 
Balance Sheet: A balance sheet on the position of the enterprise
• 
Dashboards: Financial dashboard (Revenue versus Expenses), by period and 
by Product Category.

Chapter 6
[ 149 ]
• 
An example of the default Balance Sheet Business View report is as follows:
• 
An example of the default Profit and Loss Statement Business View report is 
as follows:

Compiere Financial Management
[ 150 ]
To edit the layouts of the above business view reports you need to go to the External 
Report menu item, in the System Administrator role. Here you will find the business 
view report's defined and the report source is loaded in the attachment to the report 
line, from where it can be edited:
Shown below is the example of the Financial Dashboard:

Chapter 6
[ 151 ]
Business view reports and Dashboards are Compiere 
Professional and Enterprise edition features.
Summary
With a separated accounting engine, through the JBoss application server, Compiere 
offers multiple layers of information, scalability, and capacity for business process 
customization, while still keeping within the normal rules of an accounting framework. 
What must be remembered is that the basic accounting rules per document type apply, 
and operationally it requires the normal disciplines in managing the accuracy and 
validity of the accounting entries. 
We have touched on various system aspects of financial management. In this 
chapter we:
• 
Learnt an understanding of the Compiere accounting terminology
• 
Explained how accounting entries are derived from documents
• 
Showed you the accounting setups required in the system
• 
Explained open item management and the reconciliation of Accounts 
Receivable and Accounts Payable ledgers
• 
Explained the cash and bank management reconciliations
• 
Showed you how to find and follow up on unposted documents
• 
Overview of the Financial Reporting capabilities
Make sure to revisit the particular accounting entries, and the context per business 
cycle, that we covered in detail in previous chapters. 
In the next chapter we will illustrate some avanced concepts in the system.


Advanced Aspects
In the preceding chapters we illustrated the transactional processes of Compiere, 
and in this chapter we will be dealing with more advanced aspects of Compiere, 
including the following areas:
• 
Overview of the Compiere Application Dictionary and its components
• 
Adding a custom field in Compiere
• 
Setting up a basic document process approval workflow in Compiere
The Compiere Application Dictionary 
(AD)
The Application Dictionary is what makes Compiere a truly unique and flexible 
business framework. Compiere was originally designed from the ground up on a 
model driven architecture (MDA), as defined by the Object Management Group 
(OMG—refer to www.omg.org). This means that the system design conforms to 
an open standard in its layered architecture between business, application, and 
platform logic. What MDA tries to achieve is to separate the business logic modeling, 
from technology modeling so as to ensure that both can evolve within their own 
domains, but still keeping within a framework of an open standard (and platform 
independent) that interconnects the two.
The benefit in the Compiere environment is that through modeling, design, and 
build the actual deployment time is greatly reduced. The AD also ensures a seamless 
upgrade of the platform while having little impact on the environment-specific 
business objects and processes.

Advanced Aspects
[ 154 ]
The Application Dictionary of Compiere is meta data driven,meaning that contextual 
data defines the experience. This also means that the end user presentation layer and 
thus the Graphical User Interface (GUI) platform have been defined in different 
technologies (i.e. Java Swing, HTML, and Ajax) and offers endless possibilities.
The Application Dictionaries can be illustrated as follows:
To access the Application Dictionary you need to log in as a System Administrator 
and refer to the following sub menu:
We will use the Java Swing (Compiere Standard Edition) 
user interface for illustration purposes in this section.

Chapter 7
[ 155 ]
The Application Dictionary consists of the following configuration.
Table and columns
This refers to the fundamental building blocks of the system, and links Compiere 
data to the underlying Table and Column structures in the database. Illustrated 
below is the Period table in the AD that links to the underlying table name of 
C_Period, which you will find in the database:

Advanced Aspects
[ 156 ]
If the underlying database already contains the required fields, then by pressing the 
Create Columns from DB button and having the correct DB Table Name, Compiere 
will create the columns from the database in the AD.
Within a table, a key column must be created for use as the table identifier:
Illustrated is the key column C_Period_ID. A column links to a System Element, 
as explained below, and is linked to the underlying table through the Synchronize 
Column button. In effect, synchronization creates or updates a column to the 
underlying database.
System elements
System elements are the common data elements and are used for central 
terminology references. These system elements link the underlying database 
columns to business-speak, for instance, in the following screenshot, C_Period_ID 
would be translated into the actual period:

Chapter 7
[ 157 ]
System elements are also used for setting up translations, as well as help comments 
on column fields.
Validation rules
Field validation rules that are defined in the context of a column field are 
dynamically verified based on the predefined rules or user context, at time of 
rendering the data.
For instance when a Business Partner field is displayed for selecting, the Business 
Partner account must be active and not be a Summary Account as follows:
Based on the example shown above, a dynamic validation will be set up for the 
C_BPartner_ID column field (the Business Partner table key identifier) on the Order 
table, as follows:

Advanced Aspects
[ 158 ]
Reference
A Reference refers to database column field types that are either Data Types (i.e. an 
Amount, Integer, Date, Time, image, hyperlink, etc.) or a List validation (i.e. user 
pre-defined dropdowns) or Table validation (i.e. drop-downs for table key columns).
An example of a Data Type column would be a period start date. The Column field 
StartDate in the Period table in the database is defined as reference Date:
An example of a list validation on a Period Control Action (the actions that you can 
perform on a period) set-up is as follows:
The list defined through a Search Key and a Name is shown below:
Search keys are saved in the database.
Table Validations are data-defined based on existing referenced key columns and 
SQL selection. An example of a table reference would be a Document type based on 
a table validation SQL query. Herewith a Document type (C_DocType) is defined, 
but it refers to the appropriate Tenant/client so as to ensure that only the document 
types for a Tenant are displayed:

Chapter 7
[ 159 ]
Windows, Tabs, and Fields
Compiere generates all of its windows in a standard dynamic way by reference to the 
defined AD. This AD window thus relates to setting up the Windows, and the Tabs 
(sub-linked windows) and Fields that are displayed on those Windows. 
Illustrated here is an example of the Calendar and Period window that defines the 
structure of the periods within Compiere:
Windows may be of the following Window Types:
• 
Maintain: Usually used in the context of master data, such as Business 
Partner or Products.
• 
Query Only: A window type that is used for displaying results in a grid, and 
is not editable.
• 
Transaction: A window type used for transaction processing , such as an 
order or an invoice.

Advanced Aspects
[ 160 ]
The Window Tabs refer to the sub-linked windows of the main window header, or 
the preceding tab. In the example below, the Calendar window is built by defining 
the Calendar, applicable Year, Period and Period control, and Non Business Day:
The window's Fields are populated from the Table and Columns associated with 
the window:
Forms
Forms are windows that are not automatically generated through the AD but are 
static and are usually for custom purposes, based on specific Java code classes.
Below is a Form that defines the File Import Loader process:

Chapter 7
[ 161 ]
Once a Form has been defined, it is linked to the Java classes through the Classname 
(Swing) and Java Classname for Web UI fields. These classes will contain the source 
code to build these custom Forms.
Info windows
These are windows that are used for quick searches and information views.
Here is the Info window for viewing invoices. It is defined through an SQL query on 
a table and then defining the columns within the Info Window:
Report Views
Where database views may exist within the underlying database, the AD requires the 
Database views to be defined in the system in order to be accessible. 
Here is an example of the Invoice database view for a week:

Advanced Aspects
[ 162 ]
To distinguish them from normal tables, Compiere uses the RV_ prefix convention to 
name a Report View within the underlying database.
Reports and processes
These are used to set up reports (link to a Report view) or a process that can link to 
a Java code class. Reports and processes may have parameters that define a selection 
process. Examples of a report would be an invoice enquiry, and an example of a 
process would be to generate invoices from orders.
Here is the actual Report that defines the Invoices per week report:
Reports may have access restrictions and selection parameters. If a report is also 
displayed as a Dashboard (Compiere Enterprise version 3.5 onwards) then an 
underlying dashboard widget needs to be defined.
An example of the Invoice Generate Process that links to the underlying Java class is 
as follows:

Chapter 7
[ 163 ]
In windows, Buttons may be linked to processes (i.e. C_Invoice Copy From which 
copies lines from other invoices on the Invoice windows) and Processes need not all 
be manually run as such. Processes can be defined as server processes, and can also 
be scheduled through the Compiere scheduler. 
Setting up a Compiere menu item
The user menu is your default tree, and is accessed through the System 
Administrator role. You can find the Menu item in the screen tree:

Advanced Aspects
[ 164 ]
The above screenshot illustrates a typical window set-up, which is done as follows:
1.	 Create a new menu item by clicking on the New button. Enter a name 
and a description.
2.	 Define its action type: A menu item's action type can be a Window, Form, 
Process, Report, Task, or Workflow. Link an AD item to the menu, which  
is illustrated above, where window Sales Order is linked to the Sales Order 
menu item.
3.	 Move the menu item in context of the main menu tree for users 
understanding and access.
It is recommended that you define your own windows, or copy from 
the existing dictionary, for customizations. Because dictionary (system) 
defined items may be overwritten during the process of migrating to a 
new version, it is better to copy a window and customize it in the copied 
window (or create new). This applies to Java code as well: never change 
the original source as it may be overwritten during migration.
Adding a new field to a window and 
database
In this section we are going to illustrate how the System Administrator would go 
about adding a new field to the database. As an illustration, we are going to add a 
probability reference field that can be used to measure a predefined set of outcomes 
on an order to the Sales Order window.
1.	 Find the context by Zooming to the Table from the Window. Open and find 
the Sales Order window in the Window, Tab, and Field menu item when 
logged in as System Administrator:

Chapter 7
[ 165 ]
2.	 Zoom from the window into the underlying Table and Column window. 
Order records are maintained in the database in the C_Order table:
3.	 Next we refer the Column tab, and create a new column in the table 
(see the field naming conventions below). The new column must be as a 
System Element defined and hence we need to create a System Element 
prior to using it as a Column in the Table:

Advanced Aspects
[ 166 ]
4.	 Once the System Element has been defined, we set up the Column 
as follows:
5.	 Create a new Reference key as follows:
Because this is a custom list, we choose a validation type of List Validation, 
and a value format of L, indicating that any letters are allowed. For a full list 
of these conventions, refer to the help documentation in the system by 
pressing F1. 
6.	 We then define the Reference key's list validation options as follows:

Chapter 7
[ 167 ]
7.	 The finalized column (and thus the ultimate window field) set-up is thus 
shown as follows:

Advanced Aspects
[ 168 ]
We finalize the set-up of the field by indicating:
1.	 Field naming conventions: Compiere recommends that customer-specific 
table and database column names be prefixed by EXT_, XX_, or CUST_, or 
the four letter entity registered with Compiere, such as SAAC_. This would 
also apply to indexes and constraints. The reason for this is that these entities 
are ignored in the migration process.
2.	 Length of field: Because we know that for this particular field there is going 
to be only one character we define a length of 1.
3.	 Default logic: We assume U, based on our list being Unknown.
4.	 Mandatory UI: Indicates that this field will be mandatory in the window, but 
not at database level.
5.	 Updatable: Indicates that the field is editable.
6.	 Always Updatable: Indicates that the field is always updatable, regardless of 
document status.
Final step in column creation—Create / Synchronize with 
the database
The final step in the process of creating a field is to make sure that it is synchronized 
to the underlying database from the AD. Scroll down on the column tab to find the 
Synchronize Column button, as shown in the example below:

Chapter 7
[ 169 ]
Adding our custom field to the Order window
Back in the menu item Window, Tab, and Field (find the Sales Order window) > Tab 
(header/top level):
1.	 Click on the Create Fields button to add the field to the database:
2.	 Change the desired sequence of the field to the correct position in the list 
of fields:

Advanced Aspects
[ 170 ]
3.	 Re-open the appropriate Sales Order window to display the field:
Setting up a basic approval workflow
Compiere's workflow processes form an integral part of the system. In this section 
we are going to learn how to setup a basic approval workflow for a document 
within Compiere.
The system definitions are as follows:
• 
A workflow is made up of a node and transitions.
• 
A node refers to a piece of work.
• 
A transition is the action to get to the next node, based on a logical condition.
• 
The workflow process is the active workflow and an activity for the 
processing of the active node (an activity also may have multiple 
parallel processes).
• 
A workflow also has an active State. A Workflow State refers to whether 
the workflow is running, not running, not started, completed, aborted, 
or terminated.
• 
Nodes also have Owners or Responsible persons.

Chapter 7
[ 171 ]
Illustrative workflow example
We are going to set up a workflow between two roles, whereby the Gardenworld 
Purchasing role will capture a Purchase Order and the order will be approved by the 
Gardenworld User role. This type of approval requires a flag, and Compiere has a 
built in IsApproved database field that is used for this purpose.
Compiere has standard document workflows and transitions that are 
predefined within its workflow processes. These nodes are DocStart, 
DocPrepare, DocComplete, and DocAuto (automatic approval). What 
this means is that workflow processes already manage the transitions of 
documents, with the System being the Owner of these workflow nodes.

Advanced Aspects
[ 172 ]
Defining a custom node in a workflow
We use the workflow editor to define a new node.
1.	 Open the Workflow editor window, and find the Order process 
Process_Order. Right-click in the editor, and then add an additional 
new node called Order Approval:
2.	 We need to define where the transition is going to take place by 
defining the originating node (Document prepare) and the next 
node (Document complete):

Chapter 7
[ 173 ]
3.	 Click on the upper-right Zoom button to zoom to the actual workflow 
process, and find the newly-created node:
4.	 Define the node's owner by creating a workflow owner. Right-click on the 
workflow owner field:
5.	 The node's workflow owner is set to be role-based, as follows:

Advanced Aspects
[ 174 ]
6.	 The Node for Approval can be summarized as follows:
7.	 Define the Transition of the node through a condition:

Chapter 7
[ 175 ]
The condition we set up for the document workflow to transition to Document 
Complete is as follows:
Testing the workflow
We can now illustrate the workflow by creating an order and ensuring that it gets 
approved correctly.
1.	 We log in as the GardenWorld Purchasing role, as follows:
2.	 Create a Purchase Order, and then click on the Complete button. The Order 
will be placed in an In Progress status, because the workflow's next node is 
document approval:

Advanced Aspects
[ 176 ]
3.	 We log off, and then log back in to the system with the GardenWorld User 
role (workflow owner):
4.	 Find the Workflow Activities menu item, and then approve the document, 
as follows:
5.	 The Document will be approved when the owner sets the approval status 
to Yes:

Chapter 7
[ 177 ]
Summary
We have covered certain aspects with regards to Compiere in this chapter—namely 
the Application Dictionary (AD) and Workflows, as follows:
• 
We gave you an overview of the Compiere Application Dictionary 
components.
• 
We illustrated how to add a menu item and a custom list field to a Compiere 
window by using the AD components.
• 
We gave you an overview of the Compiere Workflow processes, and 
illustrated how this is set up.
In the next chapter we will illustrate some core concepts in the project implementation 
of Compiere.


Project Planning for Go-Live 
and Beyond
In this chapter, highlight some of the project planning aspects of getting to the 
Compiere system's go-live milestone and beyond. We will cover:
• 
The issues around the people involved in the project
• 
Overview of aspects regarding technical and functional environments
• 
The go-live milestone
• 
Identifying aspects regarding post-implementation, including support
• 
An overview of keeping Compiere up-to-date, and its migration process
Managing people (and the project) 
for success
A system could be defined as an abstract entity that maintains its existence through 
the mutual interaction of its components/actors. The success of these interactions is 
determined by an organizations' people. From the outset of a new implementation 
project, it is required of management to engage, manage, motivate, and evaluate the 
people involved in the project, throughout the duration of the project.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 180 ]
Finish with the people you start with
Implementing an ERP system requires significant change and buy-in throughout 
the business. People will learn new skills and work in a new or different way. This 
requires decision making, as well as a top-down approach within the company 
structures. In realising the changes required, it is thus important to note that the 
key people within the project be identified early, and that they be appropriately 
incentivized to stay on board for the duration of the project. These key staff members 
may include the original project initiators, key project members, and user staff 
members that know the aspects of the business very well. Also important will be the 
investment in such staff members from a training point of view. The key to success 
is to ensure that the new knowledge is contained within the project and within the 
organization for as long as possible.
On conclusion of the project, it is also important for these staff members to be available, 
because for a while they will be the key people that users and management refer to for 
the detailed knowledge and impact of business process and system requirements.
The people you start with are not necessary 
the people you end-up with
An integrated ERP environment may not have every person in the organization's 
buy-in, and users and management that do not buy in to the processes need to be 
identified and appropriately addressed as soon as possible. The best outcome is 
that these users are specifically re-trained in their area, or that their concerns 
are addressed through the correct channels. But even with all of the change 
management, communication, project meetings, and functional training, some 
users still either see a new system as a threat or simply just don't buy in to the new 
processes, because they may be adverse to change. These types of users create a 
negative atmosphere and may, in extreme circumstances, cause deliberate damage to 
the process. Sadly, these users often sabotage the project before they even have the 
necessary information and experience to make an informed decision.
Project communication and follow up
It is critical for the communication level within the project to be appropriate for 
the different stages of the project. The key driver in change management process is 
communication. Communication has many forms, and includes staff conferences, 
posters-on-the-wall, meetings, email, web portals, events, forums, surveys, or any 
format currently used within the organization to communicate issues. 

Chapter 8
[ 181 ]
The project will start to fail when action items are not communicated and followed 
through within the timeframe required. Action items should be communicated 
after every meeting, and accountability assigned. The status of such items should 
be followed up consistently and reported with the aim of ensuring consistent 
transparency and corrective action prior to getting serious issues that could affect 
the project further down the line. The key to communication is that it instils 
confidence throughout the project and the organization. Key issues and decisions 
should be communicated by management and not by the project, as communication 
by management will reinforce the perception that business is taking ownership of 
the processes.
No project can be a success without key management buy-in at the appropriate 
decision-maker level, and at the level of detail required. Whether that is at CEO, 
CFO, or CIO level depends on the issue, but it is important that they be the drivers 
of the process.
Project documentation control
Another foundation for the success of the project is documentation control. 
This is true for any size of project, and entails the following:
• 
Appropriate project templates and sign-off: Regardless of the project 
methodology, document templates formalize the process and commit all 
parties to the agreed process, and sign-off ensures appropriate accountability.
• 
Compiling and managing documentation for business process 
knowledge: A tremendous amount of knowledge builds up during an ERP 
implementation, and it is important to document this. 
• 
Documentation of testing: Testing processes and results should be 
documented and agreed upon.
• 
Documentation of technical aspects: The IT infrastructure team should 
ensure that all technical aspects of the project are appropriately documented.
• 
End user training documentation: It is critical that this be relevant and up-
to-date with the latest changes, and should be simple enough for new users 
to easily understand.
• 
Managing documentation repositories: There is no point in having 
documentation if it cannot easily be accessed by the correct user. Whether 
this is done on an electronic Wiki basis, through the use of shared directory 
repositories, or through traditional lever arch files, it should be natural and 
should fit the business.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 182 ]
Technical and infrastructure go-live
In most cases, considerations for new hardware or change in operational structure is 
advised with a new ERP system.
Hardware and environment for development 
and testing
Having a test or sandbox environment is critical, as this facilitates experimental 
changes and also verifies particular system and process scenarios by the 
implementation and development team.
The environment for development and testing should be formalised, and very often 
time is wasted on re-installation and re-configuration of the test environment when 
appropriate controls would have avoided this. Such controls include:
• 
Ensuring a clear split between the development and formal test environment, 
to facilitate controlled feedback and release staging.
• 
Subversion control of source code and deployment files: Subversion is a 
software engineering tool for controlling different versions of source code for 
tracking, comparison, or roll back.
• 
A Backup strategy for development, test data, and the production 
environment, each of which will require a different strategy.
• 
A Fail over and server redundancy strategy entailing a cloned development 
and test environment, for easy recovery depending upon time requirement.
Hardware and environment for production
The hardware and operational environment for the production system should meet 
the business requirements, and should consider any anticipated short-to-medium 
term future growth.
Key decisions regarding this environment include the following:
• 
Hosted versus on-premise installation
• 
Stress testing and performance tuning
• 
Network and security environment
• 
Back-up strategy for the production environment.

Chapter 8
[ 183 ]
Hosted versus on-premise installation
With the changing data centre environments, and due to Compiere being a 
web-based system, it is very often beneficial to host the server at a data centre 
versus on the customer's premises. The Compiere Cloud Edition also facilitates 
hosting within the Amazon EC2 cloud computing environment. There are also 
options available from Compiere partners to run Compiere as a service, or run it 
within private Virtual Machine (VM) clouds. Following are the new decisions 
affecting the ERP environment, the answers to which will depend on the critical  
factors important to the business:
• 
Cost: Often, hosted environments have a lower cost of ownership, 
because data centres provide better hardware scalability and redundancy 
environments, and the up-front investment costs of a new environment may 
not make sense. If the enterprise has existing infrastructure then the cost 
benefit of using a hosted environment may not be realised and an on premise 
solutions may be advisable.
• 
Data integration issues: With the advance of Webservices (SOA) standards, 
data integration decisions are pretty much the same, regardless of whether 
data is hosted or is on-premise. Legacy integration systems may dictate that 
localized access is required.
• 
Control and security issues: For many businesses' risk and legal profile, 
the business may prefer to remain in control of their systems on premise 
or hosted.
Stress testing and performance tuning
Because of the tremendous growth in hardware advances, infrastructure risk 
is certainly much lower than it was 10 years ago. However, under sizing of the 
infrastructure is much harder to fix than before due to complexity. It is important to 
stress-test the transactional and operational aspects of the production environment 
prior to go-live. The overall architecture must meet the operational requirements 
of the system. Hardware issues pertaining to performance are RAM, CPU 
benchmarking, and data I/O and load balance monitoring. Performance tuning of 
the Oracle database and Tomcat/JBoss application server environment is critical in 
a particular environment, and would differ depending on transactional volumes and 
number of concurrent users as well as data storage requirements.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 184 ]
A large system architecture environment scenario could dictate multiple application 
servers and a single database server configured in clusters:
Compiere can support multi-server environment license and 
product options depending on a particular environment.
Network and security environment
While standard networks these days are pretty fast and reliable the main issues 
around the production environment are firewalls, browser security, client anti-virus 
software, and remote access policies. It is critical that these aspects be tested 
up front, and that appropriate firewall and security environment changes and 
policies be put in place. 
Backup-strategy
The operational back up strategy should back up the following:
• 
Operating system jobs and scripts.
• 
Compiere source code, SUN Java, and Subversion repositories.
• 
Compiere2 directory, which includes all of the deployment files.
• 
Data repositories. Usually these are backed up to the Compiere2\data 
directory, but may be set up differently, in order to accommodate the 
back-up strategy. Different real-time back-up strategies could also affect 
production performance.

Chapter 8
[ 185 ]
The go-live milestone
We will address the go-live in two aspects: namely, the technical go-live and the 
functional go-live.
The technical go-Live
During the technical go-live, the following aspects should be in place:
• 
Synchronization of the development environment and the production 
environment should be finalized. A clear cut-off, in terms of functionality 
that is implemented and functionality that is not implemented (i.e. those 
that are left for a later phase or that are not critical for go-live) should be 
communicated to the management and users.
• 
All master data and operational data required for go-live should be finalized 
and be ready for upload.
• 
Hardware servers and software should now be in a redundant environment.
• 
The network environment and settings should be finalized and in place.
• 
Lock down access to the system to prevent changes being made accidentally.
• 
Technical sign-off by the infrastructure management.
The functional go-live
The goal of a go-live is to ensure that it is as much of a non-event as possible. When 
the systems starts functioning for users it should be reflective of the processes as 
designed and agreed. User should have been through test scenarios and be capable 
of handling basic system functions:
• 
Super users and system trainers should be on hand to assist with the issues 
that arise, and there may be a list of repetitive questions that can be clearly 
communicated. Compile a daily list of these questions and communicate the 
answers to staff where relevant.
• 
A help desk should be ramped up where there are many users that can use a 
call centre environment.
• 
The project team should meet daily to address the most pertinent issues and 
give feedback to the management team and users.
• 
Regular management meetings with the project team should be in place so as 
to ensure feedback at the correct levels of the project.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 186 ]
A Compiere standard implementation 
project plan
The following briefly depicts a standard Compiere implementation project plan, 
which will include:
• 
The Pre-implementation phase: This would include the sales, negotiation, 
and scoping of the requirements.
• 
The Implementations phase:This phase includes the setting up of 
infrastructure, development, and training aspects.
• 
The Go Live:This is the time of data migration from the old environment to 
the new, as well as users starting to use the new environment.
• 
The post implementation phase: This phase involves finalizing procedures 
documentation, snaglists, and maintenance.
• 
Project closure: This includes the aspects of agreement such as hand-over of 
ownership to the enterprise. 
The Compiere pre-implementation project plan
This phase of the project involves pre-sales, scoping, and defining user requirements 
and finalizing the negotiations regarding costing and other requirements. Aspects of 
the project plan can be illustrated as follows:

Chapter 8
[ 187 ]
The implementation project plan
The aspects of the implementation phase will include the infrastructure environment, 
the initial assessment of data, development of customizations, configuring the system 
to user requirements, and is illustrated as follows over the next five illustrations:
• 
Project plan illustration 1: Implementation plan.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 188 ]
• 
Project Plan illustration 2: Implementation plan continues.

Chapter 8
[ 189 ]
• 
Project Plan illustration 3: Implementation plan continues.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 190 ]
• 
Project Plan illustration 4: Implementation plan continues.

Chapter 8
[ 191 ]
• 
Project Plan illustration 5: Implementation plan continues.
The go-live milestone project plan
The go-live milestone includes infrastructure and the functional go-live of the 
systems as follows:

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 192 ]
Post implementation
The post implementation phase of the implementation covers snaglists, finalizing 
documentation, maintenance, and user training, as follows:
Finishing off the project and closure
It is critical that the action points of the project are resolved as quickly as possible. 
Action points may be to revisit some areas, to extend in certain areas, or to address 
issues which presented themselves that were not thought of. Usually this happens 
when the process that users actually follow is different from the design discussions, 
or when what users say and do are practically different, either due to their point of 
reference being a legacy system, or out of pure habit. Any issues with a business 
process must be resolved in the system and users must agree to the new process even 
if it is amended after go-live for some reason.
Change management of production 
environments
A well thought through and practical change management process must be 
implemented after go-live to ensure that the risk of breaking the business process 
and operation is mitigated and managed. A typical Compiere environment 
infrastructure after go live is as follows:

Chapter 8
[ 193 ]
Production server(s): This is the main transactional processing environment.
Backup/Failover server(s): Should the production server fail, this environment 
would be a copy of the production server. In larger environments the costs of 
downtime could out-weigh the cost of a proper backup/failover server environment.
Development and Test server(s): This environment is where deployment files are 
deployed for testing by users, prior to loading onto the production server.
Training system: The training server is a stable environment in which a new 
user can be trained and gets to know the system prior to actually using it in the 
production environments. 
Supplier Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
management
The critical part in the production environment is what aspects are maintained 
in-house and what is expected from external parties. Some areas to consider in 
the management of the environments are as follows:
• 
Down time and vendor response times: How critical is the down time and 
how are responsibilities contractually disseminated between infrastructure, 
hardware, and Compiere vendors?
• 
Fault reporting and follow-up: How will issues and bugs be managed, 
and who will take responsibility for these aspects? How will users report 
issues internally, and what types of problems and resolution actions will 
external vendors be responsible for?

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 194 ]
• 
Monitoring aspects: Who will manage the monitoring systems, log files, 
system issue reports and errors, and follow these up and report in a timely 
manner to management and external vendors for their response?
• 
Strategic direction and enhancements: What aspects of the system 
are being improved upon internally, and how are these being managed 
against a timeline and goals of efficiency improvement and automation? 
Who, internally, will be responsible for managing this aspect, or will this 
be outsourced?
• 
New version migration: With new versions of Compiere being released 
every six months, how will the implementation be migrated to new versions, 
and what planning is required to do this?
Some issues that the Compiere Partner and Consona Corporation. would incorporate 
into their SLA and Annual License are as follows:
Compiere Authorized Partner
Consona Corporation
Pre-Sales Support
Yes
Yes
Implementation
Yes
Not Applicable
Enhancement / 
Customization
Yes
Product Roadmap
Access to Support, 
Documentation, Issue 
Tracking
First Line and Second Line 
Support
Product General Support
Support requests, 
Response Time support, 
Phone Support
Yes—Client instance related
Yes—Product General for 
Professional and Enterprise 
Editions only.
Source code
Commercial access 
Commercial access 
Upgrades and Service 
Packs
Responsible for service pack 
implementation and migration
Released every 3-6 Months
Infrastructure Support
Negotiated
Not Applicable
User Product Training
Yes
Online training 
Database Support
Yes
Product General Support
Keeping up-to-date: Compiere migration
One of the benefits of the Compiere environment is that migration to an upgraded or 
latest version is a relatively seamless and safe process. 

Chapter 8
[ 195 ]
What is migration?
Migration is the process of moving from one version of Compiere to another version 
(usually the latest version). This move involves the data and application dictionary 
definitions, as well as the source code. In other words, it's moving from Compiere 3.1 
to 3.6 or interim releases  such as 3.61. What this means is that Compiere Inc. maintains 
and generally supports only the latest version of Compiere. The requirement is that the 
older versions have to migrate to the latest version for up-to-date support.
Due to the experiences of many traditional systems, there may be consensus of Don't 
touch the system once it is working. This response is due either to the fear of losing 
customizations or extensions or to the cost of re-writing customizations, and sadly 
many professional consultants would even advise against any changes to packaged 
software whatsoever (the boxed-in approach). As we know, because Compiere is 
open source, an enhancement or customization is not a self-inflicted injury and 
actually the more often you migrate, the more seamless the experience becomes. 
However, it must be added that in real life, if the migration does fail, it is purely the 
technical development team that did not know what they were doing and need to 
skill up.
How does migration work?
The automated aspect of the migration involves the transformation of the underlying 
database tables, columns, IDs, and foreign keys to the next version. The process of 
migration is described in the Release Notes of each version of Compiere. Behind the 
scenes, the process can be described as follows:
The non-automated aspect of the migration is transforming the source code from the 
current to the latest version, using the new version of the source code as a reference:

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 196 ]
The migration process does not affect tenant data—it is the transformation of the 
underlying data structures into the latest version, and is rarely impacted. In some 
instances where the data is impacted, this transformation would be to accommodate 
more functionality, and thus the data will be transformed by the migration process, 
with full logs that describe the impacted aspects being created.
Application Dictionary (AD) changes
Since the AD changes are impacted during the migration, it is important that AD 
changes are managed accordingly.
Dictionary versus User Maintained entity types: This relates to any non Compiere 
AD change, which will automatically be assigned a User Maintained entity type:
Keeping AD changes after the migrate
When changing data within the AD, make sure that you assign them in the Change 
Audit menu item as a Customization change which will ensure that, as part of the 
migration, these custom changes can be identified and applied:

Chapter 8
[ 197 ]
After the migration has completed, use the Reapply Customizations menu process 
in the System Administrator role:

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 198 ]
Also, make sure that Roles are set to manual, otherwise these will be overridden 
during migration:
Planning for the migration
It is strongly advised to migrate at least once or twice per year. This ensures the 
stability and technical and functional growth of the product for the end user, and 
minimizes the risk of the migration becoming a huge project, when it should be a 
seamless process. Thus, there are certain aspects that can be managed in order to 
ensure that the migration remains seamless:
• 
Backup Strategy: Ensure that the appropriate backup strategy is followed 
and tested.
• 
Timing of Migration: As mentioned previously, at least annual migration is 
advised. During an extended implementation project it is advised to migrate 
as regularly as possible This is to ensure that not only are the benefits of a 
later release enjoyed, but also that future migrations are going to be easy and 
that the rules have been followed.
• 
Minimize and don't change the Compiere source code: Through Java 
source code structuring and modeling, it is highly recommended that no 
direct changes to Compiere source base be made and that all code changes 
are made in overriding classes or custom call-outs. Compiere also allows 
for Component registration so as to ensure the uniqueness of applicable 
component entity IDs within the market place.
• 
Functional migration: Make sure to read the version's accompanying 
release notes for details of changes made and bugs corrected, and evaluate 
the impact on existing business processes. If a new module is implemented, 
then user training should be made within the organization's normal change 
management processes.

Chapter 8
[ 199 ]
• 
Database migration: Follow up on the migration logs meticulously, and 
resolve items during a test migration. The test process is repeatable, and logs 
are very descriptive:
There may be harmless messages that can be ignored; these will be 
identified in the release notes. Migration may sometimes require the 
entire process to be run twice.

Project Planning for Go-Live and Beyond
[ 200 ]
Summary
This chapter highlighted that a Compiere implementation requires the same change 
management process as any other major change within an organization. Due to the 
integrated environment, it will affect most parts of the business environment.
We explained that it is important to identify the people and ensure appropriate 
communication for the project. We covered an overview of technical and project 
requirements to reach the go-live milestone. We also listed issues to be addressed 
after go-live, including post-implementation support. We also covered the migration 
process and planning for the migration so as to ensure that the system stays up-to-date.
The success of a Compiere implementation has less to do with the actual 
functionality and more to do with a practical project implementation approach, 
and guiding management, end users, and the project role players through the 
implementation journey to their new environment. Any ERP system or technology 
is not the answer to every business problem, and although Compiere is flexible, care 
should be taken to implement it in a structured and phased approach, and not fall 
into the dreaded scope creep and code-and-fix project scenarios. Due to its designed 
architecture, Compiere offers large-scale enterprise scalability in its platform, as well 
as fast customization and a seamless and efficient migration and upgrade process.
I shout enthusiastically about Compiere because, having worked on most other 
major systems in the market, I have not come across a system offering the openness 
(it is transparent by nature), value (TCO, ROI, yes!), well thought-out design 
(very structured, yet flexible, thanks to Mr Jorg Janke!) and yet so fundamentally 
integrated in its ERP core. Happy trading!

Index
A
account elements is setup
reporting hierarchy  129
account element template
about  28
account description  29
account document  30
account name  29
account parent  30
account sign  29
account summary  30
account type  29
account value  29
default account  30
accounting combinations  39
accounting entries  140
accounting entry principle  125
accounting info view
about  133
viewing  133
accounting, of product warehouse 
transactions  97
accounting schema
about  130
Accounting GAAP  36
accounting schema elements tab  37, 38
automatic period control  37
commitment type  36
costing level  36
costing method  36
currency  37
defaults tab  38
general ledger tab  38
overview  36
tax correction  37
accounting setup flow
about  126
account elements setup  129
accounting schema  130
calendar year and period setup  126, 127
GL document types  131
information dimension  130
accounting terminology
about  124
account combination  124
account elements  124
accounting date  124
accounting fact  124
accounting schema  124
calendar year and period  124
document date  124
financial report  124
re-posting accounts  124
trail balance  124
unposted document  124
Accounts Payable Ledger Account  137
Accounts Receivable Ledger Account  136
aliases  39
AP invoice
about  109
capturing  109, 110
for expense items  111
Application dictionary
about  153
diagrammatic representation  154
field validation rules  157
forms  160
info window  161
reference  158
reports and processes  162, 163
system elements  156, 157

[ 202 ]
table and columns  155, 156
window fields  160
window tabs  160
window types  159
B
backup/failover servers  193
bank statement
capturing  137, 139
basic approval workflow
custom node, defining  172-175
illustrative workflow example  171
setting up  170
testing  175, 176
business partner management
about  8
functionalities  8
business partners
about  51
credit management  56
defining  51
leads, converting  58
leads, entering  57
linked organization business partners  51
proxy business partners  51
setting up  52, 55
business partners, setting up
Business Partner Group  52
Business Partner information  53
dunning  53
invoice schedule  53
payment terms  52
C
calendar year and period setup
about  126
default setup  126
cash and bank management reconciliation
bank in transit account  140
bank statement, capturing  137, 139
cash management
about  9
functionalities  9
Compiere
about  6
accounting entry  125
accounting info view  133
accounting setup flow  126
accounting terminology  124
Application Dictionary  153
bank management  137
basic approval workflow, setting up  170
cash management  137
community supported edition  14
core ERP functionality  6
desktop launch  22
document sequences  42
download link  17
evaluating  14
financial reporting  144
go-live  185
initial tenant setup process  28
integrated advanced ERP functionality  10
launching  22
logging  22
material management  85
migration  194
open item management  134
partner community  16
people, managing  179
post implementation phase  192
procurement management  101
product  75
roles, setting up  44, 45
technical and infrastructure go-live  182
unposted documents  142
UOM  40
user, creating  43, 44
web launch  23
Compiere Community  16
Compiere components
about  10
advanced material resources planning 
(MRP / MRP II)  11
advanced warehousing and distribution  11
Data and SOA integration  10
eCommerce / WebStore integration  10
human resources  11

[ 203 ]
in-house programming  11
request management  10
workflow  10
Compiere core functionality
about  7
business partner management  8
cash management  9
CRM management  9
financial accounting management  9
light production  10
material management  10
purchasing cycle functionality  8
sales cycle functionality  8
system administration functions  7
Compiere editions
about  16
Compiere Cloud Editions  16
Compiere Community  16
Compiere Distribution  16
Compiere Enterprise  16
Compiere Manufacturing  16
Compiere Professional  16
Compiere Standard  16
Compiere Warehouse  16
Compiere Enterprise  16
Compiere evaluation
considerations  14, 15
Compiere implementation project 
about  186
go-live  191
implementation phase  187
pre-implementation phase  186
project closure  186
Compiere menu
about  24
Swing menu  24
web user interface  25
Compiere menu item
setting up  163, 164
Compiere migration
about  194
AD changes  196
AD changes, keeping  196-198
backup strategy  198
database migration  199
functional migration  198
planning  198
timing  198
working  195
Compiere Professional  16
Compiere setup
application server, starting  22
application server, stopping  22
faults ans solutions  22
overview  21
Compiere Standard  16
Compiere system
organizational circumstances  6
Compiere system administration
about  7
functions  7
Compiere terminology
account element  20
accounting schema  20
business partners  20
organization  20
products  20
representatives  20
role  20
tenant  20
users  20
warehouse  20
Compiere transaction window
about  26
Swing user interface window  26
web user interface window  27
components. See  Compiere components
costing methods
Average Invoice  96
Average PO  96
Fifo  96
Last Invoice  96
Last PO  96
Lifo  96
Standard Costing  96
credit management
about  56
Credit Status field parameters  57

[ 204 ]
critical components, ERP decision
about  11
brand loyalty  14
budget  11
data relationships  12
internal learning curve  12
personal career aspirations  13
static out-of-the-box versus dynamic flex­
ible ERP  12
technology  13
time availability  12
upfront functional design  12
CRM management
about  9
functionalities  9
customer and sales process
managing  49
custom field
adding, to order window  169, 170
custom node
defining, in workflow  172-175
D
database
field, creating  164
field, synchronizing  168
database migration  199
delivery rules, sales order processing
about  62
after receipt  62
availability  62
complete line/order  62
force  62
manual  62
desktop launch, Compiere  22
development and test servers  193
document actions, sales order processing  64
documents
lines, matching manually  113
matching  111-113
document sequences  42
document status, sales order processing
about  64
completed document status  65
drafted document status  65
open order report  66
sales order documents, finding  66
E
ERP system  5
F
field
creating, in database  164-168
field validation rules, Application 
dictionary  157
financial accounting management
about  9
tfunctionalities  9
financial reporting
about  144
columns and row sets  144
reporting hierarchy  145
running  146, 148
financial reporting hierarchy
about  145
account element hierarchy  146
organizational hierarchy  145
financial reports
balance sheet business view report  149
financial dashboard  150
profit and loss statement business view 
report  149
forms, Application dictionary  160
functional go-live  185
functional migration  198
G
General Ledger (GL) document types
about  131
accounting documents processing rules  
131, 132
General Ledger Journals  127
posting  141, 142
General Public License (GPL) software  14
go-live
functional go-live  185
technical go-live  185

[ 205 ]
go-live milestone project plan, 
Compiere  191
Graphical User Interface (GUI) platform  
154
H
hardware and development, for production
about  182
hosted, versus premise installation  183
network and security environment  184
operational backup strategy  184
performance tuning  183
stress testing  183
I
information dimension  130
info windows, Application dictionary  161
initial tenant setup process
about  28
account elements import, defining  28
account element tree, setting up  34, 35
account element tree, verifying  35
accounting schema rules, setting up  36
accounting schema rules, verifying  36
calendar, defining  32
locators, setting up  33
organizations, setting up  32
periods, defining  32
tenant, setting up  30, 31
warehouses, setting up  33
year, defining  32
integrated advanced ERP functionality  10
inventory
internal inventory move  92, 93
material receipts, from Vendors  91, 92
material shipments, to customers  89, 91
moving  89
product replenishment  94, 95
invoicing rules, sales order processing
about  62
after delivery  62
after delivery of complete order  62
customer schedule after delivery  62
immediate  62
invoices, generating in batch  63
invoices, generating manually  63
J
Java class, example  162, 163
Java Swing  154
K
key column C_Period_ID  156
L
light production
about  10
functionalities  10
list reporting  69
M
material management
about  10, 85
accounting, of product warehouse 
transactions  97
functionalities  10
inventory, moving  89
product costing  96
product info window  98
product quantities, adjusting  86
product reports  98
warehouse overview  85
material receipt
about  91, 92, 107
capturing  107, 108
material shipments  91
material shipmentsabout  89
menu item, Compiere
setting up  163, 164
migration  195
model driven architecture (MDA)  153
O
Object Management Group (OMG)  153
open item management
about  134
Accounts Payable Ledger Account  137

[ 206 ]
Accounts Receivable Ledger Account  136
payments, allocating to vendors  135
payment selection  135
receipt, allocating to invoices  134
receipt, capturing from customer  134
unallocated receipts or payments  137
operational backup strategy  184
order and invoicing reports
invoice detail  68
invoicing transactions  68
open orders  68
order transactions  68
order window
custom field, adding  169, 170
P
payment selection  135
Period Document Control  127
post implementation project plan, Compiere
about  192
closure, finishing off  192
production environment management, 
changing  192, 193
project, finishing off  192
SLA management  193
pre-implementation project plan, 
Compiere  186
price lists, product
about  79
decimal precisions, pricing  84
discount breaks  84
price list increase, illustrating  82, 83
pricing logic flow  79, 80
setting up  80, 81
procurement documents
accounting consequences  119
accounting entries  119-121
procurement flow
about  102
AP invoice, capturing  109, 110
AP invoices  109
diagrammatic representation  102
invoices, for expense items  111
material receipt  107
material receipt, capturing  107, 108
purchase order  104
purchase order, capturing  105
requisition documents  103
procurement management  101
procurement reports
about  121
Compiere Enterprise Edition  122
material receipts detail  122
material receipts not matched  122
open orders report  121
open requisitions report  121
purchase orders detail  122
purchase orders summary  121
purchases by invoice date  122
purchases by product category and vendor  
122
purchases by product category summary  
122
purchases by vendor detail  122
product, Compiere
about  75
describing  76
features, describing  76, 77
information, describing  76, 77
managing, as services  85
price lists  79
setting up  77, 78
product costing  96
product info window  98
production servers  193
product quantities
adjusting  86
internal use inventory transactions  88, 89
physical inventory transaction  87, 88
product replenishment  94, 95
product reports  98
project implementation project plan, 
Compiere
about  187
illustrations  187-191
purchase order
about  104
capturing  105, 106
sources  105
purchasing cycle functionality  8

[ 207 ]
R
reference, Application dictionary  158
requisition documents
about  103
purchase order, generating  104
Return Material Authorization (RMA) 
process
about  69
customer RMA  70
distribution runs  70
return credit memo  70
return policies  70
RMA category  70
returns, to vendor process
AP credit memo  118
overview  118
return policy  118
return to vendor  118
RMA category  118
vendor RMA  118
roles
creating  45, 46
setting up  44, 45
S
sales cycle functionality  8
sales leads
converting  58
entering  57
sales order processing
about  59
delivery rules  62
document actions  64
document status  64
document types  61
field names, zooming on  67
info view  67, 68
invoicing rules  62
sales overview  49, 50
sales processing accounting consequences
about  71
cost of sales accounting  71
default accounts  71
receivables accounts  71
revenue accounts  71
summary accounting  72
tax accounting  72
SLA management
about  193
issues  194
summary accounting
about  72
commissions  73
sales regions  73
Swing menu  24
Swing user interface window  26
system administration functions, Compiere
Compiere Application Dictionary (AD)  7
document settings  7
functional settings  7
role management  7
system settings and parameters  7
system utilities  7
tenant setup  7
user administration  7
system elements, Application dictionary  156
T
table and columns, Application dictionary  
155, 156
technical and infrastructure go-live
about  182
environment, for development and testing  
182
hardware and development, for production  
182
hardware, for development and testing  182
technical go-live  185
tenant
setting up  30-32
system items, creating  32
training system  193
U
unallocated receipts or payments  137
Unit of Measures(UOM)
about  40
conversions  41
example  41, 42

[ 208 ]
gallons, setting up  41
litres, setting up  41
unposted documents  142
user
creating  43, 44
V
vendor payments
about  114
batch processing  114-116
manual payment, selecting  117
W
warehouse overview  85
web launch, Compiere  23, 24
window fields, Application dictionary  160
window tabs, Application dictionary  160
window types, Application dictionary
about  159
maintain  159
query only  159
transaction  159

Thank you for buying 
Compiere 3
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For 
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home 
to books published on software built around Open Source licences, and offering information 
to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open Source brand 
also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open 
Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

SAP Business ONE 
Implementation 
ISBN: 978-1-847196-38-5             Paperback: 320 pages
Bring the power of SAP Enterprise Resource Planning 
to your small-midsize business
1.	
Get SAP B1 up and running quickly, optimize 
your business, inventory, and manage your 
warehouse 
2.	
Understand how to run reports and take 
advantage of real-time information 
3.	
Complete an express implementation from start 
to finish 
ADempiere 3.4 ERP Solutions
ISBN: 978-1-847197-26-9            Paperback: 460 pages
Design, configure, and implement a robust enterprise 
resource planning system in your organization using 
ADempiere
1.	
Successfully implement ADempiere—an 
open source, company-wide ERP solution—
to manage and coordinate all the resources, 
information, and functions of a business
2.	
Master data management and centralize the 
functions of various business departments in 
an advanced ERP system 
3.	
Efficiently manage business documents such 
as purchase/sales orders, material receipts/
shipments, and invoices  
4.	
Extend and customize ADempiere to meet your 
business needs
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Implementing Microsoft Dynamics 
NAV 2009
ISBN: 978-1-847195-82-1            Paperback: 552 pages
Explore the new features of Microsoft Dynamics NAV 
2009, and implement the solution your business needs
1.	
First book to show you how to implement 
Microsoft Dynamics NAV 2009 in 
your business 
2.	
Meet the new features in Dynamics NAV 2009 
that give your business the flexibility to adapt 
to new opportunities and growth
3.	
Easy-to-read style, packed with hard-won 
practical advice
Apache OFBiz Development: The 
Beginner's Tutorial
ISBN: 978-1-847194-00-8            Paperback: 472 pages
Using Services, Entities, and Widgets to build custom 
ERP and CRM systems
1.	
Understand how OFBiz is put together
2.	
Learn to create and customize business 
applications with OFBiz
3.	
Gain valuable development and performance 
hints 
4.	
A fully illustrated tutorial with functional 
step-by-step examples
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

