
The Farlex Grammar Book:
Complete English Grammar Rules
 
 
 
FARLEX International
Copyright © 2016 Farlex International
All rights reserved.
ISBN: 1535231688
ISBN-13: 978-1535231688
2

Table of contents
About the author
Preface
Editor’s Note
English Grammar
Parts of Speech
Nouns
Common and Proper Nouns
Nouns of Address
Concrete and Abstract Nouns
Countable Nouns
Uncountable Nouns
Collective Nouns
Compound Nouns
Nominalization (Creating Nouns)
Pronouns
Personal pronouns
Personal Pronouns - Number
Personal Pronouns - Person (First person, Second person, Third person)
Personal Pronouns - Gender
Personal Pronouns - Case
Personal Pronouns - Reflexive Pronouns
Intensive Pronouns
Indefinite Pronouns
Demonstrative Pronouns
Interrogative Pronouns
Relative Pronouns
Reciprocal Pronouns
Dummy Pronouns
Verbs
Finite and Non-finite Verbs
Transitive and Intransitive Verbs
Regular and Irregular Verbs
Auxiliary Verbs
Primary Auxiliary Verbs
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Will
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Would
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Shall
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Should
3

Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Can
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Could
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - May
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Might
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Must
Substituting Modal Verbs
Semi-Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Infinitives
Participles
Action Verbs
Stative Verbs
Linking Verbs
Light Verbs
Phrasal Verbs
Common Phrasal Verbs
Conditional Verbs
Causative Verbs
Factitive Verbs
Reflexive Verbs
Adjectives
Attributive Adjectives
Predicative Adjectives
Proper Adjectives
Collective Adjectives
Demonstrative Adjectives
Interrogative Adjectives
Nominal Adjectives
Compound Adjectives
Order of Adjectives
Degrees of Comparison
Comparative Adjectives
Superlative Adjectives
Adverbs
Adverbs of Time
Adverbs of Place
Adverbs of Manner
Adverbs of Degree
Mitigators
Intensifiers
Adverbs of Frequency
4

Adverbs of Purpose
Focusing Adverbs
Negative Adverbs
Conjunctive Adverbs
Evaluative Adverbs
Viewpoint Adverbs
Relative Adverbs
Adverbial Nouns
Regular and Irregular Adverbs
Degrees of Comparison
Comparative Adverbs
Superlative Adverbs
Order of Adverbs
Prepositions
Prepositional Phrases
Categories of Prepositions
Common Prepositional Errors
Prepositions with Nouns
Prepositions with Verbs
Prepositions with Adjectives
Prepositions in Idioms
Idioms that Start with Prepositions
Idioms that End with Prepositions
Conjunctions
Coordinating Conjunctions
Correlative Conjunctions
Subordinating Conjunctions
Other parts of speech
Particles
Articles
Determiners
Possessive Determiners
Gerunds
Gerunds as Objects of Verbs
Interjections
Inflection (Accidence)
Conjugation
Tense
Present Tense
5

Present Simple Tense
Present Continuous Tense (Progressive)
Present Perfect Tense
Present Perfect Continuous Tense
Past Tense
Past Simple Tense
Past Continuous Tense
Past Perfect Tense
Past Perfect Continuous Tense
Future Tense (Approximation)
Future Simple Tense
Future Continuous Tense
Future Perfect Tense
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
Aspect
Perfective and Imperfective Aspect
Aspects of the Present Tense
Aspects of the Past Tense
Aspects of the Future Tense
Mood
Indicative Mood
Subjunctive Mood
Subjunctive Mood - Expressing Wishes
Voice
Active Voice
Passive Voice
Middle Voice
Speech
Reported Speech (Indirect Speech)
Grammatical Person
Declension
Plurals
Gender in Nouns
Regular and Irregular Inflection
Syntax
Subjects and Predicates
The Subject
The Predicate
Complements
6

Objects
Subject Complements
Object Complements
Adjective Complements
Adverbial Complements
Modifiers
Adjuncts
Phrases
Noun Phrases
Adjective Phrases
Adverbial Phrases
Participle Phrases
Absolute Phrases
Appositives
Clauses
Independent Clauses
Dependent Clauses
Noun Clauses
Relative Clauses
Adverbial Clauses
Sentences
Compound Sentences
Complex Sentences
Compound-Complex Sentences
Declarative Sentences
Interrogative Sentences
Negative Interrogative Sentences
Imperative Sentences
Conditional Sentences
Major and Minor Sentences (Regular and Irregular Sentences)
Quiz answers
Index
7

About the author
Peter Herring was born in Boulder, Colorado, and grew up with a passion for
reading. He attended the University of British Columbia, in Vancouver,
Canada, where he majored in English Literature. He went on to complete a
master’s degree in Anglo-Irish Literature and Drama at University College
Dublin in Ireland, where he graduated with honors.
Peter has worked as an editor since 2009, lending his passion for words to
scientific research projects, non-fiction publishing, and The Free Dictionary.
He lives in Dublin, Ireland, with his wife and son.
 
About the editor
Nick Norlen is the managing editor of The Free Dictionary, where he
oversees all editorial projects. After graduating with honors from La Salle
University in Philadelphia, he worked as a reporter before joining the Farlex
team in 2008.
He lives in Newtown, Pennsylvania, with his wife and daughter, whose first
word is his favorite word.
8

Preface
Grammar is without a doubt one of the most daunting aspects of the English
language, 
an 
area 
riddled 
with 
complexities, 
inconsistencies, 
and
contradictions. It has also been in a state of flux for pretty much its entire
existence. For native speakers of English, as well as for those learning it as a
new language, grammar presents a very serious challenge to speaking and
writing both accurately and effectively.
Having a single, reliable, go-to reference guide should therefore be
indispensable to those trying to learn, improve, or perfect their speech or
writing. This book is that guide: a clear, unambiguous, and comprehensive
source of information that covers all the relevant topics of English grammar,
while still being easy to understand and enjoyable to read.
Every topic in the book has been broken down into basic units. Each unit can
be read and understood in its own right, but throughout the book you will
find cross-references to other sections and chapters to help make it clear how
all the pieces fit together. If you’re having trouble understanding something,
try going back (or forward) to other related topics in the book.
Finally, it must be mentioned that, because English is such a flexible,
inconsistent language, the “rules” that are often bandied about are usually
not rules at all, but rather guides that reflect how the language is used.
Accordingly, the guidelines contained within this book are just that—
guidelines. They are not intended to provide constrictive or proscriptive rules
that confine everyone to a particular way of speaking or writing.
Learning how the English language works will enhance your engagement
with speech and writing every day, from the books you read, to the e-mails
you write, to the conversations you have with friends and strangers alike.
As such, mastering grammar is not an exercise that is confined to the
classroom. While it is certainly important to learn the structures, styles, and
rules that shape the language, the key to truly learning English is to read and
listen to the way people write and speak every day, from the most well-
known authors to the people you talk to on the bus. Take the information
you find in this book and carry it with you into the world.
-P. Herring
9

Editor’s Note
This book is written according to the standard styles and spellings used in
American English. While major differences between American and British
English are usually addressed, some information in the book might not
coincide with the styles, tendencies, or preferences of other English-speaking
communities.
10

English Grammar
Grammar refers to the way words are used, classified, and structured
together to form coherent written or spoken communication.
This guide takes a traditional approach to teaching English grammar,
breaking the topic into three fundamental elements: Parts of Speech,
Inflection, and Syntax. Each of these is a discrete, individual part, but they
are all intrinsically linked together in meaning.
Parts of Speech
In the first part of the guide, we will look at the basic components of English
—words. The parts of speech are the categories to which different words
are assigned, based on their meaning, structure, and function in a sentence.
We’ll look in great detail at the seven main parts of speech—nouns,
pronouns, 
verbs, 
adjectives, 
adverbs, 
prepositions, 
and
conjunctions—as well as other categories of words that don’t easily fit in
with the rest, such as particles, determiners, and gerunds.
By understanding the parts of speech, we can better understand how (and
why) we structure words together to form sentences.
Inflection
Although the parts of speech provide the building blocks for English, another
very important element is inflection, the process by which words are
changed in form to create new, specific meanings.
There are two main categories of inflection: conjugation and declension.
Conjugation refers to the inflection of verbs, while declension refers to the
inflection of nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs. Whenever we change
a verb from the present tense to the past tense, for example, we are using
conjugation. Likewise, when we make a noun plural to show that there is
more than one of it, we are using declension.
Syntax
The third and final part of the guide will focus on syntax, the rules and
patterns that govern how we structure sentences. The grammatical
structures that constitute syntax can be thought of as a hierarchy, with
11

sentences at the top as the largest cohesive unit in the language and words
(the parts of speech) at the bottom.
We’ll begin the third part by looking at the basic structural units present in
all sentences—subjects and predicates—and progressively move on to
larger classes of structures, discussing modifiers, phrases, and clauses.
Finally, we will end by looking at the different structures and categories of
sentences themselves.
Using the three parts together
The best way to approach this guide is to think of it as a cross-reference of
itself; when you see a term or concept in one section that you’re unfamiliar
with, check the other sections to find a more thorough explanation. Neither
parts of speech nor inflection nor syntax exist as truly separate units; it’s
equally important to examine and learn about the different kinds of words,
how they can change to create new meaning, and the guidelines by which
they are structured into sentences.
When we learn to use all three parts together, we gain a much fuller
understanding of how to make our speech and writing not only proper, but
natural and effective.
12

Parts of Speech
Definition
The parts of speech are the primary categories of words according to their
function in a sentence.
English has seven main parts of speech. We’ll look at a brief overview of each
below; continue on to their individual chapters to learn more about them.
Nouns
Nouns are words that identify or name people, places, or things. Nouns can
function as the subject of a clause or sentence, an object of a verb, or an
object of a preposition. Words like cat, book, table, girl, and plane are all
nouns.
Pronouns
Pronouns are words that represent nouns (people, places, or things).
Grammatically, pronouns are used in the same ways as nouns; they can
function as subjects or objects. Common pronouns include I, you, she, him,
it, everyone, and somebody.
Verbs
Verbs are words that describe the actions—or states of being—of people,
animals, places, or things. Verbs function as the root of what’s called the
predicate, which is required (along with a subject) to form a complete
sentence; therefore, every sentence must include at least one verb.
Verbs include action words like run, walk, write, or sing, as well as words
describing states of being, such as be, seem, feel, or sound.
Adjectives
Adjectives are words that modify (add description to) nouns and
(occasionally) pronouns. They can be a part of either the subject or the
predicate. Common adjectives are red, blue, fast, slow, big, tall, and wide.
13

Adverbs
Adverbs are words that modify verbs, adjectives, other adverbs, or even
entire clauses. Depending on what they modify (and how), adverbs can
appear anywhere in the sentence. Adverbs are commonly formed from
adjectives by adding “-ly” to the end, as in slowly, quickly, widely,
beautifully, or commonly.
Prepositions
Prepositions are words that express a relationship between a noun or
pronoun (known as the object of the preposition) and another part of the
sentence. Together, these form prepositional phrases, which can function
as adjectives or as adverbs in a sentence. Some examples of prepositional
phrases are: on the table, in the shed, and across the field. (The
prepositions are in bold.)
Conjunctions
Conjunctions are words that connect other words, phrases, or clauses,
expressing a specific kind of relationship between the two (or more)
elements. The most common conjunctions are the coordinating
conjunctions: and, but, or, nor, for, so, and yet.
Other Parts of Speech
In addition to the seven parts of speech above, there are several other
groupings of words that do not neatly fit into any one specific category
—particles, articles, determiners, gerunds, and interjections.
Many of these share characteristics with one or more of the seven primary
categories. For example, determiners are similar in many ways to
adjectives, but they are not completely the same, and most particles are
identical in appearance to prepositions but have different grammatical
functions.
Because they are harder to classify in comparison to the seven primary
categories above, they’ve been grouped together in this guide under the
general category Other Parts of Speech.
14

Nouns
Definition
Nouns are words that indicate a person, place, or thing.
In a sentence, nouns can function as the subject or the object of a verb or
preposition. Nouns can also follow linking verbs to rename or re-identify
the subject of a sentence or clause; these are known as predicate nouns.
The Subject
The subject in a sentence or clause is the person or thing doing, performing,
or controlling the action of the verb. For example:
• “The dog chased its tail.” (The noun dog is performing the action of the
verb chase.)
• “Mary reads a book every week.” (The proper noun Mary is performing the
action of the verb read.)
Objects
Grammatical objects have three grammatical roles: the direct object of a
verb, the indirect object of a verb, or the object of a preposition.
Direct objects
Direct objects are what receive the action of the verb in a sentence or
clause. For example:
• “The dog chased its tail.” (The noun tail is receiving the action of the verb
chase.)
• “Mary reads a book every week.” (The noun book is receiving the action of
the verb read.)
Indirect objects
An indirect object is the person or thing who receives the direct object of
the verb. For instance:
• “Please pass Jeremy the salt.” (The proper noun Jeremy is receiving the
15

direct object salt, which receives the action of the verb pass.)
• “I sent the company an application for the job.” (The noun company is
receiving the direct object application, which receives the action of the verb
sent.)
Objects of prepositions
Nouns are also used after prepositions to create prepositional phrases.
When a noun is part of a prepositional phrase, it is known as the object of
the preposition. For example:
• “Your backpack is under the table.” (The noun table is the object of the
preposition under, which creates the prepositional phrase under the table.)
• “I am looking for work.” (The noun work is the object of the preposition
for, which creates the prepositional phrase for work.)
Predicate Nouns
Nouns that follow linking verbs are known as predicate nouns (sometimes
known as predicative nouns). These serve to rename or re-identify the
subject. If the noun is accompanied by any direct modifiers (such as
articles, adjectives, or prepositional phrases), the entire noun phrase
acts predicatively.
For example:
• “Love is a virtue.” (The noun phrase a virtue follows the linking verb is to
rename the subject love.)
• “Tommy seems like a real bully.” (The noun phrase a real bully follows
the linking verb seems to rename the subject Tommy.)
• “Maybe this is a blessing in disguise.” (The noun phrase a blessing in
disguise follows the linking verb is to rename the subject this.)
(Go to the section on Subject Complements in the part of the guide that
covers Syntax to learn more about predicate nouns.)
Categories of Nouns
There are many different kinds of nouns, and it’s important to know the
different way each type can be used in a sentence. Below, we’ll briefly look at
the different categories of nouns. You can explore the individual sections to
16

learn more about each.
Common and Proper Nouns
Nouns that identify general people, places, or things are called common
nouns—they name or identify that which is common among others.
Proper nouns, on the other hand, are used to identify an absolutely
unique person, place, or thing, and they are signified by capital letters, no
matter where they appear in a sentence.
Common Nouns
Proper Nouns
“He sat on the chair.”
“Go find Jeff and tell him dinner is ready.”
“I live in a city.”
“I’ll have a Pepsi, please.”
“We met some people.” “Prince William is adored by many.”
 
Nouns of Address
Nouns of address are used in direct speech to identify the person or
group being directly spoken to, or to get that person’s attention. Like
interjections, they are grammatically unrelated to the rest of the sentence
—they don’t modify or affect any other part of it. For example:
• “James, I need you to help me with the dishes.”
• “Can I have some money, Mom?”
• “This, class, is the video I was telling you about.”
• “Sorry, Mr. President, I didn’t see you there.”
Concrete and Abstract Nouns
Concrete nouns name people, places, animals, or things that are physically
tangible—that is, they can be seen or touched, or have some physical
properties. Proper nouns are also usually concrete, as they describe unique
people, places, or things that are also tangible. For example:
table
rocks
lake
17

countries
people
Africa
MacBook
Jonathan
Abstract nouns, as their name implies, name intangible things, such as
concepts, ideas, feelings, characteristics, attributes, etc. For instance:
love
hate
decency
conversation
emotion
Countable 
and 
Uncountable
Nouns
Countable nouns (also known as count nouns) are nouns that can be
considered as individual, separable items, which means that we are able to
count them with numbers—we can have one, two, five, 15, 100, and so on.
We can also use them with the indefinite articles a and an (which signify a
single person or thing) or with the plural form of the noun.
Single Countable Nouns Plural Countable Nouns
a cup
two cups
an ambulance
several ambulances
a phone
10 phones
 
Countable nouns contrast with uncountable nouns (also known as non-
count or mass nouns), which cannot be separated and counted as
individual units or elements. Uncountable nouns cannot take an indefinite
article (a/an), nor can they be made plural.
✔ Correct
✖ Incorrect
“Would you like tea?”
“Would you like a tea?”
18

“Do you have any information?”
“Do you have an information?”
“We 
bought 
new 
camping
equipment.”
“We 
bought 
new 
camping
equipments.”
Collective Nouns
Collective nouns are nouns that refer to a collection or group of multiple
people, animals, or things. However, even though collective nouns refer to
multiple individuals, they still function as singular nouns in a sentence. This
is because they still are technically referring to one thing: the group as a
whole. For example:
• “The flock of birds flew south for the winter.”
• “The organization voted to revoke the rules that it had previously
approved.”
• “The set of tablecloths had disappeared. ”
Attributive 
Nouns 
(Noun
Adjuncts)
Attributive nouns, also called noun adjuncts, are nouns that are used to
modify other nouns. The resulting phrase is called a compound noun. For
example:
• “The boy played with his toy soldier.”
In this sentence, toy is the noun adjunct, and it modifies the word soldier,
creating the compound noun toy soldier.
To learn more about attributive nouns, go to the section on Adjuncts in the
chapter on The Predicate.
Compound Nouns
A compound noun is a noun composed of two or more words working
together as a single unit to name a person, place, or thing. Compound nouns
are usually made up of two nouns or an adjective and a noun.
• water + bottle = water bottle (a bottle used for water)
19

• dining + room = dining room (a room used for dining)
• back + pack = backpack (a pack you wear on your back)
• police + man = policeman (a police officer who is a man)
Noun Phrases
A noun phrase is a group of two or more words that function together as a
noun in a sentence. Noun phrases consist of a noun and other words that
modify the noun. For example:
• “He brought the shovel with the blue handle.”
In this sentence, the shovel with the blue handle is a noun phrase. It
collectively acts as a noun while providing modifying words for the head
noun, shovel. The modifiers are the and with the blue handle.
Nominalization (Creating Nouns)
Nominalization refers to the creation of a noun from verbs or adjectives.
When nouns are created from other parts of speech, it is usually through the
use of suffixes. For example:
• “My fiancée is an actor.” (The verb act becomes the noun actor.)
• “His acceptance of the position was received warmly.” (The verb accept
becomes the noun acceptance.)
• “The hardness of diamond makes it a great material for cutting tools.”
(The adjective hard becomes the noun hardness.)
• “This project will be fraught with difficulty.” (The adjective difficult
becomes the noun difficulty.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. A noun can be which of the following?
a) The subject
b) An object
c) Predicative
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
20

 
2. What category of nouns is used to identify the person or group being
directly spoken to?
a) Common nouns
b) Nouns of address
c) Attributive nouns
d) Abstract nouns
 
3. Identify the type of noun (in bold) used in the following sentence:
“Your indifference is not acceptable.”
a) Proper noun
b) Countable noun
c) Collective noun
d) Abstract noun
4. What category of nouns is used to modify other nouns?
a) Common nouns
b) Nouns of address
c) Attributive nouns
d) Abstract nouns
5. Which of the following is commonly used to create a noun from a verb or
adjective?
a) Prefix
b) Suffix
c) Attributive noun
d) Predicative noun
Common and Proper Nouns
Nouns fall into one of two broad categories: common nouns and proper
nouns.
Common Nouns
All nouns serve to name a person, place, or thing.
Those that identify general people, places, or things are called common
21

nouns—they name that which is common among others.
For example:
• “He sat on the chair.”
• “I live in a city.”
• “We met some people.”
• “She went into politics.”
• “Our teacher is angry.”
• “Let’s go down to the lake.”
Proper Nouns
Proper nouns, on the other hand, are used to identify a unique person,
place, or thing. A proper noun names someone or something that is one of a
kind, which is signified by the use of a capital letter, no matter where it
appears in a sentence.
Names
The most common proper nouns are names, as of people, places, or events.
For example:
• “Go find Jeff and tell him dinner is ready.”
• “I lived in Cincinnati before I moved to New York.”
• “My parents still talk about how great Woodstock was in 1969.”
Brands
Proper nouns are also used for commercial brands. In this case, the object
that’s being referred to is not unique in itself, but the brand it belongs to is.
For example:
• “Pass me the Hellmann’s mayonnaise.”
• “I’ll have a Pepsi, please.”
• “My new MacBook is incredibly fast.”
Appellations
When a person has additional words added to his or her name (known as an
22

appellation), this becomes part of the proper noun and is also capitalized.
(Some linguists distinguish these as proper names, rather than proper
nouns.) For example:
• “Prince William is adored by many.”
• “Italy was invaded by Attila the Hun in 452.”
Job Titles and Familial Roles
Many times, a person may be referred to according to a professional title or
familial role instead of by name. In this case, the title is being used as a
noun of address and is considered a proper noun, even if it would be a
common noun in other circumstances. For example:
• “How are you doing, Coach?”
• “I need your advice, Mr. President.”
• "Mom, can you come with me to the playground?”
• “Pleased to meet you, Doctor.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Common nouns identify people, places, or things that are ___________?
a) Especially unique or one-of-a-kind
b) Generic among other similar nouns
c) Addressed by the speaker
d) Uncountable
2. Things referred to by their brand use which kind of nouns?
a) Common nouns
b) Proper nouns
3. Nouns of address are used in the same way as which kind of nouns?
a) Common nouns
b) Proper nouns
Nouns of Address
23

Definition
Nouns of address (technically called vocatives, but also known as
nominatives of address or nouns of direct address) identify the
person or group being directly spoken to. Like interjections, they are
grammatically unrelated to the rest of the sentence—that is, they don’t
modify or affect any other part of it. Instead, they are used to let the listener
or reader know who you are addressing, or to get that person’s attention. For
example:
• “James, I need you to help me with the dishes.”
• “Can I have some money, Mom?”
• “This, class, is the video I was telling you about.”
• “Mr. President, I didn’t see you there.”
• “Hey, guy in the red shirt, can you help me?”
Punctuation
Nouns of address are found in the initial, middle, or final position in a
sentence. No matter where they occur, they are normally set apart from the
rest of the sentence by one or two commas. If they occur in the initial
position, they are followed by a comma. If they occur in the middle position,
they are enclosed between two commas, and if they occur in the final
position, they are preceded by a comma. For example:
• “James, I was wondering if you could help me with the dishes.”
• “I was wondering, James, if you could help me with the dishes.” 
• “I was wondering if you could help me with the dishes, James.”
• “Class, this is the video I was telling you about.” 
• “This, class, is the video I was telling you about.” 
• “This is the video I was telling you about, class.”
Capitalization
Proper nouns
Proper nouns, such as the name or title of a person, are the most frequent
nouns of address. These nouns are always capitalized, no matter where they
24

appear in a sentence. If a professional title is used with the name, it is
capitalized as well. For example:
• “Can you help me, James?”
• “Thank you, Mrs. Smith, for being here.”
• “It’s so nice to meet you, Doctor Jenner.”
• “Hey, Coach Frank, how are you doing today?”
Common nouns in place of titles
Common nouns can also be used as nouns of address. If the common noun is
the title of a job or family member and is used in place of a person’s name, it
should always be capitalized. For example:
• “How are you doing, Coach?”
• “I need your advice, Mr. President.”
• "Can you come with me, Mom?”
• “Pleased to meet you, Doctor.”
Compare the examples above to the following cases in which the same titles
of jobs and family members are not used to address the person directly, and
therefore are not capitalized:
• “Give that football to the coach.”
• “Was the president at the meeting?”
• “Tell your mom to come with us.”
• “Did you call the doctor yet?”
Terms of endearment
When a term of endearment is being used in place of a person’s name, we do
not capitalize the word unless it begins the sentence. For example:
• “Would you get me a glass of water, sweetie?”
• “Thanks, pal, I appreciate your help.”
• “Love, please put away your clothes.”
Other common nouns
25

If they do not act as a professional or familial title, other common nouns
should generally remain in lowercase, unless they occur as the first word of
the sentence. For example:
• “This, class, is the video I was telling you about.”
• “Can you help me, guy in the red shirt?”
• “Please stand up, boys and girls.”
• “Ladies and gentlemen, please remain seated for the duration of the
performance.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Nouns of address occur in the ________.
a) initial position
b) middle position
c) final position
d) A & C
e) All of the above
 
2. Nouns of address are set apart by ________.
a) periods
b) commas
c) hyphens
d) semicolons
 
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain a noun of address?
a) “Oh, hello, Dad.”
b) “Come with me, Daniel.”
c) “Coach, I thought that was you!”
d) “Give that message to the president, please.”
 
4. Which of the following sentences is written incorrectly?
a) “I wish you were here, grandma.”
b) “I wish my grandma was here.”
c) “I wish you were here, Grandma.”
d) “Grandma, I wish you were here.”
26

 
5. Which of the following sentences is written incorrectly?
a) “Please help us, Doctor Green.”
b) “Doctor Green please help us.”
c) “Please, Doctor Green, help us.”
d) “Doctor Green, please help us.”
Concrete and Abstract Nouns
All nouns serve to name a person, place, or thing. Depending on whether
they name a tangible or an intangible thing, nouns are classed as being
either concrete or abstract.
Concrete Nouns
Concrete nouns name people, places, animals, or things that are or were
physically tangible—that is, they can or could be seen or touched, or have
some physical properties. For instance:
rocks
lake
countries
people
child
air
water
bread
Proper nouns are also usually concrete, as they describe unique people,
places, or things.
Mary
The Queen
Africa
my MacBook
a Pepsi
Abstract Nouns
27

Abstract nouns, as their name implies, name intangible things, such as
concepts, ideas, feelings, characteristics, attributes, etc.—you cannot see or
touch these kinds of things.
Here are some examples of abstract nouns:
love
hate
decency
conversation
emotion
aspiration
excitement
lethargy
Gerunds, verbs that end in “-ing” and function as nouns, are also abstract.
For example:
running
swimming
jumping
reading
writing
loving
breathing
These all name actions as concepts. They cannot be seen or touched, so we
know they are not concrete.
Countable 
Nouns 
vs.
Uncountable Nouns
Both concrete and abstract nouns can be either countable or
uncountable, depending on what they name.
Countable Nouns
Countable nouns (also known as count nouns) are, as the name suggests,
nouns that can be counted as individual units.
28

Concrete countable nouns
Many concrete nouns are countable. Consider the following, for example:
cup
ambulance
phone
person
dog
computer
doctor
Each of these can be considered as an individual, separable item, which
means that we are able to count them with numbers—we can have one, two,
five, 15, 100, and so on. We can also use them with the indefinite articles a
and an (which signify a single person or thing) or with the plural form of
the noun. For example:
a cup – two cups
an ambulance – several ambulances
a phone – 10 phones
a person – many people
Abstract countable nouns
Even though abstract nouns are not tangible, many of them can still be
counted as separable units. Like concrete nouns, they can take a or an or can
be made plural. For example:
a conversation – two conversations
an emergency – several emergencies
a reading – 10 readings
an aspiration – many aspirations
Uncountable Nouns
Uncountable nouns, on the other hand, are nouns that cannot be
considered as separate units. They are also known as non-count or mass
nouns.
29

Concrete uncountable nouns
Concrete nouns that are uncountable tend to be substances or collective
categories of things. For instance:
• wood, smoke, air, water
• furniture, homework, accommodation, luggage
Uncountable nouns cannot take the indefinite articles a or an in a sentence,
because these words indicate a single amount of something. Likewise, they
cannot take numbers or plural forms, because there cannot be multiple units
of them. For example:
✖ “I see a smoke over there.” (incorrect)
✔ “I see (some*) smoke over there.” (correct)
✖ “I don’t have furnitures.” (incorrect)
✔ “I don’t have (any*) furniture.” (correct)
(*We often use the words some or any to indicate an unspecified quantity of
uncountable nouns.)
However, uncountable nouns can sometimes take the definite article the,
because it does not specify an amount:
• “They’re swimming in the water.”
• “The homework this week is hard.”
Abstract uncountable nouns
A large number of abstract nouns are uncountable. These are usually ideas or
attributes. For instance:
• love, hate, news*, access, knowledge
• beauty, intelligence, arrogance, permanence
(*Even though news ends in an “-s,” it is uncountable. We need this “-s”
because without it, news would become new, which is an adjective.)
Again, these cannot take indefinite articles or be made plural.
✖ “He’s just looking for a love.” (incorrect)
✔ “He’s just looking for love.” (correct)
✖ “She’s gained a great deal of knowledges during college.” (incorrect)
✔ “She’s gained a great deal of knowledge during college.” (correct)
30

As with countable nouns, though, we can sometimes use the definite article
the:
• “I can’t stand watching the news.”
• “Can you believe the arrogance he exhibits?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a distinguishing feature of abstract nouns?
a) They can be seen or touched
b) They cannot be seen or touched
c) They can be counted
d) They cannot be counted
 
2. Proper nouns are generally _________.
a) concrete
b) abstract
 
3. Is the following word concrete or abstract?
amazement
a) concrete
b) abstract
4. Is the following word concrete or abstract?
sugar
a) concrete
b) abstract
5. Is the following word concrete or abstract?
Australia
a) concrete
b) abstract
6. True or False: All concrete nouns are countable.
a) True
b) False
31

Countable Nouns
Definition
Countable nouns (also known as count nouns) are nouns that can be
considered as individual, separable items, which means that we are able to
count them with numbers—we can have one, two, five, 15, 100, and so on.
We can also use them with the indefinite articles a and an (which signify a
single person or thing) or in their plural forms.
Countable nouns contrast with uncountable nouns (also known as non-
count or mass nouns), which cannot be separated and counted as
individual units or elements. Uncountable nouns cannot take an indefinite
article, nor can they be made plural.
Concrete vs. Abstract Countable
Nouns
Both concrete and abstract nouns can be countable. Concrete nouns
name people, places, or things that are tangible—they can be seen or
touched. Abstract nouns, on the other hand, name intangible things, such as
ideas, concepts, feelings, or attributes.
Concrete countable nouns
Concrete nouns are a bit easier to understand as being countable—after all,
they are things that we can see and feel, and so we can usually count them.
Consider the following, for example:
• cup
• ambulance
• phone
• person
• eel
• computer
• doctor
Each of these can be considered as an individual item or unit, which means
that we are able to count them:
32

Singular
Plural
a cup
two cups
an ambulance several ambulances
a phone
10 phones
a person
many people
an eel
three eels
a computer
a few computers
a doctor
some doctors
 
Abstract countable nouns
Even though abstract nouns are not tangible, many of them can still be
counted as separable units. Like concrete nouns, they can take a or an or can
be made plural.
Consider these abstract nouns:
• conversation
• emergency
• reading
• aspiration
• emotion
• belief
Now let’s see how they can be counted:
Singular
Plural
a conversation two conversations
an emergency several emergencies
a reading
10 readings
an aspiration
many aspirations
an emotion
hundreds of emotions
a belief
certain beliefs
33

Grammar with countable nouns
When we use countable nouns, certain elements in a sentence will change
depending on whether the noun is singular or plural.
Third-person singular vs. third-
person plural pronouns
If a countable noun is being represented by a third-person pronoun, we
must take care to use the correct singular or plural form.
Singular
When a noun is singular and names a person (or, sometimes, a pet) whose
gender is known,* then we use the third-person singular he, him, or his
(masculine) or she, her, or hers (feminine). For example:
• “The man left early, so I didn’t get a chance to talk to him.” (Man is
singular, so it takes the third-person singular pronoun him.)
• “The president has many things that she wants to accomplish in office.”
(President is singular, so it takes the third-person singular pronoun she.)
• “We taught our dog to know which bed is his.” (Dog is singular, so it takes
the third-person singular pronoun his.)
If the noun names a singular place, thing, or non-domestic animal, then we
must use the third-person neuter pronoun it:
• “I hate this computer because it is so slow!”
• “The cow lowed softly as it ate.”
• “Some people dislike this town, but I’ve always loved it.”
Plural
When a noun is plural, we use the same third-person pronouns for people,
places, animals, and things: they, them, and theirs*. For example:
• “The parade floats are spectacular! I love watching them go down the
street.”
34

• “Bill and Samantha told me they were coming over later.”
• “Make sure the children know which bags are theirs.”
*Usage Note: “Singular they”
English does not have a way of identifying a single person with a pronoun if
his or her gender is not known, so sometimes the third-person plural forms
(they, them, etc.) are used as a gender-neutral alternative to the third-person
feminine/masculine forms. This is sometimes called “singular they.”
For example:
• “You shouldn’t judge someone until you know what they are really like.”
• “If anyone needs extra help with their studies, they should feel free to see
me after class.”
While it is still considered incorrect by some writers and writing guides,
especially in American English, “singular they” is gradually becoming
accepted as the norm, especially in instances with indefinite pronouns that
sound plural but are grammatically singular (like anyone in the example
above).
Subject-Verb Agreement
Because countable nouns can be either singular or plural, it is very important
to use the correct subject-verb agreement when they are functioning as
the subject of a clause.
Subject-verb agreement refers to using certain conjugations of verbs for
singular subjects and using other conjugations for plural subjects. This
happens most noticeably with the verb to be, which becomes is or was with
singular subject nouns and are or were with plural subjects.
For example:
• “My brother is back from college.” (singular present simple tense)
• “The company was in financial trouble.” (singular past simple tense)
• “Many people are getting frustrated with the government.” (plural present
simple tense)
• “The computers were rather old.” (plural past simple tense)
For any other verb, we only need to make a change if it is in the present
simple tense. For most verbs, this is accomplished by adding an “-s” to the
35

end if it is singular and leaving it in its base form if it is plural. For example:
• “My father runs his own business.” (singular)
• “But his sons run it when he’s away.” (plural)
• “The dog wags his tail when he is happy.” (singular)
• “Dogs sometimes wag their tails when they’re angry or scared.” (plural)
The verbs have and do also only conjugate for singular subjects in the
present simple tense, but they have irregular forms for this: has and does.
For example:
• “The apple has a mark on it.” (singular)
• “All the apples have marks on them.” (plural)
• “The teacher does not think it’s a good idea.” (singular)
• “The other teachers do not mind, though.” (plural)
Finally, the modal auxiliary verbs will, would, shall, should, can, could,
might, and must do not conjugate for singular vs. plural subjects—they
always remain the same. For instance:
• “This phone can also surf the Internet!” (singular)
• “Most phones can do that now.” (plural)
• “The president will arrive in Malta next week.” (singular)
• “The other diplomats will arrive shortly after that.” (plural)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following cannot be used with countable nouns?
a) Indefinite articles
b) Definite articles
c) Third-person singular pronouns
d) Plural forms
e) All of the above
f) None of the above
2. True or False: Countable nouns are always concrete nouns.
a) True
b) False
3. How do most verbs conjugate when they have a singular subject?
36

a) By adding “-d” to the end
b) By adding “-s” to the end
c) They remain in their base form
d) They take an auxiliary verb
 
4. Which of the following third-person pronouns is used for plural nouns?
a) he
b) she
c) it
d) they
 
5. Which of the following third-person pronouns is used for non-gendered
singular nouns?
a) he
b) she
c) it
d) they
Uncountable Nouns
Definition
Nouns that cannot be divided or counted as individual elements or separate
parts are called uncountable nouns (also known as mass nouns or non-
count nouns). These can be tangible objects (such as substances or
collective categories of things), or intangible or abstract things, such as
concepts or ideas. Nouns that can be divided are called countable nouns,
or simply count nouns.
Here are some examples of uncountable nouns:
• wood, smoke, air, water 
• furniture, homework, accommodation, luggage
• love, hate, beauty, intelligence, arrogance
• news*, access
(*Even though news ends in an “-s,” it is uncountable. We need this “-s”
because without it, news would become new, which is an adjective.)
37

Using articles with uncountable
nouns
Uncountable nouns cannot take the indefinite articles “a” or “an” in a
sentence, because these words indicate a single amount of something. For
example:
✖ “Would you like a tea?” (incorrect)
✔ “Would you like tea?” (correct)
✖ “Do you have an information?” (incorrect)
✔ “Do you have (some/any) information?” (correct)
(We often use the words “some” or “any” to indicate an unspecified quantity
of uncountable nouns. We’ll investigate this more in a later part of this
section.)
However, uncountable nouns can sometimes take the definite article “the,”
as in:
• “Have you heard the news?”
• “The furniture in my living room is old.”
However, this is only the case if a specific uncountable noun is being
described. For example:
✖ “I am looking for an accommodation.” (incorrect)
✖ “I am looking for the accommodation.” (incorrect)
✔ “I am looking for accommodation.” (correct)
✔ “I am looking for the accommodation listed in this advertisement.”
(correct—references specific accommodation)
Uncountable 
nouns 
are 
not
plural
Third-person singular vs. third-
person plural pronouns
38

Just as uncountable nouns cannot take the indefinite articles “a” or “an”
because there is not “one” of them, it is equally incorrect to use third-person
plural pronouns with them, as they are not considered a collection of single
things. For example:
• Person A: “Your hair looks very nice today.”
✖ Person B: “Yes, I washed them last night.” (incorrect)
✔ Person B: “Yes, I washed it last night.” (correct)
Note that single hairs become countable. If there are two hairs on your
jacket, you can say “hairs” or use the plural pronoun “they.” The hair on your
head, however, is seen as an uncountable noun.
Plural forms of the noun
We also cannot make uncountable nouns plural by adding “-s” on the end.
Again, they are grammatically regarded as single, collective units. For
example:
✖ “We bought new camping equipments.” (incorrect)
✔ “We bought new camping equipment.” (correct)
✖ “The teacher gave us many homeworks.” (Incorrect. We also cannot
use the quantifier “many” with uncountable nouns, because it refers to
individual things.)
✔ “The teacher gave us a lot of homework.” (Correct. We can use the
quantifier “a lot” to indicate a large amount of an uncountable noun.)
Subject-verb agreement
Because uncountable nouns cannot be plural, it is very important to use the
correct subject-verb agreement. Subject-verb agreement refers to using
certain conjugations of verbs with singular vs. plural subjects. This happens
most noticeably with the verb to be, which becomes is or was with singular
subject nouns and are or were with plural subjects. Because uncountable
nouns are grammatically singular, they must take singular forms of their
verbs.
Here are a few examples illustrating this distinction:
✖ “The furnitures in my living room are old.” (incorrect)
✖ “The furnitures in my living room is old.” (incorrect)
✔ “The furniture in my living room is old.” (correct)
39

✖ “Their behaviors are not good.” (incorrect)
✔ “Their behavior is not good.” (correct)
✖ “The news are good.” (incorrect)
✔ “The news is good.” (correct)
Measurements of distance, time,
and amount
A notable exception to the subject-verb rule we just discussed relates to
countable nouns that are describing measurements of distance, time, or
amount. In this case, we consider the sum as a singular amount, and so they
must take singular forms of their verbs. For example:
✖ “$20,000 have been credited to your account.” (incorrect)
✔ “$20,000 has been credited to your account.” (correct)
✖ “I think 50 miles are too far to travel on foot.” (incorrect)
✔ “I think 50 miles is too far to travel on foot.” (correct)
✖ “Wow, two hours fly by when you’re having fun!” (incorrect)
✔ “Wow, two hours flies by when you’re having fun!” (correct)
Making 
uncountable 
nouns
countable
If we want to identify one or more specific “units” of an uncountable noun,
then we must add more information to the sentence to make this clear.
For example, if you want to give someone advice in general, you could say:
• “Can I give you advice?” or;
• “Can I give you some advice?”
But if you wanted to emphasize that you’d like to give them a particular
aspect or facet of advice, you could not say, “Can I give you an advice?”
Instead, we have to add more information to specify what we want to give:
• “Can I give you a piece of advice?”
By adding “piece of” to the uncountable noun advice, we have now made it
functionally countable. This means that we can also make this phrase
plural, though we have to be careful to pluralize the count noun that we’ve
40

added, and not the uncountable noun itself. For example:
• “Can I give you a few pieces of advice?”
Using 
quantifiers 
with
uncountable nouns
As we’ve already seen, certain quantifiers (a kind of determiner that
specifies an amount of something) can only be used with uncountable
nouns, while others can only modify countable nouns. While we will examine
these more in depth in the chapter on Determiners, here are a few
examples that cause particular confusion.
Too – Too Much – Too Many
We use “too + adjective” to mean “beyond what is needed or desirable,” as in,
“It is too big.”
Too much, on the other hand, is used to modify uncountable nouns, while
too many is used with countable nouns—they are not used with adjectives.
For example, the following sentences would both be incorrect:
✖ “It is too much big.”
✖ “It is too many big.”
One particular source of confusion that can arise here is the fact that much
can be used as an adverb before too to give it emphasis, as in:
• “It is much too big.”
We also must be sure not to use too much with a countable noun, nor too
many with an uncountable noun.
✖ “I have too much pieces of furniture.” (incorrect)
✔ “I have too many pieces of furniture.” (correct)
✖ “I have too many furniture.” (incorrect)
✔ “I have too much furniture.” (correct)
Fewer vs. Less
The conventional rule regarding less vs. fewer is that we use fewer with
countable nouns and less with uncountable nouns. For example:
41

✖ “I have less friends than Jill has.” (incorrect)
✔ “I have fewer friends than Jill has.” (correct)
✖ “I have fewer money than he has.” (incorrect)
✔ “I have less money than he has.” (correct)
The rule carries over when we add words to an uncountable noun to make a
countable phrase (as we looked at above). We can see this distinction in the
following examples:
• “I want less toast.” (toast is uncountable)
• “I want fewer pieces of toast.” (pieces of toast is countable)
• “There is less water in the jug.” (water is uncountable)
• “There are fewer cups of water in the jug.” (cups of water is countable)
Measurements of distance, time,
and amount
As we noted above, measurements of distance, time, or amount for nouns
that we would normally consider countable (and thus plural) end up taking
singular verbs. Likewise, these terms also take the word less, most often in
the construction less than. For example:
• “$20,000 is less than we expected to pay.”
• “We walked less than 50 miles to get here.”
• “We have less than two hours to finish this project.”
• “I weigh 20 pounds less than I used to.”
Note, however, that we can’t use less before these kinds of nouns:
✖ “We have less $20,000.” (incorrect)
✖ “I ran less 10 miles.” (incorrect)
Less is also used with countable nouns in the construction one less _____,
as in:
• “That is one less problem to worry about.”
Fewer can also be used (albeit less commonly), but the construction usually
changes to one ______ fewer, as in:
• “That is one problem fewer to worry about.”
42

Rule or non-rule?
It is important to note that many grammar guides dispute the necessity of
this supposed “rule,” referencing that it was in fact implemented as a stylistic
preference by the 1770 grammarian Robert Baker, and that fewer and less
had been used interchangeably for countable and uncountable nouns for
hundreds of years before that. Specifically, it is considered by some as
acceptable to use less with countable nouns, especially in informal or
colloquial writing and speech.
As long as the sentence does not sound awkward, it is probably safe to do so.
However, many still regard the fewer vs. less rule as indisputable, so it is
recommended to adhere to the rule for professional, formal, or academic
writing.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which article can be used with uncountable nouns?
a) a
b) an
c) the
d) A & B
2. What verb form is generally used with uncountable nouns?
a) singular
b) plural
c) singular in the past tense only
d) plural in the past tense only
 
3. Which of the following is an uncountable noun?
a) person
b) friend
c) intelligent
d) news
 
4. Which of the following is not an uncountable noun?
a) love
43

b) piece
c) wood
d) water
5. Which of the following sentences is correct?
a) “We are waiting for a news.”
b) “You can never have too many love.”
c) “These homeworks are very hard.”
d) “Could I have less water, please?”
Collective Nouns
Definition
Collective nouns are nouns that refer to a collection or group of multiple
people, animals, or things. However, even though collective nouns refer to
multiple individuals, they still usually function as singular nouns in a
sentence. This is because they still are technically referring to one thing: the
group as a whole. Here are some examples of collective nouns:
group – A group is a single unit that is made up of a number of
individuals, whether people or things.
collection – A collection is a single unit that typically consists of
many similar things organized together, such as paintings.
tribe – A tribe is a single unit that is made up of a group of tribe
members.
fleet – A fleet is a single unit that is made up of several vehicles or
vessels, such as ships.
band – A band is a single unit that consists of a number of different
musicians.
Collective nouns are used in sentences to refer to a group of people, animals,
or things. Here are some examples of collective nouns being used in
sentences:
• “The flock of birds flew south for the winter.”
• “The organization voted to revoke the rules that it had previously
approved.”
• “The set of tablecloths had disappeared. ”
44

Similarity to plural nouns
Collective nouns are very similar to plural nouns. Plural nouns are nouns
that refer to multiple people, places, or things, and they primarily (but not
always) end in “-s,” “-es,” or “-ies.” They are derived from singular nouns, and
so are truly plural in form and function. For example, the following words are
all plural nouns:
dogs
cities
tables
oceans
sleds
Both plural nouns and collective nouns can refer to multiple things. The
difference is that collective nouns refer to a group of individuals in a single
unit, whereas plural nouns refer to multiple individuals. To understand the
difference, consider the following sentence:
• “The musicians played the song beautifully.”
This sentence contains the plural noun musicians. This word lets the reader
know that there are multiple musicians who played the song beautifully.
However, consider the following sentence:
• “The orchestra played the song beautifully.”
This sentence contains the collective noun orchestra. This word lets the
reader know that there is a group of musicians that played the song
beautifully. However, it also lets the reader know that the multiple musicians
are arranged into a single group. The plural noun musicians in the first
sentence does not do that.
Here are two more examples:
• “The soldiers marched very swiftly.” (plural noun)
• “The platoon marched very swiftly.” (collective noun)
As in the previous examples, both soldiers and platoon indicate multiple
people. However, only platoon lets the reader know that the soldiers are
organized into a collective unit.
Singular vs. Plural Use
45

Collective nouns usually function as singular nouns in a sentence, but they
are occasionally used as plurals, too. Whether they are used in a singular or
plural manner can impact which verbs and pronouns should be associated
with the word.
The way we determine in which manner the collective noun should be used
is to consider whether the members of the collective noun are being regarded
as a single, whole unit, or as multiple individuals. If they are functioning as a
whole, then you use singular verb tenses and pronouns; if they are acting
individually, then you use plural verb tenses and pronouns.
For example, the following sentence demonstrates singular use of a collective
noun:
• “The offense hopes to score a touchdown on its next play.”
Here, the collective noun offense refers to the members of the team’s
offensive unit functioning as a whole; therefore, it acts as a singular noun in
the sentence. As a result, the verb hopes and the pronoun its are also
singular.
Compare this to the next sentence, which demonstrates plural use of a
collective noun:
• “The jury eat their lunches before they deliberate.”
In this sentence, the collective noun, jury, refers to the jury members acting
individually. As a result, jury functions as a plural noun in the sentence. This
means that the plural pronouns they and their are used, as is the plural form
of the verb eat.
Finally, it is worth noting that in British English, it is more common for
collective nouns to function as plurals in all instances.
Plural-only collective nouns
Certain collective nouns can only be plural, such as “police.” For example:
✖ “The police is investigating the matter.” (incorrect)
✔ “The police are investigating the matter.” (correct)
However, we can make the noun countable by adding more information to
the sentence. If we want to specify a single member of the police, we could
say:
• “A police officer is investigating the matter.”
46

Here are some other examples of collective nouns that can only be plural:
people
children
poultry
vermin
cattle
Collective Nouns and Animals
In the English language, there are many different types of collective nouns
that refer to different groupings of animals. There are hundreds of different
collective nouns used to describe animal group names, but here are a few
common ones:
flock of birds
pod of whales
pack of wolves
pride of lions
gaggle of geese
band of coyotes
gatling of woodpeckers
huddle of penguins
mob of kangaroos
school of fish
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following words is a collective noun?
a) birds
b) berries
c) cake
d) team
 
2. Which word is the collective noun in the following sentence?
“The herd moved north over the mountains.”
a) moved
47

b) north
c) herd
d) mountains
 
3. Which of the following is not a collective noun?
a) ships
b) group
c) committee
d) government
 
4. A collective noun is usually _______ in a sentence.
a) plural
b) singular
c) Neither
d) A & B
 
5. Which of the following is a collective noun that refers to a group of
animals?
a) book
b) snow
c) flock
d) sky
Compound Nouns
Definition
A compound noun is a noun consisting of two or more words working
together as a single unit to name a person, place, or thing. Compound nouns
are usually made up of two nouns or an adjective and a noun, but other
combinations are also possible, as well.
Generally, the first word in the compound noun tells us what kind of
person or thing it is or what purpose he, she, or it serves, while the second
word defines the person or object, telling us who or what it is. For example:
• water + bottle = water bottle (a bottle used for water)
• dining + room = dining room (a room used for dining)
48

• back + pack = backpack (a pack you wear on your back)
• police + man = policeman (a police officer who is a man)
Like other nouns, compound nouns can be modified by other adjectives. For
example:
• “I need to buy a large water bottle.”
• “That’s a beautiful dining room.”
• “My old backpack is still my favorite.”
• “A lone policeman foiled the attempted robbery.”
You can recognize compound nouns because the meaning of the two words
put together is different than the meaning of the words separately. For
example, water and bottle have their own separate meanings, but when we
use them together they mean a particular type of bottle that we drink water
from.
Forming compound nouns
As mentioned, compound nouns are formed by combining two or more
words, with the most common combinations being noun + noun or adjective
+ noun. However, combinations using other parts of speech are also possible.
Below are the various combinations used to create compound nouns.
Noun + noun
There are a great number of compound nouns formed using the noun + noun
combination. For example:
• backpack 
• bathroom 
• bathtub 
• bedroom 
• bus stop 
• fish tank 
• football
• handbag 
• motorcycle 
• shopkeeper 
• tablecloth 
• toothpaste 
49

• wallpaper 
• water bottle 
• website
• wristwatch
Adjective + noun
There are also many compound nouns that are formed using the adjective +
noun combination. For example:
• full moon
• blackberry 
• blackbird
• blackboard
• cell(ular) phone 
• mobile phone 
• hardware 
• highway
• greenhouse
• redhead
• six-pack
• small talk
• software
• whiteboard
Other combinations
Although the noun + noun and adjective + noun combinations are the most
common, there are also plenty of other possibilities for forming compound
nouns. For example:
Combination
Examples
noun + verb
haircut, rainfall, sunrise, sunset
noun + preposition
hanger-on, passerby
noun 
+
prepositional
phrase
brother-in-law, mother-in-law
noun + adjective
cupful, spoonful
50

verb + noun
breakfast, 
washing 
machine, 
runway,
pickpocket, swimming pool
preposition + noun
bystander, 
influx, 
onlooker, 
underpants,
upstairs
verb + preposition
check-in, 
checkout/check-out, 
drawback,
lookout, makeup
adjective + verb
dry cleaning, public speaking
preposition + verb
input, output, overthrow, upturn
Writing compound nouns
Compound nouns are very common, both in written and spoken English, and
there are spelling, punctuation, and pronunciation norms that we must be
aware of if we want to use them correctly.
The 
three 
written 
forms 
of
compound nouns
Writing compound nouns is a bit complicated due to the fact that they can
take three different forms.
First, open compound nouns (or spaced compound nouns) are those
that are written as two separate words, such as washing machine, swimming
pool, and water bottle.
Second, there are hyphenated compound nouns, as in check-in, hanger-
on, and mother-in-law.
Third, there are closed compound nouns (or solid compound nouns)
—those that are written as one word, such as rainfall, drawback, and
toothpaste.
Unfortunately, there aren’t any rules that tell us which of the three forms is
acceptable for a particular compound noun. Some compound nouns are
commonly written in two forms, as in website / web site or checkout / check-
out, while others, such as bus stop, are strictly used in one form. Where more
than one is possible, the form that is more commonly used may depend on
the variety of English (American English vs. British English, for example),
51

the style guide of a publication, or the personal preference of the writer.
If you’re not sure which of the three forms to use, it’s important to check a
good, up-to-date dictionary. If you are relying on the spellchecker in a word
processor, remember that this has its limits. For example, spellcheck is good
for checking whether a particular compound noun can be written as one
word (closed); however, if we write a compound noun as two words (open)
and it should be written as one word (closed), or if we write it with a hyphen
and it should be written without a hyphen, spellcheck will not catch the
mistakes.
Finally, remember that, no matter which way the compound noun is written,
it always functions grammatically as a single unit.
Pluralizing compound nouns
We usually pluralize a compound noun by adding an “-s” or “-es” to the main
word, or the defining word, of the compound noun. This is usually the
second word, but not always. For example:
Singular
Plural
bedroom
bedrooms
football
footballs
water bottle water bottles
full moon
full moons
BUT
Singular
Plural
secretary general
secretaries general
mother-in-law
mothers-in-law
passerby / passer-by passersby / passers-by
When it’s not obvious which of the words is the defining word, we pluralize
the end of it. For example:
Singular
Plural
52

haircut
haircuts
check-in
check-in
checkout / check-out checkouts / check-outs
upturn
upturns
Pronouncing compound nouns
In general, compound nouns are pronounced with the emphasis on the first
part of the word. For example:
BEDroom
BLACKbird
CHECK-in
GREENhouse
MAKEup
WATER bottle
Pronouncing compound nouns in this way helps us distinguish words that
form a compound noun like blackbird and greenhouse from other instances
when the same words would appear together, as in: “Look at that beautiful
black bird,” or “I like that green house on the corner.”
Although we normally stress the first word in a compound noun, there are
certain exceptions to this pattern. For example, we disregard this rule when
pronouncing compound nouns that include titles or proper nouns, as in
Secretary GENeral and Mount RUSHmore.
If in doubt, you can use a good dictionary to determine which syllable
should be emphasized.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Compound nouns are made up of ________ words.
a) two or more
b) two
c) many
d) one or two
53

2. Closed compound nouns are written ________.
a) as two words
b) as one word
c) with a hyphen
d) with a comma
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain a compound noun?
a) “Did you see that noisy blackbird?”
b) “Let’s go eat breakfast.”
c) “I’d love to live in a green house with a red door.”
d) “Would you like to see my new swimming pool?”
4. Which of the following compound nouns is written incorrectly?
a) spoonful
b) tablecloth
c) hangeron
d) passerby
5. If capital letters show emphasis in pronunciation, which word is
pronounced incorrectly?
a) attorney GENeral
b) PASSERby
c) BACKpack
d) PRIME minister
Nominalization (Creating Nouns)
Definition
Nominalization refers to the creation of a noun from verbs or adjectives.
Most of the time, nouns are created from other parts of speech through the
use of suffixes. In other cases, the word remains the same but is simply
used a different way; this is known as conversion or zero derivation.
Suffixes
54

Suffixes are certain groupings of letters that can be attached to the end of
words to change their meaning. Most verbs and adjectives that become
nouns are changed using suffixes.
(Be aware, however, that the examples below only show some of the
common ways of using suffixes to change verbs and adjectives to nouns; they
are not all concrete rules, and the lists of possible suffixes are not exhaustive
ones. The best way to learn the spellings of such nouns is by using a good
dictionary, or by encountering them in everyday speech and writing.)
Verbs
There are certain patterns that we follow to decide which suffix is needed in
order to create a noun from a verb.
Gerunds
The most straightforward way of turning a verb into a noun is through the
use of gerunds. These are made by adding the suffix “-ing” to the end of the
verb. For example:
• “Walking is very pleasant.”
• “I enjoy reading.”
• “Listening is an important aspect of any relationship.”
• “My sleeping has been very disrupted lately.”
• “Baking is my favorite pastime.”
• “I hate running.”
Note that if the gerund takes any additional information, such as an object,
adverb, or prepositional phrase, then this entire group of words (known
as a gerund phrase) acts as a noun. To learn more about gerunds and
gerund phrases, go to the section on Gerunds in the chapter about Other
Parts of Speech.
Nouns of agency and profession
When we turn a verb into a noun to represent someone (or occasionally
something) who is an agent of that action, or who performs the action in a
professional capacity, we typically use the suffixes “-or,” “-er,” or “-r.” For
example:
55

• “My fiancée is an actor.” (Someone who acts.)
• “I’m training to be a teacher.” (Someone who teaches.)
• “The writer is very well known.” (Someone who writes.)
• “The company is a major employer in the area.” (Something that employs
people.)
• “The projector was broken today.” (Something that projects.)
Nouns of recipience
For verbs that become nouns to represent someone who is the recipient of
an action, we often use the suffix “-ee.”
Perhaps the most common example of this in modern English is employee
(someone who others employ), as in:
• “The employee is disputing his wages.”
Other examples include:
• “The bank must approve you as the payee.” (Someone who is paid.)
• “There is one more interviewee waiting to be seen.” (Someone who is
interviewed.)
Nouns of general action
We can use a variety of different suffixes to describe an action in general. The
most common of these are “-tion,” “-sion,” “-ance,” “-ment,” and “-ence”; in
some instances, we change the ending of the verb slightly in order to take the
suffix.
For example:
• “His acceptance of the position was received warmly.” (The verb accept
becomes the noun acceptance.)
• “Thank you for the invitation!” (The verb invite becomes the noun
invitation.)
• “In conclusion, we should see a spike in profits soon.” (The verb conclude
becomes the noun conclusion.)
• “Government must derive from the will of the population.” (The verb
govern becomes the noun government; the verb populate becomes the
noun population.))
56

• “Attendance is at an all-time low.” (The verb attend becomes the noun
attendance.)
• “I was surprised by my enjoyment of the play.” (The verb enjoy becomes
the noun enjoyment.)
• “Use the textbook as your reference if you’re confused.” (The verb refer
becomes the noun reference.)
Some other suffixes that work in this way are “-al” and “-ure,” as in:
• “Failure to find a solution is not an option.” (The verb fail becomes the
noun failure.)
• “The review will include a quick perusal of your work.” (The verb peruse
becomes the noun perusal.)
Adjectives
We change adjectives into nouns when we want to speak of them as general
ideas or concepts. Adjectives can take a variety of different suffixes,
depending on how they are spelled.
“-ness”
We often use the suffix “-ness” for many adjectives. Most of the time, we can
simply add the suffix on to the end of the adjective without making any
changes to its spelling. For example:
• “The hardness of diamond makes it a great cutting tool.” (The adjective
hard becomes the noun hardness.)
• “The child’s meekness is quite sweet.” (The adjective meek becomes the
noun meekness.)
• “His gruffness is not appreciated.” (The adjective gruff becomes the noun
gruffness.)
• “I don’t care for the roughness of my hands.” (The adjective rough
becomes the noun roughness.)
• “I don’t think you understand the seriousness of the situation.” (The
adjective serious becomes the noun seriousness.)
• “Please don’t underestimate my gratefulness.” (The adjective grateful
becomes the noun gratefulness.)
However, when we use this suffix with an adjective ending in “-y,” we change
57

“y” to “i”:
• “We’re waiting for some steadiness in the market.” (The adjective steady
becomes the noun steadiness.)
• “The teacher puts her students’ happiness above all else.” (The adjective
happy becomes the noun happiness.)
Some adjectives ending in a “-t” preceded by a long vowel sound can take this
suffix as well:
• “Her greatness is without question.” (The adjective great becomes the
noun greatness.)
• “The flatness of the Earth was disproven long ago.” (The adjective flat
becomes the noun flatness.)
“-y”
Other adjectives that end in a “-t” preceded by a consonant will take the
suffix “-y” to become nouns. For example:
• “This project will be fraught with difficulty.” (The adjective difficult
becomes the noun difficulty.)
• “That’s enough of your modesty.” (The adjective modest becomes the
noun modesty.)
• “Honesty is a very important virtue.” (The adjective honest becomes the
noun honesty.)
“-ity”
When adjectives end in “-e,” they often take the suffix “-ity” to become
nouns. However, there is often a change to the spelling of the word. Usually,
we simply drop “e” and replace it with “-ity,” as in:
• “There is a scarcity of food in the city.” (The adjective scarce becomes the
noun scarcity.)
• “Kindness is a rarity in this world.” (The adjective rare becomes the noun
rarity.)
When the word ends in “ble,” though, we have to change “le” to “il,” as in:
• “This project is your responsibility.” (The adjective responsible becomes
the noun responsibility.)
58

• “I have no question of your ability.” (The adjective able becomes the noun
ability.)
Uniquely, we also use the “-ity” suffix to change the adjective hilarious to
hilarity, even though other adjectives with similar endings (such as serious,
grievous, callous, etc.) take the suffix “-ness.”
“-ance” and “-ence”
We often use the suffix “-ance” for adjectives ending in “-ant,” as in:
• “This is of the utmost importance.” (The adjective important becomes the
noun importance.)
• “Your ignorance is astounding.” (The adjective ignorant becomes the
noun ignorance.)
We often use the suffix “-ence” for adjectives ending in “-ent,” as in:
• “We demand greater independence.” (The adjective independent becomes
the noun independence.)
• “Silence is expected during tests.” (The adjective silent becomes the noun
silence.)
Conversion
When we use a verb or adjective as a noun without changing its spelling in
any way, it is called conversion or zero derivation.
Verbs
Conversion is especially common with verbs, and there are many instances
where the same word may function as a verb or a noun, depending on the
context. For example:
• “Please answer the phone, Tom.” (verb)
• “We’ll need an answer by tomorrow.” (noun)
• “I run each morning before breakfast.” (verb)
• “I’m going for a run later today.” (noun)
• “Meteorologists are forecasting a snowstorm overnight.” (verb)
• “The forecast said there would be rain in the afternoon.” (noun)
Less commonly, there are instances in which, instead of changing a word’s
59

spelling, we change where we pronounce a stress on the word’s syllables to
indicate a shift from a verb to a noun; this change is known as a suprafix.
Let’s look at some examples (with the stressed syllable underlined):
• “You need to convert pounds into kilograms.” (verb)
• “The church always welcomes recent converts to its meetings.” (noun)
• “Make sure you record the meeting so we can review it later.” (verb)
• “I love listening to old records.” (noun)
• “Please don’t insult my intelligence.” (verb)
• “We will not forget this insult to our company.” (noun)
The word use can also function as either a noun or a verb, but instead of
changing the stress on a syllable, we change the actual pronunciation of the
word, as in:
• “We plan to use a diagnostic test to evaluate the problem.” (verb—use is
pronounced “yooz”)
• “There is only one use for this tool.” (noun—use is pronounced “yuce”)
Nominal adjectives
We can also convert adjectives into nouns without changing spelling, but we
generally do so by adding the article the before the word. These are known as
nominal adjectives. For example:
• “The wealthy have an obligation to help the poor.”
• “We all want the best for her.”
• “This law protects the innocent.”
To learn more about how and when these are used, go to the section about
Nominal Adjectives in the chapter on Adjectives.
Infinitives
Lastly, verbs can serve the function of nouns by being used in their
infinitive form—that is, the base form of the verb with the particle to.
Infinitives are not technically an example of nominalization, because they
can also act as adjectives and adverbs, but it’s worth looking at how they
work when they function as nouns. For example:
As the subject of a clause
60

• “To err is human; to forgive is divine.”
• “To study mathematics at Harvard was her ultimate dream.”
• “To live in the city means adjusting to a completely different lifestyle.”
As the object of a verb
• “I’m not going unless you agree to go with me.”
• “You appear to be correct.”
• “Please be quiet; I’m trying to study.”
As an object complement
(An object complement is a word or group of words that describe, rename,
or complete the direct object of the verb.)
• “I don’t expect you to approve of my decision.”
• “She’s forcing me to work through the weekend.”
• “We need you to make a few more copies.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is used to change the spelling of a verb or adjective
that is made into a noun?
a) prefixes
b) suffixes
c) infixes
d) circumfixes
 
2. What is the name for nominalization in which the spelling of the verb or
adjective does not change?
a) inversion
b) conscription
c) conversion
d) elision
 
3. Which of the following suffixes is commonly used to change a verb to a
noun to reflect agency or profession?
61

a) “-or”
b) “-ing”
c) “-ance”
d) “-ence”
4. Which of the following nominalized verbs (in bold) is a gerund?
a) “Adherence to the rules is expected of all students.”
b) “We weren’t expecting her refusal of our offer.”
c) “Winning isn’t everything, you know.”
d) “We need to hire a few more employees.”
Pronouns
Definition
Pronouns are words that are used in place of nouns in a sentence. The
noun being replaced is known as the antecedent of the pronoun.
Using pronouns
We commonly use pronouns in speech and writing to avoid sounding
unnatural and repetitive by reusing the same noun in a sentence multiple
times. Take, for example, the following sentence:
• “John said that John wants to use the computer that belongs to John.”
The sentence is awkward because John is repeated so many times. Instead,
we can use personal pronouns to stand in for the name of the antecedent
to make the sentence sound more natural, as in:
• “John said that he wants to use the computer that belongs to him.”
In addition to making the sentence sound better, the pronouns provide
specific information, telling us that John is in the third person. If the
sentence were in the first person, it would read:
• “I said that I want to use the computer that belongs to me.”
(We never use our own names when we talk about what we’re doing in the
first person, so we use the personal pronoun I instead of an antecedent.)
As we can see in the examples above, the pronouns are all serving the same
function as nouns. They can be the subject of a sentence or clause, the
62

object of a verb, or they can follow linking verbs to rename or re-identify the
subject (known as a subject complement).
Categories of Pronouns
There is a wide range of different categories of pronouns that we use in
everyday speech and writing. Each kind of pronoun has a unique function in
a sentence; many pronouns belong to multiple categories, and can serve
different purposes depending on the context. We’ll briefly summarize these
categories below, but you can continue on into the chapter to learn more
about each.
Personal Pronouns
Personal pronouns, which we looked at briefly above, are used to
represent people in a sentence. Unique among pronouns, personal pronouns
experience a wide range of inflection, meaning they change form to reflect
specific meaning in different contexts.
We already saw in the example above how personal pronouns can inflect
according to grammatical person (first person, second person, or third
person), but they also change to reflect grammatical number (singular or
plural), gender (masculine, feminine, or neuter), and case (subjective,
objective, or possessive).
Go to each of the sub-sections of personal pronouns to learn more about
all their different forms.
Reflexive Pronouns
Reflexive pronouns are very similar in style and form to personal
pronouns—so similar, in fact, that they are listed as a sub-group of personal
pronouns in this guide. (They are technically not personal pronouns, but
their use and the way they are formed are so similar that it is useful seeing
them in direct comparison to personal pronouns.)
We use reflexive pronouns when the subject of a clause is also the object of
the clause’s verb. This occurs with certain reflexive verbs. They are formed
by adding “-self” (singular) or “-selves” (plural) to the end of my, your, our,
him, her, it or them (as well as the indefinite pronoun one). For example:
• “I saw myself in the mirror.”
63

• “She imagined herself on a tropical beach.”
• “They consider themselves to be above the law.”
• “One should not concern oneself with the business of others.”
Intensive Pronouns
Intensive pronouns are identical to reflexive pronouns in form, but,
instead of functioning as the object of a verb, they serve to emphasize or
reiterate the subject’s role in the verb’s action. For instance:
• “I checked over these documents myself.”
• “The president himself will be in attendance.”
Indefinite Pronouns
We use indefinite pronouns in place of a noun that is not being specified
in the sentence. There are many different indefinite pronouns; which one we
use depends on whether we are representing a noun that is a person or thing,
and whether that noun is singular or plural. Some common examples
include:
• “Is everyone here?”
• “I hope all is going well.”
• “Whatever you decide is fine with me.”
• “Many are coming to the show tonight.”
Demonstrative Pronouns
Demonstrative pronouns are used to indicate specific people or things
and indicate whether they are a) singular or plural and b) near or not near to
the speaker. The most common are this, that, these, and those. For example:
• “This isn’t mine.” (singular, nearby)
• “Give me that.” (singular, not near)
• “These are really gross.” (plural, nearby)
• “I forgot to bring those.” (plural, not near)
Interrogative Pronouns
64

Interrogative pronouns are used to ask questions, functioning either as
the subject or object of such sentences. There are five primary interrogative
pronouns: who, whom, whose, which, and what.
• “Who is coming to the party tonight?” (subject)
• “So, which will it be: $10,000, or a new sports car?” (object)
• “Could you tell me whose these are?” (subject)
• “Do you know what we’re doing here?” (object)
Relative Pronouns
Relative pronouns are used to connect relative clauses (also known as
adjective clauses) to the main clause in a sentence. Relative clauses either
help clarify the antecedent with essential information (in which case they are
known as restrictive clauses), or else give extra, nonessential information
about it (in which case they are known as non-restrictive clauses).
In a relative clause, the relative pronoun functions in one of three ways: as
the subject of the clause, as the object of the clause’s verb, or as a
possessive determiner. For example:
• “There’s the woman who always sits next to me on the bus.” (restrictive
clause; who functions as the subject)
• “The book that I wrote is being published in January.” (restrictive clause;
that functions as the object of wrote)
• “The escaped giraffe, which had been on the loose for weeks, was finally
captured.” (non-restrictive clause; which functions as the subject)
• “The person, whose name can’t be revealed, appeared in court today.”
(non-restrictive clause; whose functions as a possessive determiner,
modifying name)
Reciprocal pronouns
We use reciprocal pronouns when two or more people both act as the
subject of a verb, and both (or all) individually and equally receive the verb’s
action. They can be the object of either the verb itself or a preposition used to
complete the verb’s meaning.
There are two reciprocal pronouns—each other (traditionally used for two
people) and one another (traditionally used for more than two people). For
65

example:
• “Jake and I call each other every day.”
• “My neighbors and I spent a lot of time at each other’s houses when we
were kids.”
Dummy Pronouns
“Dummy” pronouns (more technically known as expletive pronouns)
are words that function grammatically as pronouns but do not have
antecedents—that is, they do not replace a noun, phrase, or clause. They
refer to nothing in particular, instead helping the sentence to function
properly in a grammatical context. There are two dummy pronouns, there
and it.
• “There is a ship in the harbor.”
• “There were flowers in the meadow.”
• “It looks like it may snow tonight.”
• “Could you tell me what time it is?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the term for a noun that is replaced by a pronoun?
a) Remnant
b) Descendent
c) Antecedent
d) Precedent
2. Which of the following pronouns are used when a subject is also the object
of the same verb?
a) Reflexive pronouns
b) Relative pronouns
c) Personal pronouns
d) Demonstrative pronouns
3. Which of the following pronouns are used to indicate the nearness and
number of a specific noun?
66

a) Reflexive pronouns
b) Relative pronouns
c) Personal pronouns
d) Demonstrative pronouns
 
4. Pronouns have the same grammatical function as _______ in a sentence.
a) Nouns
b) Adjectives
c) Adverbs
d) Prepositions
 
5. Identify the type of pronoun (in bold) used in the following sentence:
“Let me know if you need anything.”
a) Reciprocal pronoun
b) Interrogative pronoun
c) Indefinite pronoun
d) Dummy pronoun
Personal pronouns
Definition
A personal pronoun is a pronoun (a word that functions as and acts as a
substitute for a noun or nouns) that represents a grammatical person within
a sentence. While personal pronouns often do indicate an actual person, they
can also refer to animals, inanimate objects, or even intangible concepts. For
instance, the word they in the previous sentence is a plural third-person
neuter (gender neutral) pronoun representing the words “personal
pronouns” as a grammatical person. Here are some other examples:
• “As soon as John comes home, I am going to give him back his hat.”
• “My team lost again. We really stink this year!”
• “He spoke to the boss yesterday and already got her approval.”
Which personal pronoun is used in each instance varies depending on four
grammatical elements: number (singular or plural), person (first, second,
or third person), gender (male, female, or neuter/neutral), and case
(subjective, objective, or possessive). This shifting of form is called
67

inflection. Quite often, the inflection of a personal pronoun will change
within the same sentence.
There is also a different kind of pronoun called a reflexive pronoun, which
is used when the subject of a verb is also the object (receiving the action) of
the same verb. For example:
• “He looked at himself in the mirror before he left.”
• “I hurt myself on the playground today.”
Although not technically considered personal pronouns, reflexive pronouns
are so similar in form and use that they have been included in this section.
We will examine each of these grammatical elements in relation to personal
pronouns more in-depth in the sub-sections of this chapter, but here is a
quick breakdown of all the personal pronouns and their different
inflections.
Person Number
Gender
Subjective
Case
Objective
Case
Po
De
First
Person
Singular
Masculine/feminine I
Me
My
First
Person
Plural
Masculine/feminine We
Us
Ou
Second
Person
Singular/Plural Masculine/feminine You
You
You
Third
Person
Singular
Feminine
She
Her
Her
Third
Person
Singular
Masculine
He
Him
His
Third
person
Singular
Neuter
It
It
Its
Third
person
Plural*
Neuter 
(Gender
Neutral)
They
Them
The
 
(*See the usage note under “Gender” for information about using they as a
singular pronoun.)
68

Personal Pronouns - Number
Definition
Grammatical number in English simply means whether something or
someone is singular or plural—that is, is there one of something or
someone (singular), or are there more than one (plural)? This is answered by
the pronoun’s antecedent (the word, phrase, clause, etc., that indicates
what pronoun should be used, and in what form).
For nouns, we usually just add an “-s” to the end of the word to signify that it
is plural (though there are many exceptions to this). Personal pronouns,
however, have specific inflections (different forms of the word) depending
on whether they are singular or plural. For the most part, only the first-
person and third-person personal pronouns have plural forms. The only
plural second-person pronoun is the reflexive pronoun yourselves.
For second-person pronouns that don’t inflect for number, you sometimes
have to use information from another part of the sentence or paragraph to
determine if it is plural or singular. (See the examples below.)
Unfortunately, there is no rule to how personal pronouns change when they
become plural; you simply have to memorize them. Refer to the table in the
chapter overview to learn them.
Examples:
• “I (first-person singular) am meeting my (first-person singular) writing
club this afternoon. We (first-person plural)always meet on Wednesdays
after class.”
• “I (first-person singular) really envy you (second-person singular)!”
• “They (third-person plural) can’t tell you (second-person plural) what it
will be like; you (second-person plural) will just have to find out for
yourselves (second-person plural reflexive).”
• “The main reason Martha is so beautiful is because she (third-person
feminine singular) is so tall.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
69

1. Which personal pronouns can be inflected for number? (Choose the
answer that is most correct.)
a) All of them
b) First-person and third-person pronouns
c) Reflexive pronouns
d) Second-person pronouns
e) B & C
 
2. Which of the following sentences has at least one pronoun that is plural?
(Choose the answer that is most correct.)
a) “I told you that I needed it done by yesterday, Jeff.”
b) “She went for a walk by herself.”
c) “Don’t take your sister’s toys, or you will make her cry.”
d) “I asked all of you here so we could discuss the state of the business.”
 
3. Which of the following is the plural form of the second-person
reflexive pronoun?
a) yourselves
b) itselves
c) themselves
d) ourselves
 
4. What is the plural form of the first-person possessive pronoun mine?
a) our
b) my
c) ours
d) theirs
70

Personal 
Pronouns 
- 
Person
(First person, Second person,
Third person)
Definition
Grammatical person refers to the perspectives of the personal pronouns used
to identify a person in speech and text—that is, it distinguishes between a
speaker (first person), an addressee (second person), and others beyond that
(third person).
First person
• Singular: I, me, my, mine, myself
• Plural: we, us, our, ours, ourselves
First-person pronouns are used to express an autobiographical point of view
—they tell what is directly happening to the speaker, writer, or fictional
character. For example:
• “I don’t know where my hat is!”
• “Janet is meeting me in town later.”
• “Hey, that book is mine! I bought it!”
When the speaker is part of a group, the first-person pronouns inflect to the
plural form:
• “We brought our own car.”
• “They told us to help ourselves.”
Second person
• Singular/Plural: you, you, your, yours, yourself (singular),
yourselves (plural)
We use the second-person pronouns to indicate those who are being
addressed directly by the speaker. Unlike first-person pronouns, there is not
a distinction between singular and plural second-person pronouns (except in
71

the reflexive form). Here are some examples:
• “Bill, I was wondering if you could help me with the dishes?” (second
person singular)
• “Children, where are your manners?” (second person plural)
• “You really must learn to help yourself.” (second person singular)
• “I’m sick of cleaning up after all of you; from now on, you can clean up
after yourselves!” (second person plural)
Usage note: Generic “you”
The second-person pronouns are also often used to indicate an unspecified
person. This is sometimes referred to as generic you, impersonal you, or
indefinite you. This is less formal than its counterpart, the pronoun one,
but it is sometimes preferred because it does not sound as snobbish or
unnecessarily formal.
If one is writing something very formal or professional, then one might be
better off using the generic pronoun one. If you’re writing something a bit
less formal, then you are probably just fine using the generic pronoun you.
Third person
Third person is used to talk about someone or something that is not the
speaker and is not being directly addressed. This is most widely used in
fiction writing. When the person or thing is singular, the pronouns used in
the third person are the different forms of she, he, and it:
• Feminine singular: she, her, hers, herself
• Masculine singular: he, him, his, himself
• Neuter singular: it, its, its own, itself
However, when there are multiple people or things, we use the ungendered
forms of they:
• Third person plural: they, them, their, theirs, themselves
Sometimes, when a single person of an unknown gender is being discussed,
the third-person plural forms (they, them, etc.) are used as a gender-neutral
alternative to the third-person feminine/masculine forms. To learn more
about this, please see the Usage Note about “Singular they” under the
chapter section explaining gender in personal pronouns.
72

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which perspective of grammatical person is used for someone being
addressed directly by the speaker?
a) First person
b) Second person
c) Third person
d) Third-person plural
2. Which of the following sentences uses a first-person plural pronoun?
a) “John said that I should be more careful with my writing.”
b) “They are not happy with your sales this quarter.”
c) “I’m not sure that he knows what they’re doing.”
d) “She doesn’t think that we should be paying that much.”
 
3. Who or what would be represented by third-person pronouns in a
sentence?
a) A person or thing who is not being directly addressed by someone
b) A person or thing who is being directly addressed by someone
c) A person who is directly addressing someone or something
d) A person who is speaking about someone or something who is not present
 
4. Which perspective (or perspectives) of grammatical person are being
used in the following sentence?
“When we were young, my father often told us that he didn’t have as many
luxuries growing up.”
a) First person
b) Second person
c) Third person
d) Both first and third person
e) Both second and third person
f) First, second, and third person
Personal Pronouns - Gender
73

Definition
Modern English is largely an ungendered language. Whereas other
languages might have masculine and feminine forms for nouns depending on
the verbs, articles, or adjectives they are used with, English nouns by and
large remain neutral. However, a personal pronoun can be inflected for
gender to correspond to the gender of the person (and, in some cases, an
animal) it represents.
Personal pronouns are only inflected for gender when they are in the third
person and singular—first-person and second-person pronouns (singular or
plural) and third-person plural pronouns* remain gender neutral. Here are
the gendered pronouns in English:
• Third-person feminine singular: she, her, hers, herself
• Third-person masculine singular: he, him, his, himself
The third-person singular can also be neuter. This is used when a personal
pronoun represents a thing or an animal. Animals can sometimes take
gendered personal pronouns if they are pets or domesticated animals;
otherwise, they take the third-person neuter form:
• Third-person neuter singular: it, its, its own, itself
Remember, when there are multiple people or things, we use the
ungendered forms of they*:
• Third person plural: they, them, their, theirs, themselves
Examples
• “I really love Jenny. She is my best friend.”
• “Danny said that he would lend me his jacket for tonight.”
• “Look at that cute dog wagging his tail!”
• “Bill and Samantha told me they were coming over later.”
• “You should not try to control love, but rather be guided by it.”
• “I’ve got the report for you. I’ll just set it on your desk.”
• “The horse galloped by, its hooves pounding the ground violently.”
• “The parade floats are spectacular! I love watching them go down the
street.”
74

Countries and ships
Countries and vehicles, especially ships or boats, will sometimes be given a
feminine form when spoken of in the third person. For example:
• “The SS Freedom is a good ship. She has certainly seen her fair share of
adventure.”
• “The Prime Minister promised that the United Kingdom would be returned
to her former glory during his term.”
This is a more traditional usage; it is less common these days, and by no
means necessary. Some style guides go so far as to discourage its use.
*Usage Note: “Singular they”
English does not have a way of identifying a single person with a pronoun if
his or her gender is not known, so sometimes the third-person plural forms
(they, them, etc.) are used as a gender-neutral alternative to the third-person
feminine/masculine forms. This is sometimes called “singular they.”
For example:
• “You shouldn’t judge someone until you know what they are really like.”
• “If anyone needs extra help with their studies, they should feel free to see
me after class.”
“Singular they” is gradually becoming accepted as the norm, especially in
instances with indefinite pronouns that sound plural but are grammatically
singular (like anyone in the example above). However, it is still considered
incorrect by many writers and writing guides, especially in American English.
Previously, it was standard practice to simply use the masculine third-person
singular forms (he, him, his, himself), but this is now seen as being
potentially sexist. Likewise, using only the feminine third-person singular
would be exclusionary, and mixing him and her throughout a piece of writing
would be confusing.
Therefore, in formal or professional writing, the best form to use is “he or
she” or “him or her,” or else simply to rewrite the sentence to avoid sounding
cluttered or awkward. In informal writing or speech, though, using “singular
they” is generally OK.
75

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is an appropriate third-person plural pronoun
to use when talking about more than one girl or woman?
a) Hers
b) Herselves
c) They
d) We
 
2. With what non-human things is it sometimes considered acceptable to use
a gendered pronoun?
a) A ship or boat
b) A country
c) A pet or domestic animal
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
 
3. Which of the following sentences uses the informal “singular they”?
a) “I asked them if they would like to join us for lunch.”
b) “When a child asks you a question, you should always strive to answer
them truthfully.”
c) “Don’t pay any attention to them; that group is always bullying freshmen.”
d) “John and Daniel said they would look after the kids tonight.”
4. When is an animal most commonly given a gendered pronoun? (Select the
answer that is most correct.)
a) Never
b) If it is a wild animal
c) If there is only one
d) If it is a pet or domestic animal
e) C & D
 
5. In what instance can a third-person neuter singular pronoun be used
with a person?
a) If his or her gender is not known or specified
b) If there is more than one person
76

c) Never
d) A & B
e) Always
Personal Pronouns - Case
Definition
The English language has largely discarded its case system, which is the
manner by which a noun is inflected depending on its grammatical function
as a subject or object in a sentence. English largely uses prepositions to
accomplish this now, but personal pronouns are one part of English in which
the case system is still active, being inflected depending on whether they
function as a subject, object, possessive determiner, or possessive
pronoun.
Subjective Case
When a personal pronoun is acting as the subject of a verb (that is, it is the
person or thing doing the action), it is said to be in the subjective case. For
instance:
• “I know that she said that.” (Both pronouns are subjective, as both are
agents of their respective actions.)
• “He told her to be quiet.” (Here, only he is in the subjective case; her, the
recipient or “object” of his action, is in the objective case.)
Objective Case
A personal pronoun is in the objective case when it is a direct or indirect
object of a verb, or else if it is the object or a preposition.
A direct object directly receives the action of a verb. For example:
• “Please send them in straight away.”
• “Take him away!”
An indirect object, on the other hand, is the recipient of the direct object—it
therefore indirectly receives the action of the verb via the direct object. For
example:
• “Please tell me any news immediately!”
77

Here, any news is acting as the direct object of the verb tell—it is the thing
being told. Me, on the other hand, is looking to receive any news by means of
the action of tell, making it the indirect object.
• “I can’t believe he brought you flowers. How sweet!”
Again, you is receiving the flowers, which is the direct object of brought. Be
careful with the personal pronouns you and it, however—their subjective and
objective forms are the same. Take the following sentence, for example:
• “You said to give you the money as soon as I had it.”
The pronouns you and I in italics are in the subjective case because they are
each performing the action of their verbs. The pronouns you and it in bold
are in the objective case because they are functioning as indirect and direct
objects of their verbs (respectively).
After 
Linking 
Verbs 
(Subject
Complements)
One confusing area is when a pronoun is a subject complement to a
linking verb. For personal pronouns, this is almost always with forms of the
verb be. In this situation, the personal pronoun should be in the subjective
case. For example, “It was I who did this” is more correct than “It was me
who did this.”
It is easy to mistake it as the direct object because it seems like it is receiving
the action of the verb, but linking verbs behave differently from action
verbs. One way to be sure you are using the correct pronoun is to reverse
the order of the verb and pronoun and see if the statement still makes sense.
Let’s look again at the examples above:
✖ “It was me who did this.” (incorrect)
✔ “It was I who did this.” (correct)
If you reverse the order of the verb and pronoun, you can see why the first
sentence is incorrect:
✖ “Me was the one* who did this.” (incorrect)
✔ “I was the one* who did this.” (correct)
(*Because in most instances we don’t refer to a person as being it in a subject
complement (except maybe in a game of tag), the indefinite pronoun phrase
the one is used instead to identify the speaker as the person who did
78

something.)
Here are some more examples:
• “Her husband took all the credit, but it was she who did all the work.”
• “It was they who assured us that there would be no problems.”
In many cases, it might be better to simply reword the sentence to sound less
awkward. For example, “it was he who won the race” would sound better
simply as “he won the race.”
In conversational English, this distinction is much less frequently observed
for simple sentences like our first examples, and you will often hear people
using phrases such as “it’s me” or “that was her” in response to questions.
But in writing (especially formal or professional writing), always use the
subjective case for a personal pronoun if it is functioning as a subject
complement after a linking verb.
Possessive Case (Genitive Case)
As the name implies, the possessive case changes the inflection of a personal
pronoun to mark possession. There are two forms of personal pronouns in
the possessive case: possessive determiners, and possessive pronouns.
Possessive determiners function grammatically like adjectives, modifying
a noun or nouns. However, they cannot function as nouns in a sentence. For
example:
✔ “My dad’s glasses went missing.” (My is correctly used as a possessive
determiner, modifying dad to show his relation to the speaker.)
✖ “Hey, those glasses are my!” (My is incorrectly used as a possessive
pronoun; it should read “Hey, those are my glasses!” or “Hey, those glasses
are mine!”)
Possessive pronouns are personal pronouns in the possessive case which
have the grammatical function of nouns. For example:
• “I can see mine through the window!”
• “You said you bought yours for $50?”
• “Jenny seems pretty sure that the book is hers.”
Be aware that the possessive determiners and possessive pronouns for the
third-person masculine and third-person neuter are the same (his and his,
its and its), although its is more often used as a possessive determiner in the
79

phrase its own. For example:
• “He said it was his computer, but I don’t think it is actually his.”
• “As the campaign reached the peak of its success, it seemed to take on a life
of its own.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What determines if a personal pronoun is in the subjective case?
a) If it is the person or thing performing the action of a verb
b) If it is the person or thing receiving the indirect action of a verb
c) If it is the person or thing receiving the direct action of a verb
d) If the person or thing demonstrates possession of the object of a verb
2. How does a possessive determiner function grammatically?
a) As a verb
b) As an adjective
c) As an adverb
d) As a noun
3. Which of the following possessive determiners is the same when it is
functions as a possessive pronoun?
a) Her
b) His
c) Its
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) None of the above
4. In the following sentence, which personal pronoun is in the objective
case?
“I have told him a thousand times that he shouldn’t act that way!”
a) he
b) I
c) him
d) that
80

5. Which of the following sentences has a possessive determiner?
a) “I told you that my recipe was good!”
b) “She still claims that the bag isn’t hers.”
c) “He’s had his since he was a kid.”
d) “Donald said they bought theirs during a sale.”
Personal Pronouns - Reflexive
Pronouns
Definition
Reflexive pronouns are used when someone or something is both the subject
and the object of the same verb—that is, both that which is performing the
action of the verb and that which is receiving the action. When this happens,
the reflexive verb is used as the object of the verb to represent the person or
thing.
For example, in the sentence “I heard you speaking,” “I” is the subject, and
“you” is the object—they are not the same person, so a reflexive noun is not
used.
Likewise, “I’ll be sure to thank himself” is not correct: “him” should be the
object of “thank,” while “I” is the subject.
But in the sentence “I heard myself speaking,” the speaker (“I”) is both the
subject of the verb “heard” and its object (what was heard), and thus is
represented by the reflexive noun “myself.”
The reflexive pronouns are myself, ourselves, yourself, yourselves, herself,
himself, itself, themselves, and oneself. The last of these is formed from the
gender-neutral indefinite pronoun one (which also has the possessive form
one’s); however, the pronoun one is not a personal pronoun.
Here are some more examples:
• I wish you could hear yourselves right now!
• She admitted to herself that she was wrong.
• The vole hides itself beneath the ground for safety.
• The players have really outdone themselves today!
• One should strive to better oneself every day.
81

On a final note, a reflexive pronoun can never be used as the subject of a verb
—it can only act as the object, and only when the person or thing it
represents is already being used as the subject.
For example, “myself taught me to read” is very clearly wrong, because
myself should be used as the object of “taught,” while the personal pronoun I
should be used as the subject. “John and myself will be in attendance” is also
incorrect because the speaker (and John) is the subject of the verb “be,”
without an object—it should read “John and I will be in attendance.”
For more information on the subjective and objective cases, please see
the chapter section on grammatical case in personal pronouns.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following sentences uses reflexive pronouns correctly?
a) “I couldn’t believe the pictures of myself after the party!”
b) “And how is himself these days?”
c) “I really haven’t felt like myself lately.”
d) “Please send the relevant information to Bob, Jane, and myself.”
2. Which of the following sentences uses a reflexive pronoun incorrectly?
a) “Myself and a few others are going to see a movie later.”
b) “I can see myself taking up golf when I retire.”
c) “Tom saw himself in the reflection of the water.”
d) “Students who have not done the work themselves will be penalized.”
3. Which is the correct singular first-person reflexive pronoun?
a) Ourselves
b) Yourself
c) Themselves
d) Myself
4. When do you use a reflexive pronoun?
a) When a personal pronoun is the object of a preposition.
b) When a person or thing is the subject and the object of the same verb.
c) When a person or thing is the subject of one verb and the object of another
verb in the same sentence.
82

d) When a personal pronoun and another noun are both subjects of a verb.
Intensive Pronouns
Definition
Intensive pronouns are identical to reflexive pronouns—myself,
yourself, ourselves, himself, herself, itself, and themselves. However,
intensive pronouns do not serve a grammatical function in a sentence;
instead, they add emphasis by reiterating the subject of the sentence (known
as the pronoun’s antecedent).
Using intensive pronouns in a
sentence
When we use an intensive pronoun to add emphasis to a sentence, we
generally place it after either its antecedent or the direct object of the verb.
For instance:
• “The surgeon general himself will oversee the operation.”
• “They themselves indicated that the transactions might be illegal.”
• “He did it himself, much to his father’s surprise.”
• “We designed the album artwork ourselves.”
If we use an intensive pronoun to add a pointed or argumentative emphasis
to the sentence, it comes after the direct object, as in:
• “I can operate the TV remote myself, thank you very much.”
• “Our son can do the project himself, Hank.”
Distinguishing between intensive
and reflexive pronouns
Although intensive and reflexive pronouns are identical in appearance, there
is a clear distinction between them. Reflexive pronouns are used when the
subject of a sentence also receives the action of the sentence—that is, the
subject of the verb is also the object the same verb. For example:
83

• “I saw myself in the mirror.”
• “She asked herself if it was worth the hassle.”
• “The actor played himself in the film about his life.”
In all of these sentences, we use reflexive pronouns to indicate that the
subject of the verb is also the recipient of its actions.
However, we use an intensive pronoun if we want to place special emphasis
on who is performing the action of the subject on a separate object. Because
of this, the intensive pronoun is not grammatically integral to the meaning of
the sentence. Take, for example, these three sentences:
• “John played the tuba.”
• “John played the tuba himself.”
As we can see, the addition of himself has no bearing on the logical meaning
of the sentence—in both cases, it is John who played the tuba. However, by
adding the intensive pronoun himself in the second sentence, we let the
reader or listener know that it is somehow remarkable or noteworthy that it
was John who played the tuba, as opposed to someone else.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Intensive pronouns are identical to what other kind of pronoun?
a) indefinite pronouns
b) relative pronouns
c) reflexive pronouns
d) reciprocal pronouns
 
2. What is the function of intensive pronouns in a sentence?
a) To add emphasis to the role of the subject
b) To add emphasis to the role of the direct object
c) To indicate that the subject is also the object of the verb
d) To indicate that the object of the verb is also the object complement
 
3. Where does an intensive pronoun typically occur in a sentence?
a) Immediately after the subject of the sentence
b) Immediately after the main verb of the sentence
c) Immediately after the direct object of the verb
84

d) A & B
e) B & C
f) A & C
g) All of the above
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses an intensive pronoun?
a) “I could really see myself competing in a triathlon someday.”
b) “After much consideration, he decided to write himself out of the will.”
c) “She did herself a disservice by not renegotiating her contract.”
d) “He wrote the music himself to avoid extra copyright costs.”
Indefinite Pronouns
Definition
An indefinite pronoun is used in place of a noun without specifying a
particular person or thing that is being represented. There are quite a few
indefinite pronouns, which you can see listed in the table below. Look them
over, and then read on to learn about their usage.
Table of Indefinite Pronouns
People vs.
Things
Singular
Plural
Singular or
Plural
Either People or
Things
another
one (quantifier)
each
either
other
both
few
fewer
many
others
several
all
any
more
most
neither
none
plenty
some
85

People only
anybody/anyone
everybody/everyone
one 
("impersonal"
pronoun)
nobody/no one/no-one
somebody/someone
whoever/whosoever
whomever/whomsoever
you (see usage note)
they 
(see
usage note)
 
Things only
anything
enough
everything
less
little
much
nothing
something
such
this
whatever
whichever
 
such
Singular vs. Plural
Many pronouns that refer to more than one—e.g., everything, everyone,
much, etc.—are considered singular. This is because, grammatically, they
function as a single unit (like the collective nouns team, group, collection,
etc., which are made up of multiple people or things). As a result, they must
take a singular verb and have agreement with the rest of the text. For
example:
• “Everyone is invited.”
• “I hope everything is alright; I would hate if it wasn’t.”
Likewise, the plural pronouns must have plural agreement with their verbs
and other parts of the text:
• “Many are in agreement with their peers.”
Some pronouns can function either as singular or plural, depending on
86

context and usage; thus, their verb agreement changes accordingly. For
example:
• “All are welcome should they wish to attend.” (plural)
• “All is right with the world.” (singular)
People vs. Things
Both people and things can be identified in a sentence by an indefinite
pronoun. Many pronouns are only used to refer to people or to things; as
we’ll see later on, though, there are also many which can be used for either.
People
Take the following sentence, for example:
• “Would anyone like a drink?”
Here, anyone is standing in for any person, but it doesn’t specify who that
person is or might be—it could be anyone!
(If we wanted to use a pronoun that specified a person, we would use a
personal pronoun, as in “Would you like a drink?”)
However, we wouldn’t use anyone to refer to a thing. Any indefinite pronoun
with “one” or “body” in it is reserved for identifying people. Incidentally,
“one” and “body,” when used as part of an indefinite pronoun, can be used
interchangeably. Although some people feel that using “body” sounds a bit
less formal, it is up to the discretion of the writer.
Let’s look at examples for each indefinite pronoun that relates to people:
• “I don’t think anybody/anyone wants to dance.”
• “Everybody/everyone is leaving early.”
• “One* would hope that this sort of behavior wouldn’t be tolerated.”
• “You* would think that the government would have thought of that
already.”
• “I can’t believe nobody/no one/no-one came to my play!”
• “She’s hoping somebody/someone will help her with her work.”
• “Whoever/whosoever would like to join us is more than welcome.”
• “Hire whomever/whomsoever you think would be the most appropriate
for the job.”
87

• “They* say you should always wear a helmet on a bicycle.”
(Note that whosoever and whomsoever, while perfectly acceptable, have
come to sound a bit antiquated compared to whoever and whomever.)
*Usage note: Generic “you” and “they”
The second-person pronouns (you, your, yours, yourself,
yourselves) are also often used as indefinite pronouns to indicate
an unspecified person. This is sometimes referred to as generic
you, impersonal you, or indefinite you. 
You is far less formal than its counterpart, the indefinite pronoun
one, but it is sometimes preferred because it does not sound as
snobbish or because such formality is unnecessary. Because one
is used to refer to people, but without specifying who it
represents, it is sometimes called an impersonal pronoun.
If one is writing something very formal or professional, then one
might be better off using the indefinite pronoun one. If you’re
writing something a bit less formal, then you are probably just
fine using the generic pronoun you.
(Also note that one has a second function as an indefinite
pronoun that is used as a quantifier, as in “I think I'll get the red
one" or “Most of our group is here, but one is running late.”)
Similarly, the third-person plural pronoun they can be used as an
indefinite pronoun to refer to people in general. It is usually used
in the form “They say…,” as in “They say that drinking too often is
bad for your health.” However, this is considered very informal,
and would be frowned upon in formal, professional, or academic
writing.
Things
We can also use indefinite pronouns to represent things in the same manner:
• “Is there something you’d like to say?”
Any indefinite pronoun that is formed with “-thing” is, understandably, only
88

used to refer to things. (One can also refer to things, but only as a
quantifier, which functions differently in a sentence than the impersonal
pronoun one.)
Let’s look at examples of the indefinite pronouns that only apply to things:
• “I don’t care what I eat, so just order me anything.”
• “I think she has had enough.”
• “He wanted to buy everything in the shop.”
• “The less you know, the better.”
• “As I’ve gotten older, I’ve realized that I know very little.”
• “There was nothing she felt like doing.”
• “There is still much to be done.”
• “I’m sure that I’m forgetting something.”
• “She finds tourists very irritating, and she hates being treated as such
when she travels.”
• “He had this to say in his defense.”
• “I’ll just have whatever you’re having.”
• “It’s your money, so buy whichever you like.”
People and Things
Quite a few indefinite pronouns can be used to refer to either people or
things. In such cases, we rely on context or other elements of the sentence to
know which:
• “One was short and stout; the other was long and skinny.”
In the above sentence, we don’t know whether one and other refer to people
or to things; we have to rely on comes before or after the sentence to know
which. Now let’s look at another example:
• “Each to his own—that’s what I always say!”
Because it is used in conjunction with the personal pronoun his, we can infer
that the indefinite pronoun each is referring to a person. Likewise:
• “Get both if you like them so much.”
You don’t “get” (as in “acquire”) people, so we can safely assume that both is
referring to things.
89

Let’s look at examples of the indefinite pronouns that can refer to both things
and people. Try to see if you can figure out which each is referring to by the
information in the sentence, or whether you would need more information to
know for sure.
• “Come on, let’s get another!”
• “Each will get a turn to speak.”
• “I think either will do for now.”
• “Few came to the service, in the end.”
• “There are fewer than I remember.”
• “Many are voicing their concerns.”
• “One likes to play the banjo, while the other prefers the piano.”
• “There are a few others that still need to be collected.”
• “Most have left, but several are still here.”
• “There were plenty there.”
• “All are accounted for.”
• “I don’t think there are any left.”
• “There’s a bit more to be done still.”
• “Neither seem willing to negotiate.”
• “There are none left.”
• “Save some for me!”
Indefinite 
Adjectives 
vs.
Indefinite Pronouns
Some indefinite pronouns can also function as indefinite adjectives if they
come immediately before a noun. For example:
• “There is more to be done.” (indefinite pronoun)
• “There is more work to be done.” (indefinite adjective)
• “There is another who can fill in, if necessary.” (indefinite pronoun)
• “There is another student who can fill in, if necessary.” (indefinite
90

adjective)
If you’re trying to determine whether a word is an indefinite pronoun, just
see if it’s on its own; if it is paired with a noun, then it is an indefinite
adjective.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following indefinite pronouns can only be used to refer to
things?
a) All
b) Many
c) Much
d) Several
2. Identify the indefinite pronoun used in the following sentence:
“People are saying all sorts of things, but little is worth listening to.”
a) People
b) All
c) Little
d) B & C
3. What is the difference between an indefinite pronoun and an
indefinite adjective?
a) An indefinite pronoun stands alone; and indefinite adjective precedes a
noun.
b) An indefinite adjective stands alone; and indefinite pronoun precedes a
noun.
c) An indefinite adjective always modifies an indefinite pronoun.
d) They are the same thing.
 
4. How do you tell if an indefinite pronoun represents a person or a thing, if
it is capable of both?
a) Other information within the sentence
b) Context around (before or after) the sentence
c) Determine if it could be replaced by a noun
d) A & B
91

e) B & C
f) A & C
Demonstrative Pronouns
Definition
Demonstrative pronouns are pronouns used to replace nouns or noun
phrases in a sentence, representing that which is nearby or far away in space
or time.
Because demonstrative pronouns are less specific than the nouns or noun
phrases they replace, you must use context to clarify what is being referred
to. In spoken English, this can mean having to gesture toward, point to, or
look at the thing or things indicated by the demonstrative pronoun. In
written English, demonstrative pronouns are usually used to refer to
previously mentioned nouns, ideas, or topics.
Here is a complete list of demonstrative pronouns:
this
that
these
those
none
such
neither
Functions 
of 
major
demonstrative pronouns
The most common demonstrative pronouns are this, that, these, and those.
Their functions are explained in the following table:
Demonstrative Pronoun Singular/Plural Nearby/Far Away
this
singular
nearby
that
singular
far away
these
plural
nearby
92

those
plural
far away
 
Each of the four major demonstrative pronouns describes something that is
either singular or plural and either near or not near to the speaker. For
example:
• “This isn’t mine.” (singular, nearby)
• “Give me that.” (singular, not near)
• “These are really gross.” (plural, nearby)
• “I forgot to bring those.” (plural, not near)
Demonstrative pronouns can also be used to indicate more abstract things,
such as chronological events or ideas:
• “I really love this!” (This can possibly represent a physically close thing, a
current event, or a recently developed idea.)
• “That was so cool.” (That can possibly represent a physically distant thing,
a past event, or an old idea.)
• “These are the times I remember to stay calm.” (These represents recently
occurring events in this sentence, made clear by the word times.)
• “Those were some fantastic days, right?” (Those in this case represents
past events, made clear by the word days.)
Though the demonstrative pronouns in the above cases do not refer
specifically to physical things, the rules of singular and plural still apply. In
other words, you cannot replace this with these or that with those unless the
number of things indicated has increased to more than one.
Functions 
of 
other
demonstrative pronouns
The less commonly used demonstrative pronouns are none, such, and
neither. None and such can be used as both singular and plural
demonstrative pronouns. For example:
• “None of this makes sense.” (None is singular because this is singular.)
• “None of the people here seem to like the cake I made.” (None is plural
because the people is plural.*)
93

• “Such is the way of life.” (Such is singular because the way of life is
singular.)
• “Such are the rules.” (Such is plural because the rules is plural.)
(*There is debate as to whether none can denote plurality. Some sources
argue that none can only represent the singular not one, whereas others
claim it can also represent the plural not any. Since none has a long history
of being used as both a singular and plural demonstrative pronoun, there is
little historical or grammatical basis to support the claim that it can only be
treated as singular.)
On the other hand, neither is always treated as a singular demonstrative
pronoun, regardless of the presence of any plural nouns:
✔ “Neither sounds good to me.” (correct)
✔ “I think neither of the twins wants a babysitter.” (correct)
✖ “Neither of his parents work at the firm.” (incorrect)
Describing 
people 
with
demonstrative pronouns
Demonstrative pronouns always represent nouns, typically things, places,
events, ideas, and animals. In certain cases, however, some of these
pronouns may also be used to describe people. This can only be done when
the person is identified by the pronoun’s antecedent within the same
sentence. For example:
• “That is Amy standing by the door.”
• “This must be Jake.”
• “That appears to be the woman I saw earlier.”
• “Who is that?”
✖ “Go talk to that.” (incorrect; no antecedent)
✔ “Go talk to that woman.” (correct)
✖ “That is quite handsome.” (incorrect; no antecedent)
✔ “That man is quite handsome.” (correct)
Demonstrative 
pronouns 
vs.
94

demonstrative 
adjectives 
and
determiners
Some demonstrative pronouns may also be used as demonstrative
adjectives or determiners, but their usage is quite different. As
demonstrative pronouns, this, that, these, those, such, and neither represent
nouns. As demonstrative adjectives and determiners, however, these same
words instead modify nouns, appearing immediately before them in a
sentence. We can see this in the examples below:
• “She wants to photograph this.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “She wants to photograph this painting.” (demonstrative adjective)
• “That is one of my favorites.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “That book is one of my favorites.” (demonstrative adjective)
• “These taste the best.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “These chocolates taste the best.” (demonstrative adjective)
• “He wanted to try those.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “He wanted to try those recipes.” (demonstrative adjective)
• “Such is the man’s poor choice.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “Such men make poor choices.” (determiner)
• “Neither is mine.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “Neither locket is mine.” (determiner)
None is the only demonstrative pronoun that does not also function as a
demonstrative adjective:
✔ “I’ll eat none.” (correct)
✖ “I’ll eat none sandwiches.” (incorrect)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a demonstrative pronoun?
a) those
b) that
c) there
d) this
 
95

2. Which sentence uses a demonstrative pronoun correctly?
a) Those was an interesting movie.
b) This aren’t something to cry about.
c) These isn’t the worst restaurants in town.
d) I want to do that right now.
3. Which sentence uses a demonstrative pronoun incorrectly?
a) Neither of my dreams are too grand.
b) Such are the habits of teenagers.
c) Billy said he wanted to use those.
d) None of this matters to me.
4. Which sentence contains a demonstrative adjective, as opposed to a
demonstrative pronoun?
a) I wouldn’t mind giving those a try.
b) I am pretty sure that’s Nina walking by the bookstore.
c) They’d love to take a stroll through this park.
d) Neither is interested in attending the concert.
96

Interrogative Pronouns
Definition
Interrogative pronouns are used in interrogative sentences to ask
questions, functioning either as the subject or object of such sentences.
There are five primary interrogative pronouns: who, whom, whose, which,
and what.
There are other interrogative pronouns as well that are used for emphatic
purposes, which we’ll cover later in this section.
Using interrogative pronouns
Direct Questions
Most often, interrogative pronouns are used in direct questions, representing
the person or thing that is being asked about. In direct questions, the
interrogative pronoun usually comes at or near the beginning of the
interrogative clause, acting as either the subject or object of the sentence.
For example:
• “Who is coming to the party tonight?” (subject)
• “Whom did you ask to fill in for Mr. Smith?” (object)*
• “Whose is this computer?” (subject)
• “So, which will it be: $10,000 or a new sports car?” (object)
• “What do you expect me to do, exactly?” (object)
An interrogative pronoun is easy to identify because it can stand on its own
in a sentence and takes the grammatical function of a noun. Other question
words, on the other hand, act as adverbs when they stand alone, as in:
• “How did you find me?” (How modifies the verb find.)
• “When are we leaving?” (When modifies the verb leaving.)
• “Why did we stay?” (Why modifies the verb stay.)
(*Usage Note: Whom is becoming increasingly rare in modern English.
Although it is technically correct to use whom when it functions as the object
of a verb and who when it functions as the subject, it is much more common
97

to use who in both cases.)
Indirect Questions
Interrogative pronouns can also appear within indirect questions. When
this happens, they appear in the middle of the sentence. Indirect questions
are sometimes used to ask something in a more polite way, as in:
• “Could you tell me whose these are?”
• “Would you mind telling me which I’m supposed to bring?”
• “Do you know what we’re doing here?”
Other times, indirect questions are used for emphasis to convey surprise:
• “She wants who to come to the party?”
• “You’re going to do what in New York City?”
• “He’s going to ask whom out on a date?”*
In such cases, emphasis is put on the interrogative pronoun—we can hear
the stress on the words when we say the sentences aloud.
Reported Questions
Interrogative pronouns also appear in the middle of reported questions.
Reported questions are actually a form of declarative sentences using
reported speech (also called indirect speech): they tell us about
something someone else asked, but do not ask a question themselves. As
such, they do not end in a question mark. For example:
• “She wants to know whose these are.”
• “He wondered which is correct.”
• “I asked you what we were supposed to do today.”
• “She was wondering who would be coming tomorrow.”
• “They asked whom to consult in the matter.”
The speaker in each of the examples isn’t asking an actual question, but
rather is reporting or clarifying a question that has already been asked.
Other interrogative pronouns
There are technically seven other interrogative pronouns—whoever,
98

whomever, whichever, whatever, whatsoever, whosoever, and whomsoever
—that are used for emphatic purposes, but they are typically used in more
formal or old-fashioned English. For example:
• “Whoever would believe such a story?”
• “Whatever could I have done to make you so angry?”
• “Whomever did you ask to accompany you to the gala on such short
notice?”
• “Whichever will the gentleman choose, I wonder?
The last three, whatsoever, whosoever, and whomsoever, are synonymous
with whatever, whoever, and whomever. However, they are considered even
more antiquated in modern English, bordering on archaic. It is uncommon to
come across them even in more formal speech or writing.
Other grammatical roles
Many of the interrogative pronouns we’ve examined above often serve other
grammatical functions in different contexts. It’s important to know the
difference between them.
Interrogative Adjectives
Three of the interrogative pronouns—whose, which, and what—can also
function as interrogative adjectives, meaning they come before and
modify another noun. An easy way to be sure whether you are dealing with
an interrogative adjective or an interrogative pronoun is to check whether
the question word is immediately followed by a noun it modifies. For
example:
• “What book is your favorite?” 
In this example, what is immediately followed by the noun book, which it is
modifying. We can be sure that, in this case, what is a possessive adjective.
• “What are you reading?”
In this sentence, what is not immediately followed by a noun that it
modifies, which means that it is an interrogative pronoun.
Here are some other examples:
• “Which shirt should I wear?” (interrogative adjective)
• “Which would you choose if you were me?” (interrogative pronoun)
99

• “Whose book is this on the table?” (interrogative adjective)
• “Whose is this that I’m holding?” (interrogative pronoun)
Relative Pronouns
Who, whom, which, and whose can also be used as relative pronouns in
declarative sentences. They are not considered interrogative in this form,
because they are no longer associated with a question; rather, they are used
to help clarify whom or what a sentence is talking about, or else give extra
information about it. For example:
• “I helped the old man who lives down the road with his groceries.”
• “The computer, which belonged to my brother, is very slow.”
• “Could the person whose car is parked outside please move it?”
• “A man who/whom I had never met before greeted me in the street.”
In addition, the pronouns whoever, whichever, and whatever are also used
as indefinite relative pronouns. They are much more commonly used in this
way in modern English than they are as interrogative pronouns. For
example:
• “Do whatever you please; I don’t care.”
• “Whoever decides to join us is more than welcome.”
• “Take whichever route is fastest.”
Whomever can also be used in this way when the pronoun functions as an
object, as in:
• “Be with whomever makes you happy.”
However, this is becoming increasingly uncommon, with whoever more
often being used instead.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a function of interrogative pronouns?
a) To help clarify who or what a sentence is talking about
b) To ask or report a question
c) To modify a noun that is being asked about
d) To provide additional information to a sentence
100

2. Which of the following is not one of the primary interrogative pronouns?
a) which
b) who
c) whose
d) whatever
3. Identify the interrogative pronoun that completes the following sentence
correctly:
“______ shall I ask to come to dinner tonight?”
a) who
b) which
c) whom
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) A & C
g) All of the above
4. Which of the following interrogative pronouns is used for emphasis?
a) whichever
b) which
c) whose
d) whom
Relative Pronouns
Definition
A relative pronoun is a type of pronoun used to connect a relative
clause (also known as an adjective clause) to the main clause in a
sentence. Relative clauses either help clarify who or what a sentence is
talking about (known as the antecedent), or else give extra information
about it.
Here are the five most commonly used relative pronouns:
that
which
who
101

whom
whose
Less commonly used relative pronouns include the following:
where
when
whoever
whosoever
whomever
whichever
wherever
whatever
whatsoever
Functions 
of 
the 
relative
pronoun
Subjects, objects, and possession
In a relative clause, the relative pronoun functions in one of three ways: as
the subject, the object, or a possessive pronoun (though whose is the
only possessive relative pronoun). The usage of a relative pronoun ultimately
depends on its antecedent and the relative clause it introduces.
We can use this table as a quick guide:
Type of Antecedent Subject
Object
Possessive
People
Who
Who / Whom Whose
Things
Which
Which
Whose
People or Things
That
That
 
 
Let’s look at how each of these can be used in a sentence:
Subject
102

• “The woman who came to my house was a salesperson.” (Who is the
subject of the relative clause who came to my house, which describes the
antecedent the woman.)
• “The male birds danced and sang, which attracted nearby females.”
(Which is the subject of the non-restrictive relative clause which attracted
nearby females that describes the antecedent danced and sang.)
• “I have to go mend the fence that is broken.” (That is the subject of the
restrictive relative clause that is broken, describing the antecedent the
fence.)
• “I want a computer which can download a lot of games.” (Which is the
subject of the relative clause which can download a lot of games and
describes the antecedent a computer.)
Object
• “I don’t know if I passed the test that I took yesterday.” (That is the object
of relative clause that I took yesterday and describes the antecedent the
test.)
• “The new employee whom I hired is a dedicated worker.” (Whom is the
object of the relative clause whom I hired and describes the antecedent the
new employee.)
Possession
The relative pronoun whose is unique in that it is the only one that can
describe possession. It comes before a noun in a sentence, modifying it like
an adjective to indicate that it belongs to the antecedent.
• “She tried to help the student whose lunch money had been stolen.”
(Whose modifies lunch money and introduces the relative clause whose
lunch money had been stolen, which describes the antecedent the student.)
Substituting relative pronouns
Most relative pronouns are capable of multiple functions and usages,
meaning they can be used in place of one another in certain circumstances.
The table below gives a quick breakdown of when it is acceptable to use each
relative pronoun:
103

Can be
used...
as a
subject?
as an
object?
as a
possessive?
to describe
things?
to describe
people?
who
✔
✔
(informal)
✖
✖
✔
whom
✖
✔
(formal)
✖
✖
✔
whose
✖
✖
✔
✔
✔
which
✔
✔
✖
✔
✖
that
✔
✔
✖
✔
✔
Relative pronouns that can be
replaced
• “The woman who/that came to my house was a salesperson.” (Who and
that are interchangeable when describing people.)
• “The new employee whom/who/that* I hired is a dedicated worker.” (In
addition to whom, who and that can also be used as an object in informal
English when describing a person in a restrictive relative clause.)
• “The mailman, whom/who* my father knew in high school, is running for
the state senate.” (When whom is the object of a non-restrictive relative
clause, it can only be replaced by who)
• “I want a computer that/which** can download a lot of games.” (Which
and that can both describe things.)
(*Usage note 1: Traditionally, whom is considered the only correct relative
pronoun when functioning as the object of a relative clause, but nowadays
who is also acceptable (as is that in restrictive relative clauses). In fact, most
people these days only use who, while whom tends to be reserved for formal
English.)
(**Usage note 2: In general, the relative pronoun that is preferable to
which in restrictive relative clauses; however, which is largely considered
acceptable, especially in informal writing. We will discuss the differences
between restrictive and non-restrictive clauses in more detail later.)
104

Relative pronouns that cannot be
replaced
• “The male birds danced and sang, which attracted nearby females.” (Since
which is the subject of a non-restrictive relative clause describing a thing
(the act of dancing and singing), it cannot be replaced by any other relative
pronoun.)
• “She tried to help the student whose lunch money had been stolen.” (Only
whose can be used as a possessive relative pronoun, whether it describes a
person or a thing.)
Restrictive 
vs. 
non-restrictive
relative clauses
Restrictive 
(defining) 
relative
clauses
Restrictive relative clauses (also known as defining relative clauses)
are clauses carrying essential information. Without its restrictive relative
clause, a main clause will lack a vital description and fail to convey the full or
appropriate meaning. Because of the necessity of their information,
restrictive relative clauses are not set apart by commas:
• “I’ve never understood people who hate sports.”
• “That book that I read when I was young is being made into a movie.”
• “Here is the website which my sister created.”
• “Did you hear about the sailor whose ship was haunted by a headless
ghost?”
• “I think a man whom my father hired has been stealing from the
company.”
If you were to remove each example’s relative clause, the corresponding main
clause would change in meaning and appear to be lacking necessary
information out of context. For example:
105

• “I’ve never understood people who hate sports.” 
• “I’ve never understood people.” (The speaker doesn’t understand people or
their intentions.)
• “That book that I read when I was young is being made into a movie.” 
• “That book is being made into a movie.” (Some unspecified book is being
made into a movie.)
• “Here is the website which my sister created.” 
• “Here is the website.” (The speaker is indicating some unidentified
website.)
• “Did you hear about the sailor whose ship was haunted by a headless
ghost?” 
• “Did you hear about the sailor?” (The speaker is asking the listener whether
he or she has heard about some unidentified sailor.)
• “I think a man whom my father hired has been stealing from the
company.”
• “I think a man has been stealing from the company.” (Some unspecified
man is thought to have been stealing.)
That vs. which in restrictive
clauses
As discussed earlier, that is preferable to which in restrictive relative clauses,
though many writers tend to use both, especially in less formal writing. As a
general rule, though, which is normally reserved for non-restrictive relative
clauses, which we will learn about in the following section.
Non-restrictive 
(non-defining)
relative clauses
Unlike restrictive relative clauses, non-restrictive relative clauses (or
non-defining relative clauses) contain non-essential or additional
information to the main clause that, when taken away, does not affect or
dramatically change the overall intent and meaning of the sentence.
Non-restrictive clauses require the use of commas to distinguish the non-
essential information from the rest of the sentence.
106

Which is used to introduce non-restrictive clauses that describe things or
non-domestic animals:
• “The large park, which she used to visit when she was young, had been
around for many years and was a popular gathering spot for children.”
• “I had to search extensively for the missing cookbook, which took me
many hours to find.”
• “The song, which was his favorite, could be heard from miles away.”
• “The cattle, which always wander away from the ranch, didn’t return
until nightfall.”
Who and whom may also be used in non-restrictive clauses that describe
people or domestic animals:
• “The woman, who volunteers at a local homeless shelter, won the lottery.”
• “My friend, Tom, whom I haven’t seen in years, is coming to stay with us
tomorrow.”
• “Our dog, who is missing one of his hind legs, ran away yesterday.”
Whose can be used with both people and things in non-restrictive clauses:
• “Jane, whose primary goal is to become a doctor, sent out her medical
school applications last month.”
• “The old bank, whose exterior is falling apart, is remarkably beautiful on
the inside.”
It is important to remember that that, as a relative pronoun, can only be
used in restrictive relative clauses. On the contrary, who, whom, whose,
and which are all capable of introducing both restrictive and non-restrictive
relative clauses (although, in restrictive relative clauses, that is preferable to
which).
Omitting relative pronouns
Sometimes, especially in informal writing, relative pronouns can be omitted
altogether. This can only be done when the relative pronoun is the object of a
restrictive relative clause.
For example, if a relative pronoun is the object of a clause, there are several
ways you can phrase the sentence, depending on how formal or informal you
want it to sound:
• “The girl to whom I gave my ice cream looked up and smiled at me.” (very
107

formal)
• “The girl whom I gave my ice cream to looked up and smiled at me.”
(formal)
• “The girl who I gave my ice cream to looked up and smiled at me.” (casual)
• “The girl that I gave my ice cream to looked up and smiled at me.” (very
casual)
• “The girl I gave my ice cream to looked up and smiled at me.” (most casual)
Unlike whom, which can only act as an object of a relative clause, who and
that can function as both objects and subjects when describing people;
therefore, in relative clauses, it is acceptable to replace the rather formal-
sounding whom with either who or that, or omit the relative pronoun
entirely.
When describing things instead of people, the relative pronouns that and
which may be omitted as long as they are used, like whom, as an object of a
restrictive relative clause:
• “The house that I want to buy is going on sale today.”
• “The house which I want to buy is going on sale today.”
• “The house I want to buy is going on sale today.”
Similarly, if a relative clause uses an auxiliary verb (such as to be) + a
present or past participle after the relative pronoun, it can be worded like
this:
• “The girl who is jumping into the lake is a world-famous diver.”
• “The girl that is jumping into the lake is a world-famous diver.”
• “The girl jumping into the lake is a world-famous diver.”
Relative pronouns as objects of
prepositions
In certain cases, relative pronouns can be used as objects of prepositions,
meaning the relative pronoun works in conjunction with a preposition to
modify the subject or verb of the relative clause. Only whose, which, and
whom can function as objects of prepositions.
In more formal English, we place a preposition before the pronoun. Here are
some of the combinations you might see:
108

with whom
to whom
for whom
through which
of which
about which
from which
at whose
in whose
with whose
In modern English, positioning prepositions in front of relative pronouns
often sounds overly formal, in particular when it comes to the relative
pronoun whom. As a result, it is generally acceptable for a preposition to
come after a relative clause instead of before a relative pronoun. For
example:
• “The teacher with whom I spoke had many interesting things to say.”
(Very formal)
• “The teacher whom/who/that I spoke with had many interesting things
to say.” (Less formal. Whom is most often replaced by either who or that,
and the preposition with is moved to the end of the relative clause.)
• “The teacher I spoke with had many interesting things to say.” (Most
casual. The relative pronoun is omitted, and the preposition is kept at the
end of the relative clause.)
It is also acceptable to place a preposition at the end of a relative clause when
using the pronoun which:
• “The home in which I grew up holds many dear memories for me.” (Very
formal. In this case, you cannot replace which with that, as that cannot be
used as an object of a preposition in a relative clause.)
• “The home that/which I grew up in holds many dear memories for me.”
(less formal)
• “The home I grew up in holds many dear memories for me.” (most casual)
The pronoun whose follows this same pattern of prepositional placement,
except that it cannot be substituted with another pronoun and it cannot be
omitted:
109

• “My friend, in whose house I’m staying, invited me to see a movie with
him.” (very formal)
• “My friend, whose house I’m staying in, invited me to see a movie with
him.” (less formal)
When and Where
When and where are also used as relative pronouns, especially in less formal
writing and conversation. They are always used in restrictive relative
clauses.
We use when to describe antecedents that have to do with time, as in:
• “That’s the day when we met.”
• “I’m looking forward to a time when the world will be at peace.”
We use where to describe antecedents that have to do with location, as in:
• “The café where we went on Sunday was very nice.”
• “The town where she lives is only an hour away.”
Using prepositions for formal
English
In more formal English, where and when are often replaced with a
preposition + which to mark precise locations or points in time. For example:
• “We preferred a part of the country where we could live in peace and
quiet.”
• “We preferred a part of the country in which we could live in peace and
quiet .”
• “Ben is looking forward to the day when he can finally join the army.”
• “Ben is looking forward to the day on which he can finally join the army.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not one of the five most commonly used relative
pronouns?
a) whom
b) where
110

c) whose
d) which
 
2. Which of the following sentences uses a relative pronoun incorrectly?
a) “She tried to fix the mirror whom had broken many years earlier.”
b) “I watched a dog that was chasing its tail.”
c) “He decided to take the mysterious motorcycle, whose owner had
seemingly disappeared.”
d) “The bartender took the day off, which gave her some time to relax.”
3. Choose the sentence that contains a non-restrictive relative clause.
a) “Mrs. Anderson reread the book she’d loved as a child.”
b) “I can’t help but wonder where they’re going.”
c) “I sit right beneath a light that constantly flickers.”
d) “They moved to Florida, which they hoped would lead to better job
prospects.”
4. Which of the following sentences is the least formal?
a) “The box I’d returned appeared on my doorstep again.”
b) “The box which I’d returned appeared on my doorstep again.”
c) “The box that I’d returned appeared on my doorstep again.”
d) “The box whom I’d returned appeared on my doorstep again.”
5. Select the relative pronoun that correctly completes the following
sentence:
“The pizza, ____ was pepperoni, was left in the oven too long.”
a) which
b) that
c) who
d) whom
6. Select the relative pronoun that correctly completes the following
sentence:
“The male candidate, ____ I hadn’t voted for, won the election anyway.”
a) which
b) whose
111

c) that
d) who/whom
Reciprocal Pronouns
Definition
Reciprocal pronouns are used to refer to two or more people who are or
were the subject of the same verb, with both or all parties mutually receiving
or benefiting from that action in the same way. Reciprocal pronouns always
function as the objects of verbs, referring back to the two or more people who
are or were the subject(s).
The two reciprocal pronouns in English are each other and one another. In
more traditional grammar, each other is used to identify only two people
who are engaged in the mutual action, while one another describes more
than two people. However, this supposed “rule” is less commonly applied in
modern English, with each other and one another often being used
interchangeably.
Reciprocal 
Pronouns 
vs.
Reflexive Pronouns
Because the subjects of the sentence are also the objects of the same verb, it
might seem logical to use one of the reflexive pronouns to represent them
instead, as in:
✖ “We call ourselves every day.”
However, this is incorrect. Reflexive pronouns are used with “one-way”
actions, so saying “we call ourselves” means each person is calling him- or
herself individually—i.e., person A calls person A every day, person B calls
person B every day, and so on.
Because we are describing a reciprocal action of the verb (meaning the action
is mutually given and received between the parties involved), we must
therefore use a reciprocal pronoun. The correct expression would thus be:
• “We call each other every day.”
or
• “We call one another every day.”
112

Now the sentence means that person A calls person B every day, and person
B calls person A every day.
Using each other vs. one another
As we said already, we can use both each other and one another to refer to
reciprocal action between two individuals or between multiple people in
larger groups—it depends entirely on the context. If we have already been
talking about Mary and Susan before we say “they love one another,” then it
is obvious that the action is limited to those two. Likewise, if we had been
talking about the various members of a large family and then say “they love
each other,” then it is clear that the action is reciprocal among all of the
individuals in the group.
Again, while traditional and prescriptive grammarians sometimes insist that
each other can only be used between two people and one another can only
be used between more than two people, this guideline is not based on
historical or linguistic evidence. The two are interchangeable.
Each other’s and One another’s
When we wish to make reciprocal pronouns possessive, we always treat them
as singular and add “-’s” to the end. Because both each other and one
another refer to the individuals within a pair or group, they cannot take the
plural possessive form (i.e., each others’ or one anothers’).
However, because we are talking about things belonging to two or more
people, the nouns that follow their possessive form are usually pluralized.
For example:
• “My neighbor and I spent a lot of time at each other’s houses when we were
kids.”
• “The students were sent off in pairs to correct one another’s assignments.”
• “Everyone at the rally was bolstered by each other’s energy.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which reciprocal pronoun is used when talking about two people?
a) each other
b) one another
113

c) themselves
d) A & B
e) B & C
 
2. What grammatical role do reciprocal pronouns take in a sentence?
a) the subject
b) the object
c) the object complement
d) the subject complement
 
3. Which of the following do we add to reciprocal pronouns to indicate
possession?
a) -’s
b) -s’
c) -’s’
d) -’
 
4. When do we use a reciprocal pronoun instead of a reflexive
pronoun?
a) When the subject of the sentence receives the action of the same verb
b) When the object of the sentence receives the action of the same verb
c) When the subjects of the sentence receive the action of the same verb
individually and separately
d) When the subjects of the sentence receive the action of the same verb
mutually and equally
Dummy Pronouns
Definition
Dummy pronouns are words that function grammatically as pronouns, but
which do not have antecedents like normal pronouns do. This means that,
unlike normal pronouns, dummy pronouns do not replace a noun, phrase, or
clause. They refer to nothing in particular, but instead help the sentence to
function properly in a grammatical context. Dummy pronouns are also
commonly referred to as expletive pronouns.
There are two dummy pronouns, there and it.
114

There as a dummy pronoun
There is primarily used as a dummy pronoun in circumstances where the
sentence is explaining that a person, place, or thing exists. When the word
there is being used in this manner, it is often referred to as the existential
there. For example, the following sentences contain the dummy pronoun
there to explain the existence of people, places, or things:
• “There is a ship in the harbor.”
• “There is a bowl on the table.”
• “There were flowers in the meadow.”
• “There is a river that passes through the mountain.”
• “There are many reasons to go to Jamaica.”
Singular vs. Plural use of there
The dummy pronoun there can be used in either a singular or plural context.
When it is used in a singular context, the correlating nouns and verbs have
singular endings; when it is used in a plural context, the corresponding
nouns and verbs have plural endings.
Singular
• “There is a fence around the yard.”
In this case, the existence of only one thing, a fence, is being discussed.
Therefore, the singular verb is and the singular noun fence are used. Here is
another example of there being used in a singular context:
• “There is a canoe on the lake.
Again, the existence of only one canoe is being discussed, so the singular
verb is and the singular noun canoe are used.
Plural
• “There are two fences around the yard.”
This sentence discusses the existence of two fences, and thus the plural form
is used. This is demonstrated by the use of the plural verb are and the plural
noun fences. Here is another example:
115

• “There are many canoes on the lake.”
This sentence discusses the existence of two or more canoes. Because of this
fact, the plural verb are and the plural noun canoes are used.
Difference from adverbial there
Although the word there can be used as a dummy pronoun, it can also be
used as an adverb. Because of this fact, it is important to know the difference
between the two.
When there is being used as an adverb, it is taking the place of an adverbial
phrase, oftentimes an adverbial prepositional phrase. For example, consider
the following sentences:
• “They swam in the water.”
• “I’m going to hide the cookies up above the fridge.”
In this sentence, in the water is a prepositional phrase that functions as an
adverb. However, this adverbial can be replaced by the word there:
• “They swam there.”
• “I’m going to hide the cookies up there.”
In these cases, the word there acts as an adverbial that gives further
information about where the action takes place. But, if the word there was
used differently in a similar sentence, it could function as a dummy pronoun.
For example:
• “There were fish where they swam.”
• “There are cookies up above the fridge.”
Both of these sentences use the existential there to explain that certain
things—namely, the fish and the cookies—exist. There also does not have any
antecedents in these sentences, so it is clearly functioning as a dummy
pronoun in both.
It as a dummy pronoun
Just like the dummy pronoun there, it is also used as a pronoun without an
antecedent in sentences. It is commonly used in situations when weather,
distance, or time is being discussed.
116

Weather
The following are examples of sentences that use it as a dummy pronoun
related to weather.
• “It looks like it may snow tonight.”
• “Is it raining?”
• ”It was very sunny at the beach last weekend.”
• “It always seems to sleet when he drives on the highway.”
Distance
The following examples use it as a dummy pronoun in sentences involving
distance.
• “It is very far from North America to Europe.”
• “Is it a long drive to get to the mountain?”
• “It is a short walk once you get out of the forest.”
• “It is farther than you think to drive to California.”
Time
The following examples use it as a dummy pronoun in sentences involving
time.
• “It is 4:30.
• “It was earlier than he expected.”
• “Could you tell me what time it is?”
• “She told him to come back when It was later in the day.”
Other uses
There are a number of other situations where it can be used as a dummy
pronoun, without pertaining to weather, distance, or time.
When it functions as an empty subject to introduce or “anticipate” something
that appears later in the sentence, it is sometimes referred to as
anticipatory it:
• “It was assumed that the tour guide knew exactly how to get there.”
117

• “It seems that four people showed up instead of the expected two.”
It can also function as an object when it is a dummy pronoun:
• “The teacher seemed a bit out of it yesterday.
• “Watch it, pal!”
Singular vs. Plural
Notice that in all of the examples above, it is only functioning as a singular
dummy pronoun. This is because it can’t be plural. This means that the verbs
and objects in sentences with the dummy pronoun it have to be singular as
well.
Subject vs. object
A subject is a noun or pronoun that performs the action of the verb. An
object is a noun or pronoun that receives the action of the verb,
The dummy pronoun it can either function as the subject of a sentence or as
the object, although it is more commonly used as the subject. Existential
there, on the other hand, can only be a subject.
(The word there can function as the object of a preposition, as in “We left
from there.” However, it is considered a noun in this case, not a pronoun.)
Here are some examples of sentences where dummy pronouns are used as
subjects:
• “There are many ducks in the pond.”
• “There is a tree in the middle of the field.”
• “It is 12:30.”
• “It is sunny outside today.”
Here are some examples of sentences where dummy pronouns are used as
objects:
• “Will he make it to the game?”
• “Cool it down.”
• “Watch it!”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
118

1. Which of the following words is a dummy pronoun?
a) and
b) the
b) it
d) when
 
2. Which dummy pronoun could be used to complete the following
sentence?
“_____ were 12 colors in the painting.”
a) It
b) There
c) Both A & B
d) None of the above
 
3. Dummy pronouns are also referred to as what?
a) Roundabout pronouns
b) Concrete pronouns
c) Ghost pronouns
d) Expletive pronouns
 
4. The following sentence includes what type of dummy pronoun?
“It was warm outside when they went to the pool.”
a) Subject
b) Object
c) Hyphenated
d) None of the above
 
5. Dummy pronouns are different from regular pronouns because they don't
have which of the following?
a) Clauses
b) Periods
c) Antecedents
d) Adverbs
Verbs
119

Definition
Verbs are used to indicate the actions, processes, conditions, or states of
beings of people or things.
Verbs play an integral role to the structure of a sentence. They constitute the
root of the predicate, which, along with the subject (the “doer” of the
verb’s action), forms a full clause or sentence—we cannot have a sentence
without a verb.
When we discuss verbs’ role in the predicate, we usually divide them into two
fundamental categories: finite and non-finite verbs.
Finite and Non-Finite Verbs
The predicate requires at least one finite verb to be considered complete.
A finite verb has a direct relationship to the subject of a sentence or clause,
and does not require another verb in the sentence in order to be
grammatically correct. For example:
• “I swim every day.”
• “She reads many books.”
• “He talked for several hours.”
Each of the above is a finite verb, expressing an action that is directly related
to the subject of the sentence. Non-finite verbs, on the other hand, do not
express that relationship directly.
The only verbs that can be considered finite are those in their base form (the
infinitive form without the particle to), their past tense form, or their
third-person singular form. Verb forms that are never considered finite
are gerunds, infinitives, and participles (both past and present).
Let’s look at an example containing both a finite and non-finite verb:
• “We are learning about the American Revolution in school.”
This sentence uses the present continuous verb are learning. This functions
as a single unit, with learning expressing most of the meaning.
However, learning is a present participle, which is considered a non-finite
verb; the finite verb of the sentence is actually just the auxiliary verb are.
It is an inflection of the verb be used for a first person plural subject (we).
We can see the difference if we use each verb in isolation with the subject:
120

• “We are”
• “We learning”
We can see that the first verb is finite because it expresses a direct
relationship with the subject, and it can go on to form any number of
complete sentences. For example:
✔ “We are tired.”
✔ “We are almost there.”
✔ “We are a large group.”
The second verb, the present participle learning, cannot make such
sentences, and so is not finite. The following examples all require a finite
verb to be correct:
✖ “We learning math.”
✖ “We learning a lot.”
✖ “We learning in school.”
To learn more about the differences between these two classes of verbs, go to
the section Finite and Non-finite Verbs in this chapter.
Transitive and Intransitive Verbs
Every verb is classed as being either transitive or intransitive.
Transitive verbs describe an action that is happening to someone or
something. This person or thing is known as the direct object of the verb.
For example:
• “He’s reading a book.” (The action of reading is happening to the book.)
• “The people watched the game from the bleachers.” (The action of
watched is happening to the game.)
• “I was eating a delicious steak for dinner last night.” (The action of eating
is happening to a delicious steak.)
Transitive verbs can also take indirect objects, which are the people or
things receiving the direct object. For instance:
• “I sent my brother a letter.” (My brother receives the letter through the
action of sent.)
Conversely, intransitive verbs do not have objects—their action is not
happening to anyone or anything. For example:
121

• “I can’t believe our dog ran away.” (There is no object receiving the action
of ran away.)
• “There was a lot of dust in the air, which made me sneeze.” (There is no
object receiving the action of sneeze.)
• “Don’t be too loud while the baby sleeps.” (There is no object receiving the
action of sleeps.)
Regular and Irregular Verbs
Just as every verb is either transitive or intransitive, each one is considered
to be either regular or irregular
Most verbs are regular verbs, which means that “-d” or “-ed” can be added
to their base form (the infinitive of the verb without to) to conjugate both
the past simple tense and past participle forms. For example:
Base Form
Past Simple Tense
Past Participle
“I play violin.”
“I bake cakes.”
“I 
listen 
to 
my
teacher.”
“I gather firewood.”
“I climb trees.”
“I played violin.”
“I baked cakes.”
“I 
listened 
to 
my
teacher.”
“I gathered firewood.”
“I climbed trees.”
“I had played violin.”
“I had baked cakes.”
“I had listened to my
teacher.”
“I had gathered firewood.”
“I had climbed trees.”
Irregular verbs, on the other hand, have past tense and past participle
forms that do not (or do not seem to) adhere to a distinct or predictable
pattern, and they are usually completely different from one another.
Unfortunately, this means that there is generally no way of determining how
to conjugate irregular verbs—we just have to learn each one individually.
There are many irregular verbs, but here are a few common ones:
Base Form
Past Simple Tense
Past Participle
122

“I see the horizon.”
“I grow bigger every
day.”
“I give to charity.”
“I sing on Tuesday.”
“I swim often.”
“I drive to work.”
“I saw the horizon.”
“I grew bigger every
day.”
“I gave to charity.”
“I sang on Tuesday.”
“I swam often.”
“I drove to work.”
“I had seen the horizon.”
“I had grown bigger every
day.”
“I had given to charity.”
“I had sung on Tuesday.”
“I had swum often.”
“I had driven to work.”
 
Uniquely, the verb be is considered highly irregular, having three different
present tense forms (is, am, are) and two past tense forms (was, were), in
addition to its base form and its past and present participles (been, being).
Forms and categories
All verbs are either finite or non-finite and transitive or intransitive in a given
sentence, depending on their form and function. There are many different
forms and categories of verbs that we’ll be looking at in this chapter, and
we’ll give a brief summary of the different kinds of verbs below. You can
continue on to their individual sections to learn more.
Verb forms
Auxiliary Verbs
Auxiliary or “helping” verbs are verbs that are used to complete the
meaning of other primary or “main” verbs in a sentence. In the example we
looked at above, are is an auxiliary to the main verb, learning.
The three primary auxiliary verbs—be, have, and do—are used to create
different tenses, to form negatives, or to ask questions. For example:
• “I am working on my project.” (present continuous tense)
• “She does not work here anymore.” (negative sentence)
• “Have you seen my keys?” (question)
There are also modal auxiliary verbs (often just called modal verbs),
which are used to express modality—that is, possibility, likelihood, ability,
permission, obligation, or future intention. These are can, could, will, would,
shall, should, must, may, and might. They are distinguished by the fact that
they are unable to conjugate into different forms, and they are only followed
123

by a verb in its base form. For example:
• “I will be there tonight.” (future intention)
• “She can write very well.” (ability)
• “May I be excused from the table?” (permission)
• “We must finish this today.” (obligation)
Infinitives
Infinitives are the most basic construction of a verb. When we talk of a verb
as a general concept, we usually use the infinitive form, which is the
uninflected base form of the verb plus the particle to. For instance:
to run
to walk
to read
to be
to learn
to act
Infinitives can be used as nouns, adjectives, or adverbs in a sentence, but
they do not actually function as verbs—they are used to express an action as
a concept, rather than what is being done or performed by the subject of a
clause. For example:
• “I love to run.” (functions as a noun)
• “I wish I had something to do.” (functions as an adjective)
• “I run a lot to stay healthy.” (functions as an adverb)
Participles
Participles are forms of verbs that either function with auxiliary verbs to
create the continuous and perfect verb tenses, or as adjectives to modify
nouns. Every verb (except the modal auxiliary verbs) has two participle
forms: a present participle and a past participle.
The present participle is always the base form of the verb + “-ing.”
Although the spelling of some verbs changes very slightly to accommodate
this suffix, every verb takes “-ing” for the present participle.
We use present participles with the auxiliary be to form continuous tenses,
124

as in:
• “Can’t you see that I am reading?” (present continuous tense)
• “I was watching that.” (past continuous tense)
• “They will be arriving soon.” (future continuous tense)
The past participle is usually the same as a verb’s simple past tense form,
which is made by adding “-d” or “-ed” to the end of the verb. However, many
verbs are irregular, meaning they do not follow this spelling pattern, and
they have different past tense and past participle forms. (We’ll look at
regular and irregular verbs later on.)
The past participle is used with the auxiliary have to form the perfect
tenses:
• “You have worked long enough.” (present perfect tense)
• “We had seen too much.” (past perfect tense)
• “They’ll have arrived before we get there.” (future perfect tense)
We can also use participles as adjectives to add description to nouns. Though
they still relate to action, they are not functioning as verbs when used this
way. For example:
• “The mother looked down at her smiling child.”
• “I could tell by the exhausted look on his face that he needed sleep.”
Categories of verbs
There are many different categories of verbs that describe different kinds of
actions or states of being.
Action (Dynamic) Verbs
Action verbs (also known as dynamic verbs) describe an active process
that results in an effect. For example:
• “I ran to school.”
• “She read a book.”
• “They talked during lunch.”
• “We swam for over an hour.”
125

Stative Verbs
In contrast to action verbs, stative verbs describe states of being of a
subject. These include linking verbs, such as be and verbs of the senses,
which are used to describe or rename a subject using a predicative
adjective or noun. For example:
• “I am hungry.”
• “You sound tired.”
• “He seems like a bully.”
Other stative verbs are those that express emotions, possession, cognition,
and states or qualities. For example:
• “She likes old movies.”
• “They own three cars.”
• “I understand the issue.”
• “Your happiness depends on doing something you enjoy.”
Light Verbs
Light verbs do not carry unique meaning on their own, but instead rely on
another word or words that follow them to become meaningful. Common
examples include do, have, and take, as in:
• “Do your homework!”
• “Why don’t we have something to eat?”
• “I took a shower before breakfast.”
In many cases, the same light verb will have different meanings, depending
on the word or words it is paired with. For instance:
• “Please don’t make a mess.”
• “Please make your bed.”
Phrasal Verbs
Phrasal verbs are verbs that pair with prepositions or particles to create
unique, specific meanings. These are largely idiomatic, which means that
they don’t make literal sense according to their individual parts. For
126

example:
• “I can’t believe that you’re giving up!”
• “The plane took off an hour late.”
• “He has been looking after his mother.”
• “Stop picking on your brother!”
Conditional Verbs
The term conditional verbs refers to verb constructions that are used in
conditional sentences, which describe a hypothetical outcome that is
reliant upon another conditional situation being true. These sentences most
often use the conjunction if with one of the verbs to express the conditional
situation, and often use modal auxiliary verbs to describe the
hypothetical outcome. For example:
• “The leaves will fall if the wind blows.”
• “If you had done your chores, you could have had an ice cream cone.”
• “You would get better grades if you studied harder.”
Causative Verbs
Causative verbs are used to indicate that a person or thing is causing
another action or an event to happen. They are generally followed by a noun
or pronouns and an infinitive verb that is not causative, which describes the
action that was caused to happen. For example:
• “He let his dog run through the field.”
• “The bigger house enabled the family to have more room for their
belongings.”
• “The new dress code forced the students to wear different shoes.”
• “The law requires a person to obtain a permit before hunting on public
land.”
Factitive Verbs
Factitive verbs are used to indicate a condition or state of a person, place,
or thing that results from the action of the verb. For example:
• “She was appointed commissioner by the mayor.”
127

• “The committee elected Mr. Fuller chairman of the board.”
• “The jury judged the defendant not guilty.”
Reflexive Verbs
Reflexive verbs have subjects that are also their direct objects—that is, the
action of the verb is both committed and received by the same person or
thing. The objects of transitive reflexive verbs are usually reflexive
pronouns. For example:
• “I accidentally burned myself with the hairdryer.”
• “The problem seems to have worked itself out in the end.”
• “This car doesn’t drive properly anymore.” (intransitive—no direct object)
Conjugation
When we discuss verbs, we usually must touch upon conjugation. This is
the inflection (changing of form) of verbs to create new meaning in specific
contexts. We generally refer to tense (which we looked at briefly above)
when we talk about conjugation, but verbs experience a large amount of
inflection depending on how they are being used in a sentence. For more
information, go to the chapter on Conjugation in the part of this guide
called Inflection (Accidence).
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the function of verbs in a sentence?
a) To identify the person or thing performing or controlling an action
b) To describe an action, state of being, or condition performed or
experienced by someone or something
c) To identify the person or thing directly receiving the effect of an action
d) To add descriptive information about another part of the sentence
2. The predicate of a sentence always contains what kind of verbs?
a) Regular verbs
b) Transitive verbs
c) Finite verbs
d) Non-finite verbs
128

 
3. Unlike regular verbs, irregular verbs usually have different:
a) Past tense and past participle forms
b) Present tense and present participle forms
c) Past tense and present tense forms
d) Present tense and past participle forms
 
4. Unlike transitive verbs, intransitive verbs are not able to take which of
the following?
a) Subjects
b) Direct objects
c) Indirect objects
d) Modifiers
e) A & C
f) B & C
g) All of the above
 
5. Identify the form of the verb in bold in the following sentence:
“We were looking for a place to eat.”
a) Transitive verb
b) Auxiliary verb
c) Infinitive verb
d) Participle
 
5. What is the term for changing a verb’s form to reflect things like tense?
a) Conscription
b) Transformation
c) Conjugation
d) Declension
Finite and Non-finite Verbs
Definition
Finite verbs are verbs that have subjects and indicate grammatical tense,
person, and number. These verbs describe the action of a person, place, or
thing in the sentence. Unlike other types of verbs, finite verbs do not require
129

another verb in the sentence in order to be grammatically correct.
Here are some examples of finite verbs:
• “They went to the mall today.”
• “The outfielder leaped for the baseball.”
• “Many people travel to the ocean in the summer.”
• “The sailboat glides over the water.”
• “The lion is the king of the jungle.”
Difference from non-finite verbs
Non-finite verbs are verbs that do not have tenses or subjects that they
correspond to. Instead, these verbs are usually infinitives, gerunds, or
participles. Gerunds and present participles end in “-ing,” while past
participles usually end in “-ed,” “-d,” or “-t.”
Let’s have a look at how infinitives, gerunds, and participles function in a
sentence in contrast to finite verbs.
Infinitives
If an infinitive is used in its full form (to + base form of the verb), it can
function as a noun, adjective, or adverb in the sentence. Bare infinitives
(base form of the verb without to) of non-finite verbs are used in conjunction
with modal auxiliary verbs, which are considered the finite verb(s) of the
sentence. For example:
• “To run is often tiresome.” (The infinitive to run functions as a noun, while
is functions as the finite verb.)
• “It takes a while to learn to ride a bicycle.” (The infinitive phrase to learn
to ride a bicycle functions as an adjective, modifying “a while.”)
• “I can’t swim yet.” (The bare infinitive swim relies on the finite auxiliary
verb can to be complete.)
Gerunds
Gerunds are “-ing” forms of a verb that function as nouns in a sentence.
Because they do not have the grammatical function of a verb, gerunds are
always non-finite.
130

• “Seeing the ocean for the first time is incredible.”
• “Reading books is often very enjoyable.”
Participles
Present Participles
Present participles have the same form as gerunds, ending in “-ing.”
However, they function in a sentence as either part of a continuous tense,
relying on an auxiliary verb to be complete; as an adjunct to a finite verb,
indicating a secondary action; or as an attributive or predicative
adjective, modifying a noun.
• “My daughter is watching me work.” (Watching is used with is to form the
present continuous tense.)
• “The car sat rusting in the driveway for over a year.” (Rusting is used in
conjunction with the finite verb sat to indicate a parallel activity.)
• “I read a very engaging book last week.” (Engaging functions as an
attributive adjective of book.)
• “This book is engaging.” (Engaging functions as a predicative adjective,
following the finite linking verb is and modifying book.)
Past Participles
Past participles of verbs are used to create non-continuous perfect verb
tenses ( past perfect, present perfect, and future perfect), or else
function as adjectives modifying nouns (again, either attributively or
predicatively). They are also used when forming the passive voice.
It is important to note that non-finite past participles and finite past tense
verbs often both end in “-d” or “-ed.” If the word directly describes the action
of a subject, then it is a finite verb. However, if the word is being used as an
adjective or requires another verb to be complete, then it is a non-finite verb.
• “I had already walked for many miles.” (Walked is a past participle that
depends on the auxiliary verb have to create the past perfect tense.)
• “Those clothes are washed.” (Washed is a past participle acting as an
predicative adjective to the noun clothes, following the finite linking verb
are.)
131

• “She carried the washed clothes upstairs.” (Carried is a past tense verb
describing the action of the subject, she; washed is a past participle acting as
an attributive adjective to the noun clothes.)
Importance to sentence structure
Sentences need a finite verb in order to be complete. Without a finite verb, a
sentence would simply be a subject, or a subject and other parts of speech
that do not express action and are not linked together properly. In other
words, sentences do not function correctly without finite verbs.
To illustrate this point, consider the following examples:
• “The car.”
• “The car on the road.“
• “The car on the road through the mountains.”
In the above examples, car is the subject. In order to make complete
sentences, a finite verb must be used to describe the action of the car, as well
as show how the other parts of the sentence relate to it. In the following
examples, a finite verb is used to form complete sentences:
• “The car drove.”
• “The car drove on the road.”
• “The car drove on the road through the mountains.”
Simply adding the finite verb drove makes all three of these sentences
complete. This is because it lets the reader know what the car is doing, and it
connects the subject to the other parts of the sentence.
We can also see how a using a non-finite verb instead of a finite one would
render the sentence incomplete again. For example:
• “The car driving on the road through the mountains.”
Because we used the present participle driving, the sentence is now
disjointed—the action is not fully expressed by the sentence. We would need
to add a finite verb to complete it, as in:
• “The car was driving on the road through the mountains.”
Identifying finite verbs
Due to the fact that multiple types of verbs can often exist in the same
132

sentence, it is helpful to know some common instances of finite verbs that
can help you identify them.
Third person singular present
verbs ending in “-s”
Any verb that has an “-s” ending for the third person singular present form is
a finite verb. Non-finite verbs do not have tense, and thus never switch their
endings to “-s” in the third person singular present form.
(The exceptions to this are modal auxiliary verbs: can, could, will, would,
shall, should, may, might, and must. Modal verbs also cannot take an “-s”
ending for third person singular present; however, they are always finite.
They come directly after the subject and before main verbs, and help to
determine aspect, tense, and mood.)
Here are some examples of finite verbs in the third person singular present
form with “-s” endings:
• “He runs to the store every morning.”
• “The woman swims in the ocean.”
• “The boy kicks the soccer ball at the goal.”
• “She has three cars in her driveway.”
Past tense irregular verbs
Verbs that are functioning in the past tense (not past participles) are
inherently finite. As we noted above, the majority of verbs have the same
form for both past tense and past participle. These are known as regular
verbs. To determine if a regular verb is in the past tense or is a past
participle (and thus finite or non-finite), we have to examine how it is
functioning in the sentence.
However, some verbs are irregular, and they have a past tense form that is
separate from their past participle form. Here are a few examples of
sentences using irregular verbs:
Be
• “She was feeling unwell.” (past tense – finite)
• “She has been feeling unwell.” (past participle – non-finite)
133

Go
• “I went to the store.” (past tense – finite)
• “I had gone to the store.” (past participle – non-finite)
Fly
• “They flew to San Diego already.” (past tense – finite)
• “They have flown to San Diego already.” (past participle – non-finite)
There are quite a few irregular verbs, and there is no rule to how they are
conjugated (which is why they are irregular). To learn more, go to the section
about Regular and Irregular Verbs.
Verbs that immediately follow
subjects
Finite verbs often directly follow the subjects whose actions they are
describing. This location allows for a clear connection between the subject
and the verb—it makes it easy for the reader or listener to understand that
the verb is describing the action of the subject and not another word in the
sentence. Here are some examples of finite verbs appearing directly after
subjects in sentences:
• “Everyone listened to the music.”
• “Elephants travel together in herds to find water.”
• “Across the field, the trees swayed in the wind.”
Non-finite verbs however, generally do not appear directly after the subject.
This is because they are often not directly describing the action of the
subject, but are instead serving another grammatical purpose in the
sentence.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a finite verb?
a) to jump
b) swimming
c) is
d) gone
 
134

2. Identify the finite verb in the following sentence.
“Running late, the family quickly drove to their relative's house.”
a) Running
b) to their
c) relative
d) drove
3. Finite verbs correspond to a specific subject and ________.
a) a tense
b) an infinitive
c) a past participle
d) a present participle
4. Which of the following verbs in the sentence is not a finite verb?
“Jumping into the ocean can be very refreshing after a long day.”
a) can
b) Jumping
c) be
d) A & B
e) B & C
5. In the past tense, finite verbs commonly end in:
a) “-ing”
b) “-s”
b) “-ed”
d) “-er”
Transitive and Intransitive Verbs
Definition
English verbs are split into two major categories depending on how they
function in a sentence: transitive and intransitive. Transitive verbs take
one or more objects in a sentence, while intransitive verbs take no objects in
a sentence.
Distinguishing between the two
135

Transitive Verbs
Put simply, a transitive verb describes an action that is happening to
something or someone, which is known as the verb’s direct object. For
instance, in the sentence “I am reading a book,” book is the direct object,
which the action reading is happening to.
To put it another way, the verb is transitive if a word or words in the
sentence answer the question “Who or what did the action of the verb
happen to?”
Examples
• “The people watched the game from the bleachers.” (The game is what
the people watched.)
• “I was eating a delicious steak for dinner last night.” (A delicious steak
is what I was eating.)
• “They met your brother at the airport in Dubai.” (Your brother is who
they met.)
Intransitive Verbs
An intransitive verb, on the other hand, describes an action that does not
happen to something or someone. For example, in the sentence “I arrived
late,” arrived is describing an action, but there is nothing and no one for that
action to happen to—the action is complete on its own. The verb is
intransitive if we cannot answer the question “Who or what did the action
of the verb happen to?”
Examples
• “I can’t believe our dog ran away.” (What did the dog run away? Nothing,
there is no object receiving the action of ran away.)
• “There was a lot of dust in the air, which made me sneeze.” (What did I
sneeze? Nothing, there is no object receiving the action of sneeze.)
• “Don’t be too loud while the baby sleeps.” (What did the baby sleep?
Nothing, there is no object receiving the action of sleeps.)
136

Intransitive 
verbs 
with
prepositional phrases
When intransitive verbs are modified by prepositional phrases, they can
often look like they are transitive because the preposition has its own object;
however, this is not the case. Take, for example, the following sentences:
• “I can’t believe our dog ran away from home.”
• “I sneezed from the dust.”
• “The baby is sleeping in our room.”
It may seem like home, dust and our room are all objects of the verbs in
these sentences, but they’re actually objects of the prepositions, which
together form prepositional phrases that modify the verbs. The verbs
remain intransitive, regardless of the objects in prepositional phrases.
Mnemonic device
One way to remember the difference between the two is to think about their
names:
Transitive verbs transition or transfer an action to a person or thing that
receives it.
In- 
means 
not 
in 
this 
case, 
so 
intransitive 
verbs 
do 
not
transition/transfer an action to a person or thing that receives it.
“Ambitransitive Verbs”
Some action verbs can be both transitive and intransitive, depending on the
context of the sentence or what information the speaker wishes to include.
These are sometimes known as ambitransitive or ergative verbs.
For example:
• “She eats before going to work.” (Intransitive—no direct object receiving
the action of the verb eats.)
• “She eats breakfast before going to work.” (Transitive—has a direct object
(breakfast) receiving the action of the verb eats.)
Here are some other examples of verbs that function both transitively and
intransitively.
137

• “I’ve been trying to read more.” (intransitive)
• “I’ve been trying to read more novels.” (transitive)
• “I’m still cooking, so I’m going to be a little late.” (intransitive)
• “I’m still cooking dinner, so I’m going to be a little late.” (transitive)
• “I’ve been exercising every day this month.” (intransitive)
• “I’ve been exercising my arms every day this month.” (transitive)
Monotransitive, Ditransitive, and
“Tritransitive” Verbs
As we’ve seen, a transitive verb is by definition a verb that takes an object.
Most verbs are monotransitive, meaning they only take one object.
However, some verbs, known as ditransitive verbs, can take two objects in
a sentence, while others, known as tritransitive verbs, can take (or seem
to take) three objects.
Monotransitive Verbs
A verb that acts upon a single object in a sentence is referred to as
monotransitive (mono meaning one). This single object is called its direct
object. All of the examples we’ve seen so far have been monotransitive
verbs; here’s a few more:
• “I rode my bike to get here.”
• “Jim just told a funny joke.”
• “I’m making lasagna for dinner.”
• “I heard she’s writing a novel.”
Ditransitive Verbs
There are some verbs in English that take two objects: a direct object and
an indirect object. These are known as ditransitive verbs. The direct
object relates to the person or thing that directly receives the action of the
verb, while the indirect object relates to the person or thing that indirectly
receives or benefits from the action as a result.
The indirect object in a ditransitive verb can either come immediately before
the direct object in a sentence, or it can form the object of a prepositional
138

phrase using to or for that follows and modifies the direct object.
For example:
• “He gave Mary a pen.” (The indirect object, Mary immediately follows
the direct object, pen.)
or
• “He gave a pen to Mary.” (The indirect object, Mary, forms the object of
the prepositional phrase to Mary, which follows and modifies the direct
object, pen.)
Here are some other examples:
• “She teaches the students mathematics.”
• “She teaches mathematics to the students.”
• “I sent my brother a letter.”
• “I sent a letter to my brother.”
• “My father baked our class a batch of cupcakes.”
• “My father baked a batch of cupcakes for our class.”
Factitive Verbs
Factitive verbs are or appear to be ditransitive as well. Instead of having a
direct object that impacts on an indirect object, factitive verbs describe a
status, category, quality, or result that the direct object is becoming due to
the action of the verb. This secondary element can be either an object or
object complement of the verb. For example:
• “The American people elected her the president of the United
States.”
• “He was appointed Supreme Court justice.”
• “The committee selected Mrs. Fuller chairman of the board.”
• “The group designated Marshall the leader from then on.”
• “The coach made Linda point guard.”
• “We painted the ceiling white.”
See the section on factitive verbs to learn more.
“Tritransitive” verbs
An unofficial third type of transitive verb is what’s sometimes known as a
139

tritransitive verb, meaning that it takes three objects. This third “object” is
formed from a prepositional phrase or clause that appears to receive the
action of the verb by way of the indirect object. For example:
• “We will make you CEO for $300,000.”
• “I’d trade you that sandwich for an ice cream cone.”
• “I bet you 50 bucks (that) our team will win the championship.”
There is some dispute among linguists, however, as to whether these kinds of
verbs truly have three objects, or whether the third piece of information is
merely considered an adjunct, as the sentence would be grammatically
sound without it.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What do all transitive verbs have that intransitive verbs do not?
a) a preposition
b) a subject
c) an object
d) an adverbial clause
 
2. What kind of verb can be both transitive and intransitive?
a) monotransitive
b) ditransitive
c) tritransitive
d) ambitransitive
 
3. What kind of verb is in the following sentence?
“I played my grandmother a song.”
a) intransitive
b) monotransitive
c) ditransitive
d) tritransitive
 
4. What kind of verb is in the following sentence?
“I swam for half an hour before my meeting.”
a) intransitive
140

b) monotransitive
c) ditransitive
d) tritransitive
 
5. What kind of verb only has a direct object?
a) intransitive
b) monotransitive
c) ditransitive
d) tritransitive
141

Regular and Irregular Verbs
Definition
All English verbs are either regular or irregular, depending on how they
are conjugated. The majority are regular verbs, which means that “-d” or “-
ed” is added to their base form (the infinitive of the verb without to) to create
both the past simple tense and past participle.
The past simple tense and past participles of irregular verbs, on the other
hand, have many different forms that do not adhere to a distinct or
predictable pattern. Much of the time, their past tense and past participle
forms are completely different from one another. Unfortunately, this means
that there is no way of determining how to conjugate irregular verbs—we just
have to learn each one individually.
Conjugating 
Regular 
and
Irregular Verbs
In the following sections, we’ll look at various examples of regular and
irregular verbs and how the past simple tense and past participle are formed
for each one.
We’ll also look at a few examples of how each of these different forms
functions in a sentence.
Regular verbs
As we saw above, regular verbs are defined as having both their past simple
tense and past participle forms constructed by adding “-d” or “-ed” to the end
of the word. For most regular verbs, this is the only change to the word.
Here are some examples of common regular verbs.
Base Form Past Simple Tense Past Participle
142

play
bake
listen
approach
gather
climb
walk
arrive
bolt
played
baked
listened
approached
gathered
climbed
walked
arrived
bolted
played
baked
listened
approached
gathered
climbed
walked
arrived
bolted
 
In all of the above examples, the only alteration to the verb has been the
addition of “-d” or “-ed.” Notice, too, that the past tense and past participle
forms are identical in each case—this is a defining feature of regular verbs.
Changing spelling
In some cases, though, we have to modify the verb slightly further in order to
be able to add “-d” or “-ed.”
For instance, with verbs that end in a “short” vowel followed by a consonant,
we double the final consonant in addition to adding “-ed”;* when a verb ends
in a consonant + “y,” we replace the “y” with “i” and add “-ied”; and when a
verb ends in “-ic,” we add the letter “k” in addition to “-ed.”
For example:
Base Form Past Simple Tense Past Participle
chop
copy
panic
chopped
copied
panicked
chopped
copied
panicked
 
(*Usage Note: An exception to this rule occurs for words that end in a soft
vowel and the consonant “l” (as in travel, cancel, fuel, label, etc.). In this
case, we merely add “-ed” to form the past simple and the past participle (as
in traveled, canceled, fueled, labeled, etc.)—we do not double the consonant.
Note, however, that this exception only occurs in American English; in
other varieties of English, such as British or Australian English, the
consonant is still doubled.)
See the chapter on Suffixes to learn more about how words change when we
143

add to their endings.
Example sentences
• “I walk around the park each evening.” (base form)
• “I walked around the park in the afternoon.” (past simple tense)
• “I have walked around the park a few times this morning.” (past
participle)
• “I’m going to chop some vegetables for the salad.” (base form)
• “He chopped some vegetables for the salad before dinner.” (past simple
tense)
• “He had already chopped some vegetables for the salad.” (past participle)
• “Don’t copy other students’ answers or you will get an F.” (base form)
• “I think he copied my answers.” (past simple tense)
• “The only answers he got right were the ones he had copied.” (past
participle)
• “Your father’s fine, don’t panic!” (base form)
• “I panicked when I heard he was in the hospital.” (past simple tense)
• “I wish hadn’t panicked like that.” (past participle)
Irregular verbs
Irregular verbs, by their very definition, do not have spelling rules that we
can follow to create the past simple tense and past participles. This means
that the only way of knowing how to spell these forms is to memorize them
for each irregular verb individually. Below are just a few examples of some
common irregular verbs.
Base Form Past Simple Tense Past Participle
144

be
see
grow
give
think
throw
drive
ride
run
swim
sit
was/were
saw
grew
gave
thought
threw
drove
rode
ran
swam
sat
been
seen
grown
given
thought
thrown
driven
ridden
run
swum
sat
 
As you can see, irregular verbs can have endings that are dramatically
different from their base forms; often, their past simple tense and past
participles forms are completely different, too. Again, the only way to learn
these variations is to memorize them.
Examples
Let’s look at some sentences that use irregular verbs in their various forms:
• “I am excited that college is starting.” (base form)
• “I was sad to leave home, though.” (past simple tense)
• “I have been making a lot of new friends already.” (past participle)
• “I drive to work every morning.” (base form)
• “I drove for nearly an hour yesterday.” (past simple tense)
• “I had already driven halfway to the office when I realized I forgot my
briefcase.” (past participle)
• “I would love to grow vegetables in my garden.” (base form)
• “I grew some juicy tomatoes last summer.” (past simple tense)
• “He has grown a lot of different vegetables already.” (past participle)
• “I think I would like to get a dog.” (base form)
• “She thought a dog would provide some good company.” (past simple
tense)
• “She hadn’t thought about how much work they are.” (past participle)
Conjugating present tense and
145

the present participle
Although there are stark differences between regular and irregular verbs
when it comes to conjugating their past simple tense and past participles,
both kinds of verbs do follow the same conventions when creating present
participles and present tense in the third person singular (the other two
elements of verb conjugation).
For example:
Regular Verbs
Regular
Verb
Past
Simple
Tense
Past
Participle
Third Person
Singular Present
Tense
Present
Participle
bake
baked
baked
bakes
baking
tap
tapped
tapped
taps
tapping
tidy
tidied
tidied
tidies
tidying
mimic
mimicked
mimicked
mimics
mimicking
 
Irregular Verbs
Irregular
Verb
Past
Simple
Tense
Past
Participle
Third Person
Singular Present
Tense
Present
Participle
ride
rode
ridden
rides
riding
see
saw
seen
sees
seeing
give
gave
given
gives
giving
swim
swam
swum
swims
swimming
 
The exception to this is the verb be, which conjugates the present tense
irregularly for first, second, and third person, as well as for singular and
plural:
Verb
Past Simple
Tense
Past
Participle
Present
Tense
Present
Participle
146

be
was/were
been
is/am/are
being
 
For this reason, be is known as a highly irregular verb. Note, however, that
it still forms the present participle following the same conventions as all
other verbs.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a regular verb?
a) think
b) find
b) listen
d) ran
 
2. Which of the following is an irregular verb?
a) happen
b) talk
c) walk
d) swim
 
3. Identify whether the verb in the following sentence is regular or irregular:
“The family hiked over the mountain.”
a) regular
b) irregular
 
4. Identify the irregular verb in the following sentence:
“She gave me a bunch of potatoes, which she harvested herself, to cook for
dinner later.”
a) cook
b) gave
c) picked
d) bunch
 
5. In which of the following ways do regular and irregular verbs conjugate
differently?
a) When forming the past simple tense
147

b) When forming the past participle
c) When forming the present participle
d) A & B
e) B & C
d) None of the above
 
6. In which of the following ways do regular and irregular verbs conjugate in
the same way?
a) When forming the past simple tense
b) When forming the past participle
c) When forming the present participle
d) A & B
e) B & C
d) None of the above
Auxiliary Verbs
Definition
Auxiliary verbs (also called helping verbs) are verbs that add functional
meaning to other “main” or “full” verbs in a clause. They are used to create
different tenses or aspects, to form negatives and interrogatives, or to add
emphasis to a sentence. However, they do not have semantic meaning unto
themselves.
Types of Auxiliary Verbs
Here is the complete list of auxiliary verbs:
be
do
have
can
could
will
would
shall
should
148

must
may
might
ought to
used to
need
dare
The primary auxiliary verbs are be, do, and have, and they are the most
commonly occurring auxiliaries in English. Each can also be used as a main
verb in a clause, and each is able to conjugate to reflect plurality, tense, or
aspect.
The verbs can, could, will, would, shall, should, must, may, and
might are known as modal auxiliary verbs. These are distinguished by
the fact that they are unable to conjugate into different forms, and they are
only followed by a verb in its base form.
The remaining verbs—ought to, used to, need, and dare—are known as
semi-modal verbs, since they do not share all the characteristics of the
modal verbs above and only function as auxiliary verbs in certain ways.
Creating verb tenses
One of the most common uses of auxiliary verbs is to create the continuous
and perfect continuous verb tenses (as well as the future simple tense).
Future Simple Tense
The future tense is structured as will + the main verb, or is/am/are + going
to + the main verb:
• “I will arrive in New York at 10 PM.”
or:
• “I am going to arrive in New York at 10 PM.”
Present Continuous Tense
The present continuous tense is structured as am/is/are + the present
participle of the main verb:
149

• “I am working tomorrow.”
• “She is living in New York.”
• “They are trying to save some money.”
Past Continuous Tense
The past continuous tense is structured as was/were + the present participle
of the main verb:
• “I was cooking breakfast when she called.”
• “We were talking on the phone at the time.”
Future Continuous Tense
The future continuous tense is structured as will be + the present participle
of the main verb, or am/is/are + going to be + the present participle of the
verb:
• “I will be leaving in the morning.”
or:
• “I am going to be leaving in the morning.”
Present Perfect Tense
The present perfect tense is structured as have/has + the past participle of
the main verb:
• “I have lived here all my life.”
• “She has studied for this exam for weeks.”
• “They have tried to find a solution to the problem.”
Past Perfect Tense
The past perfect tense is structured as had + the past participle of the main
verb:
• “I had already made my fortune when I was your age.”
• “We had seen that the results were constant.”
150

Future Perfect Tense
The future perfect tense is usually structured as will have + the past
participle of the main verb:
• “I will have finished by that time.”
• “She will have sung with a professional orchestra before the tour begins.”
Present 
Perfect 
Continuous
Tense
The present perfect continuous tense is structured as have been + the
present participle of the main verb:
• “I have been trying to reach you for over an hour.”
Past Perfect Continuous Tense
The past perfect continuous tense is structured as had been + the present
participle of the main verb:
• “We had been working through the night.”
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
The future perfect continuous tense is structured as will have been + the
present participle of the main verb, or am/is/are + going to + have been +
the present participle of the verb:
• “She will have been living here for most of her life.”
• “I am going to have been working here for 10 years next week.”
Identifying auxiliary verbs
Auxiliary verbs can be identified by two main criteria: whether the verb is
capable of inversion with the subject, and whether it can take the negating
adverb not as a postdependent modifier.
(An exception to the first two rules is the linking verb be, which can both
invert and take not, despite having the function of a main verb.)
151

Subject-auxiliary inversion
Inversion refers to the reversal of the normal position of the subject and the
auxiliary verb of a clause. While it is technically possible for a main verb to
invert with its subject, it is much less likely than having an auxiliary verb
cause an inversion, due to the fact that subject-auxiliary inversion is
commonly used to create interrogative sentences. Additionally, subject-
auxiliary inversion can be used to create conditional sentences, as well as
for emphasis in negative sentences when negating phrases are used.
Interrogative sentences
When a sentence is in the present simple tense or past simple tense, we
use the auxiliary verb do to form it into a question word. Do is inverted with
the subject, coming before it in the sentence. For example:
• “John works across town.” (declarative sentence)
• “Does John work across town?” (interrogative sentence)
If the verb is in a continuous tense (present, past, or future) or the future
simple tense, then the auxiliary verb used to create the tense is inverted
with the subject; if the verb is in a perfect continuous tense (present, past, or
future), then the first of the two auxiliary verbs is inverted. For example:
Present continuous tense:
• “John is working across town.” (declarative)
• “Is John working across town?” (interrogative)
Past continuous tense:
• “John was working across town.” (declarative)
• “Was John working across town?” (interrogative)
Present perfect continuous tense:
• “John has been working across town.” (declarative)
• “Has John been working across town?” (interrogative)
Past perfect continuous tense:
• “John had been working across town.” (declarative)
• “Had John been working across town?” (interrogative)
Future simple tense:
• “John will work across town.” (declarative)
152

• “Will John work across town?” (interrogative)
or:
• “John is going to work across town.” (declarative)
• “Is John going to work across town?” (interrogative)
Future continuous tense:
• “John will be working across town.” (declarative)
• “Will John be working across town?” (interrogative)
or:
• “John is going to be working across town.” (declarative)
• “Is John going to be working across town?” (interrogative)
Future perfect continuous tense:
• “John will have been working across town.” (declarative)
• “Will John have been working across town?” (interrogative)
or:
• “John is going to have been working across town.” (declarative)
• “Is John going to have been working across town?” (interrogative)
Question words and modal verbs
This inversion holds true even when a question word is used, as in:
• “Where will John be working across town?”
• “Why had John been working across town?”
• “When was John working across town?”
Modal auxiliary verbs can also be used to create questions with specific
meanings, as in:
• “Can you work a forklift?” (question of ability)
• “May I watch television for an hour?” (question of permission)
• “Must we sit through another boring play?” (question of obligation)
Inversion of be
Finally, as we mentioned earlier, be is able to invert when it functions as a
linking verb (meaning it is a main verb) as well as when it functions as an
auxiliary. For example:
153

• “I am cold.”
• “Are you cold?”
• “They were all present.”
• “Were they all present?”
Conditional sentences
Conditional sentences are most often formed using the conjunction if to
create a condition clause. For example:
• “If I were to move to Florida, I would be warm all year round.”
• “If they had trained a little harder, they would have won.”
We can also achieve conditional clauses by using subject-auxiliary inversion,
although the sentence sounds a bit more formal as a result:
• “Were I to move to Florida, I would be warm all year round.”
• “Had they trained a little harder, they would have won.”
Negative phrases
Negative phrases are sometimes used to provide extra emphasis in a negative
sentence. Because the main verb remains affirmative, the negative phrase
appears ahead of the subject and the main verb, which means that an
auxiliary verb must come between it and the subject.
If the negative phrase were to come after the main verb of the sentence (as
adverbial phrases often do), the sentence would become unclear because the
verb would shift from an affirmative position to a negative one. For example:
✖ “You are spending the night there under no circumstances.” (No
inversion—the sentence is unclear and/or lacks emphasis.)
✔ “Under no circumstances are you spending the night there.” (Subject-
auxiliary inversion—the sentence is now clear with proper emphasis on the
negative phrase.)
✖ “They told us what the problem was at no point.” (no inversion)
✔ “At no point did they tell us what the problem was.” (subject-auxiliary
inversion)
Forming negative sentences with
154

not
The most common way to make a verb negative is to use the adverb not.
However, main verbs usually do not take not on their own—they require an
auxiliary verb to accomplish this. For example:
• “I work in a law firm downtown.” (affirmative sentence)
✖ “I work not in a law firm downtown.” (incorrect negative sentence)
✔ “I do not work in a law firm downtown.” (correct negative sentence)
As with subject-verb inversion, be as a main verb is an exception to this rule.
For instance:
✔ “He is very warm.” (affirmative)
✔ “He is not very warm.” (negative)
Finally, it must be noted that in older, formal, and more literary English,
main verbs were able to take not without an auxiliary. For example:
• “I know not where the problems lie.”
• “Betray not your kin.”
However, this type of negative formation is rarely used in modern speech or
writing.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a modal auxiliary verb?
a) be
b) do
c) must
d) have
 
2. What can the primary auxiliary verbs do that modal verbs cannot?
a) Take the adverb not to become negative
b) Invert with the subject in an interrogative sentence
c) Form a verb tense
d) Conjugate to reflect plurality
 
3. Which of the following can perform subject-verb inversion as a main verb
155

in the same way as auxiliary verbs?
a) be
b) do
c) have
d) will
 
4. Identify the auxiliary verb in the following sentence:
“I have to tell you that you are being ridiculous.”
a) have
b) tell
c) are
d) being
 
5. Select the auxiliary verb that will put the following sentence in the future
perfect continuous tense:
“James will ____ been studying for three years come this September.”
a) be
b) do
c) have
d) will
Primary Auxiliary Verbs
Definition
The “primary” auxiliary verbs are be, have, and do—they occur most
commonly in English. They are also some of the trickiest to master, because
each can also be used as a main verb in a clause, and each is able to
conjugate to reflect plurality and tense as a result.
Be and have are used as auxiliaries to conjugate the continuous, perfect, and
perfect continuous tenses. Do is used to make main verbs negative or to form
interrogative sentences; it can also be used to add emphasis to a
sentence.
We will begin by examining these different conjugations, and then we’ll look
more closely at how these verbs function as auxiliaries.
156

Conjugating be, have, and do
Because be, have, and do are able to function as main verbs, they must also
be able to inflect for plurality and tense; it is important to know these
conjugations, as they must be used correctly when the verbs function as
auxiliaries.
Do conjugates as did (past tense), does (third-person singular present tense),
done (past participle), and doing (present participle); have conjugates as
had (past tense/participle), has (third-person singular present tense), and
having (present participle).
Be, meanwhile, has seven conjugations: am (first-person singular present
tense); are (first-person plural present tense, second-person singular/plural
present tense, third-person plural present tense); is (third-person singular
present tense); was (first-person singular past tense, third-person singular
past 
tense); 
were 
(first-person 
plural 
past 
tense, 
second-person
singular/plural past tense, third-person plural past tense); been (past
participle); and being (present participle).
The following tables will help illustrate these different conjugations. Note
that only conjugations used in an auxiliary capacity have been included:
Be
Conjugations
Form
Auxiliary example sentence
be
base form
"You must be joking."
am
first-person 
singular
present tense
"I am moving to Germany next
month."
are
first-person 
plural
present tense
second-person
singular/plural 
present
tense
third-person 
plural
present tense
"We 
are 
leaving 
tomorrow
morning."
"Are you working later?"
"Where are they going?"
is
third-person 
singular
present tense
"She is wondering where we're
going."
157

was
first-person singular past
tense
third-person 
singular
past tense
"I was talking to my brother
yesterday."
"It was raining quite hard last
night."
were
first-person plural past
tense
second-person
singular/plural 
past
tense
third-person plural past
tense
"We were looking for a new
place to live."
"You were thinking of running
away?"
"When were they planning on
electing a new president?"
been
past participle
"Everyone has been worrying
about their jobs."
 
Have
Conjugations
Form
Auxiliary Example sentence
have
base form
"I have been to this part of town
before."
has
third-person
singular 
present
tense
"It has been raining for over an hour
now."
had
past tense
"They had been confident in the
project's success."
having
present participle
"Having worked his whole life, Larry
relished the thought of retirement."
Do
Conjugations
Form
Auxiliary Example
sentence
do
base form
"Do be careful."
158

does
third-person 
singular
present tense
"Does he know what he's
talking about?"
did
past tense
"We didn't know any better."
Auxiliary Functions
Forming Tenses
The verbs be and have are used as auxiliary verbs to form different tenses of
main verbs. Be is used on its own to form the continuous tenses, while
have is used to form the perfect tenses. Both have and been (the past
participle of be) are used together to form the perfect continuous tenses.
As we saw above, be and have both have multiple conjugations, all of which
must be used correctly when they function as auxiliaries.
Present 
Continuous 
Tense
(Progressive)
The present continuous tense is structured as am/is/are + the present
participle of the main verb:
• “I am working tomorrow.”
• “She is living in New York.”
• “They are trying to save some money.”
Past Continuous Tense
The past continuous tense is structured as was/were + the present participle
of the main verb:
• “I was cooking breakfast when she called.”
• “We were talking on the phone at the time.”
Future Continuous Tense
The future continuous tense is structured as will be + the present participle
of the main verb OR am/is/are + going to be + the present participle of the
159

verb:
• “I will be leaving in the morning.”
• “I am going to be meeting with my professor later.”
• “He is going to be studying abroad next year.”
Present Perfect Tense
The present continuous tense is structured as have/has + the past participle
of main verb:
• “I have lived here all my life.”
• “She has studied for this exam for weeks.”
• “They have tried to find a solution to the problem.”
Past Perfect Tense
The past continuous tense is structured as had + the past participle of the
main verb:
• “I had already made my fortune when I was your age.”
• “We had seen that the results were constant.”
Future Perfect Tense
The future continuous tense is usually structured as will have + the past
participle of the main verb:
• “I will have finished by that time.”
• “She will have sung with a professional orchestra before the tour begins.”
(Notice that have does not conjugate for the third-person singular in this
tense.)
Present 
Perfect 
Continuous
Tense
The present perfect continuous tense is structured as have been + the
present participle of the main verb:
• “I have been trying to reach you for over an hour.”
160

Past Perfect Continuous Tense
The past perfect continuous tense is structured as had been + the present
participle of the main verb:
• “We had been working through the night.”
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
The future perfect continuous tense is structured as will have been + the
present participle of the main verb:
• “I will have been working here for 10 years next week.”
(Notice that have does not conjugate for the third-person singular in this
tense.)
You may have noticed that the future tenses also use the auxiliary verb will.
This is one of the modal auxiliary verbs, which will be covered in a
separate section.
Forming negative sentences with
not
The most common way to make a verb negative is to use the adverb not.
However, main verbs cannot take not on their own—they require an auxiliary
verb to do this.
Using do
If a verb does not already use an auxiliary verb (i.e., to form one of the tenses
above), we use the auxiliary verb do/does to accomplish this.
For example:
• “I work on the weekends.” (affirmative sentence)
✖ “I work not on the weekends.” (incorrect negative sentence)
✔ “I do not work on the weekends.” (correct negative sentence)
• “She lives in the city.” (affirmative)
✖ “She lives not in the city.” (incorrect negative sentence)
✔ “She does not live in the city.” (correct negative sentence)
Notice that because the auxiliary verb do conjugates to reflect the third-
161

person singular, the main verb of the sentence reverts back to its base form.
Likewise, if a sentence is in the past simple tense, do conjugates to did,
and the main verb remains in the present-tense base form. For instance:
• “He studied in Europe.” (affirmative simple past tense)
✖ “He studied not in Europe.” (incorrect negative past tense)
✔ “He did not study in Europe.” (correct negative past tense)
Using not with other tenses
If a verb is already using one or more auxiliary verbs to create a perfect,
continuous, or perfect continuous tense, then it is the auxiliary closest to the
subject that takes the word not. For example:
• “I am working later.” (affirmative present continuous tense)
• “I am not working later.” (negative present continuous tense)
• “She had been living there for a month.” (affirmative past perfect
continuous tense)
• “She hadn’t been living there for a month.” (negative past perfect
continuous tense)
• “They will have been writing their dissertations for almost a year.”
(affirmative future perfect continuous tense)
• “They will not have been writing their dissertations for almost a year.”
(negative future perfect continuous tense)
Errors with have not
A frequent error is to make the verb have negative in the present simple
tense. We need to always remember that the present simple negative is do
not (contracted as don’t) or, in third person singular, does not (contracted as
doesn’t). For example:
✖ “I haven’t a dog.” (incorrect)
✔ “I don’t have a dog.” (correct)
✖ “She hasn’t a cat.” (incorrect)
✔ “She doesn’t have a cat.” (correct)
If we say “I haven’t a dog,” we are using have as an auxiliary rather than as a
main verb meaning “to possess”—in doing so, the main verb is now missing.
And just as in the present simple negative, we need an auxiliary verb when
using the past simple negative:
162

✖ “I hadn’t a car.” (incorrect)
✔ “I didn’t have a car.” (correct)
Have and have got
Have, when used as a main verb meaning “to possess,” means the same thing
as the less formal have got. They can usually be used interchangeably,
though not in every case.
In have got, have is acting as an auxiliary verb for got. Because of this, have
is now able to take not in the negative present simple tense, usually
contracted as haven’t (or hasn’t in the third-person singular):
• “He has got an idea about what happened.” (affirmative present simple
tense)
• “He hasn’t got an idea about what happened.” (negative present simple
tense)
• “They’ve got a plan to increase sales.” (affirmative present simple tense)
• “They haven’t got a plan to increase sales.” (negative present simple
tense)
Forming interrogative sentences
with subject-verb inversion
Inversion refers to the reversal of the normal position of the subject and the
auxiliary verb of a clause. We cannot use subject-verb inversion with main
verbs to create interrogative sentences—we have to either add the auxiliary
verb do, or else invert an existing auxiliary verb.
Inversion with auxiliary do
When a sentence is in the present simple tense or past simple tense, we
use the auxiliary verb do to form it into a question word. This is inverted with
the subject, coming before it in the sentence. For example:
• “John works across town.” (present simple tense declarative sentence)
• “Does John work across town?” (present simple tense interrogative
sentence)
• “They lived in an apartment.” (past simple tense declarative sentence)
• “Did they live in an apartment?” (past simple tense interrogative sentence)
163

Inversion with other auxiliary
verbs
As we saw already, be and have are used to create the continuous, perfect,
and perfect continuous verb tenses. In these cases, the auxiliary verb used to
create the tense is inverted with the subject to create a question; if the verb
is in a perfect continuous tense (and thus has two auxiliaries), then the first
of the two auxiliary verbs is inverted. For example:
Present continuous tense:
• “John is working across town.” (declarative)
• “Is John working across town?” (interrogative)
Past continuous tense:
• “John was working across town.” (declarative)
• “Was John working across town?” (interrogative)
Present perfect tense:
• “John has worked across town for a long time.” (declarative)
• “Has John worked across town for a long time?” (interrogative)
Past perfect tense:
• “John had worked across town for a long time.” (declarative)
• “Had John worked across town for a long time?” (interrogative)
Present perfect continuous tense:
• “John has been working across town for a long time.” (declarative)
• “Has John been working across town for a long time?” (interrogative)
Past perfect continuous tense:
• “John had been working across town for a long time.” (declarative)
• “Had John been working across town for a long time?” (interrogative)
Errors with have
As we saw when forming the negative with not, we often run into errors
when have is functioning as a main verb and the sentence is made into a
question.
Just like any other main verb (with the exception of be), have cannot invert
164

with the subject to form a question—it must take the auxiliary verb do to
accomplish this, like we saw above. For example:
• “You had a car when you lived in London.” (declarative)
✖ “Had you a car when you lived in London?” (incorrect interrogative)
✔ “Did you have a car when you lived in London?” (correct interrogative)
Question words
The rules of inversion that we’ve seen above hold true even when a question
word is used. For example:
• “Where is John working?”
• “Why has John been working across town?”
• “When did John work across town?”
Inversion of be
It is important to remember that we do not use do, does or did when be is a
main verb. As we mentioned earlier, be is able to invert when it is
functioning as a linking verb (meaning it is a main verb) as well as an
auxiliary. For example:
• “I am cold.” (declarative)
✖ “Do you be cold?” (incorrect interrogative)
✔ “Are you cold?” (correct interrogative)
• “They were all present.” (declarative)
✖ “Did they be all present?” (incorrect interrogative)
✔ “Were they all present?” (correct interrogative)
The inversion of be also holds true when there is a question word, as in:
• “Why are you cold?”
• “When were they all present?”
• “Who is attending the party?”
Emphatic do
In addition to making interrogative sentences, do is also used as an auxiliary
to create emphatic sentences. This is sometimes referred to as the
emphatic mood, one of the grammatical moods in English. Its purpose in
165

this case is not to add any new meaning to the sentence, but rather to
emphasize the fact that something happened or someone did something.
Emphatic do comes before the main verb in a sentence. As is the case when
do is used to create interrogative sentences, it takes the conjugation for tense
or plurality, leaving the main verb in the base form. For example:
• “I washed the dishes.” (no emphasis)
• “I did wash the dishes.” (emphasizes the fact that the speaker washed the
dishes)
• “He looks like an honest man.” (no emphasis)
• “He does look like an honest man.” (emphasizes the way the man looks)
As with interrogative sentences, however, we cannot use do when be is the
main verb of the sentence:
• “I am cold.” (no emphasis)
✖ “I do be cold.” (incorrect emphasis)
In imperative sentences
We can also use emphatic do in imperative sentences to add emphasis to
a command, instruction, or request, though this usually adds a more formal
or old-fashioned tone to the sentence. Unlike in declarative sentences, we
can use emphatic do when be is a main verb of an imperative sentence. For
example:
• “Do be careful!”
• “Do try to be quiet.”
• “Please do avoid walking on the grass.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not one of the “primary” auxiliary verbs?
a) be
b) will
c) do
d) have
 
2. Which of the following is the correct conjugation of the verb be in the
third-person present singular ?
166

a) am
b) are
c) is
d) was
3. Which auxiliary verb is added to a make a verb negative in the present or
past simple tense?
a) be
b) will
c) do
d) have
4. Identify the auxiliary verb used in the following sentence:
“Have you been working on this project for long?”
a) have
b) been
c) working
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) None of the above
5. Which of the following is a function of do as an auxiliary verb?
a) To form negatives with verbs in the present or past simple tense
b) To form the continuous, perfect, or perfect continuous tenses
c) To express the subject’s ability to perform the function of the main verb
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) None of the above
Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Definition
A modal auxiliary verb, often simply called a modal verb or even just a
modal, is used to change the meaning of other verbs (commonly known as
main verbs) by expressing modality—that is, asserting (or denying)
possibility, likelihood, ability, permission, obligation, or future intention.
167

Modal verbs are defined by their inability to conjugate for tense and the third
person singular (i.e., they do not take an “-s” at the end when he, she, or it is
the subject), and they cannot form infinitives, past participles, or present
participles. All modal auxiliary verbs are followed by a main verb in its base
form (the infinitive without to); they can never be followed by other modal
verbs, lone auxiliary verbs, or nouns.
As with the primary auxiliary verbs, modal verbs can be used with not to
create negative sentences, and they can all invert with the subject to create
interrogative sentences.
The Modal Verbs
There are nine “true” modal auxiliary verbs: will, shall, would, should, can,
could, may, might, and must. The verbs dare, need, used to, and ought to
can also be used in the same way as modal verbs, but they do not share all
the same characteristics; for this reason, they are referred to as semi-modal
auxiliary verbs, which are discussed in a separate section.
Will
As a modal auxiliary verb, will is particularly versatile, having several
different functions and meanings. It is used to form future tenses, to express
willingness or ability, to make requests or offers, to complete conditional
sentences, to express likelihood in the immediate present, or to issue
commands.
Shall
The modal auxiliary verb shall is used in many of the same ways as will: to
form future tenses, to make requests or offers, to complete conditional
sentences, or to issue maxims or commands. Although will is generally
preferred in modern English, using shall adds an additional degree of
politeness or formality to the sentence that will sometimes lacks.
Generally, shall is only used when I or we is the subject, though this is not a
strict rule (and does not apply at all when issuing commands, as we’ll see).
Would
The modal auxiliary verb would has a variety of functions and uses. It is used
168

in place of will for things that happened or began in the past, and, like
shall, it is sometimes used in place of will to create more formal or polite
sentences. It is also used to express requests and preferences, to describe
hypothetical situations, and to politely offer or ask for advice or an opinion.
Should
The modal verb should is used to politely express obligations or duties; to ask
for or issue advice, suggestions, and recommendations; to describe an
expectation; to create conditional sentences; and to express surprise.
There are also a number of uses that occur in British English, but that are not
common in American English.
Can
As a modal auxiliary verb, can is most often used to express a person or
thing’s ability to do something. It is also used to express or ask for permission
to do something, to describe the possibility that something can happen, and
to issue requests and offers.
Could
The modal verb could is most often used as a past-tense version of can,
indicating what someone or something was able to do in the past; it can also
be used instead of can as a more polite way of making a request or asking for
permission. Could is also used to express a slight or uncertain possibility, as
well as for making a suggestion or offer.
May
The modal verb may is used to request, grant, or describe permission; to
politely offer to do something for someone; to express the possibility of
something happening or occurring; or to express a wish or desire that
something will be the case in the future. We can also use may as a rhetorical
device to express or introduce an opinion or sentiment about something.
Might
The modal verb might is most often used to express an unlikely or uncertain
possibility. Might also acts as a very formal and polite way to ask for
169

permission, and it is used as the past-tense form of may when asking
permission in reported speech. It can also be used to suggest an action, or
to introduce two differing possibilities.
Must
The modal verb must is most often used to express necessity—i.e., that
something has to happen or be the case. We also use this sense of the word
to indicate a strong intention to do something in the future, to emphasize
something positive that you believe someone should do, and to rhetorically
introduce or emphasize an opinion or sentiment. In addition to indicating
necessity, must can be used to indicate that something is certain or very
likely to happen or be true.
Using Modal Verbs
Modal auxiliary verbs are used to uniquely shift the meaning of the main
verb they modify, expressing things such as possibility, likelihood, ability,
permission, obligation, or intention. As we will see, how and when we use
modal verbs greatly affects the meaning of our writing and speech.
Subtleties in meaning
Modal verbs attach differing shades of meaning to the main verbs they
modify. It is often the case that this difference in meaning is or seems to be
very slight. To get a better sense of these differences in meaning, let’s look at
two sets of examples that use each of the modal verbs we discussed above in
the same sentence, accompanied by a brief explanation of the unique
meaning each one creates.
“I will go to college in the fall.” (It is decided that I am going to
attend college in the fall.)
“I shall go to college in the fall.” (A more formal way of saying “I
will go to college in the fall,” possibly emphasizing one’s
determination to do so.)
“I would go to college in the fall.” (I was planning to attend
college in the fall (but something not stated is preventing or
dissuading me from doing so).)
“I should go to college in the fall.” (It is correct, proper, or right
that I attend college in the all.)
170

“I can go to college in the fall.” (I am able to attend college in the
fall.)
“I could go to college in the fall.” (I have the ability to attend
college in the fall, but it is not decided.)
“I may go to college in the fall.” (I will possibly attend college in
the fall, but it is not decided.)
“I might go to college in the fall.” (I will possibly attend college in
the fall, but it is not decided.)
“I must go to college in the fall.” (I have to attend college in the
fall, but it is not decided.)
“Will we spend the summer in Florida?” (Is it the future plan that
we are going to spend the summer in Florida?)
“Shall we spend the summer in Florida?” (A more formal way of
asking “Will we spend the summer in Florida?”)
“Would we spend the summer in Florida?” (Has the plan been
made that we spend the summer in Florida?)
“Should we spend the summer in Florida?” (Is it correct or
preferable that we spend the summer in Florida?)
“Can we spend the summer in Florida?” (Can we have permission
to spend the summer in Florida? Or: Are we able to spend the
summer in Florida?)
“Could we spend the summer in Florida?” (Slightly more polite way
of asking for permission to spend the summer in Florida.)
“May we spend the summer in Florida?” (More formal or polite
way of asking for permission to spend the summer in Florida.)
“Might we spend the summer in Florida?” (Overly formal way of
asking for permission to spend the summer in Florida.)
“Must we spend the summer in Florida?” (Very formal way of
asking if it is necessary or required that we spend the summer in
Florida.)
Substituting Modal Verbs
As we can see from the above sets of examples, the different modal verbs
often have very similar meanings, and it’s sometimes unclear when it is
appropriate to use one instead of another. To explore the subtle differences
in meaning that occur when we substitute certain modal verbs, go to the
171

section on Substituting Modal Verbs.
Omitting main verbs
A modal verb must always be used with a main verb—they cannot stand
completely on their own.
However, it is possible to use a modal verb on its own by omitting the main
verb, so long as it is implied by the context in or around the sentence in
which the modal is used. This can occur when a sentence is in response to
another one, or when the clause with the modal verb occurs later in a
sentence in which the main verb was already stated. For example:
• Speaker A: “I’m thinking about taking up scuba diving.”
• Speaker B: “I think you should!” (The verb taking up is omitted in the
second sentence because it is implied by the first.)
• “I’d like to switch my major to mathematics, but I’m not sure I can.” (The
verb switch is omitted in the final clause because it appears earlier in the
same sentence.)
Using adverbs
Generally speaking, we use adverbs after a modal verb and either before or
after the main verb in a clause. Sometimes putting an adverb before a modal
is not incorrect, but it will sound better if placed after it. For example:
✖ “You only must read this chapter.” (incorrect)
✔ “You must only read this chapter.” (correct)
✔ “You easily could win the race.” (correct but not preferable)
✔ “You could easily win the race.” (correct)
✔ “You could win the race easily.” (correct)
However, this is not a strict rule, and certain adverbs are able to go before
the modal verb without an issue. For example:
✔ “You really should see the new movie.” (correct)
✔ “You should really see the new movie.” (correct)
✔ “I definitely will try to make it to the party.” (correct)
✔ “I will definitely try to make it to the party.” (correct)
When a modal verb is made negative, though, it is sometimes the case that
an adverb must go before the modal verb. For example:
172

✖ “I can’t definitely go out tonight.” (incorrect)
✔ “I definitely can’t go out tonight.” (correct)
✖ “He must not absolutely travel alone.” (incorrect)
✔ “He absolutely must not travel alone.” (correct)
Unfortunately, there is no rule that will explain exactly when one can or
cannot use an adverb before a modal verb—we just have to learn the correct
usage by seeing how they are used in day-to-day speech and writing.
Common errors
Mixing modal verbs
Remember, a modal verb is only used before a main verb, or sometimes
before be or have when they are used to create a verb tense. We do not use
a modal verb before auxiliary do, or in front of other modal verbs. For
example:
✔ “We might move to Spain.” (correct—indicates future possibility)
✔ “We might be moving to Spain.” (correct—indicates future possibility
using the present continuous tense)
✖ “Do you can go?” (incorrect)
✔ “Can you go?” (correct)
✖ “I must will finish this before lunch.” (incorrect)
✔ “I must finish this before lunch.” (correct—indicates that it is necessary)
✔ “I will finish this before lunch.” (correct—indicates a future action)
Conjugating 
the 
third-person
singular
When main verbs function on their own, we conjugate them to reflect the
third-person singular (usually accomplished by adding “-s” to the end of the
verb).
However, we do not conjugate modal verbs in this way, nor do we conjugate
a main verb when it is being used with a modal.
For example:
✔ “He swims well.” (present simple tense)
173

✖ “He cans swim well.” (incorrect)
✖ “He can swims well.” (incorrect)
✔ “He can swim well.” (correct—indicates ability)
Conjugating past tense
Similarly, we cannot use modal verbs with main verbs that are in a past-tense
form; the verb that follows a modal must always be in its base form (the
infinitive without the word to). Instead, we either use certain modal verbs
that have past-tense meanings of their own, or auxiliary have to create a
construction that has a specific past-tense meaning. For example:
✔ “I guessed what her response would be.” (past simple tense)
✖ “I can guessed what her response would be.” (incorrect)
✖ “I could guessed what her response would be.” (incorrect)
✔ “I could guess what her response would be.” (correct—indicates past
ability)
✔ “I could have guessed what her response would be.” (correct—indicates
potential past ability)
✔ “I tried harder.” (past simple tense)
✖ “I should tried harder.” (incorrect)
✔ “I should try harder.” (correct, but indicates a correct or proper future
action)
✔ “I should have tried harder.” (correct—indicates a correct or proper
past action)
Following 
modal 
verbs 
with
infinitives
As we saw above, all modal auxiliary verbs must be followed by the base
form of a the main verb. Just as we cannot use a modal verb with a main
verb in its past-tense form, we also cannot use a modal verb with an
infinitive.
✖ “She could to speak five languages.” (incorrect) 
✔ “She could speak five languages.” (correct—indicates past ability)
✖ “I must to see the boss.” (incorrect) 
✔ “I must see the boss.” (correct—indicates necessity)
174

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a not a function of a modal auxiliary verb?
a) To indicate frequency
b) To indicate possibility or likelihood
c) To indicate ability
d) To indicate future intention
2. Which of the following modal verbs indicates necessity?
a) may
b) can
c) would
d) must
 
3. Which of the following modal verbs is used to request permission?
a) may
b) should
c) would
d) must
 
4. Which of the following is something that a modal verb cannot do?
a) Indicate a future action
b) Express a possible action or outcome
c) Conjugate for the third-person singular
d) Become negative with the word not
 
5. When can a modal verb stand on its own?
a) When an adverb is used before the modal verb
b) When the main verb is implied elsewhere
c) When it is used in an interrogative sentence
d) Anytime
e) Never
 
6. Which of the following is not one of the “true” modal verbs?
a) must
175

b) need
c) will
d) should
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Will
Definition
As a modal auxiliary verb, will is particularly versatile, having several
different functions and meanings. It is used to form future tenses, to express
willingness or ability, to make requests or offers, to complete conditional
sentences, to express likelihood in the immediate present, or to issue
commands.
Creating the future tense
One of will’s most common uses as a modal verb is to talk about things that
are certain, very likely, or planned to happen in the future. In this way, it is
used to create an approximation of the future simple tense and the future
continuous tense. For example:
• “I will turn 40 tomorrow.” (future simple tense)
• “She will be singing at the concert as well.” (future continuous tense)
Will can also used to make the future perfect tense and the future
perfect continuous tense. These tenses both describe a scenario that
began in the past and will either finish in or continue into the future. For
example:
• “It’s hard to believe that by next month we will have been married for
10 years.” (future perfect tense)
• “By the time I get there, she’ll have been waiting for over an hour.”
(future perfect continuous tense)
If we want to make any of the future tenses negative, we use not between
will and the main verb or the next occurring auxiliary verb. We often
contract will and not into won’t. For example:
• “I won’t be seeing the movie with you tonight.”
• “At this pace, she won’t finish in first place.”
If we want to make a question (an interrogative sentence), we invert will
176

with the subject, as in:
• “What will they do with the money?”
• “Won’t you be coming with us?”
Ability and willingness
We also sometimes use will to express or inquire about a person or thing’s
ability or willingness to do something. It is very similar to the future tense,
but is used for more immediate actions. For example:
• “You wash the dishes; I’ll take out the trash.”
• “This darn washing machine won’t turn on.”
• “Won’t Mary come out of her room?”
Requests and offers
We often create interrogative sentences using will to make requests or polite
offers. They are usually addressed to someone in the second person, as in:
• “Will you walk the dog, Jim?”
• “Will you have a cup of tea, Sam?”
However, we can use subjects in the first and third person as well. For
instance:
• “Will Jonathan bring his truck around here tomorrow?”
• “Will your friend join us for some lunch?”
Conditional sentences
In present-tense conditional sentences formed using if, we often use will to
express an expected hypothetical outcome. This is known as the first
conditional. For example:
• “If I see him, I will tell him the news.”
• “I won’t have to say goodbye if I don’t go to the airport.”
Likelihood and certainty
In addition to expressing actions or intentions of the future, we can also use
will to express the likelihood or certainty that something is the case in the
177

immediate present. For instance:
• (in response to the phone ringing) “That will be Jane—I’m expecting her
call.”
• Speaker A: “Who is that with Jeff?”
• Speaker B: “That’ll be his new husband. They were just married in May.”
Commands
Finally, we can use will to issue commands, orders, or maxims. These have
an added forcefulness in comparison to imperative sentences, as they
express a certainty that the command will be obeyed. For example:
• “You will finish your homework this instant!”
• “This house will not be used as a hotel for your friends, do you
understand me?”
Substituting Modal Verbs
In many cases, modal auxiliary verbs can be used in place of others to create
slightly different meanings. For example, we can use the word shall in place
of will in to express polite invitations. Similarly, would can also be
substituted for will in requests to make them more polite.
Explore the section on Substituting Modal Verbs to see how and when
other modal auxiliary verbs overlap.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of will as a modal verb?
a) To form the future tense
b) To issue a command or maxim
c) To express what someone is allowed to do
d) To make a request or an offer
 
2. Which of the following sentences is a conditional sentence?
a) “I will be going to Europe in August.”
b) “She’ll be moving to Alaska if she can save up enough money.”
c) “That will be your father at the door.”
d) “You will not put off doing your chores any longer!”
178

 
3. Where does the modal verb will appear in an interrogative sentence?
a) Before the subject of the sentence
b) After the subject of the sentence
c) Before the main verb of the sentence
d) After the main verb of the sentence
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Would
Definition
The modal auxiliary verb would has a variety of functions and uses. It is used
in place of will for things that happened or began in the past, and, like
shall, it is sometimes used in place of will to create more formal or polite
sentences. It is also used to express requests and preferences, to describe
hypothetical situations, and to politely offer or ask for advice or an opinion.
Creating the future tense in the
past
When a sentence expresses a future possibility, expectation, intention, or
inevitability that began in the past, we use would instead of will. For
example:
• “I thought he would be here by now.”
• “She knew they wouldn’t make it to the show in time.”
• “I thought John would be mowing lawn by this point.”
Past ability and willingness
We also use would for certain expressions of a person or thing’s ability or
willingness to do something in the past, though they are usually negative.
For example:
• “This darn washing machine wouldn’t turn on this morning.”
• “Mary wouldn’t come out of her room all weekend.”
179

Likelihood and certainty
Like we saw with will, we can also use would to express the likelihood or
certainty that something was the case in the immediate past. For instance:
• Speaker A: “There was a man here just now asking about renting the spare
room.”
• Speaker B: “That would be Kenneth. He just moved here from Iowa.”
Polite requests
We can use would in the same way as will to form requests, except that
would adds a level of politeness to the question, as in:
• “Would you please take out the garbage for me?”
• “Would John mind helping me clean out the garage?”
Expressing desires
We use would with the main verb like to express or inquire about a person’s
desire to do something. (We can also use the main verb care for more formal
or polite sentences.) For example:
• “I would like to go to the movies later.”
• “Where would you like to go for your birthday?”
• “I would not care to live in a hot climate.”
• “Would you care to have dinner with me later?”
We can use this same construction to express or ask about a desire to have
something. If we are using like as the main verb, it can simply be followed by
a noun or noun phrase; if we are using care, it must be followed by the
preposition for, as in:
• “Would you like a cup of tea?”
• “He would like the steak, and I will have the lobster.”
• “Ask your friends if they would care for some snacks.”
Would that
Would can also be used to introduce a that clause to indicate some
hypothetical or hopeful situation that one wishes were true. For example:
180

• “Would that we lived near the sea.”
• Speaker A: “Life would be so much easier if we won the lottery.”
• Speaker B: “Would that it were so!”
This is an example of the subjunctive mood, which is used to express
hypotheticals and desires. While we still use would in the subjunctive mood
to express preference or create conditional sentences (like Speaker A’s
sentence above), the would that construction is generally only found in very
formal, literary, old-fashioned, or highly stylized speech or writing in modern
English.
Preference
We use would with the adverbs rather and sooner to express or inquire
about a person’s preference for something. For instance:
• “There are a lot of fancy meals on the menu, but I would rather have a
hamburger.”
• “They would sooner go bankrupt than sell the family home.”
• “Would you rather go biking or go for a hike?”
Conditional sentences
Conditional sentences in the past tense are called second conditionals.
Unlike the first conditional, we use the second conditional to talk about
things that cannot or are unlikely to happen.
To create the second conditional, we use the past simple tense after the if
clause, followed by would + the bare infinitive for the result of the condition.
For example:
• “If I went to London, I would visit Trafalgar Square.”
• “I would buy a yacht if I ever won the lottery.”
Hypothetical situations
We can also use would to discuss hypothetical or possible situations that we
can imagine happening, but that aren’t dependent on a conditional if clause.
For example:
• “They would be an amazing band to see in concert!”
181

• “Don’t worry about not getting in—it wouldn’t have been a very
interesting class, anyway.”
• “She would join your study group, but she doesn’t have any free time
after school.”
• “I normally wouldn’t mind, except that today is my birthday!”
Polite opinions
We can use would with opinion verbs (such as think or expect) to dampen
the forcefulness of an assertion, making it sound more formal and polite:
• “I would expect that the board of directors will be pleased with this offer.”
• “One would have thought that the situation would be improved by now.”
We can also ask for someone else’s opinion with would by pairing it with a
question word in an interrogative sentence, as in:
• “What would you suggest we do instead?”
• “Where would be a good place to travel this summer?”
Asking the reason why
When we use the question word why, we often follow it with would to ask
the reason something happened or is true. For instance:
• “Why would my brother lie to me?”
• “Why would they expect you to know that?”
If we use I or we as the subject of the question, it is often used rhetorically to
suggest that a question or accusation is groundless or false, as in:
• “Why would I try to hide anything from you?”
• “Why would we give up now, when we’ve come so close to succeeding?”
Polite advice
We can use would in the first person to politely offer advice about something.
(It is common to add the phrase “if I were you” at the end, thus creating a
conditional sentence.) For example:
• “I would apologize to the boss if I were you.”
• “I would talk to her tonight; there’s no point in waiting until tomorrow.”
182

We can also use would in the second and third person to offer advice, usually
in the construction “you would be wise/smart to do something,” as in:
• “I think you would be wise to be more careful with your money.”
• “Recent graduates would be smart to set up a savings account as early as
possible.”
Substituting Modal Verbs
In many cases, modal auxiliary verbs can be replaced with others to create
slightly different meanings.
For example, in addition to using would to form the second conditional
(which we use to describe something we would definitely do), we can also
use could for what we would be able to do, as well as might for what it is
possible (but unlikely) we would do.
For example:
• “If I won the lottery, I could buy a new house.”
• “If I were older, I might stay up all night long.”
In British English, should is often used in place of would in many
constructions to add politeness or formality. For instance:
• “I should apologize to the boss if I were you.” (polite advice)
• “I should like a poached egg for breakfast.” (desire)
Explore the section Substituting Modal Verbs to see how and when other
modal verbs overlap.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of would as a modal verb?
a) To form the future tense
b) To issue a command or maxim
c) To express a wish or desire
d) To politely offer advice
2. Which of the following sentences uses would to express preference?
a) “We would have won the game if you hadn’t missed that shot.”
b) “She’d be wise to start her assignments earlier.”
183

c) “I think this would be a great city to live in.”
d) “I’d rather have a salad for lunch.”
3. What kind of conditional sentence is formed using would?
a) Zero conditional
b) First conditional
c) Second conditional
d) Third conditional
4. Which of the following sentences uses a very formal, old-fashioned
construction with would to express a wish or desire?
a) “Would that I’d made contact with him before his departure.”
b) “He would pay for college himself if he could afford it.”
c) “I think they’d rather go to the beach today.”
d) “Would you care for some lunch?”
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Shall
Definition
The modal auxiliary verb shall is used in many of the same ways as will: to
form future tenses, to make requests or offers, to complete conditional
sentences, or to issue maxims or commands. Although will is generally
preferred in modern English (especially American English), using shall adds
an additional degree of politeness or formality to the sentence that will
sometimes lacks.
Generally, shall is only used when I or we is the subject, though this is not a
strict rule (and does not apply at all when issuing commands, as we’ll see).
Creating the future tense
The future tenses are most often formed using will or be going to.
We can also use shall to add formality or politeness to these constructions,
especially the future simple tense and the future continuous tense. For
example:
• “I shall call from the airport.” (future simple tense)
184

• “We shall be staying in private accommodation.”
• “Our company shall not be held accountable for this.”
• “I shan’t* be participating in these discussions.”
(*Contracting shall and not into shan’t, while not incorrect, sounds overly
formal and stuffy in modern speech and writing; for the most part, it is not
used anymore.)
It is also possible, though far less common, to use shall in the future
perfect and future perfect continuous tenses as well:
• “As of next week, I shall have worked here for 50 years.”
• “By the time the opera begins, we shall have been waiting for over an
hour.”
Offers, suggestions, and advice
When we create interrogative sentences using shall and without question
words, it is usually to make polite offers, invitations, or suggestions, as in:
• “Shall we walk along the beach?”
• “Shall I wash the dishes?”
When we form an interrogative sentence with a question word (who, what,
where, when, or how), shall is used to politely seek the advice or opinion of
the listener about a future decision, as in:
• “What shall I do with this spare part?”
• “Where shall we begin?”
• “Who shall I invite to the meal?”
Conditional sentences
Like will, we can use shall in conditional sentences using if to express a likely
hypothetical outcome. This is known as the first conditional. For example:
• “If my flight is delayed, I shall not have time to make my connection.”
• “I shall contact the post office if my package has not arrived by
tomorrow.”
Formal commands
185

While will is often used to form commands, we use shall when issuing more
formal directives or maxims, as might be seen in public notices or in a formal
situation, or to express a reprimand in a formal way. When used in this way,
shall no longer has to be used solely with I or we as the subject. For example:
• “This establishment shall not be held liable for lost or stolen property.”
• “Students shall remain silent throughout the exam.”
• “The new law dictates that no citizen shall be out on the streets after 11
PM.”
• “You shall cease this foolishness at once!”
Substituting Modal Verbs
In many cases, modal auxiliary verbs can be used in place of others to create
slightly different meanings. For example, we can use the word should in
place of shall when issuing a command that is not mandatory, but rather is a
guideline or recommendation. If, however, we want to express that the
command or maxim is an absolute requirement, we can use must instead of
shall in this context.
Explore the section Substituting Modal Verbs to see how and when other
modal auxiliary verbs overlap.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of shall as a modal verb?
a) To express what someone is allowed to do
b) To issue a command or maxim
c) To form the future tense
d) To create conditional sentences
2. Which of the following sentences is a conditional sentence?
a) “I shall be attending Harvard this fall.”
c) “What shall we do this weekend?”
d) “Employees shall clock in at the beginning and end of every shift.”
d) “They shall begin research immediately if funds are available.”
3. Which of the following is a reason shall might be used instead of will in a
186

sentence?
a) To add intensity to a command
b) To express an opinion about what is proper or correct
c) To add politeness or formality
d) To describe a habitual action in the past
187

Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Should
Definition
The modal verb should is used to politely express obligations or duties; to ask
for or issue advice, suggestions, and recommendations; to describe an
expectation; to create conditional sentences; and to express surprise.
There are also a number of uses that occur in British English that are not
common in American English.
Polite obligations
Should is used in the same construction as other modal verbs (such as will,
shall, and must) to express an obligation or duty.
However, whereas must or will (and even shall) make the sentence into a
strict command, which might appear to be too forceful and could be seen as
offensive, should is used to create a more polite form that is more like a
guideline than a rule. For example:
• “Guests should vacate their hotel rooms by 10 AM on the morning of
their departure.”
• “I think she should pay for half the meal.”
• “You shouldn’t play loud music in your room at night.”
• “I think healthcare should be free for everyone.”
• “She should not be here; it’s for employees only.”
Asking the reason why
We can follow the question word why with should to ask the reason for a
certain obligation or duty. For instance:
• “Why should I have to pay for my brother?”
• “Why shouldn’t we be allowed to talk during class?”
Advice and recommendations
Should can also be used to issue advice or recommendations in much the
same way. For instance:
188

• “You should get a good map of London before you go there.”
(recommendation)
• “You shouldn’t eat so much junk food—it’s not good for you.” (advice)
We can also use should in interrogative sentences to ask for someone’s
advice, opinion, or suggestion, as in:
• “What should I see while I’m in New York?”
• “Should she tell her boss about the missing equipment?”
• “Is there anything we should be concerned about?”
Expectations
Using should in affirmative (non-negative) sentences can be used to
express an expected outcome, especially when it is followed by the verb be.
For example:
• “She should be here by now.”
• “They should be arriving at any minute.”
• “I think this book should be interesting.”
We can also follow should with other verbs to express expectation, but this is
less common. For instance:
• “They should find this report useful.”
• “We should see the results shortly.”
If we use the negative of should (should not or shouldn’t), it implies a
mistake or error, especially when we use it with a future time expression. For
example:
• “She shouldn’t be here yet.”
• “He shouldn’t be arriving for another hour.”
We normally do not use should not to refer to expected future actions like we
do in the affirmative; it generally refers to something that just happened (in
the present or immediate past).
Should vs. be supposed to vs. be
meant to
189

In many instances, should can be replaced by be supposed to or be meant to
with little to no change in meaning. For instance, we can use be supposed to
or be meant to in place of should for something that is expected or required
to happen.
For example:
• “He should be here at 10 AM.”
• “He is meant to be here at 10 AM.”
• “He is supposed to be here at 10 AM.”
We can also use these three variations interchangeably when asking the
reason why something is the case. For instance:
• “Why should I have to pay for my brother?”
• “Why am I meant to pay for my brother?”
• “Why am I supposed to pay for my brother?”
However, when we are expressing an obligation or duty, we can only replace
should with be supposed to or be meant to when it is in the negative. For
instance:
• “You shouldn’t play loud music in your room at night.”
• “You aren’t meant to play loud music in your room at night.”
• “You aren’t supposed to play loud music in your room at night.”
In affirmative sentences in which should expresses an obligation or duty (as
opposed to an expectation), these verbs are not interchangeable. For
instance:
• “I think she should pay for half the meal.” (obligation)
• “I think she is supposed to pay for half the meal.” (expectation)
• “I think she is meant to pay for half the meal.” (expectation)
Be supposed to and be meant to are also used to express general beliefs,
which is not a way we can use the modal verb should.
For example:
• “He is supposed to be one of the best lawyers in town.” (general belief)
• “He is meant to be one of the best lawyers in town.” (general belief)
• “He should be one of the best lawyers in town.” (obligation)
We can see how the meaning changes significantly when should is used
190

instead.
Conditional Sentences
Should can be used in conditional sentences to express an outcome to a
possible or hypothetical conditional situation.
Sometimes we use should alongside if to create the conditional clause, as
in:
• “If anyone should ask, I will be at the bar.”
• “If your father should call, tell him I will speak to him later.”
We can also use should on its own to set up this condition, in which case we
invert it with the subject. For example:
• “Should you need help on your thesis, please ask your supervisor.”
• “The bank is more than happy to discuss financing options should you
wish to take out a loan.”
Expressing surprise
Occasionally, should is used to emphasize surprise at an unexpected
situation, outcome, or turn of events.
We do so by phrasing the surprising information as a question, using a
question word like who or what and often inverting should with the subject.
(However, the sentence is spoken as a statement, so we punctuate it with a
period or exclamation point, rather than a question mark.)
The “question” part of the sentence is introduced by the word when, with the
“answer” introduced by the word but. For example:
• “I was minding my own business, when who should I encounter but my
brother Tom.”
• “The festival was going well when what should happen but the power
goes out!”
Uses of should in British English
There are a number of functions that should can perform that are more
commonly used in British English than in American English. Several of these
are substitutions of would, while other uses are unique unto themselves.
191

Should 
vs. 
would 
in 
British
English
There are several modal constructions that can either take would or should.
American English tends to favor the modal verb would in most cases, but, in
British English, it is also common to use should, especially to add formality.
Polite advice
We can use should/would in the first person to politely offer advice about
something. (It is common to add the phrase “if I were you” at the end, thus
creating a conditional sentence.) For example:
• “I should/would apologize to the boss if I were you.”
• “I shouldn’t/wouldn’t worry about that right now.”
Expressing desires
We can use either should or would with the main verb like in the first person
to express or inquire about a person’s desire to do something. (We can also
use the main verb care for more formal or polite sentences.) For example:
• “I should/would like to go to the movies later.”
• “We shouldn’t/wouldn’t care to live in a hot climate.”
• “I should/would like a cup of tea, if you don’t mind.”
• “I don’t know that I should/would care for such an expensive house.”
Asking the reason why
In addition to asking the reason why a certain obligation or requirement is
the case, we can also use should in the same way as would to ask the reason
something happened or is true. For instance:
• “Why should/would my brother lie to me?”
• “Why should/would they expect you to know that?”
If we use I or we as the subject of the question, it is often used rhetorically to
suggest that a question or accusation is groundless or false, as in:
• “Why should/would I try to hide anything from you?”
192

• “Why should/would we give up now, when we’ve come so close to
succeeding?”
To show purpose
Should and would can also be used after the phrase “so that” and “in order
that” to add a sense of purpose to the main verb, as in:
• “I brought a book so that I shouldn’t/wouldn’t be bored on the train ride
home.”
• “He bought new boots in order that his feet should/would remain dry
on the way to work.”
After other words and phrases
There are several instances in British English in which should is used after
the relative pronoun that or certain other phrases to create specific
meanings, especially in more formal language.
To express an opinion or feeling
When we use a noun clause beginning with that as an adjective
complement, we can use should in it to express an opinion or sentiment
about what is said. For example:
• “It’s very sad that she should be forced to leave her house.”
• “Isn’t it strange that we should meet each other again after all these
years?”
Conditional circumstances
Similarly, should can be used after the phrases for fear (that), in case (that),
and (less commonly) lest (that) to demonstrate the possible conditional
circumstances that are the reason behind a certain action. For example:
• “I always pack my rain jacket when I cycle for fear (that) it should start
raining midway.”
• “You should pack a toothbrush in case (that) you should be delayed at the
airport overnight.”
• “She makes sure to set the alarm before leaving lest (that) someone should
try to break in.”
193

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of should as a modal verb?
a) To form the future tense
b) To express an obligation or duty
c) To express surprise
d) To politely offer advice
2. Which of the following sentences uses should to express an expectation?
a) “I will be just around the corner should I be needed.”
b) “We really shouldn’t lie to your parents like this.”
c) “Don’t forget a spare pencil lest yours should break.”
d) “The movie should finish around 5 PM.”
3. Which of the following is a situation in which should can be used instead
of would in British English?
a) To express past ability or willingness
b) To politely offer advice
c) To form a polite request
d) To express surprise
4. True or False: Should is able to form conditional sentences without the
word if.
a) True
b) False
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Can
Definition
As a modal auxiliary verb, can is most often used to express a person or
thing’s ability to do something. It is also used to express or ask for permission
to do something, to describe the possibility that something can happen, and
to issue requests and offers.
194

Expressing ability
Can is used most often and most literally to express when a person or thing is
physically, mentally, or functionally able to do something. When it is used
with not to become negative, it forms a single word, cannot (contracted as
can’t). For example:
• “John can run faster than anyone I know.”
• “It’s rare to find a phone that cannot connect to the Internet these days.”
• “We don’t have to stay—we can leave if you want to.”
• “Can your brother swim?”
• “I don’t think he can read.”
• “Just do the best you can.”
• “Can’t you just restart the computer?”
• “When can you start?”
“Can do”
In response to a request or an instruction, it is common (especially in
American English) to use the idiomatic phrase “can do.” This usually stands
on its own as a minor sentence. For example:
• Speaker A: “I need you to fix this tire when you have a chance.”
• Speaker B: “Can do!”
• Speaker A: “Would you mind making dinner tonight?”
• Speaker B: “Can do, darling!”
The phrase has become so prolific that it is also often used as a modifier
before a noun to denote an optimistic, confident, and enthusiastic
characteristic, as in:
• “His can-do spirit is infectious in the office.”
• “We’re always looking for can-do individuals who will bring great energy to
our team.”
We can also make this phrase negative, but we use the word no at the
beginning of the phrase rather than using the adverb not after can, as we
normally would with a modal verb. For example:
• Speaker A: “Is it all right if I get a ride home with you again tonight?”
195

• Speaker B: “Sorry, no can do. I need to head to the airport after work.”
Permission
We often use can to express permission* to do something, especially in
questions (interrogative sentences).
For example:
• “Can I go to the bathroom, Ms. Smith?”
• “Can Jenny come to the party with us?”
• “You can leave the classroom once you are finished with the test.”
• “You can’t have any dessert until you’ve finished your dinner.”
(*Usage note: Although it is sometimes considered grammatically incorrect
to use can instead of may to express permission, it is acceptable in modern
English to use either one. Can is very common in informal settings; in more
formal English, though, may is still the preferred modal verb.)
As a rhetorical device
Sometimes, we use can in this way as a rhetorical device to politely introduce
or emphasize an opinion or sentiment about something, in which case we
invert can with the subject. For instance:
• “Can I just say, this has been the most wonderful experience of my life.”
• “Can we be clear that our firm will not be involved in such a dubious a
plan.”
• “And, can I add, profits are expected to stabilize within a month.”
Note that we can accomplish the same thing by using the verbs let or allow
instead, as in:
• “Let me be clear: this decision is in no way a reflection on the quality of
your work.”
• “Allow us to say, we were greatly impressed by your performance.”
Adding angry emphasis
Can is sometimes used to give permission (sometimes ironically) as a means
of adding emphasis to an angry command, especially in conditional
sentences. For example:
196

• “You can just walk home if you’re going to be so ungrateful!”
• “If he continues being so insufferable, he can have his party all alone!”
• “You can go to your room and stay there, young man! I’m sick of listening
to your backtalk.”
Possibility and likelihood
Similar to using can to express ability, we also use can to describe actions
that are possible. It may appear to be nearly the same in certain cases, but
the usage relates less to physical or mental ability than to the possibility or
likelihood of accomplishing something or of something occurring. For
instance:
• “You can get help on your papers from your teaching assistant.”
• “My mother-in-law can be a bit overbearing at times.”
• “People forget that you can get skin cancer from tanning beds.”
• “It can seem impossible to overcome the debt from student loans.”
Negative certainty and disbelief
We use the modal verb must to express certainty or high probability, but we
generally use can’t (or, less commonly, cannot) to express negative
certainty, extremely low likelihood, or a disbelief that something might be
true. For example:
• “You can’t be tired—you’ve been sleeping all day!”
• “I can’t have left my phone at home, because I remember packing it in my
bag.”
• “After three years of college, she wants to drop out? She cannot be
serious.”
Making requests
It is common to use can to make a request of someone. For example:
• “Can you get that book down from the shelf for me?”
• “Your sister is a lawyer, right? Can she give me some legal advice?”
• “Can you kids turn your music down, please?”
197

However, this usage can sometimes be seen as being too direct or forceful,
and sometimes comes across as impolite as a result. In more formal or polite
circumstances, we can use other modal verbs such as could or would to
create more polite constructions, as in:
• “Would you please be quiet?”
• “Could you help me with this assignment?”
Making offers
While it might be seen as impolite to use can to make a request, it is perfectly
polite to use it to make an offer. For example:
• “Can I do anything to help get dinner ready?”
• “Can I help you find what you need?”
• “Can I give you a ride home?”
If we want to be even more polite or add formality to the offer, we can use
may instead, as in:
• “May I be of some assistance?”
• “May we help you in any way?”
• “How may our staff be of service to you?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of can as a modal verb?
a) To ask for permission
b) To request something
c) To offer to do something
d) To express an opinion or feeling
2. Which of the following sentences uses can to express ability?
a) “Can I watch TV later?”
b) “It can get a bit too hot here in the summer.”
c) “I’m sure glad I can drive.”
d) “You can have some ice cream if you behave yourselves.”
3. Which of the following is an informal use of the modal verb can?
198

a) “You can just go without your dinner if you’re going to behave that way!”
b) “When can we expect the package to arrive?”
c) “Can I spend the night at my friend’s house?”
d) “Can we carry those groceries for you?”
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Could
Definition
The modal verb could is most often used as a past-tense version of can,
indicating what someone or something was able to do in the past; it can also
be used instead of can as a more polite way of making a request or asking for
permission. Could is also used to express a slight or uncertain possibility, as
well as to make a suggestion or offer.
Past ability
When describing what a person or thing was physically, mentally, or
functionally able to do in the past, we use could instead of can. For example:
• “When I was younger, I could run for 10 miles without breaking a sweat!”
• “Our TV growing up could only get about four channels.”
• “She couldn’t read until she was nearly 12 years old.”
• “Could your family afford any food during the Great Depression,
Grandma?”
We also use could instead of can when describing an ability that is desired or
wished for. (This is known as the subjunctive mood, which is used for
describing hypothetical or unreal situations.) For example:
• “I wish I could swim; it looks like so much fun.”
Conditional sentences
Conditional sentences in the past tense are called second conditionals.
Unlike the first conditional, we use the second conditional to talk about
things that cannot or are unlikely to actually happen.
To create the second conditional, we usually use the past simple tense
after the if clause, followed by would + a bare infinitive to describe what
would be the expected (if unreal) result of the condition.
199

However, if we want to describe what we would be able to do under a certain
condition, we can use could instead. For example:
• “If I got that promotion at work, I could finally afford a new car!”
• “If we moved to California, I could surf every day!”
We often use could in what’s known as a mixed conditional, which occurs
when the tense in one part of a conditional sentence does not match the
other half. This often occurs with could when a present-tense verb is being
used in an if conditional clause to express a hypothetical scenario that is
likely to or possibly could happen. For example:
• “If I get some money from my parents, we could go to the movies.”
• “We could visit our friends at the beach if you ask your boss for Friday
off.”
Asking for permission
When we ask someone for permission to do something, it is often considered
more polite to use could instead of can. However, we can only make this
substitution when asking for permission—when stating or granting
permission, we can only use can (or, more politely, may).
For example:
• “Dad, could I spend the night at my friend’s house?”
• “Could we invite Sarah to come with us?”
• “I was wondering if I could take a bit of time off work.”
Making a request
Just as we use could instead of can to be more polite when asking for
permission, it is also considered more polite to substitute could when making
a general request. For example:
• “Could you please be quiet?”
• “Could you help me with this assignment?”
Note that we can also do this with the modal verb would:
• “Would you ask Jeff to come over here?”
• “Would Tina help me paint this fence?”
200

As a rhetorical device
Sometimes, we use could as a rhetorical device to politely introduce or
emphasize an opinion or sentiment about something, in which case we invert
could with the subject. For instance:
• “Could I just say, this has been a most wonderful evening.”
• “And could I clarify that I have always acted solely with the company’s
interests in mind.”
• “Could I add that your time with us has been greatly appreciated.”
Note that we can accomplish the same thing by using the verbs let or allow
instead, as in:
• “Let me clarify: this decision is in no way a reflection on the quality of
your work.”
• “Allow me to add, we were greatly impressed by your performance.”
Possibility and likelihood
Like can, we can also use could to describe actions or outcomes that are
possible or likely. Unlike using could to talk about an ability, this usage is not
restricted to the past tense. For instance:
• “I think it could rain any minute.”
• “She could be in big trouble over this.”
• “Due to this news, the company could see a sharp drop in profits next
quarter.”
• “Be careful, you could hurt someone with that thing!”
• “Answer the phone! It could be your father calling.”
Making a suggestion
Similar to expressing a possible outcome, we can also use could to suggest a
possible course of action. For instance:
• “We could go out for pizza after work on Friday.”
• “You could see if your boss would let you extend your vacation.”
• “I know it will be tricky to convince your parents, but you could try.”
201

Adding angry emphasis
We also use could to add emphasis to an angry or frustrated remark. For
example:
• “My mother has traveled a long way to be here—you could try to look a
little more pleased to see her!”
• “You could have told me that you didn’t want a party before I spent all
this time and effort organizing one!”
Making offers
In addition to using could to make a suggestion, we can also use it to make
an offer to do something for someone. For example:
• “Could I give you a hand with dinner?”
• “Could we help you find what you need?”
• “Could I give you a ride home?”
Rhetorical questions
Could is sometimes used informally in sarcastic or rhetorical questions that
highlight a behavior someone finds irritating, unacceptable, or inappropriate.
It is often (but not always) used with be as a main verb. For example:
• “Could you be any louder? I can barely hear myself think!”
• “Oh my God, Dad, could you be any more embarrassing?”
• “Danny, we’re going to be late! Could you walk any slower?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of the modal verb could?
a) To ask for permission
b) To create a future tense
c) To request something
d) To offer to do something
 
2. Which of the following sentences uses could to express possibility or
202

likelihood?
a) “Could I please have a second helping of dessert?”
b) “I wish I could drive.”
c) “I have a feeling it could snow tonight.”
d) “I could move out of this dump if I get a role in that big movie.”
3. Which of the following sentences uses could incorrectly?
a) “You and your friends could go to the movies later, if you’re looking for
something to do.”
b) “I thought Jonathan could be here by now.”
c) “Could I spend Thanksgiving with Grandpa this year?”
d) “Could you be any more insulting?”
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - May
Definition
The modal verb may is used to ask, grant, or describe permission; to politely
offer to do something for someone; to express the possibility of something
happening or occurring; or to express a wish or desire that something will be
the case in the future. We can also use may as a rhetorical device to express
or introduce an opinion about something.
Asking or granting permission
May is very commonly used to express or ask for permission to do
something. There are other ways to do this (by using the modals can or
could, for instance), but may is considered the most polite and formally
correct way to do so. For example:
• “May I borrow your pen, please?”
• “May we ask you some questions about your experience?”
• “General, you may fire when ready.”
• “She may invite one or two friends, but no more than that.”
• “May we be frank with you, Tom?”
• “Students may not leave the class once their exams are complete.”
203

Making a polite offer
Like can, we can use may to offer do something for someone else, though it
is generally a more polite, formal way of doing so. For example:
• “May I help you set the table?”
• “May we be of assistance in any way?”
Expressing possibility
Another common use of may is to express the possibility that something will
happen or occur in the near future, especially when that possibility is
uncertain. For instance:
• “I’m worried that it may start raining soon.”
• “We may run into some problems down the line that we didn’t expect.”
• “I may be coming home for the winter break, depending on the cost of a
plane ticket.”
• “Although we may see things improve in the future, there’s no guarantee
at the moment.”
• “There may not be any issues at all; we’ll just have to see.”
Expressing wishes for the future
May is also used in more formal language to express a wish or desire that
something will be the case in the future. When used in this way, may is
inverted with the subject, as in:
• “May you both have a long, happy life together.”
• “May you be safe in your journey home.”
• “We’ve had great success this year; may we continue to do so for years to
come.”
• “May this newfound peace remain forever between our two countries.”
As a rhetorical device
Sometimes, we use may in this way as a rhetorical device to politely
introduce or emphasize an opinion or sentiment about something, in which
case we invert may with the subject. For instance:
204

• “May I just say, this has been the most wonderful experience of my life.”
• “May we be clear that our firm will not be involved in such a dubious
plan.”
• “May I be frank: this is not what I was hoping for.”
Note that we can accomplish the same thing by using the verbs let or allow
instead, as in:
• “Let me be clear: this decision is in no way a reflection on the quality of
your work.”
• “Allow us to say, we were greatly impressed by your performance.”
May not vs. Mayn’t (vs. Can’t)
Grammatically, it is not technically incorrect to contract may not into the
single-word mayn’t. For instance:
• “You mayn’t wish to share these details with others.”
• “No, you mayn’t go to the dinner unaccompanied.”
However, this has become very rare in modern English, and generally only
occurs in colloquial usage. In declarative sentences, it is much more
common to use the two words separately, as in:
• “Employees may not use company computers for recreational purposes.”
• “There may not be much we can do to prevent such problems from
occurring.”
It is also uncommon, though, to use may not in questions, in which may is
inverted with the subject. The resulting construction (e.g., “may I not” or
“may we not”) sounds overly formal in day-to-day speech and writing.
Because of this, it is much more common to use the contraction can’t
instead, as in:
• “Can’t we stay for a little while longer?”
• “Can’t I bring a friend along with me?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of the modal verb may?
a) To ask for permission
205

b) To express a wish for the future
c) To request something from someone
d) To offer to do something
2. Which of the following sentences uses may to express possibility or
likelihood?
a) “You may not watch television until your homework is done.”
b) “May you always live life in the way you see fit.”
c) “We may not have a choice in the matter.”
d) “They may stay for dinner if they’d like to.”
3. Which of the following sentences is considered the most correct in
modern English?
a) “The two companies mayn’t have any option but to abandon the proposed
merger.”
b) “Can’t we come with you to the movie later?”
c) “May I not stay up a little later tonight?”
d) “Mayn’t we watch some TV before starting our homework?”
 
4. Identify the function of may in the following sentence:
“May I state for the record, I’ve always supported the governor’s decisions.”
a) To express permission
b) To make a polite offer
c) To express possibility
d) As a rhetorical device
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Might
Definition
The modal verb might is most often used to express an unlikely or uncertain
possibility. Might is also used to very formally or politely ask for permission,
and it is used as the past-tense form of may when asking permission in
reported speech. It can also be used to suggest an action, or to introduce
two differing possibilities.
Expressing possibility
206

When we use might to indicate possibility, it implies a very weak certainty or
likelihood that something will happen, occur, or be the case. For instance:
• “I’m hoping that she might call me later.”
• “We might go to a party later, if you want to come.”
• “You should pack an umbrella—it looks like it might rain.”
• “There might be some dinner left over for you in the fridge.”
In conditional sentences
We also often use might to express a possibility as a hypothetical outcome in
a conditional sentence. For example:
• “If we don’t arrive early enough, we might not be able to get in to the
show.”
• “We still might make our flight if we leave right now!”
• “If we’re lucky, we might have a chance of reversing the damage.”
Politely asking for permission
Although may is the “standard” modal verb used to politely ask for
permission, we can also use might if we want to add even more politeness or
formality to the question. For example:
• “Might we go to the park this afternoon, father?”
• “Might I ask you a few questions?”
• “I’m finished with my dinner. Might I be excused from the table?”
However, even in formal speech and writing, this construction can come
across as rather old-fashioned, especially in American English. It more
commonly occurs in indirect questions—i.e., declarative sentences that
are worded in such a way as to express an inquiry (though these are
technically not questions). For example:
• “I was hoping I might borrow the car this evening.”
• “I wonder if we might invite Samantha to come with us.”
Past tense of may
When we use reported speech, we traditionally conjugate verbs one degree
207

into the past. When may has been used, especially to ask for permission, in a
sentence that is now being reported, we use might in its place, as in:
• “He asked if he might use the car for his date tonight.”
• “She wondered if she might bring a friend to the show.”
However, this rule of conjugating into the past tense is largely falling out of
use in modern English, and it is increasingly common to see verbs remain in
their original tense even when being reported.
Making suggestions
Might can also be used to make polite suggestions to someone. This is much
less direct and forceful than using should: it expresses a suggestion of a
possible course of action rather than asserting what is correct or right to do.
For example:
• “You might ask your brother about repaying that loan the next time you
see him.”
• “It tastes very good, though you might add a bit more salt.”
• “You might try rebooting the computer; that should fix the problem for
you.”
Suggesting a possibility
In a similar way, we can use might to suggest a possible action or situation to
another person. For example:
• “I was wondering if you might be interested in seeing a play with me
later.”
• “I thought you might like this book, so I bought you a copy.”
Adding angry emphasis
Just as we can with the modal verb could, we can use might to make a
suggestion as a means of adding emphasis to an angry or frustrated remark.
For example:
• “My mother has traveled a long way to be here—you might try to look a
little more pleased to see her!”
• “You might have told me that you didn’t want a party before I spent all
208

this time and effort organizing one!”
Introducing 
differing
information
Another use of might is to introduce a statement that is contrary to or
different from a second statement later in the sentence. This can be used as a
means of highlighting two different possible outcomes, scenarios, or courses
of action. For example:
• “Sure, you might be able to make money quickly like that, but you’re
inevitably going to run into difficulties down the line.”
• “I might not have much free time, but I find great satisfaction in my
work.”
• “Our organization might be very small, but we provide a unique, tailored
service to our clientele.”
As a rhetorical device
Sometimes, we use might as a rhetorical device to politely introduce or
emphasize an opinion or sentiment about something, in which case we invert
might with the subject. For instance:
• “Might I just say, this has been a most wonderful evening.”
• “And might I clarify that I have always acted solely with the company’s
interests in mind.”
• “Might I add that your time with us has been greatly appreciated.”
Note that we can accomplish the same thing by using the verbs let or allow
instead, as in:
• “Let me clarify: this decision is in no way a reflection on the quality of
your work.”
• “Allow me to add, we were greatly impressed by your performance.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of the modal verb might?
a) To ask for permission
209

b) To express a possibility
c) To request something from someone
d) To suggest something
 
2. In which of the following situations do we use might as the past tense of
may?
a) In conditional sentences
b) When making a suggestion
c) When a request for permission is being reported
d) To express a possibility
3. Which of the following sentences would occur least commonly in
modern English?
a) “Might I inquire about your stake in this claim?”
b) “I’m worried that we might not make the train.”
c) “I was hoping I might go out with my friends after school.”
d) “You might have warned me that the boss was going to be here!”
 
4. Identify the function of might in the following sentence:
“Jonathan, you might see about securing the loan before committing to
anything else.”
a) To express permission
b) To introduce differing information
c) To express possibility
d) To make a suggestion
Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Must
Definition
The modal verb must is most often used to express necessity—i.e., that
something has to happen or be the case. We also use this sense of the word
to indicate a strong intention to do something in the future, to emphasize
something positive that we believe someone should do, and to rhetorically
introduce or emphasize an opinion or sentiment. In addition to indicating
necessity, must can be used to indicate that something is certain or very
likely to happen or be true.
210

Necessity
When must indicates that an action, circumstance, or situation is necessary,
we usually use it in a declarative sentence. For example:
• “This door must be left shut at all times!”
• “We absolutely must get approval for that funding.”
• “You must not tell anyone about what we saw.”
• “Now, you mustn’t be alarmed, but we’ve had a bit of an accident in here.”
We can also use must in interrogative sentences to inquire whether
something is necessary, usually as a criticism of some objectionable or
undesirable action or behavior. For instance:
• “Must we go to dinner with them? They are dreadfully boring.”
• “Must you be so rude to my parents?”
• “Must I spend my entire weekend studying?”
However, this usage is generally reserved for more formal speech and
writing, and isn’t very common in everyday English.
Indicating strong intention
We use the same meaning of must to indicate something we have a very
strong intention of doing in the future. For example:
• “I must file my taxes this weekend.”
• “I must get around to calling my brother.”
• “We must have the car checked out soon.”
Emphasizing a suggestion
We also use this meaning to make suggestions to others of something
positive we believe they should do, as in:
• “You simply must try the new Ethiopian restaurant on 4th Avenue—it’s
fantastic!”
• “It was so lovely to see you. We must get together again soon!”
• “You must come stay with us at the lake sometime.”
211

As a rhetorical device
Finally, we can also use this meaning of must as a rhetorical device to politely
introduce or emphasize an opinion or sentiment about something:
• “I must say, this has been a most wonderful evening.”
• “And I must add that Mr. Jones has been an absolute delight to work
with.”
• “I must be clear: we will disavow any knowledge of this incident.”
Note that we can accomplish the same thing by using the verbs let or allow
instead, as in:
• “Let me be clear: this decision is in no way a reflection on the quality of
your work.”
• “Allow us to say, we were greatly impressed by your performance.”
Certainty and likelihood
In addition to being used to indicate a necessary action or situation, must is
also often used to describe that which is certain or extremely likely or
probable to happen, occur, or be the case. For example:
• “You must be absolutely exhausted after your flight.”
• “Surely they must know that we can’t pay the money back yet.”
• “There must be some way we can convince the board of directors.”
• “I must have left my keys on my desk at work.”
• Speaker A: “I just got back from a 12-week trip around Europe.”
• Speaker B: “Wow, that must have been an amazing experience!”
Generally speaking, we do not use the negative of must (must not or mustn’t)
to express a negative certainty or strong disbelief. Instead, we use cannot
(often contracted as can’t), as in:
• “You can’t be tired—you’ve been sleeping all day!”
• “I can’t have left my phone at home, because I remember packing it in my
bag.”
• “After three years of college, she wants to drop out? She cannot be
serious.”
212

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of the modal verb must?
a) To ask for permission
b) To express a certainty
c) To indicate an intention
d) To suggest something
2. In which of the following situations do we generally use can instead of
must?
a) When expressing a necessity
b) When making a suggestion
c) When expressing disbelief or a negative certainty
d) When indicating a strong intention
3. Which of the following sentences uses must to indicate a strong
intention?
a) “Employees must sign in before and after every shift.”
b) “We mustn’t let this setback deter us.”
c) “I must see about getting a refund on this software.”
d) “You must come over and see the new house sometime!”
4. Identify the function of must in the following sentence:
“Jonathan, you must have driven through the night to have arrived so early!”
a) To introduce or emphasize an opinion or sentiment
b) To indicate a strong intention
c) To express necessity
d) To express a certainty or high probability
Substituting Modal Verbs
Modal auxiliary verbs express different shades of meaning; very often,
they can be quite similar in how they are used, and it is sometimes unclear
when it is appropriate to use one instead of another. Below, we’ll look at
some comparisons between commonly confused modal verbs.
213

Indicating the future – Will /
Shall
Will is the most common modal verb used to indicate one of the future
tenses, as in:
• “I will walk to work tomorrow.” (future simple tense)
• “I will be walking to work this week.” (future continuous tense)
• “I will have walked to work each day this week.” (future perfect tense)
• “By December, I will have been walking to work each week for a year.”
(future perfect continuous tense)
We can also use shall in place of will to form the future tense, but only when
the subject is in the first person (I or we). However, this makes the sentence
very formal, and it is more commonly found in British English or in polite
invitations. For instance:
• “I shall be attending a dinner with the prime minister in April.”
• “Shall we dance, my dear?”
Requesting permission – Can /
Could / May / Might
Each of these four modal verbs can be used to ask for permission, and each
changes how formal the sentence is.
• “Can I open the window, please?”
• “Could I open the window, please?”
• “May I open the window, please?”
• “Might I open the window, please?”
In the above examples, can, could, may, and might are all used to request to
permission do something.
Can is the least formal of the four, and some sticklers for grammatical
etiquette will claim that it should not be used in this way at all; however, it is
perfectly acceptable in informal conversation.
Could is more polite and a bit more formal than can. We can use this in most
214

situations, except perhaps in very formal conversation.
May is more formal than either can or could, and it is commonly used as the
standard modal verb to express or request permission.
Might is the most formal of them all; however, it can only be used to request
permission (not to state that someone has permission), and it is not
commonly used except in extremely formal circumstances.
Indicating ability – Can / Could
We often use can to indicate physical, mental, or functional ability in doing
something. For example:
• “I can speak three languages.” (I have the mental ability to do this.)
• “He can swim very well.” (He has the physical ability to do this.)
Could is also used to indicate ability but as the past tense of can. For
example:
• “He could speak three languages when he was four years old. (He had this
ability by the time he was four years old.)
• “She couldn’t ski until she was a teenager. (She did not have this ability
until she was a teenager.)
Indicating possibility – May /
Might
We use may and might to express a possibility. When describing a possible
action, they generally indicate the same 50 percent chance of likelihood. For
example:
• “I might go to the cinema today.”
• “I may go to bed early this evening.”
May is regarded as being more formal in this use.
Both may and might are also used to indicate a possible outcome or set of
circumstances. In this case, might tends to express less certainty or a lower
likelihood than may, although the difference is slight. For example:
• “We’ve tested thoroughly, but there might be some issues we’ve yet to
discover.”
215

• “He may have a chance of making a comeback in the polls.”
Making an offer – Can / May /
Shall
Shall, may, and can can all be used to offer to do something for someone.
For example:
• “Can I get the door for you?”
• “May I get the door for you?”
• “Shall I get the door for you?”
May is considered more formal and polite than can, although can is perfectly
acceptable. Can and may, however, are both a little less direct than shall,
which is used as more of a polite suggestion.
Making a request – Will / Can /
Could / Would
All four of these modals can be used to make a request of someone, with
differing degrees of politeness:
• “Will you get the door for me, please?” (most direct – least polite)
• “Can you get the door for me, please?” (slightly less direct – slightly more
polite)
• “Could you get the door for me, please?” (less direct – more polite)
• “Would you get the door for me, please?” (least direct – most polite)
Could and would are the most polite modals to use for requests; however, the
accompanying language we use (saying “please,” “if you don’t mind,” “if you
could be so kind,” etc.) makes a bigger difference on the politeness of the
request, no matter which modal verb is used.
Indicating an obligation – Must /
Shall / Should / Will
When expressing an obligation to do something, we often use must, which is
216

particularly direct and forceful. This might be found in a public notice, as in:
• “Employees must wash their hands before returning to work.”
• “Owners must clean up after their pets.”
Must can also be used in direct commands or directives, such as:
• “You must finish your homework before you can go outside to play.”
• “Students must put their names on their assignments, or they won’t be
graded.”
We usually only find shall being used to express obligations in contracts or
legal documents; it is used as a more polite and formal construction than
must. For instance:
• “The defendant shall pay the plaintiff $5,000 in damages.”
• “The purchaser agrees that he or she shall forego any right to a refund
after 90 days.”
When indicating obligation in more conversational English, we tend to use
should instead, which is less formal than either shall or must. It is also less
forceful than either, and it is used as more of a strong suggestion of what is
best or most proper to do. For example:
• “Students should hand in their assignments before Friday.”
• “She should apologize for her behavior!”
• “You should always pay your bills on time.”
We can technically use will in the same way as must, shall and should, but it
is even more forceful than must and is less commonly used; it is generally
reserved for strong commands or directives, as in:
• “You will eat your vegetables or you won’t get any dessert!”
• “They will agree to the terms of the lease or face eviction.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In American English, when can we use shall instead of will to form the
future tense?
a) In informal speech or writing
b) When the subject is I or we
c) To express a polite invitation
217

d) All of the above
e) A & B only
f) B & C only
2. Which of the following modal verbs is considered the most polite when
requesting permission?
a) can
b) could
c) may
d) might
3. Which of the following is most commonly used to indicate obligation?
a) must
b) shall
c) should
d) will
4. Which of the following modal verbs can be substituted for the underlined
word in the following sentence?
“Excuse me, can you tell me where the nearest gas station is?”
a) will
b) could
c) would
d) All of the above
e) A & B only
f) B & C only
218

Semi-Modal Auxiliary Verbs
Definition
Semi-modal auxiliary verbs, often simply called semi-modal verbs,
are verbs that sometimes behave like modal auxiliary verbs. (They are
also sometimes known as marginal modal verbs.) Like the “proper” modal
verbs, they are used with the base form of verbs (the infinitive without to) to
create a unique meaning.
Dare, need, used to, and ought to
Not all sources agree on the complete list of semi-modal verbs, but there are
four that are widely considered as the standard set: dare, need, used to, and
ought to.
Dare and need are considered semi-modal because they can also function as
main verbs, able to take nouns and infinitives as objects and to conjugate
for person, tense, and number. Ought to and used to, while unable to be
main verbs, are considered semi-modal because they are always followed by
infinitives (compared to “true” modals, which can never be followed by
infinitives).
As semi-modal verbs, these verbs are used in conjunction with “main” verbs
to create a complete verb expression; they do not conjugate for third-person
singular subjects; they do not have a simple past tense; and they cannot form
infinitives, present participles, or past participles.
We’ll look at each of these verbs individually, examining when and how they
function as semi-modal verbs.
Dare
When dare is used as a semi-modal verb, it means “to be brave, reckless, or
rude enough to do or try something.” Remember, when functioning modally,
it does not conjugate for person or tense. For example:
• “If he dare cross me again, I’ll make sure he pays dearly for it.”
As a semi-modal verb, dare more often takes not to form a negative
statement (very rarely contracted as daren’t), or is inverted with the subject
to form an interrogative sentence. For example:
219

• “I dare not press the issue any further.”
• “How dare she talk to me like that?”
• “Dare he meddle with the laws of nature?”
• “They daren’t give him a reason to be angry.”
However, with the exception of the now idiomatic phrase “How dare
(someone),” the use of dare as a modal verb has become rare in modern
English.
As a main verb
Dare can also be used as an intransitive main verb with the same meaning as
the modal version. When it functions as a main verb, however, it is able to
conjugate for person and tense, and it can be followed by a verb in either its
base or infinitive form (the to becomes optional). For example:
• “I can’t believe he dared (to) stand up to the boss.”
• “No one dares (to) question my authority!”
When dare is used as a main verb, it must take the auxiliary verb do to
form questions or be made negative. As we saw in the section on primary
auxiliary verbs, it is do, rather than the main verb, that conjugates for
tense, person, and number in this case. For example:
• “Did they dare (to) go through with it?”
• “He doesn’t dare (to) argue with the principal.”
Dare can also mean “to challenge someone to (do) something that require
courage, boldness, or recklessness,” in which case it must take a noun,
pronoun, or infinitive as a direct object. It cannot be used modally with this
meaning. For example:
• “I dare you to ask Suzy on a date.”
• “I’ve never been dared to race someone before.”
Need
Need as a semi-modal verb is almost always used in negative sentences to
express a lack of obligation or necessity, either taking the adverb not (usually
contracted as needn’t) or paired with a negative word or phrase, such as
never, no one, nothing, etc. For example:
220

• “No one need know about this.”
• “He needn’t have called; I told him I would be late.”
• “You needn’t worry about my grades.”
• “Nothing need change simply because my father is no longer here.”
It can also be used to form interrogative sentences by inverting with the
subject, as in:
• “Need we be concerned?”
• “Need I go to the market later?”
Like dare, though, the modal use of need has become quite uncommon in
modern English, except in very formal speech or writing.
As a main verb
Need is much more common as a main verb. This means it conjugates for
person (becoming needs in the third-person singular) or tense (becoming
needed), and it uses auxiliary did to form negatives and questions. As a main
verb, need can be followed by nouns, noun phrases, pronouns, gerunds, or
infinitives. For example:
• “He needs that report by tomorrow.”
• “Does she need to know where the house is?”
• “You have plenty of time, so you don’t need to rush.”
• “He needed a place to stay, so I offered him one.”
Used to
When we speak about a past habit, condition, or fact that is no longer the
case, we can use the semi-modal used to with the base form of the verb. For
example:
• “I used to get up early when I lived in New York.”
• “She used to live in Ireland.”
• “We used to be in a band together.”
• “This watch used to belong to my father.”
Uniquely among the modal and semi-modal verbs, we form the question and
negative of used to the same way as for main verbs in the past tense—that is,
221

by using the auxiliary did for the question and did not for the negative.
Example:
• “Did you use to live in Manchester?”
• “I didn’t use to like coffee.”
• “She didn’t use to go to the gym every day.”
(Technically speaking, we should remove the “-d” from used to when forming
questions and negatives, as the auxiliary verb did takes the past tense.
Because of to immediately following use, however, the pronunciation stays
the same, and many writers include the “-d” regardless. It is common to see
it written both ways in modern English.)
As a main verb
A large source of confusion arises around the difference between the semi-
modal verb used to and two similarly structured main verbs — be used to and
get used to.
Be used to
When we use be used to with a noun, noun phrase, or the gerund of a verb, it
means “to be accustomed to something.” For example:
• “I am used to getting up at 7 AM every morning.”
• “She was used to the stress by that point.”
To form the negative of be used to, we add not after the auxiliary verb be,
which can be contracted to isn’t, aren’t, wasn’t, or weren’t. To form
interrogative sentences, we invert be with the subject. For example:
• “I am not used to living in the city.”
• “He wasn’t used to so much work.”
• “Are you used to living with roommates?”
Get used to
Get used to has a slightly different meaning from be used to; get here means
become. In fact, in more formal English, it is considered preferable to say
become used to instead. In everyday speech and writing, however, get used to
is perfectly acceptable.
222

We often use get used to in the present continuous tense. For example:
• “I am getting used to living in the city.” (I am becoming accustomed to
living in the city.)
• “He is getting used to public speaking. (He is becoming accustomed to
the act of public speaking.)
We can also use get used to in the past simple tense, but usually in
negative constructions with the word never, as in:
• “She never got used to the silence of the countryside.”
Often, we use get used to with the modal verbs could, will, and cannot (or
can’t). Could is used to create a hypothetical scenario, will creates the future
tense (often paired with never), and cannot is used to mean “unable.” For
example:
• “I can’t get used to working so many hours. I am so tired.” (I am unable
to become accustomed to this.)
• “I could get used to doing nothing all day.” (This is something that I
could find easy to do.)
• “I will never get used to these cramped conditions.” (At no point in the
future will I become accustomed to this.)
Ought to
Ought to is considered semi-modal because, like used to, it ends in to and so
makes verbs infinitive. It is commonly compared to should because it
expresses that something is viewed as correct, preferable, or necessary—or as
probable, likely, or expected. It can also be used to ask for or offer advice
about something.
For example:
• “With the cost of airfare so high, in-flight meals ought to be free.” (It is
correct or preferable that the meals be free.)
• “We ought to arrive in the evening.” (It is probable or expected that we’ll
arrive in the evening.)
• “I think we ought to turn back.” (Turning back is the necessary or best
course of action—worded as advice.)
• “You ought to see the Grand Canyon some day.” (It is my advice or
recommendation for you to visit the Grand Canyon.)
223

When ought to is made negative, not comes between ought (sometimes
contracted as oughtn’t) and to; it is common to omit to when ought to is
used with not. For example:
• “You ought not to read in such dim light.”
• “We oughtn’t leave the house; it isn’t safe.”
We can also form questions by inverting ought with the subject; this is not
very common, though. Again, to is sometimes omitted in this form. For
example:
• “Ought we find someplace to eat?”
• “Oughtn’t she study for her exam?”
• “Ought they to be more worried about the storm?”
• “Ought not he to finish his homework first?”
Ought to is becoming far less common than should in modern English,
especially in American English.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not one of the semi-modal verbs?
a) dare
b) should
c) ought to
d) need
2. Which of the following is something that semi-modal verbs cannot do?
a) Conjugate for third-person singular subjects
b) Come before main verbs to create unique meanings
c) Form the past tense
d) Become negative with the word not
e) A & B
f) A & C
g) B & C
3. In which of the following sentences is need used as a semi-modal verb?
a) “Nobody need hear about this disaster.”
b) “He needs to learn some respect.”
224

c) “I think you need a haircut.”
d) “Does she need to study more?”
 
4. Which is the only semi-modal verb that takes the auxiliary verb do to
become negative?
a) dare
b) need
c) used to
d) ought to
5. Which of the following sentences does not use a semi-modal verb?
a) “Need I ask why this report is late?”
b) “We’d all like some more, but who dares ask?”
c) “We all used to live here when we were younger.”
d) “You oughtn’t concern yourself with this matter.”
Infinitives
Definition
An infinitive is the most basic form of a verb. It is “unmarked” (which
means that it is not conjugated for tense or person), and it is preceded by the
particle to.
Infinitives are known as non-finite verbs, meaning they do not express
actions being performed by the subjects of clauses. Instead, infinitives
function as nouns, adjectives, or adverbs to describe actions as ideas.
Infinitives are distinct from a similar construction known as bare
infinitives or the base forms of verbs, which are simply infinitives without
the particle to. Although nearly identical, we use them in different ways than
“full” infinitives, which we’ll look at later in this section.
Using infinitives
Infinitives are used to express an action as a concept, rather than what is
being done or performed by the subject of a clause. In this way, they can
function as nouns, adjectives, or adverbs—that is, nearly any role in a
sentence except that of a main verb.
225

Infinitives can stand on their own to complete these functions, or they can
work together with their own predicates (any additional information that
modifies or completes them) to form infinitive phrases. Infinitive phrases
function as a nouns, adjectives, or adverbs as a single, holistic unit.
(In the examples in this section, infinitive phrases have been put in bold,
while the infinitive verbs that begin them are in italics.)
Making infinitives negative
To make an infinitive or infinitive phrase negative, we use the word not
before the infinitive. We can also put greater emphasis on not by placing it
after to.*
(*This creates what is known as a split infinitive—an infinitive that has an
adverb between to and the base form of the verb. While some traditional
grammar guides state that this should never be done, in reality there is no
such “rule” in English; it is perfectly grammatical to split an infinitive, and in
many cases it sounds more natural to do so.)
Infinitives as nouns
Because infinitives and infinitive phrases can function as nouns, it means
that they can be the subject of a clause, the direct object of a verb, or a
predicate noun.
Subjects
The subject performs, occupies, or controls the action of the verb.
• “To err is human; to forgive is divine.”
• “To study mathematics at Harvard was her ultimate dream.”
• “To live in the city means adjusting to a completely different lifestyle.”
Objects
As direct objects
A direct object is a person or thing that directly receives the action of the
verb in a clause. An infinitive that acts as the object of another verb is
sometimes known as a verb complement.
226

Remember that intransitive verbs do not take direct objects, so you will
only find infinitives used as the objects of transitive verbs.
• “I’m not going unless you agree to go with me.”
• “You appear to be correct.”
• “Please be quiet; I’m trying to study.”
• “They’re attempting to solve the equation.”
• “Let me know if you decide to leave early.”
• “We hope to go in the near future.”
• “We rarely manage to get out of the house for the night.”
As objects in reported speech
When we use reported speech, we often use infinitives as the direct object
of a “reporting verb” to express what was said or asked in the past. For
example:
• “He asked to help us fix the car.”
• “She said not to answer the phone.”
• “He demanded to speak to the manager.”
• “They offered to take me to the airport.”
• “I promised to buy her a diamond ring.”
• “He threatened to report me to the police if I didn’t give him back the
money.”
As object complements
Certain verbs do not make sense with only a direct object, especially when
that direct object is a person. More information is required about the object’s
relationship with the verb to form a complete thought. This extra
information is known as the object complement.
An infinitive can also act as an object complement, which is word or group
of words that describe, rename, or complete the direct object of the verb. For
example:
• “I don’t expect you to approve of my decision.”
• “She’s forcing me to work through the weekend.”
227

• “We need you to make a few more copies.”
• “Janet’s father wants her to go to Harvard.”
• “I would like the boss to see these reports.”
• “He persuaded me to marry him.”
• “They taught me (how) to work the photocopier.”
We often use infinitives as object complements in reported speech to
express what someone said to or asked of someone. For example:
• “He asked me to help him.”
• “She told me not to answer the phone.”
Gerunds vs. Infinitives
Certain verbs can take either gerunds or infinitives as direct objects. In
some cases, this results in no difference in meaning. For example:
Infinitive
Gerund
“I like to hike on the weekend.”
“I like hiking on the weekend.”
“She loves to read.”
“She loves reading.”
“They hate to get bad news.”
“They hate getting bad news.”
“I prefer to go out on a Friday
than to stay at home.”
“I prefer going out on a Friday
than staying at home.”
In other instances, however, the meaning of the clause is significantly
changed as a result. For instance, the verbs remember, forget, try, and stop
can have both infinitives and gerunds as direct objects, but the meaning
changes depending on which is used. For example
Infinitive
Gerund
“I 
remembered 
to 
close 
the
window.” (I didn’t forget to do it.)
“I remember closing the window.”
(I clearly recall it.)
“I forgot to meet John earlier.” (I
didn’t remember to do it.)
“I forget meeting John earlier.” (I
don’t 
remember 
this 
fact 
even
though it happened.)
228

“Try to get some rest.” (Attempt to
do this.)
“Try getting some rest.” (Try this
as 
a 
possible 
solution 
to 
the
problem.)
“I stopped to drink water before
bed.” (I interrupted what I was
doing to drink water.)
“I stopped drinking water before
bed.” (I don’t drink water before bed
anymore.)
Predicate nouns
Predicate nouns are a subset of a larger category known as subject
complements 
(including 
predicate 
pronouns 
and 
predicative
adjectives), which rename or re-identify the subject after a linking verb
(usually a form of the verb be). For example:
• “All I want is to be left alone.”
• “The best thing in life is to spend time with those you love.”
• “The best we can hope for is to break even.”
Infinitives as adjectives
When infinitives are used as adjectives, they function in a similar way to
relative clauses (also known as adjective clauses), providing more
information about a noun or pronoun that they appear directly after. For
example:
• “This is a good place to start reading.” (To start reading modifies the
noun place.)
• “Give your brother something to play with.” (To play with modifies the
pronoun something.)
• “Find a friend to help you study.” (To help you study modifies the noun
friend.)
Infinitives as adverbs
We can also use infinitives as adverbs to modify the main verb in a sentence,
describing a reason why an action is, was, or will be done. Infinitives used in
this way are often known as infinitives of purpose. For example:
• “I started running to improve my health.”
229

We can also use the phrases in order and so as to add formal emphasis to an
infinitive of purpose, as in:
• “We must leave now in order to catch our train.”
• “He’s been studying all week so as to improve his grades.”
Note that we do not use the preposition for before the infinitive; we only use
for with a noun or noun phrase to create a prepositional phrase that
modifies the verb to describe its purpose. Consider, for example, these three
sentences:
✔ “I went to the supermarket to buy some bread.” (correct—infinitive
phrase)
✔ “I went to the supermarket for some bread.” (correct—prepositional
phrase)
✖ I went to the supermarket for to buy some bread.” (incorrect—
preposition used with infinitive phrase)
Lone infinitives
We can also use infinitives in this way as isolated responses to questions
asking why something is done or is the case. For example:
• Speaker A: “Why are you going to New York?”
• Speaker B: “To see the Empire State Building.”
• Speaker A: “Why did you turn on the TV?”
• Speaker B: “To watch the news.”
These responses are known as elliptical sentences, meaning that part of
the sentence has been omitted because it is implied. In this case, the implied
section is “because I wanted… .” As this element is implicitly understood, we
often leave it out entirely and simply use the infinitive on its own.
Infinitives vs. Base Forms (Bare
Infinitives)
The base form of a verb is simply the infinitive without the particle to—like
an infinitive, it is uninflected for tense and person. Because of this similarity,
the base form of a verb is often known as a bare infinitive, and some
grammar guides and writers make little distinction between the two forms.
230

However, infinitives and base-form verbs function differently, so it is
important to distinguish between them. An infinitive can be used in a
sentence as a noun, an adverb, or an adjective, but it cannot act as a true
verb that expresses the action of a subject.
The base form of a verb, on the other hand, can be used in conjunction with
the auxiliary verb do to become negative or to form questions. They are
also used with modal auxiliary verbs to express things like possibility,
necessity, obligation and permission, as well as to create the simple future
tense.
Verbs that take bare infinitives
The base form is also used after the direct object of certain action verbs, such
as let, help, and make, as well as after verbs of the senses, such as hear,
see, and feel.
Let’s look at some examples of these below. The bare infinitives (base forms)
are in bold, while the main verbs are underlined and the direct objects are
italicized:
• “Please let me go to the party, mom.” (Please give me permission to go.)
• “His father makes him study.” (His father forces him to study.)
• “Jack is helping me clean the garage.” (Jack is cleaning the garage with
me.)
• “He heard me shout.” (He could that I was shouting.)
• “I saw her look in my direction.” (I could see that she was looking in my
direction.)
• “I felt him touch my arm.” (I could feel that he touched my arm.)
(Note that these are not the only verbs that can be followed by bare
infinitives.)
After had better
The base forms of verbs are also used after the phrase had better, which acts
like the modal verb should to suggest a required or desirable action. For
example:
• “You had better clean this up before your father gets home.”
• “I think we’d better go home soon.”
231

After why
Bare infinitives can also follow the word why to form questions, as in:
• “Why study when I already know the material by heart?”
• “Why watch TV when we could play outside?”
These types of questions are called elliptical, which, as we saw above,
means that part of the sentence has been left out because it is implied. The
full questions might read:
• “Why should I study when I already know the material by heart?”
• “Why would we watch TV when we could play outside?”
Since the italicized parts of these sentences can be implied, they are
sometimes left out entirely.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a distinguishing feature of infinitives?
a) They cannot conjugate for tense or person
b) They can function as a noun, adjective, or adverb
c) They are preceded by the word to
d) A & C
e) B & C
f) All of the above
 
2. Which of the following is not something an infinitive can function as?
a) The subject of a clause
b) The main verb of a clause
c) The direct object of a verb
d) An adverb modifying a verb
 
3. True or False: Infinitives and gerunds are always interchangeable as direct
objects of verbs.
a) True
b) False
 
232

4. Identify the grammatical function of the infinitive phrase (in bold) in the
following sentence:
“I need the employees to work a little harder.”
a) Object complement
b) Predicate noun
c) Adjective
d) Adverb
5. Which of the following distinguishes the base form of a verb from the
infinitive form?
a) It conjugates for tense or person
b) It can function as a direct object of a main verb
c) It is not preceded by the word to
d) A & C
e) B & C
f) All of the above
Participles
Definition
Participles are words formed from verbs that can function as adjectives or
gerunds or can be used to form the continuous tenses and the perfect
tenses of verbs. There are two participle forms: the present participle and
the past participle.
Form
The present participle
The present participle is the “-ing” form of a verb. This verb form is always
the same, whether the verb is regular or irregular. For example:
Regular verbs
Regular verb Present Participle
apologize
apologizing
close
closing
233

follow
following
look
looking
remember
remembering
Irregular verbs
Irregular verb Present Participle
eat
eating
run
running
sing
singing
think
thinking
write
writing
be
being
The past participle
Unlike the present participle, the past participle form changes depending on
the verb. The past participle of regular verbs ends in “-ed,” and is generally
the same as the simple past tense of the verb. For example:
Regular verb Past Simple Past Participle
apologize
apologized
apologized
close
closed
closed
follow
followed
followed
look
looked
looked
remember
remembered
remembered
The past participle form of irregular verbs has a variety of endings that must
be memorized. Note that the past participle is usually (but not always)
different from the past simple form for irregular verbs. For example:
234

Irregular verb Past Simple Past Participle
eat
ate
eaten
run
ran
run
sing
sang
sung
think
thought
thought
write
wrote
written
be
was/were
been
Using participles as adjectives
and in participle phrases
Present and past participles can be used as adjectives or as part of a
participle phrase. Participles allow us to condense two sentences into one,
expressing ideas that would otherwise require relative clauses, subordinating
conjunctions, etc., in a more economical way. For example:
Longer Form
Using a participle
“She soothed the baby, who was
crying.”
“She soothed the crying baby.”
“I was oblivious to the doorbell ringing
because I was singing in the shower.”
“Singing in the shower, I was
oblivious to the doorbell ringing.”
“We finally found James, who was
hiding under the bed, after hours of
searching.”
“After hours of searching, we
finally found James hiding under
the bed.”
 
As adjectives
When we form an adjective using the present participle, we imply action on
the part of the noun being modified. For example:
• “She soothed the crying baby.” (The baby is crying).
• “The speeding car crashed into the tree.” (The car was speeding.)
235

• “Hugging, the two sisters said goodbye to each other.” (The sisters were
hugging.)
When we form an adjective using the past participle, on the other hand, we
don’t imply action on the part of noun that it modifies. Instead, we describe a
characteristic of that noun. For example:
• “I picked up the broken bottle.” (The bottle is broken.)
• “The jumbled puzzle pieces were all over the floor.” (The puzzle pieces are
jumbled.)
• “Please get me a bag of frozen vegetables.” (The vegetables are frozen.)
As participle phrases
Participial phrases (sometimes known as participial clauses) are
groups of words that contain a participle and function as adjective phrases.
Present participle phrase
If we use the present participle in a phrase, we give the clause an active
meaning. In other words, the noun being modified is the agent of the action.
For example:
• “Singing in the shower, I was oblivious to the doorbell ringing.” (I was
singing.)
• “James, hiding under the bed, was completely silent.” (James was
hiding.)
Past participle phrase
If we use the past participle, the noun being modified is either given a
passive role in the action, or else is being described. For example:
• “The turkey, burnt to a crisp, was thrown in the garbage.”
• “My sister, exhausted after a long day’s work, has fallen asleep on the
sofa.”
In the first example, the turkey is not the agent of the action, but is being
acted upon; it has been burnt by the oven or by the person cooking, and so it
has a passive role. In the second example, my sister is also not the agent of
the verb exhaust. Instead, exhausted is used to describe how she feels.
236

Perfect 
participle 
phrase
(Having + past participle)
When we want to emphasize that one event happened before another, we
can use the structure having + past participle, also known as the perfect
participle. For example:
• “Having seen the movie before, I wouldn’t want to see it again.”
• “Having done a lot of exercise this morning, we should eat a big lunch.”
• “She was exhausted, having stayed up all night watching TV.”
Sentence Placement
Initial position
When a participle or participle phrase occurs in the initial position, it is
usually separated from the rest of the sentence by a comma. For example:
• “Running to the car, the boy welcomed his father home after three
months away.”
• “Singing in the shower, I was oblivious to the doorbell ringing.”
• “Scared, my sister slept with the light on.”
Middle position
When the participle or phrase occurs in the middle position, and is not
essential to the meaning of the sentence, it should be set apart from the rest
of the sentence by two commas. For example:
• “My sister, exhausted, has fallen asleep on the sofa.”
• “James, hiding under the bed, was completely silent.”
• “The turkey, burnt to a crisp, was thrown in the garbage.”
However, if it occurs in the middle position and is essential to the meaning of
the sentence, it should not be set apart by commas. For example:
• “The students finished with their work may have a break.”
• “Jackets left behind will be donated.”
237

• “Participants breaking the rules will be removed from the competition.”
Final position
If the participle or phrase occurs in the final position immediately after the
noun that it modifies, it doesn’t need a comma. For example:
• “We looked for hours and finally found James hiding.”
• “The cat had no interest in the poor dog wagging its tail.”
• “I was in such a hurry I didn’t notice my jacket left on the table.”
However, when it occurs in final position but not immediately after the
noun that it modifies, it does need a comma. For example:
• “It was obvious he really enjoyed dinner, having had a second helping
of dessert.”
• “My sister cried as she packed up her belongings, saddened at the idea
of moving out of her childhood home.”
• “Most of the puzzle pieces have disappeared, misplaced after so many
years.”
Common mistakes
When we use participles as adjectives, it’s important that the noun modified
is clearly stated and that the participle appears as close to it as possible.
Otherwise, we run the risk of errors known as misplaced modifiers and
dangling modifiers.
Misplaced modifier
A misplaced modifier can occur when there is more than one noun in the
sentence. If we don’t place the participle close enough to the noun that it
modifies, it may seem that it modifies another noun. For example:
• “Terrified after watching a scary movie, my father had to comfort my
little sister.”
In the above sentence, the participle phrase terrified after watching a scary
movie is supposed to modify my little sister. However, since my father
appears closer to the participle phrase, it seems it is the father that is
terrified. The sentence should be rewritten to correct the misplaced modifier.
For example:
238

• “My father had to comfort my sister, terrified after watching a scary movie.”
or
• “Terrified after watching a scary movie, my sister had to be
comforted by my father.”
or
• “My sister, terrified after watching a scary movie, had to be
comforted by my father.”
Dangling modifier
A dangling modifier occurs when we don’t clearly state the noun that is
supposed to be modified by the participle. For example:
• “Walking down the road, the birds were singing.”
Because the sentence does not state who was walking down the road, is
seems that it was the birds, which probably is not the intended meaning. The
sentence needs to be rewritten to correct the dangling modifier. For example:
• “Walking down the road, I heard the birds singing.”
Using participles as gerunds
The present participle is also used to create gerunds. A gerund is a form of a
verb that can be used as a noun, functioning as a subject, complement, or
object of a sentence. For example:
• “Swimming is my favorite sport.” (subject)
• “My brother’s favorite sport is cycling.” (complement)
• “Do you enjoy running?” (object)
Using participles in verb tenses
Both present and past participles are used along with auxiliary verbs to form
multi-part verb tenses.
The present participle in verb
tenses
The present participle is used to form the past, present, and future
239

continuous tenses.
Present Continuous
The present continuous tense is mainly used for stating an action that is
taking place at the moment of speaking, or an action that will take place in
the near future. It is formed using the present tense of the auxiliary verb be +
the present participle of the main verb. For example:
• “I’m singing.”
• “He’s running.”
• “We’re hiding.”
Past Continuous
The past continuous tense is primarily used to describe an action that
took place over a period of time in the past, especially if interrupted by
another action. It is formed using was (the past tense of the auxiliary verb
be) + the present participle of the main verb. For example:
• “I was singing in the shower when the doorbell rang.”
• “She was eating dinner when I called.”
• “They were helping their mom clean the house all day.”
Present perfect continuous
The present perfect continuous tense is mainly used to describe an
action that has recently taken place and still has an effect on the present. It
places the emphasis on the duration of the action rather than the result. It is
formed using have/has + been + the present participle form of the main
verb. For example:
• “I have been singing loudly, so my throat’s sore.”
• “I think she’s been crying—her eyes are really red.”
• “They’ve been running for 20 minutes already.”
Past perfect continuous
The past perfect continuous tense is used to describe an action that
began in the past, and continued until another point in the past. It is formed
240

using had + been + the present participle form of the main verb. For
example:
• “They had been singing for two hours when the concert finished.”
• “She had been waiting for a bus for a long time when I saw her.”
• “I had been reading my book for about 20 minutes when I realized it was
time to leave.”
Future Continuous
The future continuous tense is used to describe an action that will be in
progress at a certain point in the future. It is formed using will + be + the
present participle form of the main verb. For example:
• “Tomorrow at eight o’clock I will be waiting for my flight.”
• “Don’t call at six o’clock because they’ll be having dinner.”
• “She’ll be driving all afternoon tomorrow.”
Future Perfect Continuous
The future perfect continuous tense is used to describe an action that
will continue up until a certain point in the future. It emphasizes the
duration of the action, and is formed using will + have + been + the present
participle form of the main verb. For example:
• “At eight o'clock I’ll have been waiting here for an hour.”
• “She’ll have been living in New York City for 10 years next month.”
• “We will have been working on this project for three weeks as of
tomorrow.”
The past participle in verb tenses
The past participle is used in forming the present, past, and future simple
perfect tenses.
Present Perfect
The present perfect tense is used to describe an action or experience in
the recent past that still has an effect on the present. It is similar to the
present perfect continuous, but instead of placing the emphasis on the
241

duration of the action, it subtly emphasizes the result. It is formed using
have/has + the past participle form of the main verb. For example:
• “I have eaten already.”
• “I’ve spent all my money.”
• “She hasn’t been here before.”
Past Perfect
The past perfect tense is used to describe an action that was completed in
the past, prior to another past action. It is formed using had + the past
participle form of the main verb. For example:
• “I had eaten when she called.”
• “Why did you visit Las Vegas again when you had been there before?”
• “She had cooked dinner and had it waiting on the table when we got
home.”
Future perfect
The future perfect tense is used to describe an action that will be
completed at a certain point in the future. It is formed using will + have +
the past participle form of the main verb. For example:
• “When you get here, we’ll have eaten already.”
• “They’ll have finished by late tonight.”
• “The baby will have woken up by six o’clock tomorrow morning.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Participles are used to form ________.
a) adjectives
b) gerunds
c) verb tenses
d) A & B
e) all of the above
2. The present participle ends in ________.
242

a) “-ed”
b) “-ing”
c) A & B
d) none of the above
 
3. Which of the following words is not a past participle?
a) been
b) eaten
c) ran
d) sung
 
4. Complete the following sentence:
“________ under the bed, the dog was terrified of the thunder.”
a) Having hiding
b) Have hidden
c) Hid
d) Hiding
 
5. Which of the following sentences is punctuated correctly?
a) “James, scared he was going to fail the test, stayed up all night studying.”
b) “James scared he was going to fail the test, stayed up all night studying.”
c) “James, scared he was going to fail the test stayed up all night studying.”
d) “James scared he was going to fail, the test stayed up all night studying.”
Action Verbs
Definition
Action verbs (also known as dynamic verbs) are verbs that are used to
explain what the subject of a sentence is actively doing. For example, ran,
swim, jump, move, look, and catch are all action verbs. Here are some
examples of action verbs being used in sentences:
• “The man stretched his arm before he threw the baseball.”
• “The kittens leaped from the table to the chair.”
• “After she dove into the water, the swimmer raced to the other side of the
pool as fast as she could.”
243

• “A boy rolled down the hill on a skateboard.”
• “Before it stopped for a break, the horse ran for five miles.”
Importance to sentences
Consider the following sentences:
• “The train is on the track.”
• “The gazelles are in the field.”
Neither of these sentences contains a verb that describes an action the
subject is taking. Instead, they use the stative verb be to describe the
conditions or states of being of the subjects. However, adding action verbs
helps to identify what the subject of the sentence is actively doing:
• “The train raced along the track.”
• “The gazelles are galloping in the field.”
Action verbs can also dramatically impact the meaning of the sentence. They
not only say what the subject is doing, but can also demonstrate the manner
in which the subject is doing it. For example, consider the following
sentence:
• “Susie sat on the couch at the end of her work day.”
The action verb sat lets the reader know that Susie moved from a standing
position to a sitting position on her couch. The following sentence also tells
the reader this information, but the different choice of action verb provides
more meaning to the sentence:
• “Susie collapsed onto her couch at the end of the work day.”
In this sentence, the action verb collapsed not only indicates that Susie
moved from a standing position to a resting position, but that the transition
was much more dramatic. This could be used to illustrate that Susie was very
tired or perhaps not feeling well. In any case, it provides a more descriptive
action than sat.
Here is another example of similar action verbs providing different
information:
• “The man tossed the stone to the side of the path.”
• “The man heaved the stone to the side of the path.”
In both of the above sentences, the man is moving the stone off the path.
244

However, the action verb tossed implies that the stone was light enough to
throw, while heaved indicates that the stone was very heavy. As you can see,
by changing the action verb, we have significantly changed the sentence’s
meaning.
Difference from other verb types
All sentences require a verb to be complete, but it does not have to be an
action verb: there are also stative verbs, linking verbs, and auxiliary verbs.
Stative verbs
Unlike action verbs, stative verbs indicate the state or condition of the
subject, such as thoughts or opinions (agree, recognize, doubt),
possession (own, possess, belong, have), emotion (love, hate, like, fear,
enjoy), or senses (seem, look, hear, taste, feel).
We can see how no action is being described by these verbs in the following
examples:
• “I own 10 cars.”
• “The kids love to play outside in the summer.”
• “Janet feels that we should go home.”
You may have noticed that some of the stative verbs can function as action
verbs in certain contexts. In this case, a simplified rule for identifying if a
verb is stative or active is to conjugate the verb into one of the continuous
tenses (by using its present participle) and see if the sentence still makes
sense.
For example:
✔ “I own 10 cars.”
✖ “I am owning 10 cars.” (incorrect—stative verb)
✔ “I see your point.”
✖ “I am seeing your point.” (incorrect—stative verb)
However:
✔ “I am seeing a movie later.” (correct—action verb)
(There are some exceptions and peculiarities in English around this rule, but
it is a good starting point for differentiating stative and action verbs. Go to
the section on Stative Verbs to learn more.)
245

Linking verbs
Linking verbs are a subset of the stative verbs we looked at above—they also
describe condition or state as opposed to an action. Linking verbs are used to
connect a subject to an adjective or phrase that describes it. For example:
• “She is smart.”
• “They seem very strong.”
• “This soup tastes funny.”
Auxiliary verbs
Auxiliary verbs are verbs that precede stative, linking, or action verbs to help
complete their meaning. For example:
• “They should run faster.”
• “You can see the lake from the porch on the lake house.”
• “I have been thinking about a new method for the project.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following words is an action verb?
a) is
b) can
b) jump
d) shall
 
2. Identify the action verb in the following sentence.
“I think the man who delivers our mail is cute.”
a) think
b) is
c) who
d) delivers
 
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain an action verb?
a) “I hope to possess my own company some day.”
b) “He jumped from the rooftop into the pool.”
246

c) “She has been smiling at me from across the classroom.”
d) “Let’s drive to the mountains for the weekend.”
 
4. Action verbs are also known as which of the following?
a) stylistic verbs
b) state verbs
c) dynamic verbs
d) holding verbs
Stative Verbs
Definition
Stative verbs (also known as state verbs) are verbs that describe a static
condition, situation, or state of being. They are contrasted with action
verbs (also called dynamic verbs), which describe an active, dynamic
action that can be performed by a person or thing.
Stative verbs can be in the present, past, or future tense; however, because
they describe static conditions, they are usually unable to progress through
time, and they therefore cannot be used when forming the continuous or
progressive forms of verb tenses. For this reason, they are sometimes
referred to as non-continuous verbs or non-progressive verbs.
However, some stative verbs can be used in a continuous tense in certain
situations, as when describing a temporary state that has begun and will end.
This is becoming more common in modern English, and the prescriptive rule
that stative verbs can never be continuous is becoming less strict. We’ll look
at some of these exceptions in the sections below.
Types of stative verbs
Linking verbs are usually used as stative verbs; these include the verb be
and the verbs of the senses. Other verbs that are considered stative are
those that express emotions, possession, cognition, and states or qualities.
Below, we’ll look at common examples of different types of stative verbs. As
we will see, certain verbs can be either dynamic or stative, depending on
their use and context in a sentence.
(It’s important to note that the sections below do not contain exhaustive lists
247

of stative verbs; they are only meant to provide illustrative examples.)
To be
The verb be is the most common linking verb. It is used for describing
general characterizations, sensations, measurements, location, or to rename
the subject.
For example:
“You are wrong.”
“It was hot yesterday.”
“I am not hungry.”
“They were confused.”
“I can tell that you are upset.”
“Our daughter is one week old.”
“She is five feet tall.”
“John is in the other room.”
“This is a lost cause.”
Using the continuous form
However, the linking verb be can function as an action verb when it is used
to mean “to behave.” We can test whether be is acting as a stative or action
verb by putting it into one of the continuous tenses. For example:
✔ “The children are being too noisy.” (Correct—it is an action verb.)
✖ “The children are being outside.” (Incorrect—it is a stative verb.)
Sense verbs
Verbs of the senses, or “sense verbs” for short, are used to indicate
perceptions based on physical or mental sensations. The sense verbs are:
taste
smell
sound
seem
feel
look
248

appear
When sense verbs are used as linking verbs, they merely relate the means by
which the speaker has arrived at such a sensation about the subject. We pair
them with predicative adjectives.
For example:
“I feel terrible today.”
“You sound tired.”
“She didn’t sound Irish.”
“You look fabulous today.”
“He doesn’t look very happy.”
“This doesn’t seem right.”
“The car appears OK, but I’ll have to drive it to be sure.”
“That smells nice.”
“This milk tastes strange.”
Using the continuous form
Note, however, that some of the sense verbs can take the continuous tense to
describe a temporary state in some contexts; they are more common in more
casual speech and writing. For example:
• “You are looking great, Suzy!”
• “It is seeming less likely by the day that we will succeed.”
The sense verb feel is unique, though, in that it is very often used in the
continuous form when talking about one’s or someone else’s health, as in:
• “I’m not feeling well at all.”
• “Are you feeling OK, John?”
Certain sense verbs also function as action verbs in other contexts, and
these can take the continuous form. For example:
• “I was feeling gently around the table in the dark.”
• “The guards are sounding the alarm!”
• “What’s that delicious food I am smelling?”
• “He was looking across the table at me.”
• “Birds have been appearing out of nowhere.”
249

• “He is tasting the soup to decide whether it need salt.”
Verbs of emotion
Verbs that describe our emotions about something are also considered
stative. These transitive verbs take nouns, noun phrases, gerunds, and
sometimes infinitives as their objects. Here are some common examples
using stative verbs of emotion:
“She likes old movies.”
“My son loves to read.”
“I enjoy walking along the beach.”
“I hate to eat dinner alone.”
“The kids dislike sharing their toys.”
“I prefer salad to French fries.”
“I don’t mind eating vegetables.”
Most of the time, a verb of emotion can take either a gerund or an infinitive
with little to no difference in meaning. However, an infinitive sometimes
refers to a potential activity, while a gerund refers to an activity in general.
Other verbs of emotion, such as enjoy or don’t mind, can’t take the infinitive
at all:
✖ “I enjoy to play tennis.” (incorrect)
✔ “I enjoy playing tennis.” (correct)
✖ “I don’t mind to work on my own.” (incorrect)
✔ “I don’t mind working on my own.” (correct)
Using the continuous form
As with the sense verbs, we can sometimes use verbs of emotion in the
continuous form to describe an ongoing but temporary sensation. However,
such uses are generally quite informal. For example:
• “We are loving this neighborhood.”
• “I’m liking our chances of winning the championship.”
• “I’m hating the second season of this show.”
Although enjoy is a verb of emotion, it is often used in the continuous form
and is not considered informal. For instance:
250

• “He is enjoying his newfound wealth.”
• “Are you enjoying your meal?”
However, there are still some verbs of emotion that generally do not take a
continuous form, as in:
✖ “She is preferring her old school.” (incorrect)
Verbs 
of 
possession 
and
attribution
Possession and attribution are static actions, not dynamic ones. Verbs that
refer to ownership are considered stative and do not take the continuous
form. For example:
“I have a large house.”
“She owns three cars.”
“That stereo belongs to me.”
“They have a large family.”
“He holds several postgraduate degrees.”
“She possesses a great wealth of knowledge.”
Using the continuous form
We often find some of these verbs used in the continuous forms, but their
meanings are different and they are functioning as action verbs instead, as
in:
• “You’re not holding on to the hammer tight enough!” (Hold means “to
grip with one’s hands” in this context.)
• “He thinks that a ghost is possessing him.” (Possess means “to gain
control or power over” in this context.)
• “She’s having a baby in a few months.” (Have means “to give birth to” in
this context.)
• “They’re having a party next door.” (Have means “to arrange or carry out”
in this context.)
However, if the verb is indicating possession or attribution, we cannot use it
in a continuous form:
251

                  ✖ “I am having a large house.” (incorrect)
                  ✖ “She is owning three cars.” (incorrect)
                  ✖ “That stereo is belonging to me.” (incorrect)
                  ✖ “They are having a large family.” (incorrect)
                  ✖ “He is holding several postgraduate degrees.” (incorrect)
                  ✖ “She is possessing a great wealth of knowledge.”
(incorrect)
Verbs of cognition
Verbs of mental cognition, such as understand, know, recognize,, or think,
are generally used as stative verbs and do not take continuous forms. For
example:
✔ “I understand the issue.” (correct)
✖ “I am understanding the issue.” (incorrect)
✔ “She knows Janet very well.” (correct)
✖ “She is knowing Janet very well.” (incorrect)
Using the continuous form
Some verbs of cognition can be stative or dynamic, depending on the context.
If they can correctly be used in a continuous form, they are expressing a
dynamic action. For example:
• “I consider my options before I make a decision.” 
✔ “I am considering my options before I make a decision.” (correct—
action verb)
• “I consider myself a rational person.”
✖ “I am considering myself a rational person.” (incorrect—stative verb)
• “They thought of an answer.”
✔ “They were thinking of an answer.” (correct—action verb)
The stative verb understand, however, has some informal uses in which the
continuous form is often considered acceptable, as in:
• “I’m sorry, I’m not understanding your question.”
• Am I understanding you correctly?”
252

Verbs of states or qualities
Besides the linking verb be and the verbs of the senses, we can use other
verbs, such as weigh, depend, involve, owe, or consist, to describe the state
or qualities of something. For example:
✔ “He weighs 160 pounds.” (correct)
✖ “He is weighing 160 pounds.” (incorrect)
✖ “This report involves multiple sites across the world.” (correct)
✖ “This report is involving multiple sites across the world.” (incorrect)
✔ “Your happiness depends on doing something you enjoy.” (correct)
✖ “Your happiness is depending on doing something you enjoy.”
(incorrect)
✔ “John owes me 20 dollars!” (correct)
✖ “John is owing me 20 dollars!” (incorrect)
✔ “The book consists of research from several prominent scientists.”
(correct)
✖ “The book is consisting of research from several prominent scientists.”
(incorrect)
Using the continuous form
Some of these verbs can be dynamic or stative, depending on the context and
the way they are used. When the verb is describing an attribute of the
subject, it functions as stative verb (as we saw above). When the verb
describes an action taken by the subject, though, it is functioning as an
action verb, as in:
• “He is weighing each bag before delivery.”
• “I am involving a number of people in this project.”
The phrasal verb depend on, however, is always stative, but we often find it
being used in the continuous form, especially when its subject is a person.
For instance:
• “We are depending on you to get this done in time.”
Continuous Forms vs. Gerunds
With so much emphasis placed on whether or not a stative verb is able to use
253

one of the continuous forms, it is important to distinguish between
continuous forms and gerunds.
The continuous (or progressive) forms refer to six specific verb tenses:
present continuous tense, present perfect continuous tense, past
continuous tense, past perfect continuous tense, future continuous
tense, and future perfect continuous tense. These all use the present
participles of verbs to express an action that is continuously (or
progressively) happening. Generally speaking, only action verbs can take
the continuous forms. (Although, as we’ve seen above, there are many
exceptions to and interpretations of this rule.)
Gerunds, on the other hand, refer to the “-ing” form of the verb when it is
used as a noun. When a gerund takes additional information as part of its
predicate, the entire phrase (known as a gerund phrase) functions as a
noun. Any verb, even a stative one, can be used as a gerund. For example:
• “Knowing your own weaknesses will help you become stronger.”
• “I enjoy being in Paris.”
• “What I like most is reading in a quiet room.”
• “Loving one’s work is a rare but wonderful accomplishment.”
Because the gerund and present participle of a verb look identical, it can
often be confusing to determine how a verb is behaving. However, just
remember that if the verb and its constituent parts are functioning as a noun
would in a sentence, then it is a gerund; if it is describing an action that the
subject is performing, then it is a present participle used to create a
continuous tense.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is the function of a stative verb?
a) To describe a dynamic action taken by the subject
b) To describe a condition that must be met for something to happen
c) To describe the subject’s state of being
d) To modify the meaning of other verbs
2. In general, which of the following is something a stative verb cannot do?
a) Be used as a gerund
254

b) Be used in a continuous form
c) Be used in the future tense
d) Take a direct object
3. Which of the following cannot be used as a stative verb?
a) think
b) seem
c) exercise
d) have
 
4. Which of the following is not another name for stative verbs?
a) State verbs
b) Non-continuous verbs
c) Non-progressive verbs
d) Non-finite verbs
 
5. True or False: The linking verb be is always considered a stative verb?
a) True
b) False
Linking Verbs
Definition
Linking verbs (also known as copulas or copular verbs) are used to
describe the state of being of the subject of a clause. Unlike action verbs
(also called dynamic verbs), they connect the subject to the predicate of
the clause without expressing any action.
To be
The verb to be is the most common linking verb. Unique among English
verbs, be has eight different conjugations: be, am, is, are, was, were, been,
and being. It can link the subject to an adjective (known as a predicative
adjective) that describes it, or to a noun, noun phrase, or pronoun that
renames it. These are collectively known as subject complements.
255

General descriptions
We can use nearly any adjective after be to describe the subject. For example:
• “You are wrong.”
• “It is cold today.”
• “It was hot yesterday.”
• “The team is terrible this year.”
• “They were fortunate to have won.”
• “She has been so stubborn.”
• “He is really annoying.”
Physical or emotional sensations
Be is very often used to describe a sensation belonging to the subject. These
can be physical, as in:
• “I am cold.”
• “We are thirsty.”
• “They were tired.”
Be can also describe emotional sensations:
• “He is sad.”
• “He has been anxious lately.”
• “I can tell that you are upset.”
Precise physical descriptions
Be is also used for specific physical descriptions of the subject, such as exact
age, weight, or height.
Age
When we describe a subject’s age, we can express it simply as a number, as
in:
• “I am 32.”
• “Our daughter is one.”
256

We can also use a unit of time between the number and the adjective old, as
in:
• “I am 32 years old.”
• “Our daughter is one week old.”
(However, we cannot use only the number and years or the number and old
—“I am 32 years” and “Our daughter is one old” are both incorrect.)
Height
For height, we usually use the number, the unit, and the adjective tall all
together, as in:
• “They are five feet tall.”
• “He is two meters tall.”
If we are using feet and inches as our units, there are a number of ways that
we can write the sentence without using the adjective tall. These are
especially prevalent in informal English. For example:
• “He is six foot.”
• “She is five foot three.”
• “I am five feet, three inches.”
Weight
When describing the subject’s weight with be, we only use the number + the
unit of measurement, as in:
• “I am 185 pounds.”
• “This brick is four kilograms.”
With prepositional phrases
A linking verb can also be followed by a prepositional phrase that acts as
an adjective to describe the subject. These usually describe the subject’s
location, though they can be used to provide other descriptions as well. For
example:
• “John is in the other room.” (John is physically located in the other
room.)
257

• “I will be away from the office this week.” (I will not be present in the
office this week.)
• “They are against this plan.” (They do not agree with or support this
plan.)
Renaming the subject
We can also follow the linking verb be with a predicate noun, noun phrase, or
pronoun that renames or re-identifies the subject. These add a descriptive
element, without directly functioning as adjectives. For example:
• “She is a bully.”
• “That’s him; that’s the man we were looking for.”
• “They are a lost cause.”
• “I have been a mess lately.”
Be as an auxiliary verb
We must be careful not to confuse how be functions as a linking verb with
how it functions as an auxiliary verb. When it is used as an auxiliary, be is
no longer an independent verb describing the subject of the sentence.
Instead, it helps other verbs to create the continuous tenses or to change the
voice of the writing.
Creating verb tenses
Be frequently functions as an auxiliary verb by combining with the present
participle of a verb to form one of the continuous tenses. For example:
• “I am listening to you.” (present continuous tense)
• “She was working very hard.” (past continuous tense)
• “They will be waiting for you at the airport.” (future continuous tense)
Passive voice
We can also use be as an auxiliary to create the passive voice. For example:
• “The book was written by an anonymous author.”
• “The victory will be savored for years.”
258

• “The hospitals were built in 1805.”
Sense verbs
Certain verbs are used to indicate perceptions, opinions, or bodily sensations.
These are known as verbs of the senses, or “sense verbs” for short. The
sense verbs are:
• taste
• smell
• sound
• seem
• feel
• look
• appear
Sense verbs merely relate the means by which the speaker has arrived at
such a sensation about the subject. When we use them like this, they are
functioning as linking verbs (rather than action verbs) and we pair them
with predicative adjectives. (However, unlike be, we do not follow sense
verbs with predicative nouns, noun phrases, or pronouns.)
For example:
• “I feel terrible today.” (A feeling inside of being very unwell.)
• “You sound tired.” (A perception of tiredness in your voice.)
• “She didn’t sound Italian.” (An opinion based on the way her voice
sounds.)
• “You look fabulous today.” (This is my opinion when I look at you.)
• “He doesn’t look very happy.” (This is my opinion based on what he
looks like. Note that the adverb very is modifying the adjective happy, not
the verb look.)
• “This doesn’t feel right.” (An opinion or perception of something not
being as it should.)
• “The car appears OK, but I’ll have to drive it to be sure.” (From what I can
see, the car looks like it’s in good condition.)
• “That smells nice.” (Sensation of a pleasant aroma.)
• “This milk tastes funny*.” (Sensation of an odd or unpleasant taste.)
(*The adjective funny has two meanings. It can describe something that
259

makes you laugh, or something that is strange, unpleasant, dubious, or not
as it should be. It carries the latter meaning in the above example.)
If any of these verbs were used as action verbs, they could no longer be
followed by an adjective—they would instead be modified by an adverb. For
example:
• “I felt gently around the table in the dark.” (Describes the action of feeling
with one’s hand.)
• “He looked quickly to the right.” (Describes the action of looking in a
certain direction.)
• “The car appeared out of nowhere.” (Describes the action of coming
into sight, using a prepositional phrase as an adverb.)
• “Yes, you heard right!” (Right in this case is an adverb meaning
“accurately or correctly.”)
Verbs of progression
Verbs that show progression, growth, or development are also often used as
linking verbs. Become is a prime example of this kind of verb—it links an
adjective that describes a development or progression by the subject. Here
are some other verbs that can function as linking verbs in a similar way:
• get
• grow
• prove
• remain
• turn
As with the sense verbs, these can be followed by an adjective that describes
the subject. For example:
• “The crowd grew quiet.”
• “The kids are becoming restless.”
• “I hope you get well soon.”
• “Try to remain upbeat.”
• “Hopefully things don’t turn ugly.”
These verbs can sometimes be followed by nouns, noun phrases, or pronouns
that rename or re-identify the subject, as in:
• “The leader became a dictator after so many years in power.”
260

• “He’ll always remain my friend.”
• “They have proven valuable allies.”
Linking verbs vs. action verbs
The verbs be, seem, and become are always used as linking verbs (except
when be is an auxiliary verb, as we looked at already). However, the other
linking verbs all have the capacity to behave as action verbs in a sentence.
Sometimes it is tricky to know whether a verb is functioning as a linking verb
or as an action verb, but there are ways that we can be sure.
Checking the predicate
The predicate of a linking verb is, by definition, an adjective, noun, noun
phrase, or pronoun that directly describes, renames, or re-identifies the
subject of the clause.
If we want to see if a verb is functioning as a linking verb, we can simply
check whether the predicate that follows is describing the subject. If it is,
then it is a linking verb; if it is not, then it is functioning as an action verb.
For example:
• “He looked unwell yesterday.” (Linking verb—the predicate unwell
yesterday describes the subject of the clause, he.)
• “He looked quickly to the right.” (Action verb—the predicate quickly to
the right describes the action of the verb.)
• “I hope you get better soon.” (Linking verb—the predicate better soon
describes the subject of the clause, you.)
• “Would you please get a glass of water for me?” (Action verb—the
predicate a glass of water is the direct object of the verb.)
Replacing the verb with be
If we are still not certain about the kind of verb we’re dealing with, we can
also try replacing the verb in question with be. Because be is only a linking
verb when it functions on its own, the resulting sentence will only make
sense if the original verb was also a linking verb.
Let’s look at the two sets of examples above, this time replacing the verb in
each case with be:
• “He looked unwell yesterday.” 
261

• “He was unwell yesterday.” (The sentence makes sense, so the verb looked
was a linking verb.)
• “He looked quickly to the right.” 
• “He was quickly to the right.” (The sentence no longer makes sense, so the
verb looked was an action verb.)
• “I hope you get better soon.” 
• “I hope you are better soon.” (The sentence makes sense, so the verb get
was a linking verb.)
• “Would you please get a glass of water for me?” 
• “Would you please are a glass of water for me?” (The sentence no longer
makes sense, so the verb get was an action verb.)
Sources of confusion – Good vs.
Well
A common stumbling block for native speakers and learners of English alike
is the correct usage of good versus well.
In most instances, good is an attributive adjective directly describing a noun,
while well is an adverb describing a verb, adjective, or other adverb. For
example:
• “He is a good driver.”
• “She writes well.”
We cannot use good and well interchangeably in these instances, and we can
see immediately that the following would be incorrect:
✖ “He is a well driver.”
✖ “She writes good.”
However, well can also function as a predicative adjective, where it usually
means “healthy” or “not ill.” We use it in this sense after linking verbs such as
be, get, or the sense verbs we looked above:
• “Jenny looks well lately.” 
• “Get well soon!”
In these examples, well does not modify the verbs, but rather describes the
subjects of the clauses (implied in the second example).
Good can be used as a predicative adjective as well, meaning “of a high or
262

satisfactory quality.” This can be used after linking verbs to talk about an
opinion of something, an emotional state, or general well-being (as opposed
to physical health, specifically). For example:
• “The movie was good.” (opinion of the quality of the movie)
• “I’m feeling good about my chances!” (emotional state)
• “Janet looks good lately.” (opinion of Janet’s appearance)
• A: “How are you, Bob?” B: “I’m good, thanks!” (general well-being)
The last example is perfectly correct, and it is very frequently used as a stock
response to the question “How are you?” You could also say “I’m well,” and
no one is likely to take issue with it. However, if someone asks how you are
after an illness or injury, for instance, it would be better to respond with “I’m
well.”
If saying “I’m good” still does not sound quite right to you, you could also say
“I am doing well,” in which case well is used adverbially once more.
You can learn more about such adjective/adverb oddities in the irregular
adverbs section of the chapter on Adverbs.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is described or modified by the predicate of a
linking verb?
a) The verb
b) The direct object of the verb
c) The subject of the verb
d) The clause
2. A prepositional phrase that follows a linking verb does which of the
following?
a) Acts as an adverb modifying the verb
b) Acts as an adjective modifying the subject
c) Acts as an adjective modifying the direct object of the verb
d) Acts as an adverb modifying the entire clause
3. Which of the following can be the predicate of a linking verb of the
senses?
263

a) A predicative adjective
b) A predicate noun
c) An adverb
d) A prepositional phrase
 
4. Which of the following can be the predicate of a linking verb of
progression?
a) A predicative adjective
b) A predicate noun
c) An adverb
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) B & C
 
5. What kind of linking verb is used in the following sentence?
“I’m not sure why, but David seems a bit unhappy today.”
a) To be
b) Sense verb
c) Verb of progression
d) None of the above
 
6. If we are unsure whether a verb is an action verb or a linking verb, which
kind of verb can we use as a subsitute to check?
a) To be
b) Sense verb
c) Verb of progression
d) None of the above
Light Verbs
Definition
Light verbs (also known as delexical verbs, thin verbs, semantically
weak verbs, or empty verbs) are verbs that do not carry unique meaning
on their own, but instead rely on another word or words that follow them to
become meaningful.
Because of this, light verbs can have a great variety of meanings, depending
264

on the word(s) with which they are paired. Sometimes, the meaning of
different light verbs can overlap if they share a common predicate.
Common examples of light verbs include do, have, make, get, take, and give,
though there are others that can work the same way.
Using Light Verbs
Light verbs function by pairing with a word or words (usually, but not
always, a noun or noun phrase) to achieve their meaning. The verb itself
does not contribute very much meaning to the sentence; rather, we know
what is meant by the word it’s paired with. For example:
• “Do your homework!”
• “We did some jumping jacks to warm up.”
• “I hope you do well on your exam.”
• “Why don’t we have something to eat?”
• “I took a shower before breakfast.”
• “She’s taking a nap right now.”
• “Do you take sugar in your coffee?”
• “Give me a break!”
• “Give your father a kiss before you go to bed.”
• “I get so many emails every day.”
• “Let’s try to get warm by the fire.”
• “Stop making such a fuss!”
• “Be sure to make your bed after you get up in the morning.”
In each of these examples, the verb itself does not describe a specific, unique
action. We only know what’s happening because of the word or words that
are collocated with the verb.
Shared meaning
In some cases, we can even use different light verbs to achieve the same or
very similar meaning; this is particularly true for the verbs have and take.
For example:
• “I’m going to have a shower.”
265

• “I’m going to take a shower.”
• “OK, everyone, let’s have lunch!”
• “OK, everyone, let’s take lunch!”
• “She’s having a nap right now.”
• “She’s taking a nap right now.”
However, this can also occur with other light verbs. For instance:
• “Be sure to take a bow at the end of the performance.”
• “Be sure to make a bow at the end of the performance.”
• “Will you get a photo of all of us together?”
• “Will you take a photo of all of us together?”
• “Did you get some breakfast?”
• “Did you have some breakfast?”
Full Verbs and Auxiliary Verbs
Most verbs carry a unique semantic meaning of their own, and they do not
rely on any additional predicate information to make sense. When contrasted
with light verbs, these are sometimes known as full verbs or heavy verbs.
Auxiliary verbs, meanwhile, are similar to light verbs in that they do not
carry meaning on their own; however, unlike light verbs, these work with
other verbs to create a complete, unique meaning. Auxiliary verbs are used to
create different verb tenses, to make a verb negative, or to express
modality—that is, to assert (or deny) possibility, likelihood, ability,
permission, obligation, or future intention.
Certain light verbs function as full verbs depending on how they are used;
likewise, do and have can function as either auxiliary verbs or light verbs. For
example:
• “Let’s take some lunch to a park.” (full verb, meaning “bring to a place”)
• “Let’s all take a break.” (light verb, reliant on break for meaning)
• “I like to make toy figurines in my spare time.” (full verb, meaning “to
create or assemble”)
• “I’m afraid I made a terrible mistake in hiring him.” (light verb, reliant on
mistake for meaning)
• “Did you see the game last night?” (auxiliary verb, serves to modify the
verb see to create an interrogative sentence)
• “John did a few jobs for me this summer.” (light verb, dependent on the
266

noun jobs for meaning)
• “She had heard the rumors already.” (auxiliary verb, serves to modify the
verb heard to create the past perfect tense)
• “She had a snooze after lunch.” (light verb, dependent on the noun
snooze for meaning)
Common Light Verbs
Unfortunately, the only way to become familiar with the various meanings
and uses of light verbs is to study them in a dictionary or to come across
them in day-to-day speech and writing.
Below, we’ll look at some examples using four particularly common light
verbs that have a variety of different meanings—do, make, get, and take.
Each sentence will be accompanied by an explanation of the light verb’s
meaning.
Do
Do is used for general actions; these actions are dictated by the word or
words that follow do.
• “You can play if you do your homework.” (finish or complete your
homework)
• “Will you please do the dishes?” (wash the dishes)
• “Will you please do the washing up?” (This is a British English expression
with the same meaning as “do the dishes.”)
• “I hope you do well on your exam.” (perform well; in this context, do
relies on an adverb for its meaning)
• “He was always willing to do someone a favor.” (give or perform a
favor)
• “My husband always does the cooking.” (prepare and cook food)
• “I’m trying to avoid doing the ironing.” (iron clothes)
• “John, will you do the dusting?” (clean the dust from the furniture and
around the house)
• “It always falls on me to do the housework.” (clean and tidy up around
the house)
• “She has to do her hair before we go.” (style her hair)
267

• “I hope you can continue to do business together.” (engage in or
perform business activities)
Make
As a light verb, make carries the general meaning of “create” or “assemble”;
the specific meaning comes from what accompanies the verb.
• “I made many mistakes in my exam.” (commit errors)
• “Be sure to make your bed after you get up in the morning.” (put in
order or neaten the sheets, covers, and pillows on one’s bed)
• “After years of fighting, they decided to make peace.” (achieve,
arrange, produce, or attain a state of peace)
• “My mother is going to make a chocolate cake tonight.” (prepare
and/or bake a cake)
• “I just need to make dinner.” (prepare and cook dinner)
• “I made friends with my new neighbors.” (earn or acquire the
friendship of the neighbors)
• “You need to make a decision.” (form or arrive at a decision)
• “The neighbors make so much noise.” (create a lot of noise)
• “He made an excellent speech at his brother’s wedding.” (orally
perform or deliver a speech)
• “Have you made any plans for the summer yet?” (form or establish
plans)
• “He called the restaurant and made a reservation for four.” (arrange or
establish a reservation)
• “You would make a great teacher!” (be suited for the role of a teacher)
• “He really made a good impression at the job interview yesterday.”
(achieve or produce a good impression)
• “I will make an exception this time.” (allow an exception)
• “This doesn’t make any sense to me.” (to be coherent or intelligible)
• “Make it a priority to turn off the gas before you go out.” (establish it as a
priority)
• “I’m making a fortune in my new job.” (earn a large amount of money)
268

• “It will make a big difference to the house if we paint all the rooms
white.” (create or amount to a significant difference)
Get
Get is a particularly versatile verb. For example, it can mean any of the
following depending on the context: fetch, obtain, understand, answer,
receive, hit, be, become, hear, understand, earn, buy, win, secure,
reach/arrive at, cause, convince, open, or succeed.
We are entirely dependent upon what is collocated with get to know which
meaning it carries:
• “I get so many emails every day.” (receive emails)
• “I got good grades on my exams.” (obtain/earn good grades)
• “How do you get to the station from here?” (reach/arrive at the station)
• “I got a really good price for the car I sold.” (obtain a good price)
• “We managed to get an excellent deal.” (secure an excellent deal)
• “He didn’t laugh at the joke because he didn’t get it.” (understand it (the
joke))
• “I didn’t get the job because I didn’t have the right qualifications.”
(succeed in obtaining the job)
• “How much do you get per month in your new job?” (earn what
amount?)
• “Did you get these shoes at the new mall?” (buy the shoes)
• “She got a medal for coming in first.” (win/be awarded a medal)
• “I can’t get the children to go to bed early.” (convince or force the
children)
• “I finally got the computer to work again after it had crashed.” (cause the
computer to work)
• “Can you get the phone, please?” (answer the phone)
• “My hands are full; could you get the door for me?” (open the door)
• “Sorry, I didn’t get your name.” (hear/understand your name)
• “I got really sick while I was on vacation, but I’m feeling a lot better now.”
(became sick)
269

• “He got arrested for robbing a bank.” (was arrested)
• “The bullet got him in the head.” (hit him)
Take
As a light verb, take broadly means have, obtain, or use, but it has some
other specific meanings in certain circumstances:
• “Let’s all take a break.” (have a brief rest)
• “Would you like to take a walk?” (engage in a walk)
• “We’ll take a taxi home.” (use a taxi to travel)
• “I have to take the bus into town.” (use the bus to travel)
• “Don’t forget to take your medicine.” (ingest your medicine)
• “He’s taking an exam in the morning.” (complete an exam)
• “Will you take notes for me in class today?” (write notes)
• “He’s been so sick that we’ve had to take his temperature every hour.”
(obtain (through measurement) his temperature)
• “It might not work, but I’m willing to take that chance.” (behave or act
in a risky way)
• “Hey, come here and take a look at this!” (examine or view this)
• “We’ll just have to take your word for it.” (trust in what you say)
• “She took a seat near the back.” (assume occupancy of a seat)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following do light verbs rely on for their meaning?
a) The subject
b) The predicate
c) The full verb
d) The auxiliary verb
2. Identify the light verb in the following sentence:
“I’m hoping to train with the Olympic squad this summer, but I am not sure
they will take me.”
a) hoping
270

b) train
c) am
d) will
e) take
3. Which of the following is not another name for light verbs?
a) delexical verbs
b) hollow verbs
c) empty verbs
d) thin verbs
4. True or False: Sometimes different light verbs can have the same meaning
if they have the same predicate.
a) True
b) False
5. Which of the following can be both a light verb and an auxiliary verb?
a) have
b) get
c) make
d) take
271

Phrasal Verbs
Definition
Phrasal verbs are verb phrases that have idiomatic meanings—that is, their
meaning is not obvious from the individual words that make up the phrase.
Because of this, we have to learn what they mean by understanding them in
context.
In this section, we’ll look at how phrasal verbs are formed and how they are
distinct from prepositional verbs, and then look at a list of common phrasal
verb examples.
Constructing Phrasal Verbs –
Particles vs. Prepositions
Phrasal verbs are made up of a verb + a preposition or an adverbial
particle, and their meaning is uniquely tied to each particular combination.
A particle is very similar to a preposition—in fact, they are almost always
identical in appearance. (There are a few words that will only function as
particles in verb phrases: away, back, out, backward, forward, upward, and
downward.)
However, particles are used more like adverbs, modifying and uniquely
expanding the meaning of the verbs they are paired with. For this reason,
particles are sometimes referred to as adverbial particles, or even just
adverbs. The key difference between particles and prepositions, however, is
that particles do not (and cannot) introduce a prepositional phrase, while
the preposition in a phrasal verb always will.
Below, we’ll look at some examples of phrasal verbs that use particles,
prepositions, and combinations of both.
Particle Phrasal Verbs
• “My table takes up too much room.” (The table occupies too much space.)
Takes up is made up of the verb take + up. Up changes the meaning of the
verb, but it does not introduce a prepositional phrase expressing direction,
location, time, or possession—therefore, it is functioning as a particle.
272

• “Please look over the proposal and let me know what you think.” (Please
quickly examine the proposal.)
Again, the particle over is changing the meaning of the verb look, but it is not
introducing a prepositional phrase.
Here are some other examples of phrasal verbs formed with particles:
• “I can’t believe that you’re giving up!” (I’m surprised that you’re going to
stop trying.)
• “There will always be setbacks that we have to allow for.” (We always have
to consider and be ready for possible setbacks.)
• “We have to wait for the fire to die down before we can enter the
building.” (We have to wait for the fire to become less intense.)
• “The plane took off an hour late.” (The plane rose into the air and began to
fly later than scheduled.)
• “She is always making up excuses.” (She is always inventing excuses that
are not true.)
• “When I am on the bus, I always give up my seat to the elderly.” (I vacate
my seat and give it to an older passenger.)
Preposition Phrasal Verbs
As we’ve seen, a phrasal verb can be formed from a preposition when that
preposition acts as the head of a prepositional phrase, followed immediately
by its object. For example:
• “He has been looking after his mother.” (He has been caring for his
mother.)
• “I came across that old watch of mine when I was cleaning out the
drawers.” (I found my old watch unexpectedly.)
• “Stop picking on your brother like that!” (Stop teasing or harassing your
brother in that way.)
We can see that, in each of the above, the phrasal verb is comprised of a verb
+ a preposition—the preposition always forms a prepositional phrase with the
object of the phrasal verb.
Particle-prepositional 
phrasal
273

verbs
Some phrasal verbs have both a particle and a preposition. These are
sometimes known as particle-prepositional phrasal verbs. All three elements
—verb, particle, and preposition—act together to form a unique meaning.
For example:
• “She comes across as a really confident person.” (She gives the
impression of being confident by the way she acts.)
In this context, across functions as a particle, while as functions as a
preposition, introducing the prepositional phrase as a really confident
person.
• “You’re going too fast, so I can’t keep up with you.”
The phrasal verb here is made up of the verb keep + the particle up + the
preposition with. Up changes the meaning of the verb keep, while with
introduces the prepositional phrase with you.
Let’s look at some other examples.
• “I’ll make sure that she doesn’t get away with her plan.” (I’ll make sure
she is caught and/or punished.)
• “A substitute teacher has been filling in for Mr. Davis all week.” (The
substitute teacher is taking the place of Mr. Davis.)
• “I’ve been trying to cut back on junk food lately.” (I’m trying not to eat as
much junk food as I had been before.)
Differentiating prepositional and
particle verb phrases
Intransitive verbs
Because a preposition in a phrasal verb must always form a prepositional
phrase, the phrasal verb must be transitive because it requires a direct
object. Therefore, if a phrasal verb is intransitive, we can assume that it is
formed from a verb and a particle. For example:
• “Please don’t give up.”
• “I know you want me to lie, but I just wasn’t brought up that way.”
274

• “I hope that my idea came across well.”
None of the above phrasal verbs has a direct object, and so each one is
intransitive and a particle phrasal verb.
Transitive verbs
When phrasal verbs are transitive, they always take direct objects. This can
make it difficult to tell whether a particle or prepositional phrasal verb is
being used. However, there is a quick test that we can perform to be sure.
First, we substitute a personal pronoun for the object of the phrasal verb.
If it can be arranged before the particle/preposition and still make sense,
then a particle is being used; if it has to come after to make sense, then a
preposition is being used. Phrasal verbs that can be divided by objects are
commonly referred to as being separable; those that cannot be divided are
known as being inseparable.
Let’s look at this in one of our previous examples:
• “Please look over the proposal and let me know what you think.”
It might seem as though over does in fact introduce a prepositional phrase:
over the proposal. However, if we substitute the personal pronoun it for the
proposal, we can see that the object can come immediately after the verb:
• “Please look it over and let me know what you think.”
Therefore, look over is a particle phrasal verb and is considered separable.
Let’s look at another example to see when this can’t be done:
• “He has been looking after his mother.”
Using the personal pronoun her instead of his mother, the sentence now
reads:
• “He has been looking after her.”
Now let’s try rearranging it in the sentence:
✖ “He has been looking her after.” (incorrect)
We can see that the sentence no longer makes sense: the object, her, must
follow the phrasal verb and form a prepositional phrase to be logically
complete. Therefore, look after is a prepositional phrasal verb and is
inseparable.
Transitive 
and 
Intransitive
275

Phrasal Verbs
Finally, some phrasal verbs can be both transitive and intransitive,
depending on which idiomatic meaning is being used.
Consider these sets of examples that use the same phrasal verb:
• “I was a bit of a skinny kid, but I filled out nicely during high school.”
(Intransitive, meaning “to become larger or fuller in one’s figure.”)
• “Make sure that you fill out the form correctly.” (Transitive, meaning “to
complete (a document) by providing the required information.”)
• “The two friends made up after their bitter argument.” (Intransitive,
meaning “to reconcile or resolve a quarrel.”)
• “Please stop making up excuses.” (Transitive, meaning “to fabricate or
invent.”)
Prepositional verbs vs. phrasal
verbs
Sometimes, a prepositional verb may be mistaken for a phrasal verb.
Although both combinations appear to be very similar, you can differentiate
them by examining their meaning. Prepositional verbs use the literal
meanings of verbs, whereas phrasal verbs tend to be idiomatic.
For example, the meaning of the verb ask doesn’t change when combined
with the preposition for; however, it changes dramatically when combined
with the particle out:
• “Kelly asked for a raise.” (The literal meaning of to ask is to inquire. Kelly
inquired about a raise, making it a prepositional verb.)
• “Kelly asked out Chad.” (Ask out means to invite someone on a date,
making it an idiomatic phrasal verb.)
We can see this difference even more clearly with a set of examples that use
the same verb-preposition pairing:
• “They sailed through the waters with plenty of time to spare.”
• “They sailed through their exams with plenty of time to spare.”
Both examples use the verb sail + the preposition through. However,
because the first sentence uses the literal meaning of sail, we know it is a
276

prepositional verb—the preposition is merely describing the movement of the
verb, without changing the meaning of the verb itself. If, for instance, we
change the sentence to “They sailed along the coast,” the meaning of sail
does not change.
The verb phrase of the second sentence, however, has the idiomatic
meaning of “to complete with ease and speed.” It can only have this meaning
if sail and through are paired together. Changing the preposition would also
completely change the meaning of the verb phrase; therefore, it is
functioning as a phrasal verb in this context.
Recognizing 
Common 
Phrasal
Verbs
The only way to truly feel comfortable with phrasal verbs is to recognize
them in everyday writing and speech, understand their unique meanings,
and then begin to use them in the same way in your own writing and speech.
With that in mind, head to the section on Common Phrasal Verbs to see
an extensive list of examples of common phrasal verbs as they are used in
both spoken and written English.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a component of a phrasal verb?
a) verb
b) particle
c) participle
d) preposition
 
2. What is the primary difference between prepositional verbs and phrasal
verbs?
a) Prepositional verbs have a literal meaning; phrasal verbs have an idiomatic
meaning.
b) Prepositional verbs have an idiomatic meaning; phrasal verbs have a
literal meaning.
c) Prepositional verbs are always transitive; phrasal verbs are always
intransitive.
277

d) Prepositional verbs are always separable; phrasal verbs are always
inseparable.
 
3. What do prepositions do that particles cannot do in phrasal verbs?
a) Come after the object of the verb
b) Create a unique meaning of the verb
c) Make the phrasal verb transitive
d) Introduce a prepositional phrase
4. Identify the phrasal verb in the following sentence.
“It appears to me that you have thoroughly mucked up the case again.”
a) appears to
b) have thoroughly
c) mucked up
d) case again
5. Which of the following can be separable in a sentence?
a) intransitive phrasal verbs
b) transitive particle phrasal verbs
c) transitive prepositional phrasal verbs
d) particle-prepositional phrasal verbs
Common Phrasal Verbs
Learning common phrasal verbs
As we saw when we looked at how phrasal verbs are formed, their
meanings tend to be completely idiomatic—you cannot guess what they
mean simply by looking at their individual components.
Unfortunately, the only way to learn phrasal verbs is by encountering them
in speech and writing, until you become familiar enough with them that you
are able to use them yourself.
Below, we’ll look at an extensive list of example sentences that use common
verbs to create various phrasal verbs. The meaning of each phrasal verb
will be beside each sentence, but remember: phrasal verbs often have several
completely unrelated meanings. It’s best to check a reliable dictionary to
learn their other meanings.
278

This is also not by any means an exhaustive list—there are several hundred
different phrasal verbs in English. For one of the largest dictionaries of
idioms and phrasal verbs, go to The Free Dictionary’s Collection of Idioms
and Phrases at idioms.thefreedictionary.com.
Phrasal verbs with be
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
be about to
To intend to do or be near to
doing 
something 
in 
the
immediate future
“Hi Johnny, I was about
to call you.”
be 
after
(someone)
To be hunting, looking for,
and/or 
chasing 
after
(someone)
“The police are after a
man who robbed a bank
yesterday.”
be 
after
(something)
To want (something) from
someone
“He’s being so nice to me
these days. He is after
something, for sure.”
be down to
To 
have 
an 
amount 
of
something reduced to a lower
or minimal number
“After months of dieting, I
am down to 190 pounds.” 
“I am down to my last
dollar.”
be down to
To be the result of or primarily
caused by something
“A large number of diseases
are 
down 
to 
genetic
traits.”
be 
down
with
To be suffering from, as a
disease or illness
“I can’t go to work today
because I am down with
the flu.”
be in
To be present in a given
location
“I’m afraid Molly is not in
at the moment.” 
“I will let you know as soon
as the doctor is in.”
279

be into
To like something very much;
to be particularly enthusiastic
about something
“I’m really into this band
right now.”
be over
To be finished, ended, or
complete
“The worst is over. He
should start to recover in a
few days.” 
“It’s over between us; we
can’t 
see 
each 
other
anymore.”
be out of
To no longer have something
“Sorry, but we are out of
coffee at the moment.”
be up
To be at a higher level
“The price of gas is up
again.”
be up
To be occurring, especially in
reference 
to 
strange 
or
noteworthy events
“Something is up; the staff
are all acting strange.”
be up
To be awake and out of bed
“John’s not up yet. He’s
still sleeping.”
be 
up
against
To meet or contend with
difficulties or impediments
“I’m up against a lot of
competition these days.”
be up to
To be someone’s decision or
responsibility
“For now, the planning
stage is up to you.”
be up to
To be in the midst of doing or
planning
“I am going to see what the
children are up to.”
be up to
To 
be 
capable 
of 
doing
(something) competently
“We’ll have to fire him. He
isn’t up to the job.”
Phrasal Verbs with come
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
280

come
across
To find unexpectedly
“I came across that old watch of
mine when I was cleaning out the
drawers.”
come
across
To 
give 
a 
certain
impression through the
way one acts
“She comes across as a really
confident person.”
come
into
To 
acquire, 
especially
through 
inheritance 
or
chance
“John has been buying some flashy
cars lately. He must have come
into a bit of money.”
come up
with
To think of, develop, or
invent
“I’m finding it difficult to come up
with new ideas.”
come up
against
To meet and be forced to
deal 
with 
some
impediment, obstacle, or
difficulty
“We’ve come up against several
political and legal problems.”
come
down
with
To 
catch 
or 
become
infected with, as a virus or
disease
“I don’t feel very well today. I think
I’ve come down with the flu.”
come
(a)round
To change one’s mind
about 
and 
agree 
to
something 
after 
some
persuasion or time
“Your father doesn’t want you to
have a dog, but give him a day or
two and I’m sure he’ll come
(a)round.”
come
back to
To be recalled in one’s
memory
“I couldn’t remember her name,
but after a few minutes it came
back to me.”
Phrasal Verbs with get
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
get over
To recover from or feel better
about some sad or traumatic
event
“I can’t seem to get over the
death of my cat. I feel sadder
as the days go by.”
281

get over
To believe, understand, or no
longer 
be 
surprised 
by
something
“I can’t get over the way she
spoke to me. She has no
manners whatsoever.”
get on
To have an easy, friendly
relationship with someone; to
be 
on 
good 
terms 
with
someone
“My husband and I get on so
well together.”
get away
To escape, as from trouble,
danger, or pursuit
“The police tried to catch the
bank 
robbers 
but 
they
managed to get away.”
get away
with
To avoid blame, responsibility,
or 
conviction 
for 
some
wrongdoing
“The criminal got away with
the 
crime. 
There 
wasn’t
enough evidence to convict
him.”
get 
out
of
To find a way of avoiding
having to do, confront, or deal
with something
“How can I get out of this
mess I'm in.”
get
(a)round
to
To find the time to do or
complete something that one
has been meaning to do
“I 
still 
haven’t 
gotten
(a)round to fixing the broken
shutter.”
get back
To return, usually home
“What time did you get back
last night?”
get rid of To dispose of something that is
no longer needed or wanted
“I want to get rid of that old
mattress.”
get
through
to
To 
make 
contact 
with
someone, especially by phone
“I can’t get through to Sally.
Her phone has been busy all
morning.”
get
through
to
To make someone understand
or comprehend something
“It is difficult to get through
to him—he never listens to a
word you say.”
get
through
to
To advance to a higher stage in
a competition
“We won in overtime and
managed to get through to
the finals.”
282

 
Phrasal Verbs with give
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
give away
To donate something;
to bestow something
upon someone
“He’s a generous man. He gives
away half of his salary to charity each
month.”
give away
To present the bride
to 
the 
groom,
traditionally by the
bride’s father
“In some countries, it is the custom
for the father of the bride to give his
daughter away at the wedding.”
give back
To return something
to someone
“Can you give back that book I lent
you?”
give in (to
something)
To surrender (to) or
stop 
resisting
(something)
“No matter how much they try to get
you to accept a lower offer, don’t give
in.”
“If you are on a diet, it's hard not to
give in to temptation.”
give in
To collapse
“The floor gave in after the flood.”
give out
To 
distribute 
to
others
“Can you give out these books to the
rest of the class please?”
give up
To relinquish one’s
position to someone
else
“When I am on the bus, I rarely see
anyone give up their seat to the
elderly.”
give up
To 
stop 
doing
something, 
often
permanently
“The doctor has told me to give up
smoking.”
give up
To abandon
“After searching for hours on end, the
mountain rescue team finally gave
up all hope of finding the missing
hikers.
283

 
Phrasal Verbs with look
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
look
into
To investigate
“The police are looking into
reports of a robbery last night.”
look up
To 
find 
or 
seek
information, as from a list
or some reference source
“Can you look up John’s phone
number for me please?”
look
forward
to
To anticipate with pleasure
or excitement
“I am looking forward to seeing
my family again after six months of
living abroad.”
look out
To pay attention to or be
careful 
of 
something,
especially danger
“Look out, there’s a car coming!”
look
after
To take care of or be
responsible for someone or
something
“Can you look after my cat while
I’m away?”
look
down
on
To regard as inferior
“My neighbors look down on us
because we have less money.”
look on
To observe as a spectator
“The crowd looked on as the
firemen tried to put out the fire.”
look
over
To examine or inspect
“He carefully looked over the
contract before signing it.”
look up
to
To admire and respect
“She really looks up to her boss.
He has taught her many things.”
Phrasal Verbs with break
284

Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
break
down
To stop functioning
“My car broke down on the
highway today.”
break
down
To 
become 
very 
emotionally
upset; to begin crying
“She broke down when she
was told her cat had died.”
break
up
To end a romantic relationship
“Have you heard the news?
Sally and John broke up.”
break
into
To force entry
“Burglars broke into my
house last night.”
break
away
from
To 
become 
free 
from 
some
restriction or restraint
“The police caught one of the
burglars, but he managed to
break away from them.”
break
out
To escape from some confinement
or imprisonment
“The other burglar was put in
prison, but he managed to
break out.”
break
out
To appear or begin suddenly and
spread quickly
“An epidemic of flu has
broken out.”
break
out in
To have a large amount of
something, 
usually 
a 
skin
condition, appear suddenly and
spread quickly
“My face has broken out in
pimples, and I look terrible.”
break
even
To achieve a result with no loss or
gain in profit
“The company broke even
this year.”
 
Phrasal Verbs with pick
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
pick up
To go and collect someone or
something, especially by car
“Can you pick up the children
after school?”
285

pick up
To receive, as a radio signal
“My cell phone never picks up a
signal when I’m in the house.”
pick up
To attempt to find or become
acquainted with someone for
romantic or sexual purposes
“He always wants to go pick up
girls at bars.”
pick on
To deliberately harass or tease
someone
“You’re always picking on me,
and I wish you would stop.”
pick on
To select or choose someone
“The teacher always picks on
Jane. She never gives the other
students a chance to answer.”
Phrasal Verbs with put
Phrasal Verb
Definition
Example sentence
put out
To 
extinguish
something, such as a
flame
“We have to put out the fire
before it spreads to the rest of
the house.”
put out
To put an animal
outside the house
“Would you put the cat out
for a while?”
put
(someone/oneself)
out
To 
inconvenience
someone or oneself
on someone else’s
behalf
“It would be great if you could
do this for me, but don’t put
yourself out.”
put (someone) up
To host (someone)
in one’s house
“I can put you up for the
weekend, but no longer than
that.”
put up with
To tolerate
“He couldn’t put up with her
any longer.”
put up with
To make something
available to be sold
“They’ve put up their house
for sale.”
put in
To spend or invest,
especially time
“He puts in 12 hours at work
every day.”
286

put off
To delay doing or
commencing
something
“See if you can put the
meeting off for an hour. We
still need more time.”
put (someone) off
To make someone
uninterested in or
disinclined 
to 
do
something
“The sight of the octopus
really put me off my food.”
put aside/away
To save for future
use
“I’ve 
put 
away/aside
enough 
money 
to 
retire
early.”
put aside for
To 
reserve
something 
for
someone 
until 
a
later time
“Could you put this blouse
aside for me.”
put through to
To connect someone
with another person,
usually 
via
telephone
“Could you put me through
to the manager please?”
put through
To subject someone
to 
something
unpleasant 
or
undesirable
“This 
job 
has 
put 
me
through so much already.”
put away
To store in or return
to 
the 
proper
location
“Can you please put away all
those books lying around?”
put down
To mock, belittle, or
make 
to 
appear
foolish
“She’s always putting her
boyfriend down.”
put down
To 
euthanize 
an
animal
“Our poor cat is so old that we
have to have him put down.”
put on
To add to or increase
the amount of
“I’ve put on a lot of weight
recently.”
put on
To pretend or act
“He seems angry, but I know
he’s just putting it on.”
287

put (someone) on
To deceive or tease
someone
“I really thought I had won
the prize. I can’t believe he
was putting me on the whole
time!”
put down
To pass a telephone
to someone
“Give me one second, and I’ll
put him on.”
 
Phrasal Verbs with run
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
run
into
To encounter someone
by chance
“I ran into an old friend of mine
yesterday while I was out shopping.”
run out
of
To exhaust the supply
of something
“We’ve run out of coffee again. Could
you get some on your way home?”
run up
To 
accrue 
or
accumulate, especially
indebtedness
“He ran up a huge bill at dinner.”
run
away
with
To hurriedly leave with
someone else, as to
elope
“His husband ran away with the
secretary.”
run
over
To 
hit 
someone 
or
something 
with 
a
vehicle, usually a car
“He’s still very upset after running
over the cat last night.”
run
through
To 
quickly 
discuss,
summarize, or outline
“OK, can we just run through the
main points again?”
run to
To immediately seek
assistance 
from
someone
“He always runs to 
his 
mother
whenever he’s in trouble.”
run on
To be powered by
“Those new cars run on electricity, but
they are so expensive.”
288

run up
against
To 
encounter 
an
obstacle, difficulty, or
problem
“The company ran up against some
problems initially, but now things are
operating smoothly.”
 
Phrasal Verbs with take
Phrasal
Verb
Definition
Example sentence
take up
To begin, especially a
hobby or pastime
“I’m thinking of taking up a new
hobby.”
take up
To occupy, such as space
or time
“I’m going to buy a smaller table. This
takes up too much room.”
take up
Of clothes, to shorten or
tighten
“My new pants are too long for me.
I’m going to have to them taken up
a bit.”
take to
To have a newfound liking
or appreciation for
“The boss has really taken to the
new intern.”
take
out
To 
obtain 
a 
legal
agreement, 
such 
as
insurance or a financial
loan
“I’ve taken out an insurance policy
on my house.”
take
over
To obtain control of
“The company has been taken over
by a Spanish corporation.”
take off To leave the ground and
begin flight
“You’ve just missed the plane: it took
off a few minutes ago.”
take off To remove an article of
clothing
“Take off your jacket. It’s hot in
here.”
take off To become successful or
popular
“Business has really taken off this
year.”
take off
To not go to work or
school for a certain period
of time
“I’m really tired. I’m going to take a
day off tomorrow.”
289

takes
after
To be similar in character
or appearance to a close
relative
“He takes after his father in his love
of tennis.”
take
back
To return something to
the place where it was
purchased
“My new cell phone doesn’t work. I’m
going to take it back tomorrow and
ask for a refund.”
take on
To recruit or employ
“Why don’t you apply for a job at the
new phone company? They are
taking on new staff.”
take on
To agree or commit to
doing something
“I’ve taken on too much work. How
will I ever find the time to finish it
all?”
take in
To give shelter and/or
assistance
“She’s a very kind person. She always
takes in stray dogs that she finds in
the street.”
As we said already, there are hundreds of different phrasal verbs in English.
If you would like to learn more about the different meanings of phrasal
verbs, as well as some interesting idioms and proverbs, go to The Free
Dictionary’s 
Collection 
of 
Idioms 
and 
Phrases 
at
idioms.thefreedictionary.com.
Conditional Verbs
Definition
Conditional verbs are constructions of verbs that are used in conditional
sentences. Conditional sentences express something that might happen,
depending on whether or not a particular condition is met. The word if is
commonly used with one of the verbs to denote such a condition in
conditional sentences.
Here are some examples of conditional verbs being used in sentences.
• “The leaves will fall if the wind blows.”
• “If you drive on this road for 20 miles, you will reach your destination.”
• “If only the striker had shot the ball earlier, he would have scored a
290

goal.”
• “If you do your chores, you can have an ice cream cone later.”
• “You can get a good grade if you study very hard.”
Constructing conditional verbs
Conditional verbs are typically formed when a clause in the sentence
contains the word if, and the action of the sentence depends on the condition
established by this clause. Modal auxiliary verbs (such as can, will,
would, shall, should, and could) are often used to help indicate the tense and
intention of the verbs in the conditional or resulting clause(s). For example
• “If you see the desert, it could mean that you have gone too far.
• “If you see her, you can tell her I said ‘Hello.’”
• “If I could be anyone in history, I would be Leonardo da Vinci.”
Tenses
Conditional verbs can be in the past, present, or future tense. Which tense
they take depends on whether the sentence is referring to a condition or
possible result in the past, the present, or the future. Conditional sentences
often feature a mix of tenses depending on the relationship between the
condition and the result.
Past tense
The past tense is used for conditional verbs when the sentence refers to an
action or event that might have happened in the past depending on a
hypothetical past condition. For example:
• “She would have succeeded if she had tried harder.”
• “The cake would have been ready if the baker had hurried up a little bit
more.”
Present simple tense
A conditional sentence that is only in the present simple tense refers to
something that always happens when a condition is met. For example:
• “The television turns on if you press the power button.”
291

• “The car moves faster if you press the pedal down harder.”
Future tense
The future tense is used to describe hypothetical future results. It is often
used with conditions in the present tense to describe what might happen.
For example:
• “If our team wins the World Series, it will be amazing.”
• “The sheep will escape if the fence is left unlocked.”
Types of Conditionals
There are different types of conditionals that express a range of hypothetical
information depending on the combination of verb tenses used in the
conditional sentence.
Zero conditional
The zero conditional refers to conditional sentences in which the “if clause”
and the main clause both contain conditional verbs that are in the simple
present tense. It is used to talk about facts that are always true.
First conditional
First conditional sentences contain a conditional verb in the simple present
tense in the “if clause,” and a future tense verb preceded by the auxiliary verb
will in the main clause. First conditional sentences explain a hypothetical
result in the future depending on a non-real condition in the present.
Second conditional
Second conditional sentences include a simple past tense verb in the “if
clause” and a future tense verb in the main clause, preceded by the auxiliary
verb would. These sentences refer to things that would happen in the future
if something else happens.
Third conditional
Third conditional sentences have a past perfect verb in the “if clause” and
have a past participle verb in the main clause, preceded by the auxiliary verbs
292

would have. Third conditional sentences describe a hypothetical situation or
condition in the past that might have led to a different outcome in the
present.
If you want to learn more about these types of sentences, see the
Conditional Sentences section in the chapter on Sentences.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which word in the following sentence is a conditional verb?
“If clouds form on the horizon, it will likely rain.”
a) likely
b) If
c) form
d) will
e) rain
f) A, B, & C
g) C, D, & E
2. The conditional verbs in the following sentence are in which tense?
“The pie will taste delicious if you make it properly.”
a) past
b) present
c) future
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) None of the above
3. Which set of conditional verbs is in the past tense?
a) had played
b) will run
c) is walking
d) will drive
4. Which word in the following sentence is not a conditional verb?
“The band will have played for three hours if it plays for another 20
minutes.”
293

a) will
b) if
c) have
d) played
 
5. Identify the conditional verbs in the following sentence.
“If everything goes according to plan, the group will arrive on Tuesday.”
a) everything, goes, plan
b) goes, then, will
c) according, will, arrive,
d) goes, will, arrive
Causative Verbs
Definition
Causative verbs indicate that a person, place, or thing is causing an action
or an event to happen. Causative verbs are followed by a noun or pronoun
and a non-causative verb in either the infinitive or base form; these non-
causative verbs describe the action that the subject has caused to happen.
Examples of causative verbs include the words enable, cause, have,
force, let, keep, hold, got and require. Here are some examples of
causative verbs being used in sentences.
• “He let his dog run through the field.”
• “You got to go to the basketball game last night?”
• “The bigger house enabled the family to have more room for their
belongings.”
• “The new dress code forced the students to wear different shoes.”
• “The landlord kept his property to rent out to many different tenants.”
Tense
Because the non-causative verb is always in the infinitive form, the tense of
the sentence depends on the conjugation of the causative verb. Causative
verbs can take the past, present, or future tense. Here are some examples
of each:
294

Past
• “The woman caused the accident to occur by driving carelessly.”
• “The law required a person to obtain a permit before hunting on public
land.”
Present
• “The store holds certain items on layaway to sell to particular customers at
a later date.”
• “They get a tax break on any purchases related to the business.”
Future
• “The manager of the store will force her employees to work shorter hours
in order to cut costs.”
• “They will allow the company to install more solar panels on their roof.”
Causative verbs with other verbs
in the sentence
As previously mentioned, the non-causative verbs that follow causative verbs
explain the action that is being caused in the sentence. Depending on the
causative verb that’s used, these non-causative verbs will either be in the
infinitive or base form of the verb, or, in certain circumstances, the past
participle form.
Infinitives
Infinitives are base-form verbs that are preceded by the particle to—for
example, to run, to see, to climb, etc. The majority of causative verbs are
paired with infinitives to complete their meaning, as in:
• “He forced himself to train harder.”
• “The woman holds on to her past memories to remember all the good
times she had.”
• “The government is requiring all citizens to carry identification at all
295

times.”
Base form
Base-form verbs appear exactly as they would in the infinitive, except they
are not preceded by the word to—they are not conjugated for tense in any
way. Only three causative verbs pair with the base form of the verb instead of
an infinitive: have, make, and let. For example:
• “They let the light stay on until morning.”
• “Albert made people remove their shoes when entering his house.”
• “She had him prepare lots of finger foods before the guests arrived.”
There is an exception to these, however: when we use the passive voice
with make, it will take the infinitive rather than the base form, as in:
• “I’m sorry, but I was made to report my suspicions to police.”
• “Employees are often made to feel responsible for the company’s financial
woes.”
Past participles
Uniquely, the causative verbs have and get are also able to take the past
participle of non-causative verbs if they themselves are in the past tense.
For example:
• “My mother had the car cleaned after our soccer practice.”
• “John’s drinking problem finally got him fired.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following words is a causative verb?
a) climb
b) enable
c) manage
d) face
2. Identify the causative verb in the following sentence:
“They kept their snowblower to use whenever it snowed outside.”
a) snowed
296

b) whenever
c) to use
d) kept
3. Which of the following is not a causative verb?
a) bounce
b) have
c) let
d) force
4. The causative verb in this sentence is in what tense?
“The couple forced themselves to save money so they could buy their dream
home.”
a) base
b) present
b) past
d) future
5. True or false: Causative verbs require another verb in a sentence?
a) true
b) false
Factitive Verbs
Definition
Factitive verbs are used to indicate the resulting condition or state (known
as the object complement) of a person, place, or thing (the direct object)
caused by the action of the verb. Examples of factitive verbs include elect,
appoint, make, choose, deem, assign, name, select, judge, and designate.
Here are some examples of factitive verbs used in sentences:
• “The populace elected him president of the United States.”
• “The committee named Mr. Fuller chairman of the board.”
• “The jury judged the defendant not guilty.”
• “She deemed him a person of high quality.”
• “The group designated Marshall leader from then on.”
297

• “The coach made Timothy point guard.”
Direct 
Objects 
and 
Object
Complements
Factitive verbs have both direct objects and object complements. Direct
objects are phrases, clauses, nouns, and pronouns that directly receive the
action of the verb.
Object complements are adjectives, nouns, or pronouns that follow direct
objects in order to indicate what the direct object's new state is. In other
words, object complements reveal what the direct object has become.
Factitive verbs always indicate that the direct object has been changed or
placed into a new condition, state, or category as indicated by the object
complement.
To understand this concept, consider the following sentence:
• “The company appointed the most experienced employee manager.”
In this sentence, appointed is the factitive verb, the most experienced
employee is the direct object, and manager is the object complement.
Appointed is a factitive verb because it indicates that someone is having his
or her status changed. The most experienced employee is the direct object
because he or she is receiving the action of the verb, while manager is the
object complement because it indicates what the direct object has become.
Here is another example:
• “The team made the star quarterback the new captain.”
In this sentence, made is a factitive verb acting directly upon the star
quarterback, its direct object. The new captain is the object complement,
indicating what the star quarterback was designated as.
Role in sentences
Factitive verbs serve the purpose of helping to answer the question of how a
person, place, or thing was changed. For example, consider the following
sentence, which does not have a factitive verb:
✖ “The school hired Mrs. McMillian principal.”
In this sentence, the verb hired is not sufficient to convey all of the intended
298

information. However, the following sentence uses a factitive verb to make it
clear:
✔ “The school appointed Mrs. McMillian principal.”
By changing hired to the factitive verb appointed, it becomes clear that Mrs.
McMillian (the direct object) was made principal. Thus, the factitive verb
appointed successfully serves its role in the sentence. Here are two more
comparisons of sentences to illustrate this concept:
✖ “The organization brought in Brad Ryan chief executive officer.” (non-
factitive)
✔ “The organization named Brad Ryan chief executive officer.” (factitive)
The addition of a factitive verb reveals the status or characteristic being given
to someone or something. In this case, Brad Ryan is being given the status of
chief executive officer. The non-factitive verb brought in does not indicate
this change at all, so the meaning of the sentence becomes incomplete or
obscure.
✖ “The builder constructed the house more modern.” (non-factitive)
✔ “The builder made the house more modern.” (factitive)
Once again, the non-factitive verb constructed describes a straightforward
action, and so is unsuited to indicating a categorical change in something. By
using made, we can clearly see the intended relationship between the direct
object, house, and the object complement, more modern.
Difference 
from 
linking 
and
causative verbs
Factitive verbs are similar to linking and causative verbs. However, there are
some important differences.
Linking verbs
Linking verbs link a subject to a noun or adjective that describes it. Linking
verbs include words such as appear, seem, and become, as well as various
forms of be. For example:
• “She appears cold.”
• “He is a very tall man.”
299

• “The group seems interested in the discussion”
Linking verbs and factitive verbs both tie a subject to another part of speech
that provides more information about it. However, unlike factitive verbs,
linking verbs do not reveal that a person, place, or thing is being made,
named, or deemed something else. Instead, they only add information about
the subject as it already exists.
Causative verbs
Causative verbs require that another action be mentioned in the sentence,
thus forcing the sentence to have at least one other verb. Enable, cause,
have, force, let, keep, hold, and require are all examples of causative verbs.
Here are some examples of causative verbs being used in sentences:
• “She was required to bring a pen and paper to her physics class.”
• “His mom let him go sledding on his snow day.”
• “The parents forced their child to tie his shoes.”
Like linking verbs, causative verbs also tie a subject to other parts of the
sentence that reveal more about the subject. In this way, they serve a similar
function to factitive verbs. However, unlike factitive verbs, causative verbs
simply cause another action to be described in the sentence. They do not
describe a change in the subject’s category, status, or characteristics like
factitive verbs do.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following words is not a factitive verb?
a) elect
b) assign
c) jump
d) appoint
 
2. Identify the factitive verb in the following sentence:
“The board of trustees met on Friday and appointed Ralph leader.”
a) leader
b) met
c) trustees
300

d) appointed
 
3. What is the direct object of the factitive verb in the following sentence?
“Americans elected Abraham Lincoln president in the year 1860.”
a) Abraham Lincoln
b) Americans
c) president
d) the year 1860
 
4. Which of the following words is a factitive verb?
a) be
b) designate
c) swim
d) sing
 
5. In what way are linking verbs different from factitive verbs?
a) Linking verbs reveal an action.
b) Linking verbs sometimes take an object complement.
c) Linking verbs do not reveal that a person, place, or thing is being made or
deemed something else.
d) Linking verbs link a subject to another part of the sentence.
Reflexive Verbs
Definition
Reflexive verbs are verbs whose subjects are also their direct objects—that
is, the action of the verb is both committed and received by the same person
or thing. Reflexive verbs are sometimes identified as being in the “middle
voice” (as opposed to the active voice or the passive voice).
Identifying reflexive verbs
Verbs with reflexive pronouns
Reflexive verbs can most easily be identified by the use of reflexive
pronouns, which are used as the direct object and refer back to the subject
301

of the sentence.
For example:
• “I accidentally burned myself with the hairdryer.” (Myself refers to the
subject, I.)
• “The baby is smiling at herself in the mirror.” (Herself refers to the
subject, the baby.)
• “The problem seems to have worked itself out in the end.” (Itself refers
to the subject, the problem.)
When the same verb is paired with an object that is not a reflexive pronoun,
then the verb is no longer considered reflexive.
For example, consider how the first two examples change if we use non-
reflexive pronouns:
• “I accidentally burned him* with the hairdryer.” (Him refers to a second
person who is not the subject, I.)
• “The baby is smiling at her in the mirror.” (Her refers to a second person
who is not the subject, the baby.)
(*When the subject is I, we might be tempted to use the personal pronoun
me, as in, “I accidentally burned me with the hairdryer,” but this is
grammatically incorrect.)
In the third example, it would not make sense to use a different pronoun
because the subject, the problem, is inanimate and cannot have agency over
a separate direct object.
Reflexive 
verbs 
with 
implied
objects
Certain reflexive verbs can also have reflexive pronouns as direct objects that
are implied and therefore omitted from the sentence. For example:
• “My father is shaving in the bathroom.” (with the reflexive pronoun
himself implied)
• “She always stretches before doing yoga.” (with the reflexive pronoun
herself implied)
• “Children, please keep quiet!” (with the reflexive the pronoun yourselves
implied)
302

Intransitive 
verbs 
in 
the
“middle” voice
While the majority of reflexive verbs are transitive, with reflexive pronouns
as their objects, certain intransitive verbs can be used to modify a subject
(usually an inanimate object) that is also the receiver of the action. In the
middle voice, this type of verb does not take a reflexive pronoun (or any
direct object). For example:
• “My sister’s lunch is cooking on the stove.” (Cook is an intransitive verb
indicating what is being cooked.)
• “This car doesn’t drive smoothly anymore.” (Drive is an intransitive verb
indicating what is being driven.)
• “Her engagement ring broke in half.” (Break is an intransitive verb
indicating what is being broken.)
We can see that the subjects of these examples (my sister’s lunch, this car,
and her engagement ring) are also the recipients of the action in each
sentence, even though the verbs are intransitive and do not take direct
objects.
Changes 
in 
meaning 
with
reflexive verbs
Most of the time, a verb’s meaning is not inherently different when it
becomes reflexive. However, there are some instances in which reflexive
verbs have slightly different meanings from standard transitive verbs. For
example:
• “He decided to apply himself to the work at hand.” (reflexive verb,
meaning “to engage in something with great diligence and persistence”)
• “She applied pressure to the wound.” (non-reflexive verb, meaning “to
bring into contact with”)
• “They found themselves without a leader.” (reflexive verb, meaning “to
perceive oneself to be in a specific place or condition”)
• “We found the solution we were looking for.” (non-reflexive verb,
meaning “to come upon, discover, or ascertain”)
303

• “Please, help yourself to the food.” (reflexive verb, meaning “to serve or
provide oneself with”)
• “Please help your brother with his homework.” (non-reflexive verb,
meaning “to give assistance to”)
We must be careful whenever we make a verb reflexive, as there is no rule to
know when or if a verb’s meaning might be altered.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following distinguishes reflexive verbs from non-reflexive
verbs?
a) They do not take a direct object
b) The agents of their action are also the recipients of their action
c) The agents of their action are implied in a sentence
d) They are always transitive
 
2. Which of the following is the most obvious indication that a verb is
reflexive?
a) It has a possessive personal pronoun as a direct object
b) It is intransitive but in the middle voice
c) The direct object is implied and omitted
d) The direct object is a reflexive pronoun
 
3. Which of the following determines whether a verb’s meaning will change
when it is used reflexively?
a) If a reflexive pronoun is the only direct object possible
b) If the verb is used intransitively in the middle voice
c) If the reflexive pronoun is implied and omitted
d) There is no rule that determines if its meaning will change
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses a reflexive verb?
a) “I don’t know why, but I love washing in the river when we’re camping.”
b) “My brother never stops helping others.”
c) “The kids are all out swimming today.”
d) “Paul seems fine, but John said he hurt him during football practice.”
304

Adjectives
Definition
Adjectives are used almost exclusively to modify nouns, as well as any
phrase or part of speech functioning as a noun. For example:
• “John wears red glasses.” (Red modifies the noun glasses.)
• “A loud group of students passed by.” (Loud modifies the noun phrase
group of students.)
• “Excellent writing is required for this job.” (Excellent modifies the
gerund writing.)
Attributive 
vs. 
Predicative
Adjectives
Adjectives are broken down into two basic syntactic categories: attributive
and predicative.
Adjectives that appear directly before (or sometimes directly after) the noun
or pronoun they modify are known as attributive adjectives. These can
appear anywhere in a sentence, and can modify parts of either the subject
or the predicate.
Predicative adjectives, on the other hand, always appear after the noun
they modify, connected to it by a linking verb. They are one of the three
types of subject complements, and they are always part of the predicate
—hence their name.
Let’s compare two examples to highlight this difference:
• “The black dog is barking.”
In this sentence, black is an attributive adjective. It is part of the noun
phrase and is not connected to the noun dog by a linking verb. Now let’s look
at a predicative adjective:
• “The dog was black.”
In this sentence, black is a predicative adjective. It follows dog, the noun
that it modifies, and is connected to it by the linking verb was.
305

Modifying pronouns
While adjectives usually modify nouns, they can also modify pronouns.
This most commonly occurs when adjectives are predicative. For example:
• “That was great!”
• “She is very nice.”
• “A few were late.”
Attributive adjectives can also modify indefinite pronouns, as in:
• “A happy few were able to attend the show.”
• “They were the lucky ones.”
In informal speech or writing, it is not uncommon to modify personal
pronouns attributively, as in:
• “Wow, lucky you!”
• “Silly me, I forgot to turn on the oven.”
However, avoid using attributive adjectives with personal pronouns in
anything other than casual conversation or writing.
Other categories of adjectives
There is a huge variety of adjectives in English. While many words are
inherently adjectival, such as colors (red, black, yellow, etc.) or
characteristics (strong, weak, nice, etc.), there are also several categories of
adjectives that are formed from other sources. The table below gives a brief
breakdown of these different categories of adjectives, along with some
examples of how they are used in a sentence. Go to each individual section to
learn more.
Category of
Adjective
Definition
Example
adjectives
Example
sentence
Proper
Adjectives
Formed 
from
proper nouns to
create 
descriptive
words.
Italian,
Shakespearean,
Alaskan,
Middle Eastern,
Nordic
“He writes in a
Shakespearean
style.”
306

Compound
Adjectives
Created from two or
more 
words 
that
work 
together 
to
modify 
the 
same
noun; they are often
joined with one or
more hyphens.
top-right, last-
minute, sugar-
free, 
record-
breaking,
expensive-
looking
“I know this is a
last-minute
suggestion, 
but
it’s a good idea.”
Demonstrative
Adjectives (or
Demonstrative
Determiners)
Used to specify what
we are referring to
and whether it is
singular or plural,
and to give more
information 
about
its proximity to the
speaker.
this, 
that,
these, those
“These cups are
very pretty.”
Interrogative
Adjectives (or
Interrogative
Determiners)
Usually used to ask
questions 
about
something.
what, 
which,
whose
“Whose
computer 
is
this?”
Nominal
Adjectives
Adjectives 
that
perform 
the
function of a noun
in a sentence. They
are preceded by the
word the and can be
found 
as 
the
subject 
or 
the
object of a sentence
or clause.
the 
best, 
the
strongest, 
the
blue
“He wants the
red car, but I
want the blue.”
Collective
Adjectives
A 
subgroup 
of
nominal
adjectives, used to
refer to a group of
people based on a
shared
characteristic.
the 
rich, 
the
poor, 
the
innocent, 
the
French, 
the
Americans, the
Dutch
“The 
rich
should help the
poor.”
 
307

Adjective Phrases and Clauses
In addition to the single-word adjectives we looked at above, we can also use
adjective phrases and relative clauses (also called adjective clauses)
to modify nouns. We’ll look at both briefly below, but to learn more about
how they are formed and used, go to their respective sections in this chapter.
Adjective Phrases
An adjective phrase is an adjective and any additional information linked
to it that work together to describe a noun or pronoun in a sentence. This
additional information can include determiners or adverbial modifiers.
The adjective around which an adjective phrase is formed is known as the
head word or head adjective of the phrase.
Adjective phrases can be either attributive (appearing before the nouns they
modify) or predicative (appearing after a linking verb)
For example:
• “You have a beautiful voice.” (head word beautiful plus the determiner a)
• “He is a very good swimmer.” (head word good plus the determiner a and
the adverb very)
• “The helicopters are controlled remotely.” (head word controlled plus
the adverb remotely)
• “I am perfectly content on my own.” (head word content plus the
adverb perfectly and the adverbial prepositional phrase on my own)
• “They felt relieved to return home.” (head word relieved plus the
adverbial infinitive phrase to return home)
Note that prepositional phrases can also function as adjectives. These are
considered adjectival phrases rather than true adjective phrases,
because there is not a head adjective at the root of the phrase. Adjectival
prepositional phrases always appear directly after the noun they modify.
For example:
• “The cat on the shed was old.” (modifies the noun cat)
• “Please hand me that book over there.” (modifies the noun book)
308

Relative 
Clauses 
(Adjective
Clauses)
Relative clauses (also known as adjective or adjectival clauses) are
dependent clauses that provide descriptive information about a noun or
noun phrase. If the information it presents is essential to the meaning of the
sentence, it is known as a restrictive clause; if it is extra information that
is not essential, it is known as a non-restrictive clause.
Relative clauses are introduced by either a relative pronoun or, less
commonly, a relative adverb. Unlike attributive adjectives, they always
appear directly after the noun they modify.
For example:
• “There’s the woman who always sits next to me on the bus.”
(restrictive clause introduced by the relative pronoun who, modifying
woman)
• “The book that I wrote is being published in January.” (restrictive clause
introduced by the relative pronoun that, modifying book)
• “The escaped giraffe, which had been on the loose for weeks, was
finally captured.” (non-restrictive clause introduced by the relative pronoun
which, modifying giraffe)
• “The house where I was born is a very special place.” (restrictive clause
introduced by the relative pronoun where, modifying house)
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.” (non-
restrictive clause introduced by the relative adverb when, modifying casual
Fridays)
Order of adjectives
We often use multiple adjectives to modify the same noun or pronoun. Note
that these are not compound adjectives or adjective phrases, but rather
individual adjectives that work independently to modify the same word.
To avoid unnatural-sounding sentences when we use more than one
adjective in this way, we put them in a specific order according to the type
of description they provide. This is known as the order of adjectives:
1. Opinion (good, bad, strange, lovely)
309

2. Measurement (big, small, tiny, huge)
3. Shape (curved, straight, round, square)
4. Condition (wet, dry, clean, sad, happy)
5. Age (old, young, new, ancient)
6. Color (red, yellowish, transparent, blue)
7. Pattern (checked, striped, plaid, flowered)
8. Origin (American, British, eastern, western)
9. Material (wooden, plastic, steel, cloth)
10. Purpose (sleeping, shopping, work, gardening)
While we would almost never use a sentence with so many adjectives in a
row, it’s very common to use two or three. In this case, we generally must
follow the order above, as in:
• “I bought an enormous rectangular Turkish rug on my vacation.”
• “It is a long, heavy table.”
Note that in some circumstances we separate adjectives with commas and/or
the coordinating conjunction and, while in other cases we use them without
any separation at all. To learn more about the rules that determine this, go to
the section on the Order of Adjectives later in this chapter.
Degrees of comparison
We can also use adjectives to create comparisons between two or more
people or things, or to identify someone or something with the highest (or
lowest) degree of some quality. To do this, we inflect (change the form of)
the adjective to create comparative adjectives or superlative
adjectives. For example:
• “I am strong.” (basic adjective)
• “John is stronger than I am.” (comparative adjective)
• “Janet is the strongest of us all.” (superlative adjective)
This process of changing an adjective’s form is known as the Degrees of
Comparison; go to that section in this chapter to learn more.
Adjectives and Determiners
310

Adjectives and determiners both provide extra information about a noun
(or pronoun). But while adjectives provide descriptive, modifying
information about a noun, determiners are used to introduce and specify a
noun.
The most common determiners are the articles the and a/an. These indicate
whether a noun is specific or general (i.e., the book vs. a book). Numbers can
also act as determiners, as in three books, 10 books, 1000 books, etc.
However, there are a number of categories of adjectives that are also
considered to be types of determiners—they share the features of both. These
are:
• demonstrative adjectives (this, that, these, those—also called
demonstrative determiners);
• possessive adjectives (my, his, your, our—also called possessive
determiners);
• 
interrogative 
adjectives 
(what, 
which, 
whose—also 
called
interrogative determiners);
• distributive determiners (each, every, either—also called distributive
adjectives;
• quantifiers (many, much, several, little).
Demonstratives and interrogatives are more commonly classed as
adjectives, while possessives and distributives are more commonly classed
as determiners; this is how they are grouped in this guide. Quantifiers are
much harder to distinguish, but, for the purposes of this guide, they are
covered in the chapter on Determiners.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following parts of speech are adjectives not able to modify?
a) Nouns
b) Pronouns
c) Adverbs
d) B & C
2. Adjectives that appear after linking verbs are known as:
a) Attributive adjectives
311

b) Predicative adjectives
c) Demonstrative adjectives
d) Interrogative adjectives
3. Which of the following types of adjectives are formed from two or more
words and a hyphen?
a) Compound adjectives
b) Nominal adjectives
c) Proper adjectives
d) Collective adjectives
4. What is the name for an adjective used to describe someone or something
with the highest degree of a certain quality?
a) Comparable adjectives
b) Comparative adjectives
c) Superior adjectives
d) Superlative adjectives
5. Which of the following often have properties similar to adjectives?
a) Adverbs
b) Particles
c) Determiners
d) Conjunctions
312

Attributive Adjectives
Definition
Attributive adjectives are adjectives that describe a characteristic (or
attribute) of the noun or pronoun that they modify. They form part of a noun
phrase, appearing immediately before (or sometimes after) the noun in a
sentence.
Attributive 
vs. 
Predicative
Adjectives
Attributive adjectives are usually considered in opposition to predicative
adjectives, which follow the noun they modify and are connected to it by a
linking verb. We can quickly illustrate the difference here:
• “The black dog is barking.”
In this sentence, black is an attributive adjective. It is part of the noun
phrase and is not connected to the noun dog by a linking verb. Now let’s look
at a predicative adjective:
• “The dog was black.”
In this sentence, black follows the noun dog, the noun that it modifies, and
is connected to it by the linking verb was; it is a predicative adjective.
While most adjectives can occur either as attributive adjectives or
predicative adjectives, there are certain adjectives that can only occur
predicatively. Most, but not all, of these adjectives begin with the letter “a”:
afloat
afraid
alike
alone
asleep
awake
aware
upset
313

well
For example:
✔ “The baby is asleep.” (correct)
✖ “The asleep baby is in the crib.” (incorrect)
✔ “The woman is well again.” (correct)
✖ “The well woman got out of bed.” (incorrect)
If you want to learn more about predicative adjectives, they are dealt with
in greater detail in another section of this chapter.
Restrictive vs. Non-Restrictive
Attributive Adjectives
Attributive adjectives can be either restrictive or non-restrictive.
Restrictive adjectives help establish the identity of the noun or pronoun
being modified, while non-restrictive adjectives simply help describe a
noun that is already clearly identified. Note the difference between these two
sentences:
• “She was emotional, and would avoid a sad film at all costs.”
• “Titanic was a sad film that no viewer could finish with dry eyes.”
In the first sentence, sad is restrictive: it tells us what kind of films she
avoids. In the second sentence, sad is non-restrictive. We already know
that Titanic is the film in question; the adjective sad simply serves to
describe it further.
Prepositive adjectives: Before the
noun
In simple sentences, attributive adjectives usually occur before the noun
they modify, like in our first example, “The black dog is barking.” Adjectives
in this position are known as prepositive or prenominal adjectives.
While most attributive adjectives can also occur as predicative adjectives
after the noun, there are a number of specific adjectives which can only
occur before the noun they modify. Some of these are: main, former, and
mere.
314

✔ “The main idea is at the beginning of the paragraph.” (correct)
✖ “The idea at the beginning of the paragraph is main.” (incorrect)
Another adjective that only occurs attributively before the noun is the word
utter, which provides heavy emphasis to the noun it modifies:
✔ “The dress was in utter ruin.” (correct)
✖ “The ruin was utter.” (incorrect)
Postpositive Adjectives: After the
noun
It’s fairly common to find attributive adjectives defined as “adjectives that are
placed before the noun or pronoun they modify.” However, it’s a bit more
complicated than that. While attributive adjectives are generally found
before the noun they modify, especially in simple sentences, there are also
many cases in which they are placed immediately after the noun.
When this happens, they are called postpositive or postnominal
adjectives. This often occurs in the following cases:
Terms 
derived 
from 
other
languages
Postpositive adjective placement is very common in other languages,
especially those derived from Latin. Postpositive placement in English
occurs especially when using terms that were borrowed from French, a Latin-
derived language.
English borrows many official, military, governmental, and administrative
terms from other languages, and the adjectives have retained their
postpositive position. For example:
• Legal and financial terms: body politic, court-martial, pound sterling,
accounts payable, and heir apparent.
• Important positions of individuals: secretary-general, poet laureate,
attorney general, princess royal, and professor emeritus.
In these types of terms, it’s conventional to pluralize the noun, not the
adjective. For example:
• “One poet laureate.”
315

• “Two poets laureate.”
However, it is becoming more and more common for writers to treat these
terms as compound nouns, pluralizing the adjective instead of the noun:
• “Two poet laureates.”
Traditional grammarians, though, consider the pluralization of the adjective
to be incorrect.
After indefinite pronouns
Attributive adjectives almost always appear postpositively when they
modify indefinite pronouns, such as someone, anyone, nobody, anyone,
etc.
For example:
• “I wish I could find somebody perfect for the job.”
• “We can give these jeans to anybody tall.”
• “Is anyone talented at math here?”
After 
superlative 
attributive
adjectives
Superlative adjectives are those that that compare three or more nouns to
indicate which exhibits the highest degree of something, for example: the
best, the worst, the tallest, the biggest, etc. When a superlative adjective is
used attributively before a noun, we can use other attributive adjectives in a
postpositive position for emphasis.
• “Let’s find the best hotel possible.”
• “She’s the worst singer present.”
In addition, the attributive adjective can sometimes come before the noun
when paired with a superlative, as in:
• “We climbed the highest nearby mountain.”
Some adjectives ending in “-
able/-ible”
316

Often, attributive adjectives ending in “-able/-ible” are placed in the
postpositive position:
• “It’s the only time available.”
• “It’s the only option imaginable.”
Be careful though, because sometimes placing an adjective of this type in the
prepositive or postpositive position can actually change the meaning of the
sentence. For example:
• “She’s looking for a responsible man.”
In this sentence, responsible is in the prepositive positive and seems to be
a good characteristic. She is likely looking for a man who can be trusted. If
we place the word responsible in the postpositive position, though, we have a
very different meaning:
• “She’s looking for the man responsible.”
In this sentence, the word responsible takes on a different connotation,
perhaps a negative one. She’s looking for the man who has done something;
in most cases, the “something” is negative, such as a mistake or even a crime.
Not many adjectives change meaning so drastically based on their position in
the sentence, but it is something to be aware of.
After 
expressions 
of
measurement
Nouns are often used in combination with numbers and adjectives to give
measurements of height, depth, age, etc. For example:
• “He’s only one year old.”
• “She’s five feet tall.”
• “The river is five miles long.”
• “The lake is one kilometer deep.”
A notable exception to this pattern is when we discuss weight. Instead, we
use the verb weigh and a unit of measurement, or else just the unit of weight
after the verb be. For example:
✔ “She weighs 120 pounds.” (correct)
✔ “She is 120 pounds.” (correct)
✖ “She is 120 pounds heavy.” (incorrect)
317

When the adjective modifies the
object of factitive verbs
Factitive verbs are used to describe an action that results in a new
condition or state of a person or thing. When an adjective modifies the
direct object of a factitive verb, it is known as an object complement,
and we place it in the postpositive position. For example:
• “He makes her happy.”
• “I find horror films terrifying.”
• “We painted the wall yellow.”
For poetic effect
Postpositive placement of attributive adjectives is frequently used for
poetic effect, as it gives a somewhat archaic and literary twist to otherwise
plain expressions. Take for example this excerpt from the poem “Happiness,”
by Thomas Frederick Young:
“Fair Happiness, I've courted thee,
And used each cunning art and wile,
Which lovers use with maidens coy,
To win one tender glance or smile.”
In this example, the poet places the adjectives coy after the plural noun
maidens, instead of before it, creating a stronger poetic effect.
We can see the same effect again in the poem “The Bouquet,” by Edward
Smyth Jones:
“A blossom pink, 
A blossom blue, 
Make all there is in love 
So true.”
The same phenomenon can also be seen in titles of books and films, which
often use postpositive placement for its dramatic effect. Consider the titles of
works such as Jupiter Ascending, The Matrix Reloaded, or The Brothers
Karamazov, for example.
Quiz
318

(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is an example of an attributive adjective?
a) A black dog.
b) The dog is black.
c) The dog black.
d) The dog.
 
2. Which of the following is not an attributive adjective?
a) Sarah is short.
b) The blond girl went to the party.
c) My dear friend James is here.
d) Have you called your poor brother?
3. Attributive adjectives never ____.
a) come after the noun.
b) precede the noun.
c) follow a linking verb.
d) appear in the postpositive position.
4. Most adjectives that are never attributive begin with the letter “____.”
a) A
b) B
a) C
b) D
5. Which sentence is traditionally considered to be more correct?
a) The secretary-generals of the three countries are meeting today.
b) The secretaries-general of the three countries are meeting today.
Predicative Adjectives
Definition
A predicative adjective (or simply “predicate adjective”) is used in the
predicate of a clause to describe either the subject of the clause or the
direct object of a verb.
319

As a subject complement
Predicative adjectives that describe the subject of the clause will follow a
linking verb. In such cases, they are known as subject complements. For
example:
• “You look nice.”
• “He is old.”
Here, “nice” describes the subject “you,” while “old” describes the subject
“he.”
Note that adjectives appearing immediately before the noun they are
describing are known as attributive adjectives. For example:
• “The old man seems nice.”
“Old” is an attributive adjective that describes the subject, “man.” “Nice” also
describes “man,” but it is a predicative adjective because it follows the linking
verb “seems.”
As an object complement
Predicative adjectives can also describe the direct object of non-linking verbs.
In this case, such adjectives function as object complements. For
example:
• “They painted the door red.”
• “All that training made me stronger.”
The predicative adjectives here are describing (complementing) the direct
objects of the verbs, rather than the subjects of the sentences. “Red”
describes the noun “door” (not the subject, “they”), while “stronger”
describes the pronoun “me” (not the subject, “training”).
Sense verbs
Certain verbs are used to indicate perceptions, opinions, or bodily sensations.
They are known as verbs of the senses, or “sense verbs” for short. Those
verbs are as follows:
taste
smell
320

sound
seem
feel
look
appear
Sense verbs merely relate the means by which the speaker has arrived at
such a sensation about the subject. When we use them like this, they are
functioning as linking verbs (rather than action verbs) and we pair them
with predicative adjectives. This is not because the predicative adjective
describes the verb, as an adverb would do. Rather, the predicative adjective
describes the subject of the clause—they are subject complements, which we
looked at above.
For example:
• “I feel terrible today.” (A feeling inside of being very unwell.)
• “You sound tired.” (A perception of tiredness in your voice.)
• “She didn’t sound Italian.” (An opinion based on the way her voice sounds.)
• “You look fabulous today.” (This is my opinion when I look at you.)
• “He doesn’t look very happy.” (Again, my opinion based on what my eyes
tell me. Note that the adverb “very” is modifying the adjective “happy,” not
the verb “look.”)
• “This doesn’t feel right.” (An opinion or perception of something not being
as it should.)
• “The car appears OK, but I’ll have to drive it to be sure.” (From what I can
see, the car looks like it’s in good condition.)
• “That smells nice.” (Sensation of a pleasant aroma.)
• “This milk tastes funny*.” (Sensation of an odd or unpleasant taste.)
*The adjective “funny” has two meanings. It can describe something that
makes you laugh, or something that is strange, unpleasant, dubious, or not
as it should be. It carries the latter meaning in the above example.
If any of the above verbs were used as action verbs, they could no longer be
followed by an adjective—you would have to pair them with an adverb. For
example:
• “I felt gently around the table in the dark.” (Describes the action of feeling
with one’s hand.)
321

• “He looked quickly to the right.” (Describes the action of looking in a
certain direction.)
• “The car appeared out of nowhere.” (Describes the action of coming into
sight, using a prepositional phrase as an adverb.)
• “Yes, you heard right!” (Right in this case is an adverb meaning “accurately
or correctly.”)
Sources of confusion – Good vs.
Well
A common stumbling block for natives and learners of English alike is the
correct usage of good versus well.
In most instances, good is an attributive adjective directly describing a noun,
while well is an adverb describing a verb, adjective, or other adverb. For
example:
• “He is a good driver.”
• “She writes well.”
We cannot use good and well interchangeably in these instances, and we can
see immediately that the following would be incorrect:
✖ “He is a well driver.”
✖ “She writes good.”
However, well can also function as a predicative adjective, where it usually
means “healthy” or “not ill.” We use it in this sense after linking verbs such as
be, get, or the sense verbs above:
• “Jenny looks well lately.”
• “Get well soon!”
In these examples, well does not describe the verbs, but rather the subjects
of the sentences (implied in the second example).
Good can be used as a predicative adjective as well, meaning “of a high or
satisfactory quality.” This can be used after linking verbs to talk about an
opinion of something, an emotional state, or general well-being (as opposed
to physical health, specifically). For example:
• “The movie was good.” (Opinion of the quality of the movie.)
322

• “I’m feeling good about my chances!” (Emotional state.)
• “Janet looks good lately.” (Opinion of Janet’s appearance.)
• A: “How are you, Bob?” B: “I’m good, thanks!” (General well-being.)
The last example is perfectly correct, and it is very frequently used as a stock
response to the question “How are you?” You could also say “I’m well,” and
no one is likely to take issue with it. However, if someone asks how you are
after, for instance, an illness or injury, it would be better to respond with
“I’m well.”
If saying “I’m good” still does not sound quite right to you, you could also say
“I am doing well,” in which case well is used adverbially once more.
You can learn more about such adjective/adverb oddities in the irregular
adverbs section of the chapter on Adverbs.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the function of an adjective when it describes a noun that is part of
the predicate?
a) Subject complement
b) Object complement
c) Attributive adjective
d) None of the above
2. What does a predicative adjective that follows a linking verb modify?
a) The verb
b) The object of the verb
c) The subject of the clause
d) The predicate of the clause
3. When can “well” function as a predicative adjective? (Choose the answer
that is most correct.)
a) When it follows a linking verb
b) When it modifies a linking verb
c) When it means “in good health”
d) When it functions as an object complement
e) A & C
f) B & D
323

 
4. Which of the following sentences does not have a predicate adjective?
a) “I don’t think I heard you right.”
b) “I am feeling well.”
c) “My father is really nice.”
d) “Does this seem different to you?”
Proper Adjectives
Definition
Proper adjectives, like all adjectives, modify nouns, but they are different
from other adjectives because they are actually formed from proper nouns.
A noun, we know, is a person, place, or thing. We can distinguish between
two types of nouns: common nouns and proper nouns. Common nouns
are general, such as man, street, and city. James, Canning Street, and Paris
are all proper nouns, because they talk about specific people, places, or
things. “James” is a specific man, “Canning Street” is a specific street, and
“Paris” is a specific city. Proper nouns are always written with a capital letter
in English.
Proper adjectives are formed from these proper nouns, and they are also
capitalized. They are often made from the names of cities, countries, or
regions to describe where something comes from, but they can also be
formed from the names of religions, brands, or even individuals. Some
examples will make this clear:
Proper
Noun
Proper
Adjective
Example Sentence
Italy
Italian
I love Italian food.
China
Chinese
How much does this Chinese robe cost?
Christ
Christian
In Europe, you can visit many ancient
Christian churches.
Shakespeare Shakespearean He writes in an almost Shakespearean
style.
324

Canon
Canon
I’m really excited to use my new Canon
camera.
 
Why We Use Proper Adjectives
We use proper adjectives to describe something efficiently, directly, and
explicitly. We could manage to avoid them, but it would result in clunky,
awkward sentences. If we want to express the same meaning as the example
sentences from the table above, we could write:
• “I love food that comes from Italy.”
• “How much does this robe that comes from China cost?”
• “In Europe, you can visit many ancient churches of the religion that
worships Christ.”
• “He writes almost in the style of the writer Shakespeare.”
• “I’m really excited to use my new camera from the Canon brand.”
These sentences are lengthy, awkward, and choppy to read. Using the
proper adjectives Italian, Chinese, Christian, Shakespearean, and Canon
makes our meaning come across much more smoothly.
Proper adjectives are often used in an academic or artistic context, when the
speaker (or writer) is addressing an audience of his or her peers and knows
that they will quickly understand the reference. For example, the sentence
“He writes in an almost Shakespearean style” would frequently be used
among scholars of English literature. You would want to avoid the term
Shakespearean if you were addressing a group of young students who had
not yet heard of the author. Likewise, a group of architects or historians may
refer to a “Romanesque building,” while we would want to avoid that term if
we were addressing a group that lacks background knowledge in historical
architecture.
How to Form Proper Adjectives
A proper adjective is usually formed by adding an ending to the noun that it
is derived from. There is not an easy rule to memorize for which ending to
use. If you’re not sure, you can try some of the most common endings—-ian,
-an, -esque, -like, and -istic—and see which sounds right.
325

Proper Adjectives for Countries,
Cities, and Regions
Countries
Many proper adjectives are formed from the names of countries to describe
where a person, place, or thing is from. We have seen some examples
already. The most common endings for nationalities are -ian/-ean/-an, -ic,
ese, and -ish. The reason that English has so many endings for different
nationalities is that we borrowed them from other languages. We borrowed
the -ian, -ean, -an from Latin, -ic also from Latin but via Germanic
languages, -ese from Italian, and -i from Arabic. The native Germanic suffix is
-ish, which English has only kept for only a small number of nationalities.
Here are some of the most common proper adjectives for countries:
-ian/-ean/-an
-ic
-ese
-i
-ish
-ish
Italian
Greenlandic Chinese
Iraqi
Danish
Chinese
Armenian
Icelandic
Japanese
Israeli
Finnish
Japanese
Australian
Nordic
Lebanese
Pakistani Irish
Lebanese
Bulgarian
Hispanic
Portuguese
Saudi
Scottish Portuguese
Korean
 
Sudanese
Emirati
Spanish Sudanese
Moroccan
 
Vietnamese Yemeni
Turkish Vietnamese
 
Cities
Proper adjectives can also describe what city or state/province something or
someone comes from. Often, these are formed without an additional ending.
For example:
• “Let’s have a New York bagel for breakfast.”
• “She has a real London etiquette.”
Other proper adjectives are formed by adding an ending to the name of the
city or state, but it’s impossible to learn them all. They’re very irregular. You
326

may find it useful to learn the endings for the most famous cities of the
world, or the places around where you live. Some examples of well-known
proper adjectives for cities or states are:
• “I will never be able to keep up with Parisian fashion.”
• “There is nothing better than Alaskan smoked salmon.”
Regions
Finally, we also have proper adjectives for general geographic regions. For
example:
• “An African elephant.”
• “An Asian person.”
• “A European museum.”
• “A South American blanket.”
• “A Middle Eastern film.”
A Few More Notes
Sometimes, a word that began as a proper adjective can lose its “proper”
significance over time. In these cases, the word is no longer capitalized. Take
the following sentence:
• “He was making quixotic mistakes.”
Quixotic was a proper adjective derived from the name Don Quixote, a
fictional character who was prone to foolish, grandiose behavior. Through
time, it has come to mean “foolish” in its own right, without necessarily
pointing to the character of Don Quixote. Therefore, it has lost its
capitalization.
Another example of this phenomenon is the word gargantuan. Once
associated with the name of a giant in a 16th-century book, it has come to
mean “huge” in daily use. Since losing its link with the fictional monster, it is
no longer capitalized.
• “The couple purchased the house next door and built a gargantuan
house.”
On the other hand, there are some common nouns that can act as proper
nouns in specific cases and need to be capitalized. For example, the adjective
native would normally be considered a common noun, as in the sentence “I
327

want to practice Spanish with a native speaker.” Consider the word native in
the following sentence, though:
• The indigenous people of Canada and the United States are commonly
referred to as Native Americans.
In this sentence, Native acts as a proper adjective because it describes a
specific group of people, just like Italian or French.
When a proper adjective needs a prefix, make sure to place a hyphen
between the prefix and the proper adjective. Don’t capitalize the prefix,
though. For example:
• “He was accused of stirring up anti-Chinese sentiment.”
• “I love studying pre-Shakespearean theater.”
The exception to this rule is if the prefix is formed from a proper noun itself,
as in the “Austro-Hungarian empire.” In this example, both Hungarian
and its prefix Austro are derived from proper nouns (Hungary and Austria),
so they are both capitalized.
Lastly, while proper adjectives are generally placed before the noun they
modify, most can also be placed after the noun, provided that there is also a
linking verb before them. For example, all of the following sentences are
correct:
• “The winning team was Spanish.
• “The man over there is Italian.”
• “The monks in this monastery are Buddhist.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a proper adjective?
a) Blue
b) Spanish
c) Tall
d) Tired
 
2. Which of the following is not a proper adjective?
a) Spanish
b) Grecian
328

c) Intelligent
d) Muslim
 
3. In the sentence “I went to a private catholic school,” which word or words
should be capitalized?
a) catholic
b) private
c) school
d) catholic and school
 
4. In the sentence “The number of afro-europeans has risen steadily,” which
word or words should be capitalized?
a) number
b) afro
c) europeans
d) afro and europeans
 
5. Proper adjectives are adjectives formed from ____.
a) proper nouns
b) common nouns
c) adjectives
d) verbs
Collective Adjectives
Definition
Collective adjectives are a subgroup of nominal adjectives, or
adjectives that act as nouns. They are used to refer to a group of people based
on a characteristic that they share. For example:
• “The rich should help the poor.”
This sentence is another way of saying, “Rich people should help poor
people.”
Some common collective adjectives are:
the blind
the elderly
329

the hardworking
the homeless
the innocent
the intelligent
the poor
the rich
the sick
the strong
the weak
the young
In addition, a large amount of collective adjectives refer to the nationality of
a group of people. For example, instead of saying “French people cook well,”
we can say, “The French cook well.” Other nationalities for which we have
collective adjectives are:
the Chinese
the English
the Irish
the Japanese
the Scottish
the Spanish
the Vietnamese
Notice that when we use a collective adjective for nationality, it’s capitalized.
Finally, collective adjectives for nationality have to be learned by heart, as we
don’t have collective adjectives for all nationalities. For example, to refer to a
group of German people, we have to say the Germans or simply Germans,
which is a plural proper noun—a corresponding collective adjective
doesn’t exist for German people. Other examples include (the) Canadians,
(the) Russians, (the) Americans, and (the) Slovaks.
How to use collective adjectives
Using collective adjectives is simple. There are only a couple of things that
we need to remember:
1. We always add the article the before the adjective (except for nationalities
that use plural proper nouns).
330

2. We always treat collective adjectives as plural nouns. This means that
they have to take plural forms of verbs.
3. We do not pluralize collective adjectives by adding the suffixes -s or -es.
They are already considered plural (except for nationalities that use plural
proper nouns).
Let’s look at some examples:
• “The rich are usually powerful.”
• “The French are the best chefs.”
• “The elderly need proper care.”
In these examples, the rich, the French, and the elderly function as the
subjects of the sentences. They are treated as plurals, which is why the
sentences use the plural forms of the verbs be and need.
Collective adjectives can also function as the object of a sentence, as in:
• “We are working hard to help the homeless.”
In this example, the subject of the sentence is we, while the object is the
collective adjective the homeless.
Common Errors
Collective adjectives are often confused with collective nouns, but there
are key differences. While they both refer to a group of people, collective
nouns (such as team, staff or class) are inherently nouns in structure and
function; collective adjectives, on the other hand, are adjectives that merely
function as nouns.
Additionally, collective nouns are often treated as singular (as in, “The best
team is going to win”), whereas collective adjectives, as we have mentioned,
are always treated as plural.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is a collective adjective?
a) the rich
b) the tenants
c) the girls
d) the German
331

2. Which of the following is not a collective adjective?
a) the poor
b) the meek
c) the team
d) the French
3. Collective adjectives are always ____.
a) plural
b) singular
c) verbs
d) subjects
4. In the following sentence, which word or words should be capitalized?
“i want to help the poor.”
a) Both “i” and “poor.”
b) Only “i.”
c) “I,” “help,” and “poor.”
d) Only “poor.”
5. Collective adjectives are adjectives that function as ____.
a) nouns
b) subjects
c) objects
d) verbs
Demonstrative Adjectives
Definition
Like all adjectives, demonstrative adjectives modify nouns or pronouns.
We use demonstrative adjectives to specify what we are referring to, to
indicate whether the person or thing is singular or plural, and to give the
listener information about that person or object’s proximity to the speaker
(identifying whether it’s nearby or far away). Because they are used to
determine a specific noun, demonstrative adjectives are sometimes known as
demonstrative determiners.
332

There are four common demonstrative adjectives in English: this, that, these,
and those.
Placement
Demonstrative adjectives always come before the noun they modify. Often,
they start the sentence. For example:
• “This toy is my brother’s favorite.”
• “These cups are very pretty.”
They can also come at the middle or at the end, as long as they are followed
by a noun (if they were not followed by a noun, they would become
demonstrative pronouns):
• “My brother’s favorite toy is this train.”
• “I wish I had more of these chocolates!”
• “Can you please go buy me those books?”
In the examples above, the demonstrative adjective is placed immediately
before the noun it modifies. However, if there are additional adjectives that
also modify the same noun, they should be placed between the
demonstrative adjective and the noun. For example:
• “My brother’s favorite toy is this blue train.”
• “I wish I had more of these delicious chocolates!”
• “Can you please go buy me those school books?”
Choosing 
the 
Correct
Demonstrative Adjective
Use this table to easily reference which demonstrative adjectives to use in
different contexts:
 
Near
Far
Singular this
that
Plural
these
those
 
333

This/That
As you can see from the table, this and that are used when the person or
thing we are talking about is singular (there is only one).
This is used for things that are nearby. The proximity is sometimes stated
explicitly in the sentence. For example:
• “This toy I’m holding is my brother’s favorite.”
• “This chair I’m sitting on is broken.”
It’s also common for the demonstrative adjective to be the only information
we have about how near or far the person or object is. For example, imagine
that there are two cups: One is on the table next to “Jen”; the other is across
the room, next to “David.”
Jen says: “This cup is very pretty.”
Because she used the demonstrative adjective this, it’s clear that Jen is
talking about the cup that is on the table next to her, and not the cup that’s
next to David.
That is used for a singular person or object that is farther away. Again, the
proximity is sometimes stated explicitly, as in:
• “That toy on the table over there is my brother’s favorite.”
• “That chair across the room is broken.”
But again, the distance can also be unstated and implied by the
demonstrative adjective. Let’s go back to our example about Jen and David.
This time, Jen says: “That cup is very pretty.”
Because Jen used the demonstrative adjective that, it’s clear that she is now
talking about the cup that is on the table next to David, and not the one
that’s next to her.
These/Those
These and those work in the same way as this and that, but as you can see in
the table, they are used to refer to people and objects that are plural (more
than one.)
These is used for plural objects that are nearby. As we saw with this, the
proximity can be explicit, as in:
• “These toys I’m holding are my brother’s favorites.”
334

• “These chairs we’re sitting on are broken.”
Or, the proximity can be implied:
• “These cups are very pretty.” (We know the cups are near the speaker.)
Those is used for plural objects that are farther away. Again, the distance can
be stated. For example:
• “Those toys on the table over there are my brother’s favorites.”
• “Those chairs across the room are broken.”
Or, the distance can be implied:
• “Those blue cups are very pretty.” (We know the cups are not near to the
speaker.)
Yon/Yonder
Yon and yonder are lesser-known demonstrative adjectives. They’re both
considered archaic and don’t exist in most modern dialects of English.
However, you may encounter them in older texts or songs. For example, this
famous line from Romeo and Juliet uses the demonstrative adjective yonder:
• “What light on yonder window breaks?”
Yon and yonder are still used in a few dialects of English, such those spoken
in certain Celtic-influenced areas like Scotland and the Southern United
States. Generally, they can be used interchangeably, and are both
understood to indicate that the noun is not near the speaker, but the
proximity really depends on the dialect of the people using it.
Here are some examples of how yon and yonder could be used in a sentence:
• “We will have to cross yon field to get home.”
• “Something has frightened yonder horses.”
Demonstrative 
Adjectives 
vs.
Demonstrative Pronouns
Demonstrative adjectives are often confused with demonstrative
pronouns, because this, that, these, and those can serve both functions. If
you think about the role of an adjective and the role of a pronoun, though,
you’ll see that they’re not so confusing after all.
335

Demonstrative adjectives do what all adjectives do: modify a noun or
pronoun. On the other hand, demonstrative pronouns do what all
pronouns do: stand in place of a noun. Let’s clarify the difference through
some examples:
• “This toy is his favorite.” (demonstrative adjective.)
• “This is his favorite toy.” (demonstrative pronoun.)
• “Give that big book to me.” (demonstrative adjective.)
• “Give me that.” (demonstrative pronoun)
• “I want this TV for Christmas.” (demonstrative adjective.)
• “This is what I want for Christmas.” (demonstrative pronoun.)
As you can see, each of the demonstrative adjectives modifies a noun (toy,
book, TV), while the demonstrative pronouns stand in place of nouns.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Choose the correct demonstrative adjective to complete the sentence:
“Stay away from ____ black dog next door.”
a) this
b) that
c) these
d) those
 
2. Choose the correct demonstrative adjective to complete the sentence:
“____ books here on my desk are for you.”
a) This
b) That
c) These
d) Those
 
3. Choose the correct demonstrative adjective to complete the sentence:
“Look at ____ trees over there. Aren’t they beautiful?”
a) this
b) that
c) these
d) those
 
336

4. Which of the following sentences does not contain a demonstrative
adjective?
a) “Please give that to me quickly.”
b) “Can you hand me those books?”
c) “Do you have this movie at home?”
d) “That girl is bad news.”
 
5. Which of the following sentences does contain a demonstrative adjective?
a) “That’s my boyfriend over there.”
b) “Can you give me a hand with this homework?”
c) “Have you seen this before?”
b) “Those are the ones that I want.”
Interrogative Adjectives
Definition
Like 
all 
adjectives, 
interrogative 
adjectives 
(also 
known 
as
interrogative determiners) modify nouns and pronouns. English has
three interrogative adjectives: what, which, and whose. They are called
“interrogative” because they are usually used to ask questions. For example:
• “What book are you reading?
• “Which shirt are you going to buy?”
• “Whose computer is this?”
In each of the examples, the interrogative adjective modifies the noun it
immediately precedes: book, shirt, and computer.
How 
to 
Use 
Interrogative
Adjectives
The interrogative adjectives what and which can often be used
interchangeably, while whose is very different. Let’s look at when to use
each:
What vs. Which
337

Although what and which are often interchangeable, there is a subtle
difference between the two.
Generally, we use what when the amount of possible answers is unknown or
unlimited, and we use which when we either know how many choices there
are, or we consider the options to be more limited. Think about the
difference between these two sentences:
• “What present do you think you’ll get for Christmas?”
• “Which present do you think you’ll get for Christmas?”
In the first sentence, the speaker does not have any idea how many possible
presents there are. In the second sentence, it seems that the speaker does
have an idea of what the presents may be, and that the choices are limited.
Let’s look at a similar example:
• “What movie do you want to see?”
• “Which movie do you want to see?”
Again, in the first sentence, it seems like the options are unlimited, while in
the second sentence, the speaker may have been discussing two or three
movies with the listener, and they are trying to make a final decision.
In most instances, we can use either what or which without causing
confusion for the reader. However, if there is clearly a limited number of
options to choose from, which is the preferred interrogative adjective to use.
Whose
Whose is an adjective that denotes possession, or belonging. We can use it
to ask who the owner of an object is. For example:
• “Whose socks are on the floor?”
• “Whose book is this?”
• “Whose turn is it?”
In these examples, the speaker is trying to find out who the socks, book, and
turn belong to.
Direct questions
When interrogative adjectives appear in normal direct questions, they are
placed at the beginning of the sentence and are immediately followed by the
338

noun that they modify. All the examples that we have seen up until this
point were direct questions. However, interrogative adjectives don’t only
appear in direct questions.
Indirect questions
Interrogative adjectives can also appear within indirect questions. When
this happens, they appear in the middle of the sentence, but they still
immediately precede the modified noun. Some indirect questions are used to
express politeness:
• “Could you tell me whose socks are on the floor?”
• “Would you mind telling me which way is north?”
• “Do you know what day it is?”
Other indirect questions are used to ask for clarifying information, or to
convey surprise:
• “You want which computer for Christmas?”
• “You’re going out with whose brother?”
• “He wants to watch what movie?”
In such cases, emphasis is put on the interrogative adjective—we can hear
the stress on the words when we say the sentences aloud.
In reported questions
Interrogative adjectives also appear in the middle of reported questions.
Reported questions are also indirect; they tell us about questions. For
example:
• “She wants to know whose socks are on the floor.”
• “He asked which way was north.”
• “I asked you what day it was.”
The speaker in each of the examples isn’t asking a definite question, but
rather is reporting or clarifying a question that has already been asked.
Other statements
Interrogative adjectives are sometimes used in other statements that aren’t
questions at all: they don’t ask questions, either directly or indirectly, but
339

still modify the nouns in the same kind of way. For example:
• “I can’t remember whose socks they are.”
• “I don’t know which way is north.”
• “I know what day it is.”
Common Mistakes
Interrogative 
Adjectives 
vs.
Interrogative Pronouns
The most common mistake regarding interrogative adjectives is confusing
them with interrogative pronouns. This is because all three interrogative
adjectives, what, which, and whose, can also function as interrogative
pronouns. An easy way to be sure whether you are dealing with an
interrogative adjective or an interrogative pronoun is to check whether the
question word is immediately followed by the noun it modifies, like in all the
examples that we have seen:
• “What book is your favorite?” 
In this example, what is immediately followed by the noun book. We can be
sure that, in this case, what is a possessive adjective.
• “What are you reading?”
In this sentence, what is not immediately followed by a noun that it
modifies, which means that in this case, it is an interrogative pronoun.
Just remember: Even though all interrogative adjectives are question words,
not all questions words are interrogative adjectives.
Whose vs. Who’s
Finally, beware of the common error of confusing whose and who’s. Whose is
an interrogative adjective or pronoun, while who’s is the contraction of who
is.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
340

1. Which of the following is not an interrogative adjective?
a) which
b) whom
c) which
d) whose
 
2. What comes immediately after an interrogative adjective?
a) The verb it modifies
b) Another adjective
c) The noun it modifies
d) An adverb
 
3. Complete the sentence: “____ stars can we see from Earth?”
a) whose
b) which
c) what
d) either A or B
e) either B or C
 
4. Which of the following sentences does not contain an interrogative
adjective?
a) “Tell me which car you like best.”
b) “I forgot what I was going to do this evening.”
c) “Do you know which dress I’m going to buy?”
d) “Would you mind telling me whose car this is?”
 
5. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “Who’s book is this?”
b) “Do you know whose book this is?”
c) “What book do you want to read tonight?”
d) “Which book do you want to read tonight?”
Nominal Adjectives
Definition
We know that adjectives are words that modify (or describe) nouns, such as
341

the word red in “the red jacket,” or the word beautiful in “that girl is
beautiful.”
Nominal adjectives, on the other hand, are adjectives that perform the
function of a noun in a sentence. They are preceded by the word the and can
be found as the subject or the object of a sentence or clause. For example:
• “The elderly are a great source of wisdom.”
• “The French have amazing restaurants.”
• “The opposite of up is down.”
• “The best is yet to come.”
In the examples above, the nominal adjectives do not modify any other noun
—they’re acting as nouns themselves. Specifically, they are performing the
function of the subject of the sentences, but, as we mentioned, they can also
function as objects. For example:
• “We should treat the elderly with respect.”
• “This law protects the innocent.”
• “We all want the best for her.”
Uses of Nominal Adjectives
Nominal adjectives perform several different functions. Some nominal
adjectives are used to refer to a group of people who all share a certain
characteristic, which can be a physical or non-physical characteristic. Other
nominal adjectives refer to a characteristic of an individual person or thing.
We’ll look at each type of nominal adjective separately.
Collective Adjectives
Collective adjectives are nominal adjectives that are used to refer to groups of
people. Sometimes they refer to a shared physical characteristic, such as the
blind, the deaf, the short, or the tall. Other times, they refer to non-physical
characteristics, like the hardworking, the intelligent, the poor, or the rich.
In each of these cases, the nominal adjective takes the place of a lengthier
description, such as “all the people who are rich,” or “all the intelligent
people.”
Collective adjectives can also refer to some nationalities, such as the Chinese,
the English, or the French.
342

If you’d like to learn more about collective adjectives, they are covered in
greater depth in their own section of the chapter about the Categories of
Adjectives.
Comparative 
and 
superlative
forms
Adjectives in their comparative or superlative form can also be nominal
adjectives. Comparative adjectives are those that end in “-er” or are preceded
by the word more, as in stronger, taller, cleverer, more beautiful, etc. They
are used to compare two things. Have a look at these examples of nominal
adjectives in comparative form:
• “His brother is the taller, but he is the cleverer.”
• “They gave the prize to the more beautiful of the two.”
• “Of the two cars, we chose the more expensive.”
Superlative adjectives are those that end in “-est” or are preceded by the
word most, such as strongest, tallest, most beautiful, most clever, etc. They
compare three or more things, and they can function as nominal adjectives in
the same way that comparatives can. For example:
• “Dan is the strongest.”
• “I want the best for you.”
• “Whenever we have a job to do, you give me the most difficult.”
Other adjectives
Most of the time, nominal adjectives are collective, comparative, and
superlative adjectives. However, just about any adjective can be made
nominal. They can make sentences shorter and more concise by avoiding
repetitive use of a noun. Here are some instances in which nominal
adjectives might be preferable:
• “I liked the red car but we bought the blue.” (nominal adjective)
instead of
• “I like the red car but we bought the blue car.” (standard adjective)
• Speaker A: “Which color did you like best?” 
• Speaker B: “I thought the blue was the prettiest.” (nominal adjective)
343

instead of
• Speaker B: “I thought the blue color was the prettiest.” (standard adjective)
• “You’ve heard the good news, now I’ll tell you the bad.”
instead of
• “You’ve heard the good news, now I’ll tell you the bad news.”
Other options
You may have noticed that a lot of these examples could be worded
differently. For example, when using collective adjectives, we can just as
easily say “French people” instead of “the French,” or “poor people” instead
of “the poor.”
With comparative and superlative forms, we can add a noun to provide more
emphasis or clarity. For example, we could say “He was the stronger man
of the two” instead of “he was the stronger” or “I want the best thing for
you” instead of “I want the best for you.”
Often, we can also replace a noun with the pronoun one instead of using a
nominal adjective. For example, “you take the green t-shirt, I’ll take the blue
one” instead of “you take the green t-shirt, I’ll take the blue.”
In many cases, these options are less formal than using a nominal adjective.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Nominal adjectives take the place of a _______ in a sentence.
a) verb
b) person
c) adjective
d) noun
2. Which of the following cannot function as a nominal adjective?
a) poor
b) red
c) shirt
d) French
3. Nominal adjectives are preceded by the word ________.
344

a) the
b) one
c) those
d) noun
 
4. In the sentence “You rent the green car, I’ll rent the red,” which word (or
words) is the nominal adjective?
a) Only green
b) Green and red
c) Only red
d) car
 
5. Which of the following sentences does not include an example of a
nominal adjective?
a) “I’m sure you’ve chosen the best.”
b) “I wish I had bought the red.”
c) “The elderly deserve respect.”
d) “You really know how to find the best music.”
345

Compound Adjectives
Definition
A compound adjective (also known as a compound modifier or a
phrasal adjective) is created by two or more words that work jointly to
modify the same noun; they always appear before the noun they modify, and
they are usually joined together by a hyphen (or hyphens) to clarify that
the words are working as a single modifying unit.
Creating compound adjectives
Compound adjectives are made up of multiple words, and, in various
combinations, they can be composed of adjectives, nouns, quantifiers,
participles, and adverbs.
Sometimes, other types of words are used to join two (or more) others. For
example, the conjunction and is often used between two nouns or two
adjectives to create a three-word compound adjective.
Let’s look at some examples of the different combinations we can make
below.
Adjective + Adjective
When multiple adjectives are used to modify the same noun, they usually
appear with commas between them or simply in a row with no punctuation,
depending on the order of adjectives. If two or more adjectives are
functioning together as a single unit, though, we must use hyphens. This
most commonly occurs with colors or position, as in:
• “She had bright, blue-green eyes.”
• “His orange-yellow skin looked very unhealthy.”
• “Look in the top-right corner of the screen.”
• “The scissors are in the bottom-left drawer.”
More often, adjectives are paired with other parts of speech to create
compound nouns, as we shall see.
Adjective + Noun
346

It is very common to follow an adjective with a noun to create a compound
adjective:
• “They went on a wild-goose chase.”
• “I can only find part-time work at the moment.”
• “The dog is a short-hair breed.”
• “I know this is a last-minute suggestion, but hear me out.”
It is equally common to use nouns before adjectives, as in:
• “I’d love an ice-cold soda right about now.”
• “Do you have any sugar-free cookies?”
Quantifiers
When we use a quantifier (a kind of determiner) with a noun to create a
compound adjective, we often pair the quantifier with a noun of
measurement (length, height, weight, age, or time). For example:
• “It is the only 10-storey building in the town.”
• “We bought a three-foot sandwich to share.”
• “The eight-pound bag fell to the floor.”
• “This is a very nice 12-year whiskey.”
When indicating age, we often add the adjective old to the end, as in:
• “His 11-year-old niece is coming to visit.”
(Note that we also use this same hyphenation when making a compound
noun from an age, as in “My 11-year-old is coming to visit.”)
When we indicate cost, we normally use quantifiers with symbols of
currency, such as $, £, €, etc. When the currency is spelled out, however, we
must use hyphens to form compound adjectives. Likewise, we use hyphens if
the numerals are spelled out as well. For example:
• “He bought a $5,000 computer.”
• “He bought a 5,000-dollar computer.”
• “He bought a five-thousand-dollar computer.”
We can also use quantifiers with other nouns, too:
• “There was an 11-car pileup on the highway.”
347

• “The theater has a 400-person capacity.”
Participles
Past and present participles can be paired with adjectives, nouns, and
adverbs to form compound adjectives. For example:
With nouns
• “Many legends still survive about man-eating whales, but they are simply
untrue.”
• “It’s another record-breaking race for the Kenyan runner.”
• “There are many mouth-watering items on the menu.”
• “I won’t spend another night in this dust-ridden house.”
• “The crocodile-infested waters are particularly dangerous.”
With adjectives
• “The table is made from rough-hewn wood.”
• “My old-fashioned aunt would never approve.”
• “There are several delicious-sounding things on the menu.”
• “He has an expensive-looking car.”
With adverbs
• “This company runs like a well-oiled machine.”
• “Our eyes had to adjust in the dimly-lit corridor.”
• “There are a only few well-running cars to choose from.”
• “We need some forward-thinking individuals for the job.”
• “My early-rising brother always baulks at me when I sleep in late.”
Prepositions
Prepositions are also used to form compound adjectives, as in:
• “You need an up-to-date computer to run this software.”
• “I’ve lived in too many run-down apartments.”
348

Other cases
And
When the conjunction and is used between two words (usually nouns) to
join them as a single modifier, we must hyphenate all three words. For
example:
• “I find her salt-and-pepper hair very attractive.”
• “These old stone-and-mortar buildings have stood the test of time.”
Proper nouns
We sometimes use a multi-word proper noun to identify a noun as
belonging to a particular person or brand. In this case, we do not hyphenate
the words. For example:
• “Can you play any Elton John songs?”
• “Did you see the Arthur Miller play on Broadway?”
Pronouns
Occasionally it is possible to use pronouns (especially personal pronouns)
to form compound adjectives, though this is not very common. For example:
• “It turned into a he-said-she-said situation.”
Adverbs before adjectives
Adverbs are often used in conjunction with adjectives to jointly modify a
noun, but they are not really considered to be compound adjectives and they
usually do not require a hyphen—the fact that they work together with the
adjective is implied. For example:
• “It was a very brave thing to do.”
• “She is an exceptionally talented girl.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which punctuation mark do we use to create compound adjectives?
349

a) comma
b) semicolon
c) hyphen
d) period
 
2. Which of the following cannot be used to form compound adjectives?
a) participles
b) verbs
c) nouns
d) prepositions
 
3. Which of the following are not hyphenated when functioning as
compound adjectives?
a) proper nouns
b) adjectives
c) quantifiers
d) pronouns
 
4. Identify the combination used to create the compound adjective (in bold)
in the following sentence:
“It was my well-educated apprentice who saved the day.”
a) adjective + noun
b) adverb + past participle
c) adjective + past participle
d) noun + adjective
Order of Adjectives
Definition
Adjectives are words that modify a noun or a pronoun. In other words, they
describe a person, place, or thing in a sentence. Adjectives usually come
before the noun. For example:
• “The small dog jumped over the white fence.”
Small is an adjective that describes the noun dog, and white is an adjective
that describes the noun fence.
350

Adjectives add to the richness of our descriptions of people and things. They
allow the listener or the reader to paint a mental picture of the person or
object that is being described to them.
Think about some adjectives that you know. Some of the most common
words are adjectives like good, bad, young, old, big, and small.
Each of these adjectives serves a purpose by describing a different aspect of
the noun. Good and bad give an opinion of the noun, old and young tell us
about the noun’s age, while big and small describe the noun’s size.
The good news is that adjectives are relatively simple in English. In some
languages, the adjective changes its form depending on whether the noun it
modifies is singular/plural, or feminine/masculine. In English, we don’t have
those complications: the adjective always remains the same.
When we speak or write, we don’t want to bore our listener or reader with
repetitive sentences. Imagine a description like this:
• “He is a tall man. He is a healthy man. He is a young man.”
You would be so bored that you wouldn’t want to listen to another word.
Luckily, we have another option. We can make such a description more
concise by using all three adjectives in one sentence:
• “He is a tall healthy young man.”
Using more than one adjective in a sentence makes our writing and speech
richer and more concise. However, this is also where we have to be careful,
because certain adjectives appear in a certain order. For example, in the
description above, which would be more correct: tall healthy young man, or
young healthy tall man?
The answer is tall healthy young man, but why?
In English, the order of adjectives can sometimes be flexible, but most of
the time we use a very specific order; if we don’t, the sentence sounds
unnatural, as in “young healthy tall man.” To avoid unnatural-sounding
sentences, we group adjectives by type, and we try to use them in this order:
1. Opinion
2. Measurements
3. Shape
4. Condition 
5. Age
6. Color
351

7. Pattern
8. Origin
9. Material 
10. Purpose
Obviously we never have a sentence that uses 10 adjectives to describe one
noun. That would be far too long of a sentence!
In fact, it would even be rare to find a sentence that uses more than three
adjectives to modify one noun. We do need to know a little about each type,
though, so that when we need to use two or three adjectives in a row, we’ll
use them in the right order.
First, let’s look at each type of adjective in detail. After that we’ll see some
examples of sentences that string two or more adjectives together.
Types of Adjectives
Opinion
Adjectives of opinion always come first before any other factual
descriptions of the noun. There are two types of opinion adjectives. The first
are general opinion adjectives and can be used with any kind of noun,
whether it is a person, place, or thing.
Some of the most common general opinion adjectives are:
good
bad
lovely
strange
beautiful
nice
The second type are specific opinion adjectives. These are adjectives that can
only be used with particular types of nouns. For example:
• People and animals: intelligent, friendly, unfriendly, hard-working
• Buildings and furniture: comfortable, uncomfortable
• Food: flavorful, tasty, delicious
If you want to use a general opinion adjective and a specific opinion adjective
in the same sentence, the general opinion adjective should come first. For
352

example:
• “Isn’t Maria a lovely, intelligent girl?”
Lovely is a general opinion adjective because it can be used with any noun.
Therefore, it comes first. Intelligent is a specific opinion adjective because it
can only be used with people and animals, so it comes second.
Measurements
Adjectives of measurement can tell us about the size, height, length, and
weight of a person or a thing. Some of the most common adjectives of
measurements are:
big
small
tiny
huge
enormous
short
tall
long
heavy
light
If we were to use more than one adjective of measurement in a sentence, we
would normally use the adjective that mentions the general size first, and the
other measurements after. For example:
• Correct: “He’s a big, tall man.”
Incorrect: “He’s a tall, big man.”
• Correct: “I bought a huge, heavy table for the kitchen.”
Incorrect: “I bought a heavy, huge table for the kitchen.”
Shape
Adjectives of shape usually describe objects. The most common are round,
square, rectangular, triangular, and oval. However, there are many words
that describe the shapes of objects that we see all around us but that are used
less frequently. For example:
353

bent
concave
convex
flat
pointy
straight
twisted
symmetrical
Condition
Adjectives of condition tell us whether something is in a good or bad
state. These are generally adjectives that describe a temporary state of the
person or thing in the sentence. Some common adjectives of physical
condition are clean, dirty, wet, and dry. Emotions like happy, sad, angry,
scared, and excited are also adjectives of condition, as are general states such
as rich, powerful, shy, or clever.”
Age
Adjectives of age can describe how old a person, place, or thing is. We have
to be careful with adjectives of age, because some are used to describe only
people, some are used only for things, and a few are used for both people and
things. For example:
• To describe people: young, youthful, elderly
• To describe things: new, antique
• To describe both: old, ancient
Color
Adjectives of color include the names of particular colors themselves,
such as yellow, red, and blue, but they can also be approximate colors, like
reddish or yellowish, or even properties of colors, such as transparent,
translucent or opaque.
If you use both a color and a property of a color in one sentence, the property
should come first, and the color after, immediately before the noun. For
example:
354

• “A translucent, yellow cup.”
• “An opaque, blue curtain.”
Pattern
Adjectives of pattern can describe patterns of materials or even of
animals. Some of the most common pattern adjectives are checked, polka-
dot, striped, plaid, and flowered.
Origin
Adjectives of origin describe where something comes from. Usually, these
are adjectives that refer to a specific country or region.
When we use a country adjective, like American, British, Indian, or Korean,
note that we capitalize the adjective. Adjectives of origin that refer to a
general region, such as eastern or southern, are not capitalized.
Material
Adjectives of material tell us what something is made of. For example:
• “A wooden table.”
• “A plastic chair.”
• “A steel railroad track.”
Purpose
Last in the order of adjectives are adjectives of purpose. They tell us what
something is for. For example:
• “A sleeping bag.”
• “A shopping cart.”
Now, let’s put all of this information about the different types of adjectives
together and see some examples of how it works when we modify a noun
with more than one adjective:
• “Don’t forget to bring your new striped jacket.”
This sentence has two adjective types: New is an adjective of age and
striped is an adjective of pattern.
355

• “Yesterday my sister gave me a blue wool sweater.
This sentence also has two adjective types: Blue is an adjective of color, and
wool is an adjective of material.
• “I bought an enormous rectangular Turkish rug on my vacation.”
This sentence includes three adjective types: Enormous is an adjective of
measurement; rectangular is an adjective of shape; and Turkish is an
adjective of origin (specifically of a country, so it’s also capitalized).
We use and to link two adjectives of the same type that describe separate
parts of one object. For example:
• “The child was playing with a blue and red plastic robot.
Blue and red are two adjectives of color, joined by and. They are followed by
the adjective of material, plastic.
Sometimes a series of adjectives follows a linking verb, like to be. In this case,
the last adjective is connected to the previous ones with the word and. For
example:
• “The house is big, white, and wooden.”
Using commas with adjectives
Last but not least, we need to mention commas. You have probably noticed
that in some of our example sentences the adjectives are separated by
commas, and in others they’re not.
Coordinate adjectives
In general, we do use commas between adjectives that belong to the same
category. For example:
• “I bought a heavy, long table.”
Adjectives of the same category are called coordinate adjectives. They each
describe the same feature of the noun that follows them. Coordinate
adjectives are separated by a comma. One way that we can check if adjectives
are coordinate is by trying to switch around the order and see if the sentence
still makes sense. For example:
• “I bought a long, heavy table.”
The sentence still sounds correct, so we know that we are looking at
coordinate adjectives and that we need to use a comma. Another way that we
356

can check is by inserting the word and where the comma would go:
• “I bought a heavy and long table.”
Again, the sentence still sounds correct, so we know we are dealing with
coordinate adjectives.
Cumulative adjectives
When the adjectives are from different categories, they are called cumulative
adjectives. This is because they accumulate as they describe the noun; that
is, they build on each other to create a complete description, and so we don’t
separate them with commas:
• “I bought a black wooden table.”
Black is describing wooden table (not just table alone), and so this sentence
would sound strange if rearranged, like this:
• “I bought a wooden black table.”
We can also try inserting and, with the same result:
• “I bought a black and wooden table.”
The sentence doesn’t sound right either rearranged or using the and test, so
we know that we are dealing with cumulative adjectives, and we should not
separate them with commas.
Exceptions
Finally, we should remember that like with most grammar rules, the order of
adjectives is not fixed, and there are exceptions. We can do our best to keep
adjectives in their natural order, but we may encounter variations.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is an adjective of material?
a) tall
b) silk
c) good
d) straight
 
2. Which of the following is an adjective of measurement?
357

a) long
b) beautiful
c) intelligent
d) round
 
3. Complete the sentence (using correct adjective order): “I bought an old
____ typewriter.”
a) beautiful
b) square
c) gray
d) dirty
 
4. Choose the correct adjective order:
a) a big fantastic old house
b) an old big fantastic house
c) a fantastic old big house
d) a fantastic big old house
 
5. Choose the correct adjective order:
a) a clean pink polka-dot sweater
b) a pink clean polka-dot sweater
c) a polka-dot clean pink sweater
d) a polka-dot pink clean sweater
Degrees of Comparison
Definition
Adjectives describe a quality or characteristic of a noun or pronoun. The
basic form of an adjective is sometimes known as the positive degree.
But adjectives can also be inflected (changed in form) to compare a quality
between two nouns—this form is known as the comparative degree.
Similarly, we can also inflect an adjective to identify a noun with the highest
(or lowest) degree of an attribute among a group—this is known as the
superlative degree.
358

Forming the Comparative and
Superlative Degrees
We generally form the comparative degree by adding the suffix “-er” to the
end of the adjective, or by using the words more or less before it.
To form the superlative degree, we either add “-est” to the end of the
adjective or use the words most or least before it.
In some cases, depending on how the adjective is spelled, we have to change
the spelling slightly to accommodate the addition of the suffix; there are
some simple rules we can follow to know when such a change is necessary.
(To learn when and how to use these inflected degrees of comparison, go to
the sections on Comparative Adjectives and Superlative Adjectives.)
“Short” Adjectives
With one-syllable adjectives, we add “-er” or “-est” and double the final
consonant if preceded by one vowel. For example:
Adjective (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
big
bigger
biggest
thin
thinner
thinnest
sad
sadder
saddest
slim
slimmer
slimmest
 
The final consonant is not doubled if it is preceded by two vowels or another
consonant, as in:
Adjective (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
weak
weaker
weakest
strong
stronger
strongest
large*
larger*
largest*
359

small
smaller
smallest
 
(*If the adjective ends in an “e,” then you only need to add “-r” or “-st.”)
If an adjective has two syllables and ends in “-y,” we replace “y” with “i” and
add “-er” or “-est,” as in:
Adjective (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
happy
happier
happiest
chewy
chewier
chewiest
“Long” Adjectives
“Long” adjectives are adjectives that have three or more syllables, or
adjectives that have two syllables and do not end in “-y.” Rather than
changing the ending of long adjectives, we use the words more or less before
the adjective to make them comparative, or most/least to make them
superlative. For example:
Adjective (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
careful
more/less careful
most/least careful
caring
more/less caring
most/least caring
gifted
more/less gifted
most/least gifted
intelligent
more/less intelligent
most/least
intelligent
beautiful
more/less beautiful
most/least beautiful
amazing
more/less amazing
most/least amazing
Irregular adjectives
As with most grammatical rules in English, there are some exceptions to the
patterns above. Adjectives that do not inflect according to the normal
360

patterns are known as irregular adjectives. For example:
Irregular adjective (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
fun
more/less fun
most/least fun
bad
worse
worst
well (healthy)
better
best
good
better
best
far*
farther/further*
farthest/furthest*
 
(*Although 
farther/further 
and 
farthest/furthest 
are 
often 
used
interchangeably, there are differences between these two forms. In American
English, farther/farthest is preferred when comparing physical distances,
and further/furthest is preferred when comparing figurative distances; in
British English, further/furthest is preferred for both uses.)
Adjectives with multiple forms of
inflection
There are also some adjectives that can be inflected using either form we
looked at above. The following are some of the most common:
Adjective (positive
degree)
Comparative degree
Superlative degree
clever
cleverer or more/less
clever
cleverest or most/least
clever
likely
likelier or more/less
likely
likeliest or most/least
likely
narrow
narrower or more/less
narrow
narrowest or most/least
narrow
quiet
quieter or more/less
quiet
quietest or most/least
quiet
361

simple
simpler or more/less
simple
simplest or most/least
simple
 
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following suffixes is used to shift a one-syllable adjective to
the superlative degree?
a) -ed
b) -er
c) -est
d) -en
 
2. Which of the following pairs of words is used to shift a two-syllable “-ly”
adjective to the comparative degree?
a) more/less
b) most/least
c) much/many
d) most/less
 
3. What is the comparative form of the irregular adjective well?
a) good
b) better
c) worse
d) best
 
4. What is the superlative form of the adjective likely?
a) likelier
b) likeliest
c) more/less likely
d) most/least likely
e) A & C
f) B & D
Comparative Adjectives
362

Definition
Comparative adjectives are adjectives that compare differences between
the attributes of two nouns. These are often measurements, such as height,
weight, depth, distance, etc., but they don’t have to be. We can also use
comparative adjectives to compare non-physical characteristics.
For example:
Adjective
Comparative
tall
taller
fast
faster
sweet
sweeter
beautiful
more/less beautiful
intelligent
more/less intelligent
 
Forming Comparative Adjectives
As we can see above, we form comparative adjectives either by adding “-er” to
the end of the adjective, or by adding the word more (or less) before the
adjective. So how do we know which to choose? Although there are some
exceptions, you can follow some simple general rules for forming
comparative adjectives:
Short Adjectives
When we discuss comparative adjectives, we class them into two types:
short and long. “Short” adjectives are adjectives that have only one
syllable, or else have two syllables and end in “-y.” For the majority of short
adjectives, we form the comparative according to the following rules:
Syllables
Rule
Examples
One syllable
Add “-er” to the end of the
adjective.
Tall becomes Taller
Two syllables ending
in “-y”
Replace “-y” with “-ier”
happy 
becomes
happier
363

Aside from the major rules in the table, there are two other things we must
keep in mind about short adjectives.
First, if the adjective ends in “-e,” we just add “-r,” not “-er.” This is to avoid
doubling the letter “e.” For example:
• Large becomes larger, not largeer.
• Cute becomes cuter, not cuteer.
• Safe becomes safer, not safeer.
Second, if the last three letters of the adjective are in the pattern consonant,
vowel, consonant, we double the final consonant before adding “-er” to the
word. For example:
• Big becomes bigger, not biger.
• Sad becomes sadder, not sader.
• Thin becomes thinner, not thiner.
Long Adjectives
“Long” adjectives are adjectives that have three or more syllables, or
adjectives that have two syllables and do not end in “-y.” For these adjectives,
we can follow these rules:
Syllables
Rule
Examples
Two syllables not
ending in “-y”
Insert the word more/less
before the adjective.
Careful 
becomes
more/less careful.
Three 
or 
more
syllables
Insert the word more/less
before the adjective.
Intelligent 
becomes
more/less intelligent.
Irregular adjectives
As with most grammatical “rules” in English, there are some exceptions to
the patterns above. Here are a few of the adjectives that have irregular
comparative forms:
Adjective
Comparative form
fun
more/less fun
364

bad
worse
good
better
well (not ill) better
There are also some adjectives that have two generally accepted comparative
forms. These are some of the most common:
Adjective Comparative Form 1 Comparative Form 2
clever
cleverer
more/less clever
likely
likelier
more/less likely
narrow
narrower
more narrow
quiet
quieter
more/less quiet
simple
simpler
more/less simple
far*
farther
further
*When 
referring 
to 
distance, 
farther 
and 
further 
can 
be 
used
interchangeably. However, in American English, farther is preferred when
comparing physical distances and further when comparing figurative
distances. For example:
• “San Francisco is farther from New York than Boston.” (physical distance)
BUT
• “I was able to make further progress at work.” (figurative distance)
In British English, further is more common both for physical and figurative
distances.
Using Comparative Adjectives
Now that we have discussed how to form comparative adjectives, we can look
at how they are used in sentences and within larger conversations.
Depending on the situation, you may or may not need to explicitly mention
both nouns being compared.
365

Explicitly mentioning both nouns
Often, the two nouns that are being compared both appear in the sentence.
This is the case if there is any chance of the listener or reader being confused
by what you’re talking about. When we need to mention both nouns, we
follow this structure:
Noun 1 + be + comparative
adjective + than + noun 2
For example:
• “An airplane is bigger than a car.”
• “Mt. Everest is taller than Mt. Fuji.”
• “Tom is faster than John.”
In each of these sentences, the noun that has the characteristic to a greater
degree comes first. We can achieve the same meaning by using opposite
adjectives and switching the order that the nouns appear in. For example:
• “A car is smaller than an airplane.”
• “Mt. Fuji is shorter than Mt. Everest.”
• “John is slower than Tom.”
If we want to achieve the same effect using “long” adjectives, instead of
inserting the word more before the adjective, we can insert the word less. For
example:
• “Tom is more studious than John.”
OR
• “John is less studious than Tom.”
Keep in mind that the two nouns being compared don’t necessarily have to
be individual people or objects. One or both of the nouns or noun phrases
being compared can also refer to groups. For example:
• “Cats are more independent than dogs."
• “Women are shorter than men.”
• “Jen is smarter than the rest of the students in her class.
366

We can even compare two gerunds (verbs ending in “-ing” that function as
nouns). We can compare characteristics of two gerunds in the same way that
we can compare any other type of noun:
• “Running is faster than walking.”
• “Drawing is easier than painting.”
• “Sailing is more relaxing than waterskiing.”
Finally, we can use the regular patterns for making negative and
interrogative sentences. For negatives, we simply add the word not, or its
contracted form, “-n’t,” after the verb be:
• “Walking is not faster than running.”
• “Women aren’t taller than men.”
• “Waterskiing isn’t more relaxing than sailing.”
To form interrogatives (questions), we simply place the conjugated form of
the verb be at the beginning of the sentence:
• “Is running faster than walking?”
• “Is Jen smarter than the rest of the students in her class?”
• “Are cats more independent than dogs?”
If we are not sure which noun is taller, faster, etc., we can ask by adding a
question word like who, which, or what to the beginning of the sentence,
and placing the two nouns as options at the end:
• “Who is taller, Mary or Jane?”
• “Which is tastier, pizza or pasta?”
• “What’s faster, a car or a motorcycle?”
Omitting one or both nouns
Sometimes in conversation, it isn’t necessary to explicitly mention one or
both nouns that we’re comparing. In fact, it might even sound repetitive.
Take for example the following conversation:
• Speaker A: “I don’t think you should be running. Swimming is easier on
the knees than running.”
• Speaker B: “Yes, but running is better for my heart than swimming.”
That’s a very repetitive conversation and probably wouldn’t occur in natural
367

speech. Instead, the two speakers can omit the parts underlined, which
avoids repetition and creates a more natural-sounding conversation:
• Speaker A: “I don’t think you should be running. Swimming is easier on
the knees.
• Speaker B: “Yes, but running is better for my heart.”
Note that when we omit a noun, we also omit the word than.
Gradable 
and 
ungradable
adjectives
We can only use gradable adjectives as comparative adjectives. Gradable
adjectives are adjectives that can move up and down on a scale of intensity.
For example, tall is a gradable adjective because something can be a little
tall, tall, or very tall.
We can also use expressions like a bit, a little, much, a lot, and far before the
comparative adjective to indicate scale. For example:
• “Jane is much taller than Emily.”
• “Giraffes have far longer necks than elephants.”
• “Is your dad a little bigger than you?”
Ungradable adjectives are adjectives that can’t move up and down on a
scale of intensity. For example, you cannot say “I am very married.” You are
either married, or you aren’t. The same can be said for the adjective dead:
something is either dead or it isn’t. These types of adjectives cannot be used
in the comparative form.
Expressing 
Equality 
and
Inequality using as … as
There is another way to express similarities and differences between two
nouns using adjectives that aren’t comparative. To describe two things as
equal, we can use the construction as + adjective + as. For example:
• “The apple is as big as the orange.” (The two are the same size.)
• “The table is as heavy as the desk.” (The two are the same weight.)
• “Jane is as talkative as Mary.” (They both like to talk the same amount.)
368

We can use the same construction to say that two things are unequal. We
just have to add the word not:
• “The apple is not as big as the orange.” (The orange is bigger.)
• “The table is not as heavy as the desk.” (The desk is heavier.)
• “Jane is not as talkative as Mary.” (Mary is more talkative.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Comparative adjectives express differences between __________ nouns.
a) Two
b) Two or three
c) Three
d) More than three
 
2. Which of the following comparative adjectives is misspelled?
a) bigger
b) taller
c) longer
d) smaler
 
3. Comparative adjectives are never ___________.
a) gradable
b) ungradable
 
4. Which of these sentences is incorrect?
a) “I think ice cream is better than cake.”
b) “I wish I had a faster car.”
c) “Are you going to buy a nicer radio than?”
d) “I’m always looking for a cheaper option.”
 
5. Which sentence has a different meaning from the other three?
a) John is taller than Tom.
b) Tom is shorter than John.
c) Tom isn’t as tall as John.
d) John isn’t as tall as Tom.
369

Superlative Adjectives
Definition
Superlative adjectives are adjectives that describe the attribute of a
person or thing that is the highest (or lowest) in degree compared to the
members of the noun’s group. Superlative adjectives are similar to
comparative adjectives, except they express the most extreme degree of
comparison, and they are only used when talking about groups of three or
more people or things.
Forming Superlative Adjectives
We form superlative adjectives either by adding “-est” to the end of the
adjective, or by adding the word most before the adjective.
Although there are some exceptions, we can follow some simple general rules
for forming superlative adjectives.
“Short” Adjectives
With one-syllable adjectives, we add “-est” and double the final consonant if
preceded by one vowel. For example:
big – biggest
thin – thinnest
sad – saddest
slim – slimmest
The final consonant is not doubled if it is preceded by two vowels or another
consonant, as in:
weak – weakest
strong – strongest
large – largest
small – smallest
(If the adjective ends in an “e,” then you only need to add “-st,” as in the case
of large – largest.)
If an adjective has two syllables and ends in “-y,” we replace “y” with “i” and
add “-est,” as in:
370

happy – happiest
chewy – chewiest
sticky – stickiest
furry – furriest
“Long” Adjectives
“Long” adjectives are adjectives that have three or more syllables, or
adjectives that have two syllables and do not end in “-y.” Rather than
changing the ending of long adjectives to make them superlative, we use the
word most before the adjective to indicate the highest degree of something,
or least to indicate the lowest degree. For example:
careful – most/least careful
caring – most/least caring
gifted – most/least gifted
intelligent – most/least intelligent
beautiful – most/least beautiful
amazing – most/least amazing
Exceptions
As with most grammatical “rules” in English, there are some exceptions to
the patterns above. Here are a few of the adjectives that have irregular
superlative forms:
fun – most/least fun
bad – worst
good – best
far – farthest/furthest*
*When referring to distance, farthest and furthest can be used
interchangeably. However, in the American English, farthest is preferred
when comparing physical distances, while furthest is preferred when
comparing figurative distances. For example:
• “San Francisco is farther from New York than Boston, but Hawaii is the
farthest.” (physical distance)
BUT
371

• “Of all the lies I’ve heard today, that one is the furthest from the truth.”
(figurative distance)
In British English, furthest is more common both for physical and figurative
distances.
Adjectives 
with 
multiple
superlative forms
There are also some adjectives that can either take the “-est” ending or be
preceded by “most” to become superlative. The following are some of the
most common:
Adjective Superlative Form 1 Superlative Form 2
clever
cleverest
most/least clever
likely
likeliest
most/least likely
narrow
narrowest
most/least narrow
quiet
quietest
most/least quiet
simple
simplest
most/least simple
Using Superlative Adjectives
We usually use superlative adjectives when comparing the attributes of
someone or something to others, either in a collective group or among
several individuals.
When we use a superlative adjective in a sentence, we almost always precede
it with the word the. For example:
• “John is the tallest student in his class.”
• “Daniel always buys the most advanced smartphones available.”
• “Mrs. Phillips is the nicest teacher among the staff.”
• “It is the highest mountain in the world.”
• “There are many expensive brands of watches, but these are the most
expensive kind.”
372

• “This is the best book I’ve ever read.”
• “Among her four sisters, Georgina has the worst eyesight.”
We can also identify a superlative attribute of a person or thing compared to
him-/her-/itself in other points in time. In this case, we generally do not use
the word the. For example:
• “I am most alert after my morning coffee.” (compared to a different time
of day)
• “The car is fastest when the engine has warmed up.” (compared to when
the engine is cold)
• “Flowers are prettiest in the spring.” (compared to the other seasons)
Omitting 
the 
group 
of
comparison
When we use superlatives, it is very common to omit the group that
something or someone is being compared to because that group is often
implied by a previous sentence, and to repeat the group would sound very
repetitive. For example:
• “My brothers are all fast swimmers. John is the fastest, though.”
In informal speech or writing, it is quite common for the word the to be left
out when the group of comparison is omitted, as in:
• “We all were carrying big, heavy sticks with us. Mine was biggest, though.”
However, this should be avoided, especially in formal or professional speech
or writing.
Superlatives for hyperbole
We can also omit a group of comparison when a superlative adjective is being
used for hyperbolic effect. For instance:
• “I’m going to buy my daughter the most beautiful puppy for her
birthday.”
• “I had the biggest steak for my lunch today.”
Expressing the lowest degree
373

As we’ve seen, “long” adjectives can either take most or least to indicate the
highest and lowest degrees of comparison. For example:
• “Though it was the least intelligent movie that I’ve seen this year, it was
the most exciting one I’d been to in a long time.”
“Short” adjectives, on the other hand, have only one superlative form that
expresses the highest degree of its characteristic. For two-syllable adjectives
ending in “-y,” we can generally just use the word least with the base form of
the adjective. For example:
• “He’s the least tidy child I’ve ever met.”
• “The baby’s least grumpy when he’s had enough naps.”
We can also technically use the least with a single-syllable adjective in its
normal form to express the lowest degree, but this is often awkward to read
or say. For example:
• “John is the tallest student in his class, but he is the least tall on the
baseball team.”
When we want to express the lowest quality of a single-syllable adjective, it is
better just to use the opposite superlative adjective, as in:
• “John is the tallest in his class, but he is the shortest on the baseball
team.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Superlative adjectives express differences among a group of __________
nouns.
a) Two
b) Two or three
c) Three or more
d) Five or more
 
2. Which of the following suffixes is used to create the superlative form for
short adjectives?
a) -er
b) -est
c) -ier
d) -ence
374

 
3. Which of the following is an incorrect superlative adjective?
a) biggest
b) least intelligent
c) longest
d) most small
 
4. When do we generally not use the article the with a superlative adjective?
a) When the person or thing is being compared to itself in other times
b) When the person or thing is being compared with a group in other times
c) When the superlative adjective is being used for hyperbolic effect
d) When a single-syllable adjective is being made into the superlative form
Adverbs
Definition
An adverb refers to any element in a sentence used to modify a verb,
adjective, another adverb, or even an entire clause.
Adverbs can be single words, as in:
• “You write beautifully.”
• “He slowly walked towards the bus.”
• “He owns the bright red car.”
They can also be phrases (called adverbial phrases) or entire clauses
(called adverbial clauses). For example:
• “She ran very quickly so as not to be late.” (The adverbial phrase very
quickly modifies the verb ran.)
• “The cat lives in the shed.” (The adverbial prepositional phrase in the shed
modifies the verb lives.”
• “She looked excited, as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment.” (The adverbial clause as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment modifies the independent clause She looked excited.)
Single-word adverbs, adverbial phrases, and adverbial clauses are sometimes
grouped together under the umbrella term adverbials, which simply means
any word or group of words used as an adverb in a sentence. However,
375

because the term is so broad in meaning, it is very common to simply call any
adverbial element an “adverb.”
Categories of Adverbs
There are many different categories of adverbs, which provide specific kinds
of descriptions and which behave slightly differently in a sentence.
The table below provides a quick breakdown of the different categories and
how they are used to describe something in a sentence. Go to the sections of
each individual category to see more examples and learn more about how
they are used.
(Note that most of the examples below are single-word adverbs. However,
adverbial phrases—and sometimes adverbial clauses—can also belong to each
category.)
Category of
Adverb
Function
Example
adverbs
Example
sentence
Adverbs of
Time
Describe when or for how
long something happens or
is the case.
now,
tomorrow,
yesterday,
still, yet, later
“We 
are
eating now.”
Adverbs of
Frequency
Describe 
how 
frequently
something happens or is the
case. A subset of Adverbs of
Time.
always,
usually,
sometimes,
often, 
rarely,
daily, weekly,
monthly
“I rarely eat
breakfast 
in
bed.”
Adverbs of
Place
Describe 
the 
direction,
distance, 
movement, 
or
position involved in the
action of a verb.
north,
everywhere,
here, 
there,
forward,
downward,
up, 
uphill,
behind
“I absolutely
hate running
uphill.”
376

Adverbs of
Manner
Describe 
how 
something
happens or how someone
does 
something. 
Usually
formed from adjectives.
beautifully,
wonderfully,
slowly,
deliberately,
happily
“He 
walked
slowly
toward 
the
bar.”
Adverbs of
Degree
Describe 
the 
intensity,
degree, or extent of the
verb, adjective, or adverb
they are modifying.
undoubtedly,
truly, 
very,
quite, 
pretty,
somewhat,
fairly
“I'm 
fairly
certain this is
correct.”
Adverbs of
Purpose
Describe 
why 
something
happens or is the case.
Single-word 
adverbs 
are
usually 
conjunctive
adverbs.
therefore,
thus,
consequently,
hence
“We’ve never
seen 
such
high
numbers. We
must
therefore
conclude that
the 
results
are 
not
normal.”
Focusing
Adverbs
Used to draw attention to a
particular part of a clause.
also,
exclusively,
just, 
mostly,
notably,
primarily
“They played
mostly
techno music
at the party.”
Negative
Adverbs
Used to modify the meaning
of a verb, adjective, other
adverb, or entire clause in a
negative way. Used in many
of 
the 
other 
categories
above.
no, 
not,
hardly, barely,
never, seldom
“He does not
work 
on
Mondays.”
377

Conjunctive
Adverbs
Used 
to 
connect
independent 
clauses 
and
describe 
the 
relationship
between them.
comparatively,
therefore, also,
however,
moreover,
similarly
“Jen 
is
terrible 
at
math;
however,
she still likes
it.”
Evaluative
Adverbs
Used by the speaker to
comment or give an opinion
on something. Evaluative
adverbs modify the entire
clause.
apparently,
astonishingly,
clearly,
frankly,
obviously,
presumably
“Clearly,
we're going to
have to work
harder.”
Viewpoint
Adverbs
Used 
to 
indicate 
whose
point 
of 
view 
we 
are
expressing, or to specify
what aspect of something
we are talking about. (Many
viewpoint 
adverbs 
are
adverbial phrases.)
personally, in
my 
point 
of
view,
according 
to
you,
scientifically,
biologically
“Personally,
I 
don’t
believe 
it’s
true.”
Relative
Adverbs
Used to introduce relative
clauses, 
when 
the
information relates to a
place, time, or the reason an
action took place.
where, when,
why
“I don’t know
why he got
angry.”
Adverbial
Nouns
Nouns or noun phrases that
function grammatically as
adverbs to modify verbs and
certain adjectives, usually
specifying time, distance,
weight, age, or monetary
value.
tomorrow, an
hour, 
an
ounce, 
five
dollars, 
25
years
“I can barely
see a foot in
front of me in
this fog.”
 
Regular and irregular adverbs
Regular adverbs are formed by adding “-ly” or some variation thereof onto
the end of an adjective. Sometimes the adjective’s spelling needs to be
378

altered slightly to accommodate this, but the rules of doing so are consistent
and fairly straightforward.
Irregular adverbs, on the other hand, are adverbs that are not formed
according to standard English spelling conventions. Because they do not
follow the “rules,” there is no trick to using them: you simply have to
memorize them.
Continue on to the section Regular and Irregular Adverbs in this
chapter to learn more about both kinds.
Comparative 
and 
Superlative
Adverbs
Comparative and superlative adverbs are almost exclusively used to
modify verbs.
Comparative adverbs express a higher (or lower) degree of how a verb’s
action is performed, usually in comparison to another person or thing. They
are generally formed by adding the suffix “-er.”
Superlative adverbs, on the other hand, are used to identify the highest
(or lowest) degree of how an action is performed. They are generally formed
by adding the suffix “-est.”
Adverbs in their basic forms are sometimes known as being in the positive
degree.
The way in which an adverb shifts from the basic degree to the comparative
and superlative degrees is known as the Degrees of Comparison.
Adverbial Phrases
An adverbial phrase (also known as an adverb phrase) is a group of
words that functions as an adverb in a sentence. These can be adverbs
modified by other adverbs, adverbial prepositional phrases, or adverbial
infinitive phrases.
Adverbs modified by mitigators
and intensifiers
Adverbial phrases are commonly formed when an adverb’s intensity is being
379

modified by another adverb. These modifying adverbs are known as
mitigators, which decrease the intensity of the main adverb, and
intensifiers, which increase its intensity. For example:
• “The kicker is running somewhat slowly back to the bench. He might be
injured.” (mitigator)
• “She performed very well on her exam.” (intensifier)
Prepositional phrases
Prepositional phrases are often used adverbially in a sentence. For
example:
• “We were playing Frisbee at the park.”
• “After they woke up, they packed up their things and went on a hike.”
Infinitive phrases
We can also use infinitive phrases as adverbial phrases in a sentence to
describe purpose or reason for an action or state of being. For instance:
• “Patricia went to the mountains to go for a hike.”
• “I’m so happy to be your friend.”
Adverbial Clauses
An adverbial clause, or adverb clause, is a group of words that contains
a subject and a predicate verb and is used, like a regular adverb, to modify
adjectives, verbs, and adverbs.
Adverbial clauses use subordinating conjunctions to connect them to
independent clauses; the way an adverbial clause modifies an element in
a sentence depends on the kind of subordinating conjunction used. For
example:
• “I will arrive when dinner is ready.” (adverbial clause of time)
• “Peter brings his sunglasses everywhere he goes.” (adverbial clause of
place)
• “I admire you because you are an inspiration to many people.”
(adverbial clause of purpose)
• “They’ll approve your request provided you pay the appropriate
380

amount of money.” (adverbial clause of condition)
• “She looked excited, as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment.” (adverbial clause of comparison or manner)
• “Although she doesn’t have much money, Wendy often goes
traveling.” (adverbial clause of contrast)
Order of Adverbs
Adverbs can appear almost anywhere in a sentence
If we use more than one adverb to describe a verb, though, there is a general
order in which the different categories of adverbs should appear—this is
known as the order of adverbs (sometimes called the royal order of
adverbs):
1. Adverbs of Manner
2. Adverbs of Place
3. Adverbs of Frequency
4. Adverbs of Time
5. Adverbs of Purpose
However, we’ll see in that section that there is still a lot of flexibility as to
how we order adverbs in a sentence.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. How are regular adverbs generally formed?
a) By adding “-er” to the end of an adjective
b) By adding “-est” to the end of an adjective
c) By adding “-ly” to the end of an adjective
d) By adding “-lier” to the end of an adjective
 
2. Which of the following cannot be used to create an adverbial phrase?
a) Intensifiers
b) Prepositional phrases
c) Gerund phrases
d) Infinitive phrases
 
381

3. Identify the category of the adverb (in bold) in the following sentence:
“I’m pretty happy with the way this turned out.”
a) Adverb of degree
b) Adverb of manner
c) Focusing adverb
d) Viewpoint adverb
4. Which of the following is used to create adverbial clauses?
a) Correlative conjunctions
b) Subordinating conjunctions
c) Relative adverbs
d) Coordinating conjunctions
5. Where can adverbs appear in a sentence?
a) At the beginning
b) In the middle
c) At the end
d) Anywhere in the sentence
Adverbs of Time
Definition
Adverbs of time tell us at what time (when) or for how long (duration)
something happens or is the case. There is also a specific category of time
adverbs that describe frequency, or how often something happens or is the
case; however, their usage is a bit more complex, so we will examine those in
a separate section.
Positioning
Adverbs of time are most often placed at the end of a sentence. For example:
• “I’m going to the movies tomorrow.” (When are you going? Tomorrow.)
• “She left yesterday.” (When did she leave? Yesterday.)
• “We are eating now.” (When are we eating? Now.)
However, we can sometimes place adverbs of time at the beginning of the
382

sentence to put an extra emphasis on the time or duration being described.
They are usually offset by a comma if appearing at the beginning of the
sentence, although this is not always necessary. For example:
• “Next year, I’m going to run for president.” (Emphasizes a point in time.)
• “Now, I have to start the whole project again from scratch.” (Emphasizes
now in a sequence of events.)
• “For 17 years we’ve been dating, and not once has he proposed!”
(Emphasizes the duration of time.)
Special exceptions
The majority of time-related adverbs appear at the end of a sentence (or the
beginning, for emphasis), but there are a few exceptions to this rule.
Later
The adverb later, in addition to its normal placement at the end or beginning
of a sentence, can also be placed immediately after the main verb. This
creates a formal tone to the sentence, as might be found in official reports or
in newspaper articles. Compare these three sentences:
• “She spoke to an adviser later.” (A simple sentence with no particular
emphasis.)
• “Later, she spoke to an adviser.” (Extra emphasis on when she spoke to the
advisor.)
• “She later spoke to an adviser.” (Slightly formal tone, as might be used by
someone reporting the sequence of events to someone else.)
Yet
As an adverb of time, the word yet is used primarily in negative sentences
or in questions. It can appear at the end of the sentence, or it can follow the
word not before the main verb in a negative sentence. It does not appear at
the beginning of the sentence (except when it functions as a conjunction,
rather than an adverb). Here are some examples:
• “He hasn’t gone to the doctor yet.”
• “We have not yet sold our house.”
• “Have you finished your homework yet?”
383

However, yet can also be used after auxiliary verbs and before the main
verb in positive sentences to talk about a future possibility, as in:
• “I have yet to decide whether I’m leaving.”
• “They may yet file for bankruptcy.”
• “Things could yet improve in the region.”
• “We might yet be able to strike a deal with them.”
Still
The adverb of time still is used to describe something that is continuously
happening. Still comes before the main verb of the sentence in questions, if
used before not in negative sentences, or if used after auxiliary verbs in
positive sentences about the future:
• “Are you still working on that project?”
• “He’s still not sure about how to proceed.”
• “I am still thinking about moving to Europe.”
The adverb still can also be used with the modal auxiliary verbs may,
might, can, and could to describe something that was a possibility in the
past, and which could possibly happen in the future. In this case, it has the
same meaning as yet, and the two are all but interchangeable (though yet
sounds a little bit more formal). Here are the same sentences we looked at
with yet, but this time using still instead:
• “They may still file for bankruptcy.”
• “Things could still improve in the region.”
• “We might still be able to strike a deal with them.”
Adverbs of Duration – For and
Since
When we want to talk about for how long something happens or is the case,
we generally use the prepositions for and since along with a determiner of
time. When we use for, we pair it with a word or words that specify a length
of time; with since, on the other hand, we use specific points in time. Both
usually occur at the end of the sentence, unless they are being followed by
infinitive or a prepositional phrases. And, as we’ve seen already, they can also
384

be used at the beginning of the sentence to add emphasis.
Here are a few examples of each:
for
• “I have been running for three hours.”
• “They have been waiting for two months to be seen by a doctor.”
• “For 10 years, we’ve seen this country’s economy continue to decline.”
since
• “Our computer systems have been having issues since last week.”
• “We have been looking since September for a place to live.”
• “Since we were kids, we’ve always dreamed of being astronauts.” (The
phrase we were kids in this sentence might seem like it should be “the time
when we were kids,” but because it is used with since, the shorter version
is acceptable.)
In Proper Order
Remember, adverbs of time can be used to describe three different aspects:
duration, frequency, and certain points in time (when). If we are using
multiple adverbs of time in the same sentence, and if there is no special
emphasis given to one aspect over another, then that is the order in which
they generally appear. Even if one of the three aspects is omitted, the other
two still maintain their position in relation to each other. Here are some
examples:
• “I went door to door for two hours every afternoon last year.”
• “He will be traveling for two years after college.”
• “The train runs hourly in the fall.”
If one aspect of time is being given particular emphasis in the sentence, then
it generally comes later in the order. Let’s look at the first sentence arranged
in a different order:
• “I went door to door every afternoon last year for two hours.”
As we can see, for two hours is given stronger emphasis than either every
afternoon or last year.
385

Notice as well that each adverb of duration is made using for; we can’t use
since in the same way with multiple adverbs. For instance, we can see how
the following would not make any sense:
✖ “She’s known him since high school each day this year.” (incorrect)
If we are using since to indicate duration along with other adverbs of time in
the same sentence, then it must come after adverbs of frequency (or at the
beginning of the sentence), and it can only be used with certain kinds of
verbs. For example:
• “We’ve spoken to each other every day since high school.”
• “Since my operation, I’ve been getting stronger every day.”
• “He’s been feeling dizzy frequently since his car accident last spring.”
Sources of confusion
Soon vs. Early
When we say, “I arrived early,” it means before the expected or required
time. It can also be used in the future tense, as in “I will arrive early.”
We use soon, on the other hand, for a future time frame; it isn’t used in the
past.
For instance, if we say, “I will see you soon,” it means in a short time (the
near future). We cannot say “I saw you soon,” because it cannot be used in
the past tense.
Any longer vs. Any more vs. No
longer
Any longer and any more (or anymore, see below) are synonyms, and they
can be used interchangeably.
When we use any longer or any more, we need to use don’t/doesn’t because
the adverbs express a negative relationship with time. No matter which
adverb you use, it is important that they are positioned at the end of the
sentence.
However, when we use no longer, it comes between the subject and the verb.
In contrast to any longer or any more, it is used in positive sentences
386

because it makes the sentence negative. It would be wrong to say, for
example, “He doesn’t work there no longer”—this creates a double negative
and makes the sentence positive, therefore creating the opposite meaning to
what was intended.
Let’s take a look at some examples in order to clarify.
• “I don’t work for that company any longer.”
• “I don’t eat meat anymore.”
• “I no longer work for that company.”
• “I no longer eat meat.”
Anymore vs. Any more
In American English, people often use these two terms interchangeably as
adverbs of time. Outside of America, though, using anymore is more rare,
and some even consider it to be incorrect. Therefore, it is better to avoid
using it outside of American English. Also, because anymore is considered by
some to be an informal, modern coinage, it is safer to avoid using it in formal
writing as well.
However, if we are talking about an amount of something, we must only use
any more. This is because more is used an adjective describing the amount
of a noun, with any modifying more. For instance:
✖ “I don’t want anymore pasta. I’m full.” (incorrect)
✔ “I don’t want any more pasta. I’m full.” (correct)
No longer vs. no more
The phrase no more cannot be used interchangeably with no longer. While it
can technically function as an adverb, it is very rarely used this way and
would usually sound quite awkward or contrived. It is much more often used
as a pronoun phrase meaning “no further amount (of something).” Here are
some examples showing correct and incorrect uses:
✔ “He no longer works here.” (correct)
✖ “He no more works here.” (incorrect)
✔ “We will tolerate no more.” (correct)
✖ “We will tolerate no longer.” (incorrect)
387

• “I love you no more.” (technically correct, but very awkward)
• “I love you no longer.” (more correct, but still awkward)
• “I no longer love you” or “I don’t love you any more.” (most correct)
That having been said, a common slang expression is to use no more as an
adverb in a negative sentence, as in, “He doesn’t work there no more.” This
is grammatically incorrect, but slang very often ignores or upends common
grammatical rules.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What are the three different categories of adverbs of time?
a) Manner, duration, and frequency
b) Points in time, duration, and place
c) Points in time, duration, and frequency
d) Duration, frequency, and degree
2. Where do the majority of adverbs of time appear in a sentence?
a) At the beginning of the sentence
b) After the verb they modify
c) Before the verb they modify
d) At the end of the sentence
3. Which adverb of time cannot appear at the beginning of a sentence?
a) yet
b) still
c) for
d) since
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) C & D
4. Identify the adverb of time used in the following sentence:
“I quickly realized that if we wanted the job done next year, we would have to
work hard and fast.”
a) quickly
388

b) next year
c) hard
d) fast
 
5. Which of the following adverbs of time can be used to complete the
following sentence?
“They _______ plan to drive to Mexico.”
a) no longer
b) any more
c) any longer
d) no more
389

Adverbs of Place
Definition
Adverbs of place tell us about an aspect of location associated with the
action of a verb, specifying the direction, distance, movement, or position
involved in the action. Because adverbs of place are specific to actions of
verbs, they cannot be used to modify adverbs or adjectives (with one
exception, as we shall see).
We’ll first look at where such adverbs are used in a sentence, and then we’ll
examine the different types of adverbs of place.
Position in a sentence
Adverbs of place generally appear immediately after the main verb in a
sentence if it is intransitive, or else after the verb’s object if it is transitive.
For example:
• “We were walking north.” (intransitive—adverb follows the verb)
• “He kicked the ball into the field.” (transitive—adverb follows the object)
• “My friend is moving far away.” (intransitive—adverb follows the verb)
• “The wind keeps scattering sand everywhere.” (transitive—adverb follows
the object)
Adverbial prepositional phrases can also be placed at the beginning of
the sentence. Doing so adds a large amount of emphasis to the location they
describe. However, the resulting sentences are more likely to be found in
literary writing; they might sound out of place or contrived in day-to-day
English. For example:
• “In this house we have lived our entire lives.”
• “Outside the office, I could hear my parents talking to the principal.”
• “Across the meadow I spied a beautiful woman.”
Adverbs ending in “-ward” or “-wards” (such as homeward(s), eastward(s),
onward(s), etc.) can appear at or near the beginning of a sentence to put
emphasis on their description as well. Again, this creates a more literary style
to the writing, and wouldn’t be suited to everyday speech or writing. For
390

example:
• “Onwards we marched, hoping to arrive before sunset.”
• “Ever upwards the mighty redwood trees grow.”
The only adverbs of place that are very commonly used at the beginning of
sentences are the adverbs here and there. As with the others, this adds
emphasis to the location or direction being described, and we can also use
them in this way to create exclamations. For instance:
• “Here is the book I was telling you about.”
• “There is the rest of the team!”
Now that we’ve seen where in a sentence the adverbs of place go, let’s look at
the various types that we can use.
Types of adverbs of place
Adverbs of direction
Many adverbs of place indicate a specific direction of movement. For
example:
up, down, across, north, south, east, west.
Here are a few example sentences illustrating their use:
• “The house is situated north of the city.”
• “Let’s drive down a bit farther.”
• “They walked across the field.”
Adverbs 
of 
movement 
and
direction
There are also adverbs of place that end in “-ward” or “-wards” that describe
movement in particular directions, as in homeward(s), backward(s),
forward(s), or onward(s). While quite similar to the adverbs of direction we
looked already, they add a sense of continual movement along with the
direction they specify.
Here are some examples used in sentences:
• “We headed eastwards.”
391

• “The people all gazed upwards at the meteor shower.”
• “You should always go forward in life.” (Describes metaphorical rather
than physical direction and movement.)
In each instance, the word can include an “s” or not; they are
interchangeable, so use whichever sounds better.
Toward and towards
Toward (or towards), while very similar to the above adverbs, is actually a
preposition—it cannot stand alone as an adverb. It must be followed by a
noun to create a prepositional phrase, which can then function adverbially to
describe movement, as in:
• “I saw them coming toward me.”
• “He walked towards the car.”
Also note that while toward, without an “s,” is more common in American
English, towards, with an “s,” is more common in British English.
Adverbs of location
These adverbs all indicate the location of someone or something in relation
to someone or something else. They can each function either as adverbs, in
which case they stand alone, or as prepositions, in which case they are
followed by nouns to form adverbial prepositional phrases. Here are a few
common adverbs related to position that can also function as prepositions:
behind, inside, outside, next to, between, over
Let’s look at some examples where these stand alone as adverbs, and then
we’ll look at the same words functioning as prepositions.
As adverbs
• “We were waiting outside.”
• “I kicked the ball around.”
• “The others started lagging behind.”
As prepositions
• “We were waiting outside his office.”
392

• “I kicked the ball around the field.”
• "The others started lagging behind us.”
Adverbs 
of 
movement 
and
location
Just as the “-ward(s)” adverbs indicated both movement and direction, other
adverbs of place can be used to indicate both movement and location.
Examples of these include indoors, inside, outdoors, outside, uphill, downhill
and abroad.
Here are some sentences where these are used to describe both movement
and location:
• "Our mother told us to go play outside for a while.”
• “I absolutely hate running uphill.”
• “They’re thinking of going abroad for their vacation.”
Note that, depending on the verb they are modifying, some of these may only
describe location, as in “I am living abroad” or “I like camping outdoors.”
These verbs do not indicate movement-based actions, and so the
accompanying adverbs only specify location.
Unspecified location or direction
Everywhere, somewhere, anywhere, and nowhere are adverbs of place.
They describe locations or directions that are indefinite or unspecific. For
example:
• “I looked everywhere for my book.”
• “I would like to go somewhere tropical for my birthday.”
• “You’re going nowhere!”
• “Is there anywhere to sit down?”
In less formal speech or writing, “place” can be used instead of “where,” thus
creating everyplace, someplace, anyplace, and no place. Note that only the
last of these is made into two words.
Here and there
393

Here and there are adverbs of place that relate specifically to the speaker.
Here indicates a location or direction that is with, towards, or near to the
speaker, while there indicates a location or direction that is away from, not
near to, or not with the speaker.
For example:
• “I put my book there.”
• “Yes, you can sit down here.”
• “Let’s go there for our trip.”
• “Turn here, please.”
And, as we mentioned earlier in this section, both here and there can be used
at the beginning of sentences to emphasize the location they are describing
or to create exclamations:
• “There’s the restaurant we were looking for.”
• “Here I am!”
It may seem like there in the first example is functioning as the subject of the
verb is, but it is actually functioning as an adverb. In this construction, the
subject (the restaurant) is inverted with the verb is.
As the object of a preposition
Here and there are also often combined with prepositions to create more
specific references to location. Note that, because they are the objects of
prepositions, they are functioning as nouns in this case rather than adverbs.
For instance:
• “Please put the table over there.”
• “Why are the keys up here?”
• “Don’t put your muddy boots on there!”
• “It’s rather hot in here.”
With the adjective bound
We’ve already mentioned that adverbs of place are not used to describe
adjectives, but there is one unique adjective that can take adverbs of place:
the adjective bound (meaning “heading, or intending to head, in a given
direction”). Note that only adverbs or adverbial phrases specifying direction
394

can be used with this, as in:
• homeward bound
• bound south
• bound for home
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What are generally not modified by adverbs of place?
a) verbs
b) adverbs
c) adjectives
d) B & C
e) A & C
2. If an adverb of place is modifying an intransitive verb, where is it
usually located in a sentence?
a) Immediately before the verb it modifies
b) Immediately after the verb it modifies
c) Immediately after the object of the verb
d) B & C
3. Which of the following adverbs of place is used to describe both
movement and direction?
a) here
b) outside
c) onwards
d) everywhere
 
4. Identify the adverb of place in the following sentence:
“Hastily, he fell silent and withdrew into his study.”
a) hastily
b) silent
c) into
d) into his study
 
5. Which of the following is an adverb of place?
395

a) abroad
b) resoundingly
c) very
d) generally
 
6. Which of the following is not an adverb of place?
a) east
b) out
c) toward
d) upward
Adverbs of Manner
Definition
Adverbs of manner are used to tell us how something happens or is done.
They can modify verbs, adjectives, or clauses of a sentence.
Creating adverbs of manner
Adverbs of manner are very often formed from adjectives by simply adding “-
ly.” For example:
• “She is a beautiful singer.” (Beautiful is an adjective. It describes the noun
“singer.”)
• “She sings beautifully.” (Beautifully is an adverb of manner. It describes
the verb “sing.” How does she sing? She sings beautifully.)
• “He is a slow walker.” (Slow is an adjective describing the noun walker.) 
• “He walks slowly.” (Slowly is an adverb of manner. How does he walk?
Slowly.)
Changes in spelling
Sometimes the spelling of a word will have to change slightly so as to better
accommodate the extra “-ly.” If the adjective ends in “-ic,” for instance, it will
usually become “-ically”:
• “They are enthusiastic students.” 
396

• “They work enthusiastically.”
If the adjective ends in a “-y,” it usually becomes “-ily”:
• “The children are happy when they are playing.” 
• “The children are playing happily.”
And if it ends in “-le,” the “e” on the end is dropped to make “-ly”:
• “He is a terrible golfer.”
• “He plays golf terribly.”
If an adjective already ends in “-ly,” we can give it an adverbial function by
simply using it in the adverbial prepositional phrase “in a ______
manner”:
• “They played in a lively manner.”
• “Please arrive in a timely manner.”
Irregular adverbs
There are a number of exceptions to these spelling rules, though, which are
known as irregular adverbs. Here are some irregular adverbs of manner:
• The adjectives straight, fast, and hard all remain the same (with no “-ly”
ending) when they function as adverbs.
• The adjective wrong can become wrongly, or simply remain wrong—both
are acceptable. However, wrong as an adverb must come after the verb if
modifies (as in “I guessed wrong” or “he filled out the form wrong”), but
wrongly can be used both before or after the word it modifies (as in
“wrongly accused” or “judged wrongly”).
• Finally, well is the irregular adverb of the adjective good—but well can be
used as an adjective, too!
(There are more irregular adverbs than the ones above. Go to the chapter on
Regular and Irregular Adverbs to learn more.)
Adverbial Phrases
As we saw above, phrases can also function as adverbs in a sentence. These
are called adverbial phrases, or sometimes simply adverbials.
Besides the ones we looked at above, other prepositional phrases can also
function as adverbs of manner. For example:
• “They left in a hurry.”
397

• “He lived without a care.”
We can also use similes with the word like to describe manner in
metaphorical terms. For instance:
• “I slept like a baby last night.”
• “He ran out like a shot.”
Positioning
The position we use for adverbs of manner depends on whether they are
modifying a verb, a clause, or an adjective.
Modifying verbs
Adverbs of manner most commonly come directly after intransitive verbs
that they modify. If the verb is transitive, then the adverb must not
immediately follow the verb; it can either come before the verb or after the
direct object. For example:
• “He speaks well.” (intransitive)
• “She walked slowly.” (intransitive)
✖ “Janet wrote beautifully the letter.” (transitive—incorrect)
✔ “Janet wrote the letter beautifully.” (transitive—correct)
Rearranging the order
You may have noticed that in the second example we can put the adverb
first: “She quickly walked” is perfectly correct, and it adds a bit more
emphasis to quickly. The adverb can also come before a transitive verb, as in
“Janet slowly sang a song.”
However, for simple sentences that don’t require extra emphasis, it is better
to have the adverb come after the verb. (And, in some instances, the adverb
can’t come first. For example, “he well speaks” is clearly incorrect.)
Modifying clauses
Adverbs of manner can also come at the beginning of the sentence, usually
set apart by a comma, which serves to modify the entire clause and add a lot
of emphasis to the adverb. Consider these two examples:
• “Quietly, he held the candle aloft.”
398

• “He quietly held the candle aloft.”
Although they are both quite close in meaning, we can see how the first
sentence places much more emphasis on the adverb quietly. In the second
example, the adverb is only modifying the verb held, so its impact on the
sentence is less intense.
Adjectives
Adverbs of manner can also be used to describe adjectives, giving them an
extra depth or dimension of character. In contrast to verbs, adverbs of
manner always come before the adjective they modify; this order cannot
change. For example:
✔ “The book was beautifully profound.” (correct)
✔ “The prisoner remained stoically silent.” (correct)
✖ “Darling, you are brave wonderfully.” (incorrect)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the most common way to form an adverb of manner?
a) Use an adjective in the phrase “in a ______ manner”
b) Add “-ly” to the end of the adjective
c) Use “like” or “as” to form a simile
d) You have to know them by heart
2. How is an adverb formed from an adjective ending in “-ic”?
a) By adding “-ly”
b) By dropping the “-ic” and adding “-y”
c) By using the adjective in the phrase “in a _______ manner”
d) By changing the ending to “-ically”
3. Where does an adverb of manner come in a sentence if it is modifying a
clause?
a) At the beginning of the sentence
b) At the end of the clause
c) Immediately after the noun
d) A & B
e) B & C
399

f) A & C
g) None of the above
4. Which of the following is an adverb of manner?
a) strongly
b) hourly
c) usually
d) very
5. Identify the adverb of manner in the following sentence:
“I never knew how absolutely lovely it is to have such wonderfully loyal
friends like them.”
a) never
b) absolutely
c) wonderfully
d) lovely
e) like them
Adverbs of Degree
Definition
Adverbs of degree are used to indicate the intensity, degree, or extent of
the verb, adjective, or adverb they are modifying. They always appear before
the adjective, verb, or other adverb they describe (except for the adverb
enough, which we’ll look at further on.)
Degrees of strength
Adverbs of degree can be mild, medium, strong, or absolute in how they
describe the intensity, degree, or extent of the word they modify.
Adverbs that are mild, medium, or strong are known as grading adverbs;
those that describe an absolute state or degree are known as non-grading
adverbs. Sometimes a grading adverb of degree can change in strength
depending on the verb, adverb, or adjective it describes. Non-grading
adverbs, on the other hand, always describe absolute states or degrees.
Here are some examples of adverbs of degree:
400

• “He undoubtedly stole the money.” (Absolute; non-grading)
• “He is definitely coming to the party.” (Absolute; non-grading)
• “It’s absolutely freezing outside.” (Absolute; non-grading)
• “She is very sorry for her bad behavior.” (Strong; grading)
• “I really love reading good books.” (Strong; grading)
• “Are you quite certain?” (Absolute; quite is a grading adverb, but it can
describe absolute states when paired with non-gradable adjectives, which
we will look at below.)
• “She’s quite mad.” (Strong)
• “I quite like Indian food.” (Medium)
• “My camera was pretty expensive.” (Medium)
• “It’s a bit cold outside.” (Medium or mild, depending on the speaker’s
emphasis.)
• “It will take a bit longer to complete.” (Mild)
• “We were somewhat surprised.” (Mild)
Adverbs of degree with gradable
vs. non-gradable adjectives
Gradable adjectives are those that can have measurable levels of degree or
intensity. Non-gradable adjectives, on the other hand, describe an
extreme or absolute state. Here are some examples of gradable versus non-
gradable adjectives:
Gradable Non-gradable
small
tiny
cold
freezing
hot
boiling
difficult
impossible
sad
devastated
Because non-gradable adjective describe an absolute state, they can generally
401

only be modified by non-grading adverbs of degree. These serve to
emphasize the extreme nature of the adjective. Likewise, gradable adjectives
are generally only paired with grading adverbs of degree. For example, the
following would be incorrect:
✖ Non-grading adverb with
gradable adjective
✖ Grading adverb with non-
gradable adjective
absolutely small
a bit tiny
utterly cold
dreadfully freezing
fully hot
unusually boiling
virtually difficult
extremely impossible
completely sad
slightly devastated
 
However, we can see how they become correct if we reverse the adverbs of
degree:
✔ Grading adverb with
gradable adjective
✔ Non-grading adverb with non-
gradable adjective
a bit small
absolutely tiny
dreadfully cold
utterly freezing
unusually hot
fully boiling
extremely difficult
virtually impossible
slightly sad
completely devastated
 
There are exceptions to this rule, however: the adverbs really, fairly, pretty,
and quite can all be used with both gradable and non-gradable adjectives:
really small
really tiny
pretty cold
pretty freezing
fairly difficult fairly impossible
quite sad
quite devastated
402

Note that in informal speech or writing, many grammar rules are often
ignored, misused, or misunderstood, so you may come across non-grading
adverbs used with gradable adjectives (e.g., “utterly surprised,” “absolutely
interested”) or grading adverbs used with non-gradable adjectives (e.g.,
“extremely certain,” “very tiny”). However, other than the exceptions listed
above, this usage should be avoided, especially in formal or professional
writing.
Enough as an adverb of degree
The word enough can be used as another adverb of degree, meaning
“sufficiently or to a satisfactory amount or degree,” “very, fully, or quite,” or
“tolerably.” Unlike other adverbs of degree, though, enough can only modify
adverbs and adjectives, and it always comes after the word it is describing in
a sentence. For example:
• “He didn’t finish the exam quickly enough.”
• “I’ll be happy enough to be back home.”
• “The play was interesting enough, but I wouldn’t go see it again.”
Enough as an adjective
If enough appears before a noun that it modifies, then it is functioning as a
determiner (a type of adjective) meaning “adequate or sufficient to meet a
need or desire,” as in “I have had enough food, thanks!”
Enough as a pronoun
It may also seem like enough can be used as an adverb to describe verbs, as
in “I’ve had enough,” or “you’ve studied enough,” but be careful: in such
instances, enough is actually functioning as an indefinite pronoun,
meaning “an adequate or sufficient amount (of something).” Enough cannot
modify verbs.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the adverb of degree used in the sentence below?
“I will happily do as you ask, but it will take a bit of time, so I will try to work
very quickly.”
403

a) happily
b) a bit
c) very
d) quickly
 
2. Where does an adverb of degree usually appear in a sentence?
a) Before the word it modifies
b) After the word it modifies
c) After a linking verb
d) Before a noun
3. Which of the following is a non-grading adverb of degree?
a) very
b) rather
c) extremely
d) utterly
 
4. Which of the following adverbs can be used with both gradable and non-
gradable adjectives?
a) virtually
b) really
c) extremely
d) enough
 
5. Select the appropriate adverb of degree to fill in the blank:
“I know I didn’t ace the exam, but I think I did well ______.”
a) really
b) enough
c) somewhat
d) a bit
Mitigators
Definition
Mitigators, a subset of adverbs of degree, are adverbs or adverbials
(groups of words that function as adverbs) that modify adjectives and
404

adverbs to reduce their intensity, making them seem less extreme or
powerful. The following are all examples of mitigators:
• rather
• pretty
• slightly
• fairly
• a bit 
• a little bit 
• just a bit 
• just a little bit 
• a little
Here are some examples of mitigators being used in sentences:
• “The movie was rather dull.”
• “He thought that the parade was just a bit too long.”
• “The runner performed fairly well, but not well enough to win the race.”
• “The sky was slightly red and orange at the time of the sunset.”
• “They were all a little annoyed that the fair had been cancelled due to
rain.”
• “The cake was pretty good, but not excellent.”
• “I can jump pretty high for my height.”
Difference from intensifiers
Mitigators are the opposite of intensifiers, which are used to increase the
intensity of the words they modify. Knowing what the main intensifiers are,
as well as how they are used, makes it easier to tell the difference between
these two different types of adverbs. Here are some of the most commonly
used intensifiers:
• very 
• remarkably
• extremely 
• amazingly
• incredibly
• completely
• exceptionally 
• super
405

• really
Here are some examples of intensifiers in sentences:
• “The weather was exceptionally warm.”
• “The scenery on the train ride from New York to Chicago was incredibly
beautiful.”
• “Her mind was completely focused on getting her coffee in the morning.”
• “The ocean was very cool when he jumped in.”
• “Your appointment was really long.”
• “All of the students did remarkably well on the exam.”
Now, let’s look at some sentences that have both mitigators and intensifiers.
Notice how each one is used to modify its respective adjective or adverb in a
different way:
• “The line was fairly short for the extremely scary roller coaster.”
• “You were pretty late for the show, but the singer was incredibly late!”
• “Some trees in the forest were exceptionally tall, but some were just a
bit taller than me.”
Notice that in all of these sentences, the mitigators reduce the intensity of
the adjectives that they modify, while the intensifiers increase the intensity.
Importance in sentences
Adjectives and adverbs help to describe the quality of something or its
actions. However, adjectives and adverbs on their own often cannot produce
the exact level of description we want when speaking or writing. For
example, consider the following sentence:
• “The rapids looked dangerous.”
This implies that the river might not be safe for recreational activities.
However, the meaning of the sentence can change significantly if a mitigator
is added. For example:
• “The rapids looked slightly dangerous.”
By adding the mitigator slightly before the adjective dangerous, the whole
meaning of the sentence is changed. Now the rapids seem much less
hazardous; they could potentially be safe if the person is very careful.
Here is another example:
406

• “The vacation was boring.”
vs.
• ”The vacation was a bit boring.”
The mitigator a bit implies that the vacation wasn't completely boring. It also
implies an element of surprise or disappointment, as if the speaker expected
the vacation not to be boring.
Here is one last example:
• “Henry felt excited to meet his long lost relative for the first time.”
vs.
• “Henry felt a little excited to meet his long lost relative for the first time.”
In the second sentence, the mitigator a little reduces the intensity of the
adjective excited. This change not only results in the man being less excited,
it now also carries a possible implication that he was not looking forward to
meeting his relative before, or that he was not expecting to be excited.
Small changes such as we’ve seen can have both minute and profound
impacts on what we write and the way we speak.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following words is a mitigator?
a) rather
b) cold
c) quickly
d) extremely
 
2. Identify the mitigator in the following sentence.
“Kevin quickly decided that he was having a pretty good day after all.”
a) good
b) decided
c) quickly
d) pretty
 
3. Which of the following words or group of words is not a mitigator?
a) slightly
407

b) just a little bit
b) amazingly
d) fairly
4. Mitigators do which of the following things?
a) increase the intensity of an adjective or adverb
b) reduce the intensity of an adjective or adverb
c) replace other words in the sentence
d) eliminate the need for punctuation
5. Mitigators act as which part of speech in a sentence?
a) adjective
b) noun
c) adverb
d) subject
Intensifiers
Definition
Intensifiers, a subset of adverbs of degree, are adverbs or adverbials
(groups of words that function as adverbs) that modify adjectives and other
adverbs to increase their strength, power, or intensity. The following words
are all examples of intensifiers:
• very 
• remarkably
• extremely 
• amazingly
• incredibly
• completely
• exceptionally 
• super
• really
Here are some examples of intensifiers being used in sentences:
• “The soup was very hot, so he put it down.”
• “The park in the middle of the city was amazingly beautiful.”
408

• “You were completely sure that you had done the assignment correctly.”
• “Sunlight in spring feels incredibly uplifting after a long, cold winter.”
• “Everyone was really excited to go to the beach and go swimming in the
ocean.”
• “They were all remarkably moved by the movie they saw in the theatre.”
• “This table was crafted really beautifully.”
Difference from mitigators
Intensifiers are the opposite of mitigators, which are used to decrease the
intensity of the words they modify. Knowing what the main intensifiers are,
as well as how they are used, makes it easier to tell the difference between
these two different types of adverbs. Here are some of the most commonly
used mitigators:
• rather
• pretty
• slightly
• fairly
• a bit 
• a little bit 
• just a bit 
• just a little bit 
• a little
Here are some examples of mitigators being used in sentences:
• “The eagle flew over the fairly large canyon before it swooped to the
ground for a landing.”
• “After eating dinner, everyone in the room was a little bit full.”
• “When Sarah stepped outside, she noticed that the weather seemed just a
bit chilly.”
• “All the players on the soccer team were slightly nervous before stepping
out onto the field for the big game.”
• “The woman sang pretty well, but it was clear she was not a professional.”
Let’s examine some sentences that contain both intensifiers and mitigators.
Notice how each one is used to modify its respective adjective or adverb in a
different way:
409

• “The dog was rather tired, so he took a very long nap in his favorite spot.”
• “The spring blossoms looked incredibly gorgeous in the fairly strong
sunlight.”
• “Timothy was claiming that everything he was saying was completely true,
but it still seemed just a little bit suspicious.”
• “The book was really entertaining; however, she thought the ending was a
bit anti-climactic.”
In each of these sentences, the intensifier strengthens the intensity of the
adjective that it modifies while the mitigator weakens its adjective.
Importance in sentences
Intensifiers not only elevate adjectives and adverbs to higher levels of
intensity. In many circumstances, the way adjectives and adverbs are
described can drastically impact their meaning in a sentence. For example,
consider the following sentence:
• “The 5k race around the city was tough.”
In this sentence, the adjective tough informs you that the race was
challenging, but we don’t know any more than that. However, adding an
intensifier can change the whole description of the race:
• “The 5k race around the city was incredibly tough.”
By simply adding the intensifier incredibly, the race comes across as being
much more challenging, perhaps more challenging than the speaker
expected or was able to handle. Here is another example:
• “When the ship was leaving the harbor, the waves were choppy.”
vs.
• “When the ship was leaving the harbor, the waves were extremely
choppy.”
There is a large difference between choppy and extremely choppy waves.
Such a difference could mean that a storm is coming in, and the ship may
even have to turn back due to danger. Once again, the intensifier modifies its
adjective and alters the sentence's meaning in the process. Here is one final
example to illustrate this concept:
• “The old bridge was safe to walk on.”
vs.
410

• “The old bridge was very safe to walk on.”
In the second sentence, the intensifier very implies that the bridge is still in
excellent condition, and there is no danger whatsoever associated with
walking on the bridge. The first sentence, however, only implies that the
bridge is passable.
Small changes such as we’ve seen can have both minute and profound
impacts on what we write and the way we speak.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is an intensifier?
a) slowly
b) just a little bit
b) completely
d) slightly
2. Identify the intensifier in the following sentence.
“Almost everyone in the group was incredibly excited to go sightseeing in
New York City.”
a) almost
b) go
c) excited
d) incredibly
3. Which of the following words is not an intensifier?
a) fairly
b) amazingly
c) super
d) really
4. Which part of speech do intensifiers function as in a sentence?
a) adjective
b) noun
c) adverb
d) subject
411

5. Which part(s) of speech do intensifiers modify?
a) nouns
b) adjectives
c) verbs
d) adverbs
e) A & C
f) B & D
g) All of the above
Adverbs of Frequency
Definition
Adverbs of frequency (sometimes called frequency adverbs) tell us
how often something happens or is the case; they can describe verbs and
adjectives, but they do not modify other adverbs.
Range of frequency
Frequency adverbs can range in frequency from 100% of the time (always) to
0% of the time (never). The following table gives some examples of different
adverbs expressing the full range of frequency:
Frequency Definite Adverbs
Indefinite Adverbs
100%
every second
always
▲
hourly
usually
▲
daily
normally
▲
weekly
often
▲
monthly
sometimes
▲
quarterly
occasionally/infrequently/seldom
▲
yearly
rarely/hardly ever
0%
never
never
 
Notice how the frequency adverbs above are split into two categories:
412

definite and indefinite. Let’s take a look at each.
Adverbs of definite frequency
Adverbs of definite frequency describe a specific or exact range of time for
when something occurs or is the case. Some common examples are:
yearly/annually
biannually (This can mean either twice a year or two times in a
year, depending on context.)
quarterly (Meaning four times in a year, at the end of every
quarter.)
monthly
weekly
daily
hourly
every minute (Minutely means the same thing, but is much less
commonly used.)
every second (We do not say secondly, because this means “in the
second place.”)
Adverbs of definite frequency modify verbs and generally appear at the
beginning or end of the sentence. (The “-ly” adverbs come only at the end,
though.) If appearing at the beginning of a sentence, they are usually offset
by a comma. For example:
• “I run eight miles daily.”
• “Every year, our office holds a big raffle for charity.”
• “He makes a point of going to his local bar once a week.”
✖ “Hourly, you need to update me on your progress.” (incorrect)
Note that most of the “-ly” adverbs above can also function as adjectives, as
in “yearly meetings,” “monthly report,” “hourly updates,” etc.
Adverbs of indefinite frequency
The frequency adverbs that are used most often, however, are adverbs of
indefinite frequency. As the name suggests, these are adverbs that give a
sense of frequency but do not specify exactly how often something happens
or is the case. Unlike definite frequency adverbs, these can modify both verbs
413

and adjectives, but their usage for each differs.
Modifying verbs
Positioning
If they are modifying verbs, the adverbs of frequency usually come before the
main verb in a sentence:
✖ “We go usually to the movies on Sundays.” (incorrect)
✔ “We usually go to the movies on Sundays.” (correct)
Here are some more examples:
• “Bethany always runs late for work in the morning.”
• “I never get what I want!”
• “We seldom see her anymore.”
• “He travels to Europe frequently.”
Notice how frequently appears at the end of the sentence in the last example.
Certain frequency adverbs—usually, sometimes, normally, occasionally,
often, and frequently—can appear at the beginning or end of a main clause as
well as before the verb they modify. If they appear at the beginning, they are
usually (but not always) followed by a comma.
For example:
• “Usually, I would go to the movies on Sundays, but not this time.”
• “He comes up to visit sometimes.”
• “Occasionally I’ll read a romance novel as a guilty pleasure.”
The adverbs always, seldom, rarely, hardly ever, and never can also appear
at the end of a sentence or clause; however, they do not go at the beginning
unless they are creating a special emphasis, in which case the sentence
structure changes. For example:
• “Never have I felt so insulted!”
• “Rarely does she leave the house unattended.”
• “Seldom is it that we part on good terms.”
Different tenses
414

Frequency adverbs are often used to modify verbs that are in the present
simple tense, which is used when we speak about habits, general facts, and
timetables.
However, we can also use them with other verb tenses. For example:
• “She often traveled when she lived in Spain.” (Past simple tense)
• “I have rarely seen the sun rise.” (Present perfect tense)
Notice that in the second example, the adverb rarely appears after the
auxiliary verb have and before the main verb seen. This is always the case
when we use auxiliary verbs:
• “She will occasionally go for walks alone.”
• “You can seldom see very far because of the fog.”
• “I will never be an actor!”
Notice that in the final example, never is modifying the linking verb be and
appears before it. This is always the case if be is used with an auxiliary verb;
most of the time, however, adverbs of frequency appear after the verb be. For
example:
• “That is often the case.”
• “This class is always a bore!”
• “She was never very friendly.”
In the third example, the adverb of frequency is modifying an adjective,
rather than the verb.
Modifying adjectives
Adverbs of frequency can also modify adjectives, in which case they come
after the verb be. This is because be is a linking verb (not a main verb), and
the adverbs modify the predicative adjective(s) associated with it.
For example, compare how the adverb of frequency always is used with the
main verb have and the linking verb be in the following examples:
• “I always have lunch at one o’clock.”
• “I am always late for work.”
In the first sentence, always is modifying the verb have, whereas in the
second sentence, it is modifying the adjective late. Here are some other
examples:
415

• “The dog is rarely quiet.”
• “The trains are occasionally late, but they are generally on time.”
• “She is often alone, but I don’t think she minds.”
Putting extra emphasis on be
The only time adverbs of frequency come before the verb be (when it is not
used with an auxiliary verb) is when be is given extra emphasis in a sentence.
For example:
• “I never was fond of his writing.”
When we read this, we can hear the stress being put on the word was.
Though it comes before was, the adverb never is actually modifying the
adjective fond.
Note that this construction can also be used when the adverb modifies be
rather than an adjective, as in:
• “You occasionally are a nit-picker.”
If we take the emphasis off be, however, the adverb would come after it as
usual.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Where do definite adverbs of frequency appear in a sentence?
a) Before the verb they modify
b) After the verb they modify
c) At the beginning of a main clause
d) At the end of a main clause
e) A & B
f) C & D
2. What can adverbs of indefinite frequency do that adverbs of definite
frequency cannot?
a) modify verbs
b) modify adjectives
c) modify adverbs
d) modify prepositional phrases
416

3. Which of the following is an adverb of frequency?
a) once in a while
b) somewhat
c) anymore
d) very
 
4. When does an adverb of frequency appear before the verb be?
a) When it is modifying a predicative adjective
b) When be is a main verb
c) When be is being emphasized
d) A & B
 
5. Identify the adverb of frequency in the following sentence:
“I quickly left so I could catch the next train, which luckily left hourly.”
a) quickly
b) next
c) luckily
d) hourly
 
6. Which of the following adverbs cannot fill in the blank space of the
following sentence?
“________, I go to visit my sister on the weekend.”
a) frequently
b) sometimes
c) always
d) usually
Adverbs of Purpose
Definition
Adverbs of purpose (sometimes called adverbs of reason) tell us why
something happens or is the case. They can modify verbs, adjectives, or
adverbs.
Types of Adverbs of Purpose
417

Adverbs of purpose are generally made up of conjunctive adverbs,
prepositional phrases, infinitive phrases, or adverbial clauses.
Conjunctive adverbs of purpose
We often use conjunctive adverbs to indicate a relationship of reason or
purpose between two independent clauses. Some common conjunctive
adverbs of purpose are thus, therefore, consequently, hence, and as a result.
When we join two independent clauses with a conjunctive adverb, they are
traditionally separated with a semicolon.
It is also acceptable to use a period and keep them as two discrete
sentences. The conjunctive adverb still usually appears at the beginning of
the second sentence, but it can also appear before or after the word it is
modifying.
For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; as a result, she didn’t recommend it.”
• “We’ve never seen such high numbers. We must therefore conclude that
the results are not normal.”
• “I’ve had some bad experiences with business partners in the past.
Consequently, I am a little nervous about entering into this deal.”
• “The market here has been shrinking every year. We have thus decided to
close our branch in this country.”
• “There has been some talk of the company going bankrupt in the near
future; she is consequently looking for a new job.”
• “I broke my leg last month; hence, I was unable to work for several weeks.”
Non-conjunctive 
adverbs 
of
purpose
It is also possible to use many of the adverbs above in a non-conjunctive
manner, especially when modifying an adjective that derives purpose or
reason from a previous part of the sentence. For example:
• “The clothing is handcrafted and hence expensive.”
• “I’ve grown fond of our time together and am thus sad to see it end.”
418

• “The markets proved to be volatile and therefore unreliable.”
Adverbial phrases of purpose
A variety of phrases are often used to indicate purpose or reason. The most
common of these are prepositional phrases and infinitive phrases.
Prepositional phrases
It is very common to use prepositional phrases adverbially, and in some cases
they can be used to indicate purpose. These prepositional phrases usually
occur at the end of the clause, appearing after the verb or adjective they are
describing, but they can also appear at the beginning of a clause or sentence,
in which case they are set apart by a comma.
The most common prepositional phrase of purpose uses the compound
preposition because of, as in:
• “I am feeling tired because of this cold.”
• “Because of my operation, I had to cancel my flight.”
Some other common prepositions that can create prepositional phrases of
purpose are for, given, owing to, and due to*. For example:
• “Every year, we honor the soldiers who sacrificed their lives for their
country.”
• “Given the huge amount of public interest, they are extending the
program for another three months.”
• “Our game was delayed due to rain.”*
• “He had to leave early owing to an emergency at the hospital.”
(*Note: Some traditional grammarians insist that due should never be used
as a preposition, and that it should instead only be used as an adjective.
However, there is no logical reason that it can’t function as part of the
compound preposition due to, and it is very often used this way in both
formal and informal speech and writing.)
Infinitive phrases
An infinitive is the most basic form of a verb. It is “unmarked” (which
means that it is not conjugated for tense or person), and it is preceded by the
particle to. Any predicative information that follows an infinitive verb
419

creates what’s known as an infinitive phrase.
Infinitives and infinitive phrases can serve as nouns, adjectives, or
adverbs. Infinitives always indicate purpose when they function as adverbs,
and for that reason they are sometimes known as infinitives of purpose.
For example:
• “I started running to improve my health.”
• “I went to the store to buy some milk.”
We can also use the phrases in order and so as to add formal emphasis to an
infinitive of purpose, as in:
• “We must leave now in order to catch our train.”
• “He’s been working quietly so as not to disturb his roommates.”
Lone infinitives of purpose
We can also use infinitives in this way as isolated responses to questions
asking why something is done or is the case. For example:
• Speaker A: “Why are you going to New York?”
• Speaker B: “To see the Empire State Building.”
• Speaker A: “Why did you turn on the TV?”
• Speaker B: “To watch the news.”
These responses are known as elliptical sentences, meaning that part of
the sentence has been omitted because it is implied. In the last example, the
implied section is “I turned on the TV because I wanted…. ” As this element
is implicitly understood, we often leave it out entirely and simply use the
infinitive on its own.
Adverbial clauses of purpose
We can also use the subordinating conjunctions as, because, since*, so
(that), in order that, for fear that, hence, or (less commonly) lest** to create
adverbial clauses that indicate reason or purpose. For example:
• “I am exhausted because I was working all night.”
• “As it’s raining, we probably shouldn’t play in the park today.”
• “I’m going to Johnny’s house later since all my homework is
finished.”*
420

• “He left the house so (that) he could be alone.”
• “I take my kids hiking in the mountains each summer in order that they
learn to appreciate nature's beauty.”
• “For fear that his son may get hurt, Dan never lets him play any
contact sports.”
• “I should explain myself to him, lest he thinks I am being
ungrateful.”**
(*Be careful with the subordinating conjunction since, because it is also used
with adverbial clauses of time, as we saw above.)
(**The subordinating conjunction lest is not commonly used today, as it
sounds old-fashioned and overly formal in modern English.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following cannot be used to form adverbs of purpose?
a) Conjunctive adverbs
b) Coordinating conjunctions
c) Subordinating conjunctions
d) Infinitives
2. Which of the following sentences does not use an adverb of purpose?
a) “I am studying James Joyce because of my love of Irish literature.”
b) “The flight leaves at 10 AM; therefore, we must be at the airport by 6
o’clock in the morning.”
c) “We’ve decided to move to a small villa in Italy.”
d) “I have to travel to New York to meet with the investors.”
3. Which of the following prepositions can be used to form a prepositional
phrase of purpose?
a) unto
b) into
c) onto
d) owing to
4. Where can adverbial clauses of purpose appear in a sentence?
421

a) At the beginning
b) In the middle
c) At the end
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) B & C
422

Focusing Adverbs
Definition
Focusing adverbs are used to draw attention to a particular part of a
clause. They frequently point to verb phrases, but they can also draw
attention to noun phrases, prepositional phrases, adjective phrases, and
adverbial phrases.
When we speak, we often emphasize a particular part of a sentence using
stressed intonation. This is sometimes represented in writing by using italics.
Both speech and writing can be simplified and ambiguity reduced by using
focusing adverbs instead. Let’s see this done both ways:
• Through intonation: “I know Tom is coming to the party.”
• Using a focusing adverb: “I know that at least Tom is coming to the party.”
Both the emphasis through intonation and the use of the focusing adverb at
least draw attention to Tom in the sentence. This signals to the listener or
reader that this information is important.
Focusing adverbs also often imply some sort of contrast. In the examples
above, drawing attention to Tom implies that there are other people who
may not be coming to the party.
Types of Focusing Adverbs
We select a focusing adverb according to how we intend to emphasize the
word or phrase. There are different focusing adverbs that are used to draw
attention to information that is being added, information that is being
limited or partially limited, information that is negative, information that
presents a choice, or information that is considered surprising. Let’s look at
some of the most common focusing adverbs for each function:
Adding information
When we want to emphasize information that is being added to previous
information, we can use the following focusing adverbs:
also
as well
423

too
For example:
• “Tom is coming to the party and is also bringing James.”
The focusing adverb also adds emphasis to the entire verb phrase: is
bringing James. This lets the listener know that this information is
especially important to the speaker. Let’s look at another example:
• “Tom is coming to the party, and James is coming too.”
Again, using the focusing adverb too adds the information about James
coming in addition to Tom and stresses its importance.
Limiting information
When we want to emphasize information that presents limits, we use the
following focusing adverbs:
• alone 
• but 
• exactly 
• exclusively 
• just 
• merely 
• not only 
• only 
• precisely 
• purely 
• simply 
• solely
Observe how these focusing adverbs emphasize limits:
Example: “Just Tom is coming to the party.”
Implication: Tom is coming to the party but is not bringing a friend, or
nobody else is coming to the party.
Example: “I’m going to study for exactly half an hour, then I’ll go to the
party.” 
Implication: I will study for no more than half an hour.
Example: “I’m only bringing James to the party.” 
Implication: I am not bringing anybody else.
Example: “The party starts at precisely 10 o’clock.”
424

Implication: The party won’t start earlier or later than 10 o’clock.
Partially limiting information
Sometimes, we want to emphasize information that isn’t completely limited,
but rather partially limited. For that purpose, we can use the following
focusing adverbs:
• chiefly 
• especially 
• mainly 
• mostly 
• notably 
• particularly 
• in particular 
• predominantly
• primarily 
• at least 
• for the most part 
• by and large
Let’s see how partially limiting focusing adverbs can work:
Example: “I want everybody to come to the party, especially James.”
Implication: I want everybody to come to the party, but I want James to
come the most.
Example: “They played mostly techno music at the party.”
Implication: They played several types of music, but most of it was techno.
Example: “A few people were missing at the party, notably Tom.”
Implication: Several people who were supposed to be at the party did not go.
Tom didn’t go, and that was significant.
Example: “The people coming to the party are going to be predominantly
students.”
Implications: There are a variety of people coming to the party, but the
majority will be students.
Other purposes
Negatives
425

When we want to draw attention to a negative statement, we can use
neither/nor.
Example: “Neither Tom nor James turned up at the party.” or:
“Tom didn’t turn up to the party, and neither did James.”
Implication: It is significant that neither Tom nor James went to the party.
Choices
When we want to draw attention to a choice of two things, we can use
either/or.
Example: “You can either bring Tom or James to the party.” 
Implication: You have to choose one friend to bring. You cannot bring both.
Surprise
Finally, when we want to show that a particular piece of information is
surprising, we can use even.
Example: “Even Tom was at the party!”
Implication: Absolutely everybody was at the party, including Tom, which
was unexpected.
Placement
Focusing adverbs can take the initial, middle, or final position in a sentence
depending on what you want them to draw attention to.
According to what you want to
emphasize
Changing the placement of the adverb changes which part of the clause is
emphasized, and thereby can greatly change the implications of the
sentence. Let’s see how this works using the base sentence “Jen can play
piano for her friends at the party.” Notice how the meaning changes as we
move around the focusing adverb only:
1. “Only Jen can play piano for her friends at the party.” 
Implication: Nobody else can play piano for her friends.
2. “Jen can only play piano for her friends at the party.” 
426

Implication: Jen can’t do anything else at the party, or Jen cannot play any
other instruments for her friends.
3. “Jen can play only piano for her friends at the party.”
Implication: Jen cannot play any other instruments for her friends.
4. “Jen can play piano for only her friends at the party.” 
Implication: Jen can play piano for her friends, but not for anybody else.
5. “Jen can play piano for her friends only at the party.” 
Implication: Jen cannot play piano for her friends in other circumstances.
Placement of focusing adverbs
around verbs
When the focusing adverb modifies a verb or verb phrase, it is placed before
the main verb. For example:
• “We didn’t go to the party. We just stayed at home.”
• “We only went for one hour.”
• “We even danced.”
However, focusing adverbs should be placed after the verb be:
• “It is just Tom.”
• “It was mostly Jen who danced at the party.”
• “I am especially sorry that I missed it.”
When a focusing adverb modifies a verb phrase that includes an auxiliary
verb and a main verb, it is placed between them. For example:
• “Jen can only play piano for her friends at the party.”
• “Tom didn’t even go to the party!”
• “They had particularly wanted a DJ instead of a band.”
Too and as well
In exception to the rules above, the focusing adverbs too and as well
normally take the final position in a clause. For example:
• “Tom is going to the party, and James is going too.”
• “I want to go to the party as well.”
427

Extra Notes
It’s worth mentioning that the words also and just have varying functions
and meanings from the examples given above. Let’s take a closer look:
Also
Also does not always function as a focusing adverb. It can also be used as a
conjunctive adverb. For example:
“Tom is coming to the party. Also, James is coming.”
Just
The word just also has different functions and meanings. We have already
seen that when used as a focusing adverb, just can limit the phrase it points
to, in the same way as only or merely.
However, it can also mean recently, as in “I just got home”; really, as in “I
just love it here”; barely, as in “We just made it on time”; and exactly, as in
“It’s just ten o’clock right now.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Too is a focusing adverb that stresses ________.
a) addition
b) limitation
c) partial limitation
d) surprise
2. Predominantly is a focusing adverb that stresses ________.
a) addition
b) limitation
c) partial limitation
d) surprise
 
3. Merely is a focusing adverb that stresses ________.
a) addition
b) limitation
428

c) partial limitation
d) surprise
 
4. Complete the following sentence with the correct focusing adverb:
“This party is ________ for students. I’m sorry, but nobody else can come.”
a) even
b) mostly
c) especially
d) exclusively
 
5. Complete the following sentence with the correct focusing adverb:
“There can be ________ 100 invited guests, no more and no less.”
a) exactly
b) particularly
c) also
d) not only
Negative Adverbs
Definition
Negative adverbs and negative adverbials (groups of words that function
as an adverb) are used to modify the meaning of a verb, adjective, other
adverb, or entire clause in a negative way. Like all adverbs, they usually
answer questions about manner, place, time, or degree.
No and Not
There is debate whether no and not should be classed as adverbs, but they
are by far the most commonly used words for creating negative statements,
so we’ll briefly look at how they work.
Using no
We use no as a negative answer to questions or an expression of
disagreement. It’s often classed as a determiner or an exclamation, but other
grammarians argue that it’s an adverb, especially when it is used to negate
comparative adjectives or comparative adverbs. For example:
429

• “He is no better than his rival.”
• “She runs no more quickly than her sister.”
Using not with auxiliary and
modal verbs
To negate a verb phrase, we insert not after the first auxiliary or modal
verb. For example:
• “I have seen him here before.” (positive) 
• “I have not seen him here before.” (negative)
• “I would have done the same.” (positive)
• “I would not have done the same.” (negative)
Using not with only a main verb
If the verb phrase contains only a main verb, we negate it by adding
do/does/did + not. For example:
• “I go swimming on Mondays.” (positive) 
• “I do not go swimming on Mondays.” (negative)
• “He works every day.” (positive) 
• “He does not work every day.” (negative)
• “We went to the supermarket yesterday.” (positive)
• “We did not go to the supermarket yesterday.” (negative)
Using not with the verb be
When a form of the verb be is the only verb in the statement, we place not
after it. For example:
• “They are tall.” (positive) 
• “They are not tall.” (negative)
• “It is an interesting project.” (positive)
• “It is not an interesting project.” (negative)
Other negative adverbs
Now that we have seen how no and not are used, let’s look at other negative
430

adverbs. The principle characteristic they all have in common is that we don’t
modify them with not because they already express negative meaning on
their own.
Negative 
adverbs 
meaning
“almost not”
Some negative adverbs mean “almost not.” They are:
hardly
barely
scarcely
These negative adverbs are placed in the same position as not. They generally
go after the first auxiliary or modal verb, before a main verb when it is the
only verb, and after forms of the verb be.
For example:
• “I hardly go out anymore.” (I almost don’t go out anymore.)
• “I can barely see the mountain through the clouds.” (I almost can’t see it.)
• “It’s scarcely surprising that you’re quitting your job.” (It is not very
surprising at all.)
Negative adverbs meaning “not
often” or “not ever”
When we want to stress how infrequently something occurs, we can use
these negative adverbs:
no longer
rarely
seldom
barely ever
hardly ever
never
Again, these adjectives are usually placed in the same position as not. For
example:
431

• “I no longer cook at home.” (I cooked at home before, but now I don’t.)
• “He has seldom/rarely/hardly ever played football.” (very infrequently)
• “We are never late.” (not ever)
Note that seldom, rarely, barely ever, and hardly ever are interchangeable.
They all mean “very infrequently.”
Negative adverbs that emphasize
quick succession of events
When we want to express that two events happened in quick succession (one
event almost did not finish before the next event happened) we can use any
of these negative adverbs:
hardly
barely
scarcely
no sooner
Some of these are the same negative adverbs that mean “almost not,” but
when we use them for events in quick succession, we must use them in
combination with either when (for hardly, scarcely and barely), or than (for
no sooner).
The first event is usually expressed in the past perfect tense, with the
negative adverb following the auxiliary verb had. The two clauses are joined
with when or than (depending on which negative adverb is used), and the
second event follows in the past simple tense.
For example:
• “We had hardly finished cleaning when the guests arrived.”
• “I had barely walked in the door when she called.”
• “She had scarcely been home five minutes when they arrived to take her
to the movie.”
• “We had no sooner put dinner on the table than the doorbell rang.”
Adverbial 
phrases 
for 
total
432

negation
There are a few adverbial phrases that are used to completely negate a
clause. For example:
under no circumstances
in no way
on no condition
Like not, these adverbials can be placed in mid position:
• “We in no way like this plan.” (We don’t like this plan.)
• “We have under no circumstances allowed them to come inside.” (They
have definitely not been allowed inside.)
• “She is on no condition to be disturbed.” (Don’t disturb her.)
However, they are more commonly placed in initial position using inversion,
which we will examine later in this article.
Using 
only 
for 
conditional
negativity
Only can be used when we want to place conditions on whether something is
going to occur or not. It most closely means “exclusively,” and can be used in
several combinations. For example:
only… after
only… if
only… when
only… until
Usually, we place only before the action that may or may not occur, and
if/after/when/until before the condition. For example:
• “I will only go to the movie if you go too.” 
Meaning: I am not going to the movie if you don’t go.
• “I’ll only help you when you ask for it.”
Meaning: I will not help you when you don’t ask for help.
• “They are only living here until they find a new house.” 
Meaning: They will leave here when they find a new house.
433

Using inversion
We have shown how negative adverbs are often placed in mid position.
However, it’s also very common for negative adverbs to appear at the
beginning of a sentence. This is often done in more formal or literary styles,
as well as when we want to place special emphasis on the negative adverb.
When we place the negative adverb at the beginning of the sentence, we
must use inversion. This is when we rearrange the normal subject/verb
order of the sentence. We already use the principle of inversion all the time
when we form questions. For example:
• “He has seen this movie.” (no inversion)
• “Has he seen this movie?” (inversion)
To form the question, the subject (he) and the auxiliary verb (has) switch
places. The process is the same when we use negative adverbs.
Inversion with auxiliary/modal
verbs
If a negative adverb is being used at the beginning a sentence that has a
modal or auxiliary verb, we simply switch the order of the first
auxiliary/modal verb and the subject. For example:
• “I have never seen such a beautiful creature.” (no inversion) 
• “Never have I seen such a beautiful creature.” (inversion)
• “We had scarcely arrived home when they called.” (no inversion)
• “Scarcely had we arrived home when they called.” (inversion)
• “He can under no circumstances play that game.” (no inversion)
• “Under no circumstances can he play that game.” (inversion)
Inversion with only a main verb
If a negative adverb is placed at the beginning of a sentence that contains
only a main verb, we must insert the auxiliary verbs do/does or did and use
the bare infinitive form of the verb, just like when we form questions. For
example:
• “We in no way like this plan.” (no inversion) 
434

• “In no way do we like this plan.” (inversion)
• “She scarcely leaves the city anymore.” (no inversion) 
• “Scarcely does she leave the city anymore.” (inversion)
• “He barely stopped in time.” (no inversion) 
• “Barely did he stop in time.” (inversion)
Inversion with the verb “be”
When a negative adverb begins a sentence that only contains the verb be, we
switch the order of the subject and be (again, the same as when we form
questions):
• “We are seldom late.” (no inversion) 
• “Seldom are we late.” (inversion)
• “He is hardly working.” (no inversion) 
• “Hardly is he working.” (inversion)
• “She is on no condition to be disturbed.” (no inversion)
• On no condition is she to be disturbed.” (inversion)
Inversion 
of 
“only” 
for
conditional negativity
When we form negative conditional expressions with only, we have to do a
bit more rearranging. The entire conditional clause joins only in the
beginning of the sentence, and the subject-verb word order changes in the
main clause. For example:
• “I will only go to the movie if you go too.” (no inversion) 
• “Only if you go too will I go to the movie.” (inversion)
• “I’ll only help you when you ask for help.” (no inversion) 
• “Only when you ask for help will I help you.” (inversion)
• “They are only living here until they find a new house.” (no inversion)
• “Only until they find a new house are they living here.” (inversion)
Common Errors
Negative adverbs leave lots of room for little mistakes. The most common
errors are using double negatives, not using inversion when starting a
435

sentence with a negative adverb, and misunderstanding or misusing the
negative adverb hardly.
Double Negatives
In English, we generally cannot use double negatives, which occur when
two negative elements are used in the same part of a sentence. We must
remember that when we use a negative adverb, we cannot further negate the
sentence with no, not or another negative adverb because the two negatives
cancel each other out, making the sentence affirmative in meaning. For
example:
✖ “You shouldn’t under no circumstances cheat on a test.” (incorrect)
• Literal meaning: There are certain circumstances under which you should
cheat.
✔ “You should under no circumstances cheat on a test.” (correct) 
Meaning: You should never cheat.
✖ “I scarcely had not enough time to get ready.” (incorrect)
• Literal meaning: I actually had plenty of time to get ready.
✔ “I scarcely had enough time to get ready.” (correct)
Meaning: I almost did not have enough time.
Using double negative for emphasis
While we should generally avoid using double negatives in our speech and
writing, there are certain circumstances in which they can be used for an
emphatic, rhetorical effect. For example:
• “Well, I didn’t not tell him the truth; I just didn’t tell him the whole
truth.”
• Literal meaning: I didn’t lie, I just left out some information.
• “You can’t just not go to school!”
• Literal meaning: You must go to school.
However, these are very informal constructions, so they should only be
used sparingly, and they should not be used in formal or professional
writing at all.
436

Not using inversion
Another common error is when we place a negative adverb at the beginning
of the sentence but forget to use inversion. For example:
✖ “Under no circumstances you can watch that movie.” (incorrect)
✔ “Under no circumstances can you watch that movie.” (correct)
Meaning: You cannot watch that movie. 
Explanation: You must invert the order of the subject (you) and the modal
verb (can).
✖ “Never he did visit the Eiffel Tower.” (incorrect)
✔ “Never did he visit the Eiffel Tower.” (correct)
Meaning: He never visited the Eiffel Tower. 
Explanation: You must invert the order of the subject (he) and the modal
verb (did).
Hardly
Finally, a common error is misusing or misunderstanding the meaning of the
negative adverb hardly. Although many adverbs are formed by adding “-ly”
to the end of an adjective, this is not the case with hardly.
The adverb form of the adjective hard is also hard. Hardly, however, never
means “in a hard way,” but rather means “almost not.” For example:
✖ “He’s working hardly.” (incorrect)
✔ “He’s working hard.” (correct—He’s working a lot or with much effort.)
✔ “He’s hardly working.” (correct—He’s almost not working at all.)
(See the chapter section on Regular and Irregular Adverbs to learn
more about adverb forms that are exceptions to the conventional rules of
English.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which negative adverb does not mean the same as the other three?
a) barely ever
b) scarcely
c) rarely
d) never
437

2. Which sentence shows correct use of the negative adverb barely?
a) “Barely she goes out anymore.”
b) “She barely goes out anymore.”
c) “She goes barely out anymore.”
d) “She goes barely anymore out.”
3. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “I had no sooner finished cooking when they came in.”
b) “I had barely finished cooking when they came in.”
c) “I had scarcely finished cooking when they came in.”
d) “I had hardly finished cooking when they came in.”
4. Which of the following sentences uses inversion correctly?
a) “Rarely have we tasted such delicious food.”
b) “Rarely we have tasted such delicious food.”
c) “We have tasted such delicious food rarely.”
d) “Have we tasted rarely such delicious food.”
5. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “Under no circumstances can you go out on Saturday.”
b) “Never have I been so upset.”
c) “Scarcely has he not seen her in the last few years.”
d) “He’s working hard.”
Conjunctive Adverbs
Definition
Conjunctive adverbs (also called linking adverbs or connecting
adverbs) are a specific type of conjunction. Conjunctions are used to join
together words, phrases, or clauses. Conjunctive adverbs are specifically used
to connect two independent clauses.
An independent clause (also called a main clause) contains a subject
and a predicate, and it expresses a full thought. In other words, it can stand
on its own and makes sense as a complete simple sentence. For example:
438

• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play. She didn’t recommend it to her friend.”
This example shows two independent clauses. The first contains the subject
Jen and the predicate hadn’t enjoyed the play, while the second includes the
subject she and the predicate didn’t recommend it to her friend. Each clause
expresses a complete idea and makes sense on its own. However, they would
sound more natural if they were connected. This is where conjunctive
adverbs come in. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; therefore, she didn’t recommend it to her
friend.”
The two independent clauses are now connected in a more natural way,
using the conjunctive adverb therefore.
Punctuating the clauses
When we join two independent clauses with a conjunctive adverb, they are
traditionally separated with a semicolon (as in our example above). It is
also acceptable to use a period and keep them as two discrete sentences.
Either way, the conjunctive adverb typically begins the second clause,
followed by a comma. (We will examine alternative placement of the adverb
later in this section.) However, we cannot separate the two clauses using a
comma. For example:
✔ “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; therefore, she didn’t recommend it.”
(correct)
✔ “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play. Therefore, she didn’t recommend it.”
(correct)
✖ “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play, therefore, she didn’t recommend it.”
(incorrect)
If we choose to separate the two clauses with a period, we must remember to
capitalize the conjunctive adverb, since it is the first word in a new sentence.
For the sake of consistency, we will use semicolons in all of the examples
below.
Choosing a conjunctive adverb
There are many conjunctive adverbs. To choose the right one, we must
consider the relationship between the first and second clause. Let’s look at
the example again:
439

• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; therefore, she didn’t recommend it to her
friend.”
The second clause is a result of the first clause. Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play,
and that is the reason that she didn’t recommend it to her friend. So, when
we connect the two clauses, we choose a conjunctive adverb (therefore) that
makes this cause-and-effect relationship clear. Think about how the
relationship between these two clauses is different from the previous
example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play. She recommended it to her friend.”
We still have two independent clauses, but now the relationship between
them is different. Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play, but recommended it to her
friend anyway. We can no longer use the conjunctive adverb therefore,
because we are no longer dealing with cause and effect. Instead, we need to
choose a conjunctive adverb like nevertheless, which is used to express
unexpected results:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; nevertheless, she recommended it to her
friend.”
These are some the most common conjunctive adverbs and their functions:
Result
Comparison
Contrast
Adding
info
Adding
stronger
info
Unexpec
Result
accordingly
comparatively contrarily
also
further
neverthele
as a result
equally
conversely
besides
furthermore nonethele
consequently likewise
however
in
addition moreover
surprising
hence
similarly
in
comparison  
 
still
therefore
 
in contrast
 
 
 
thus
 
instead
 
 
 
 
 
on 
the
other hand
 
 
 
 
 
rather
 
 
 
440

Result
When the second clause is a result of something that happened in the first
clause, we have a few options. One is therefore, which we looked at already.
We can also use accordingly, as a result, consequently, hence, and thus
interchangeably with therefore; the meaning of the sentence remains the
same. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; hence, she didn’t recommend it.”
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; as a result, she didn’t recommend it.”
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; consequently, she didn’t recommend it.”
Comparison
When we state that two things are alike, we can use the conjunctive adverbs
comparatively and similarly. For example:
• “Jen grew up in New York City; similarly, her boyfriend grew up in inner-
city Chicago.”
• “Sam always wanted to be a famous movie star; comparatively, his
brother wanted to be a famous rock star.”
When we state that two things are not just similar, but equal, we can draw a
comparison using conjunctive adverbs like equally and likewise.
• “Jen grew up in New York; likewise, her boyfriend was raised in the city.”
• “Sam always wanted to be a movie star; equally, his brother dreamed of
starring in films.”
Contrast
There are two types of contrast that we can illustrate using conjunctive
adverbs. The first, known as complete contrast, is when the two opposing
things are total opposites. For this type of contrast, we can use any of the
contrasting conjunctive adverbs in the table. For example:
• “Tom has a black backpack; in contrast, his brother has a white one.”
• “I absolutely love singing; on the other hand, my sister hates it.”
• “Jen is terrible at math; however, her friend is amazing at it, so she helps
441

her.”
The other type of contrast is weak contrast. This is when the two clauses
are opposing but are not complete opposites. For this type of contrast, we are
limited to using only the weaker of the contrasting conjunctive adverbs, and
not the strong ones like on the other hand and in contrast. For example:
✔ “Jen is terrible at math; however, she still likes it.” (correct)
✖ “Jen is terrible at math; on the other hand, she still likes it.” (incorrect)
✔ “I would have liked to stay in bed all day; instead, I got up and went to
the park.” (correct)
✖ “I would have liked to stay in bed all day; in contrast, I got up and went
to the park.” (incorrect)
Adding information
Sometimes we want to add information of equal value to the information in
the first clause. In this case, we can use also or in addition. For example:
• “When you make the dinner, remember that he doesn’t like chicken; in
addition, he can’t eat shellfish.”
• “Her favorite animals are dogs; also, she likes cats.”
When we want to add information that further explains something, we use
besides. For example:
• “I heard this movie is terrible; besides, I hate horror films.”
• “Jen passed her test because she’s good at English; besides, she studies
hard.”
Adding stronger information
When the information that we want to add has more value (is stronger) than
the information in the first clause, we can use the conjunctive adverbs
further, furthermore, or moreover. For example:
• “He was fired because he was often late; furthermore, the quality of his
work was poor.”
• “Being a doctor is an exhausting job; moreover, you don’t earn good
money until you’ve been practicing for many years.”
Unexpected result
442

When the second clause is an unexpected result of the first clause, we can
use the conjunctive adverbs nevertheless, nonetheless, surprisingly or still.
For example:
• “I am terrible at math; nonetheless, I passed my exam!”
• “That car cost far too much money; nevertheless, Tom bought it.”
• “She has never been to France; surprisingly, she speaks French fluently.”
Emphasis
When we want to place special emphasis on the second clause, we can use
the conjunctive adverbs indeed or in fact. For example:
• “I didn’t study as much as I should have; indeed, I hardly opened a book!”
• “He doesn’t like swimming very much; in fact, he hates all sports!”
Condition
The conjunctive adverb otherwise is used to place conditions on whether
something will occur or not. It most closely means “if not.” For example:
• “You have to come with me; otherwise, I’m not going.”
• “Maybe she didn’t study very hard; otherwise, she would have passed the
test.”
Where 
to 
use 
conjunctive
adverbs
Conjunctive adverbs must appear in the second of the two clauses that are
connected. For the sake of consistency, we have shown all of them at the
beginning of the second clause in the examples, but they can actually be
moved around within it.
Depending on where we place the conjunctive adverb in the sentence, there
are certain rules regarding commas that we must be aware of.
At the beginning of the second
clause
443

Conjunctive adverbs are often placed at the beginning of the second clause,
which is how we have shown them in all of our examples up to now. Note
that when they are placed in this position, they are usually followed by a
comma. The comma is sometimes optional with the conjunctive adverb thus,
but this is a stylistic preference. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; thus, she didn’t recommend it.”
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; thus she didn’t recommend it.”
In the middle of the second
clause
We can also place the conjunctive adverb in the middle of the second clause.
It should come after the subject or introductory phrase. When the
introductory phrase is short (i.e., one to two syllables), it may not be
necessary to place a comma after the conjunctive adverb. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; she therefore didn’t recommend it.”
If the introductory phrase is any longer, it is generally necessary to enclose
the conjunctive adverb between two commas. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; she decided, therefore, not to recommend
it.”
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; she did not, as a result, recommend it.”
At the end of the second clause
Finally, a conjunctive adverb can also appear at the end of the second clause.
When placing the conjunctive adverb in this position, it is usually preceded
by a comma; however, this depends on the flow of the sentence and it can be
omitted if it seems unnatural. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; she did not recommend it, consequently.”
• “Tom had never been good at basketball; he had always loved it,
nonetheless.”
• “I wanted to stay in bed; I went to the park instead.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
444

1. Conjunctive adverbs are used to connect two ________.
a) phrases
b) words
c) dependent clauses
d) independent clauses
 
2. We must separate the two clauses with ________.
a) a comma
b) a period
c) a semi-colon
d) Either A or B
e) Either B or C
 
3. Which sentence is correct?
a) “I love cake; however, I’m not a fan of pie.”
b) “I love cake. however, I’m not a fan of pie.”
c) “I love cake, However, I’m not a fan of pie.”
d) “I love cake, however, I’m not a fan of pie.”
 
4. Complete the following sentence with the correct conjunctive adverb:
“I really wish I were better at soccer; ________, I’m quite good at
basketball.”
a) in addition
b) however
c) in fact
d) furthermore
 
5. Complete the following sentence with the correct conjunctive adverb:
“He didn’t get the job because he was late to the interview. ________, he
had absolutely no experience.”
a) On the other hand
b) Furthermore
c) However
d) Thus
Evaluative Adverbs
445

Definition
Most adverbs describe how or when an action occurs. Evaluative adverbs,
which are also referred to as commenting adverbs, are different. Instead
of giving us information about the action itself, evaluative adverbs are used
by the speaker to comment or give an opinion on something. Evaluative
adverbs modify the entire clause.
Types of Evaluative Adverbs
There are several types of evaluative adverbs, which can be classified
according to their function. Some give information about how certain we
consider something to be, others express our attitude (negative or positive)
about something, while others are used to pass judgment on someone’s
actions. Some of the most common evaluative adverbs for each function are
listed in the table below:
Degree of Certainty
Attitude
Judgment
apparently
astonishingly bravely
clearly
frankly
carelessly
definitely
fortunately
fairly
doubtfully
honestly
foolishly
doubtlessly
hopefully
generously
obviously
interestingly
kindly
presumably
luckily
rightly
probably
sadly
spitefully
undoubtedly
seriously
stupidly
 
surprisingly
unfairly
 
unbelievably
wisely
 
 
wrongly
 
446

To indicate a degree of certainty
We can use the evaluative adverbs listed in the first column of the table to
state how certain we are about something. For example:
• “Clearly, we're going to have to work harder.” (I am sure that we are going
to have to work harder.)
• “Apparently, we’re going to have to work harder.” (There is some
indication that we may have to work harder.)
To indicate attitude
We can use the evaluative adverbs in the second column of the table to make
our attitude about something clear. For example:
• “Astonishingly, she did well on the test.” (I feel surprised that she did
well on the test.)
• “Sadly, he couldn’t come to the party.” (It is unfortunate that he couldn’t
come to the party.)
• “Honestly, I couldn’t eat another bite.” (The truth is that I couldn’t eat
another bite.)
To indicate judgment
We can use the evaluative adverbs in the third column to make judgments
about someone’s actions, including our own. For example:
• “I stupidly forgot my phone at home.” (I forgot my phone at home, and I
think that was stupid of me.)
• “You carelessly dropped my favorite cup.” (You dropped my cup, and I
think it’s because you were not being careful.)
• “She bravely traveled across Asia alone.” (She traveled across Asia alone,
and, in my opinion, that was brave.)
Sentence Placement
The evaluative adverb is usually placed at the beginning of the sentence,
followed by a comma. For example:
• “Clearly, he didn’t mean to ignore you.”
447

• “Apparently, she has real talent.”
• “Interestingly, he is very good at chess.”
However, they can also appear at the end of the sentence, preceded by a
comma, as in:
• “He didn’t mean to ignore you, clearly.”
• “She has real talent, apparently.”
• “He is really good at chess, interestingly.”
Some evaluative adverbs can also appear in the mid position, in which case
we usually do not set them apart with commas. In particular, probably and
definitely are most likely to occur in this position, appearing after the subject
or after the verb be. For example:
• “He probably didn’t mean to ignore you.”
• “She definitely works hard.”
• “He is probably really good at chess.” 
• “They are definitely the best of friends.”
When we use an evaluative adverb to make a judgment of an action, we
usually put the adverb after the subject. For example:
• “She bravely told the truth.”
• “He generously offered the lady a ride home.”
• “You carelessly dropped my favorite cup.”
However, if we want to place a strong emphasis on the judgment, we can also
place it at the beginning of the sentence, set apart by a comma. For example:
• “Bravely, she told the truth.”
• “Generously, he offered the lady a ride home.”
• “Carelessly, you dropped my favorite cup.
Placing this type of evaluative adverb at the end of the sentence is less
common, but still acceptable. For example:
• “She told the truth, bravely.”
• “He offered the lady a ride home, generously.”
• “You dropped my favorite cup, carelessly.”
Quiz
448

(answers start on page 610)
1. Evaluative adverbs are used to give the ________.
a) reader’s opinion
b) writer’s opinion
c) speaker’s opinion
d) Both A & C
e) Both B & C
2. Which evaluative adverb does not indicate degree of certainty?
a) clearly
b) generously
c) apparently
d) obviously
3. Which adverb does not indicate a judgment of someone’s actions?
a) stupidly
b) generously
c) wisely
d) certainly
 
4. Which adverb does not indicate attitude?
a) luckily
b) definitely
c) sadly
d) surprisingly
 
5. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “Surprisingly, he didn’t come with us.”
b) “He surprisingly didn’t come with us.”
c) “He didn’t come surprisingly with us.”
d) “He didn’t come with us, surprisingly.”
Viewpoint Adverbs
Definition
449

Viewpoint adverbs are often confused with evaluative adverbs.
Although they are similar in form, and the specific adverbs used can overlap,
the two actually serve different functions. While evaluative adverbs are used
to give an opinion, viewpoint adverbs are used to indicate whose point of
view we are expressing, or to specify what aspect of something we are talking
about. They modify an entire sentence or independent clause.
Indicating point of view
Many common viewpoint adverbs are actually adverbials, or groups of
words that function together as an adverb. Here are some common viewpoint
adverbs and adverbials for indicating whose point of view we are expressing:
according to me/you/him/her/them
as far as I/you/he/she/they am/is/are concerned
in my/your/his/her/their opinion
in my/your/his/her/their view
to my/your/his/her/their knowledge
from my/your/his/her/their perspective
from my/your/his/her/their point of view
personally
We can use these viewpoint adverbs and adverbials to express who supports
the statement. For example:
• “In my opinion, you shouldn’t go to that party.” (I believe you shouldn’t
go to that party.)
• “According to my sister, I have a fantastic sense of humor.” (My sister
thinks I have a fantastic sense of humor.)
• “To my teacher’s knowledge, my homework has been eaten by a dog.”
(My teacher believes that my homework has been eaten by a dog.)
• “Personally, I don’t believe it’s true.” (My own personal opinion is that it
isn’t true.)
Specifying 
an 
aspect 
of
something
We also use specific viewpoint adverbs to delimit, or specify, what part or
450

aspect of something we are talking about. These adverbs are often called
domain adverbs, and are almost limitless. Some examples are:
biologically
environmentally
ideologically
industrially
financially
formally
inwardly
linguistically
mathematically
medically
morally
officially
outwardly
physically
politically
scientifically
technically
theoretically
visually
For example:
• “Biologically, insects are some of the most amazing creatures on the
planet.” (From a biological point of view, insects are amazing.)
• “Industrially, 19th-century London was the most advanced city in the
world.” (19th-century London was the most advanced city in terms of
industry.)
• “Officially, we’re not allowed to sit here.” (According to official rules, we
are not allowed to sit here.)
For variety, we can also adapt the above adverbs into adverbial phrases with
no change in meaning. We can use the following patterns:
adverb + “speaking”
“in terms of” + noun
451

“in” + adjective + “terms”
“from a” + adjective + “point of view”
“as far as” + noun + “is concerned”
For example:
• “Biologically speaking, insects are some of the most amazing creatures
on the planet.”
• “In terms of biology, insects are some of the most amazing creatures on
the planet.”
• “In biological terms, insects are some of the most amazing creatures on
the planet.”
• “From a biological point of view, insects are some of the most amazing
creatures on the planet.”
• “As far as biology is concerned, insects are some of the most amazing
creatures on the planet.”
Sentence Placement
As we’ve seen in the examples above, viewpoint adverbs usually appear at the
beginning of the clause, followed by a comma. However, they can also appear
at the end of the clause. For example:
• “You shouldn’t go to that party, in my opinion.”
• “I don’t believe it's true, personally.”
• “19th -century London was the most advanced city in the world,
industrially.”
• “Insects are some of the most amazing creatures on the planet,
biologically speaking.”
Note that whether they appear at the beginning or the end, they are set apart
from the rest of the clause by a comma.
Viewpoint adverbs can appear in other positions in the sentence, but this is
less common. If we place a viewpoint adverb in mid position, we should be
sure to double check the readability of the sentence, and always set it apart
from the rest of the clause between two commas.
For example:
• “You shouldn’t, in my opinion, go to that party.”
452

• “Insects are, in terms of biology, some of the most amazing creatures on
the planet.”
• “We are not, in official terms, allowed to sit here.”
• “19th-century London was, industrially, the most advanced city in the
world.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Viewpoint adverbs are often used to indicate __________________.
a) who believes something
b) why you believe something
c) what you believe
d) how much you believe something
2. Viewpoint adverbs must be separated from the rest of the clause by a
________.
a) a colon
b) a semi-colon
c) a period
d) a comma
3. Which of the following sentences is punctuated correctly?
a) “Personally I don’t like cake.”
b) “Personally; I don’t like cake.”
c) “Personally, I don’t like cake.”
d) “Personally I don’t, like cake.”
4. Complete the following sentence:
“In scientific ________, humans are mammals.”
a) science
b) speaking
c) according
d) terms
5. Complete the following sentence:
“________ my knowledge, he is at home.”
453

a) In
b) To
c) By
d) For
Relative Adverbs
Definition
Relative adverbs, like relative pronouns, introduce relative clauses
(also called adjective clauses) that modify a noun or a noun phrase.
However, while relative pronouns (such as that, which, or who) are used to
relate information to a person or a thing, relative adverbs (where, when and
why) are used when the information relates to a place, time, or the reason an
action took place.
Functions of relative adverbs
Place
We use the relative adverb where to introduce information that relates to a
place. The place can be any location: a house, city, country, geographical
region, or even a planet.
For example:
• “The house where I was born is a very special place.”
• “Paris, where I want to live, is the most beautiful city in the world.”
• “I’ll always remember the river where we learned to swim.
Time
We use the relative adverb when to introduce information that relates to a
time. That time can be an actual time of day, a day, a week, a year, or even an
era. For example:
• “The 80s were a time when big hair was considered fashionable.”
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.”
• “Yesterday was the day when I met my husband for lunch.”
454

Reason
We use the relative adverb why to introduce information that relates to the
reason something happened. In this case, the noun being modified is “the
reason,” but it is often omitted to reduce repetitiveness. For example:
• “I don’t know the reason why he got angry.”
OR
• “I don’t know why he got angry.”
• “Do you know the reason why the sky is blue?”
OR
• “Do you know why the sky is blue?”
Restrictive and non-restrictive
relative clauses
Like relative pronouns, relative adverbs can introduce a restrictive
relative clause (also called a defining clause), or a non-restrictive
relative clause (also known as a non-defining clause). Restrictive
relative clauses identify the noun, giving us essential information about it,
while non-restrictive clauses simply give us additional information that is
not essential to the sentence. Let’s look at the difference:
Restrictive relative clauses
As mentioned, restrictive relative clauses identify the noun, giving us
information about it that we need to know in order to understand the
speaker’s meaning. This type of clause does not need any commas. For
example:
• “The house where I was born is a very special place.” 
• “I’ll always remember the river where we learned to swim.”
• “Yesterday was the day when I met my husband for lunch.” 
• “The 80s were a time when big hair was considered fashionable.”
• “I don’t know (the reason) why he got angry.”
• “Do you know (the reason) why the sky is blue?”
The restrictive relative clause in each of the sentences above is underlined.
Now, observe what happens to the meaning of the sentences if we remove
455

the relative clause:
• “The house is a very special place.” (What house?) 
• “I’ll always remember the river.” (What river?)
• “Yesterday was the day.” (What day?) 
• “The 80s were a time.” (What kind of time?)
• “I don’t know the reason.” (The reason for/about what?) 
• “Do you know the reason?” (What reason?)
When you remove a restrictive relative clause, the nouns are no longer
identifiable and the sentences contain much less information, as you can see
from the examples above. Instead, the listener or reader is left with
questions.
Non-restrictive relative clauses
Non-restrictive relative clauses give us additional information about a noun
that has already been identified, but this information is not essential for the
sentence to make sense. Only two of the relative adverbs, where and when,
can be used to introduce non-restrictive relative clauses; why cannot.
Note that non-restrictive relative clauses must be set apart from the rest of
the sentence by commas. For example:
• “Paris, where I want to live, is the most beautiful city in the world.” 
• “The blue house on the corner, where those kids are playing, is the house I
want to buy.”
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.” 
• “May, when flowers bloom, is my favorite month of the year.”
In the examples above, the underlined relative clauses merely give extra
information about the nouns; they do not define them. The sentences would
still make sense even if the relative clauses were removed, which is how we
know that we are dealing with non-restrictive relative clauses. For example:
• “Paris is the most beautiful city in the world.”
• “The blue house on the corner is the house I want to buy.”
• “I love casual Fridays.”
• “May is my favorite month of the year.”
Formality
456

Relative adverbs are used in daily speech and writing to take the place of the
structure preposition + which. This structure is considered very formal and
is usually only used in academic writing or particularly formal speech.
For example:
• “This is the house in which I was born.”
• “April 10th is the day on which I met my husband.”
• “Do you know the reason for which the sky is blue?”
These sentences all sound too formal for daily use. Instead, we usually use
relative adverbs instead:
• “This is the house where I was born.”
• “April 10th is the day when I met my husband.”
• “Do you know the reason why the sky is blue?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Relative adverbs are used to introduce ________.
a) nouns
b) adjectives
c) people
d) adjective clauses
 
2. Which of the following is not a relative adverb?
a) where
b) who
c) when
d) why
 
3. A restrictive relative clause includes ________.
a) essential information
b) extra information
c) non-essential information
d) a non-restrictive relative clause
 
4. Complete the following sentence:
457

“Monday, ________ I usually have the most work, is now my day off.”
a) that
b) where
c) when
d) why
 
5. Complete the following sentence:
“That’s ________ I haven’t called you for so long.”
a) that
b) where
c) when
d) why
 
6. Which sentence is punctuated correctly?”
a) “My brother’s house, where I used to spend a lot of time, was just sold.”
b) “My brother’s house where I used to spend a lot of time was just sold.”
c) “My brother’s house where I used, to spend a lot of time, was just sold.”
d) “My brother house where I used to spend, a lot of time was just sold.”
Adverbial Nouns
Definition
Adverbial nouns are nouns or noun phrases that function grammatically
as adverbs to modify verbs and certain adjectives.
Modifying verbs
Adverbial nouns are sometimes referred to as adverbial objectives. This is
because they hold a position normally occupied by a verb’s direct object, yet
they act as an adverb to modify the verb with an aspect of time, distance,
weight, age, or monetary value.
Time
• “I am leaving tomorrow.”
• “We walked an hour out of town.”
458

• “I’ll see you next year.”
Distance
• “I run five miles every day.”
• “I can barely see a foot in front of me in this fog.”
Weight
• “They are displaying a block of cheese that weighs a ton!”
• “I’m trying to lose a few pounds before the wedding.”
Age
• “She is 35 years old.” (In this case, the adverbial noun phrase modifies the
adjective old.)
• “This wine is aged 25 years.”
Monetary value
• “This car only costs $2,000.”
• “That speeding ticket set me back 300 bucks.”
Complementing 
certain
adjectives
Certain adjectives, such as worth and due, are able to take nouns or noun
phrases as complements when they are in a predicative position. For
example:
• “This coat is only worth a dollar.”
• “I think Mary is due an apology.”
Some sources also consider the word like to be an adjective that can take a
noun/noun phrase complement, as in:
• “He is very much like your brother.”
Other sources only consider it as a preposition in this capacity, which would
make like your brother a prepositional phrase.
459

Likewise, worth and due are sometimes considered to be more like
prepositions than adjectives when they function this way. However, there is
not a clear agreement on the terminology that is most appropriate, because it
is so unusual for nouns to be the complements of adjectives.
Finally, note that adverbial nouns are not the same as attributive nouns
(also called noun adjuncts), which are used with another noun to form
compound nouns.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following are not modified or complemented by adverbial
nouns?
a) verbs
b) adjectives
c) adverbs
d) None of the above
 
2. Which of the following is not one of the ways verbs are modified by
adverbial nouns?
a) To describe time
b) To describe distance
c) To describe weight
d) To describe manner
 
3. Identify the adverbial noun in the following sentence:
“I can’t wait to start school this September in Canada.”
a) school
b) this September
c) in Canada
d) None of the above
 
4. Identify the adverbial noun in the following sentence:
“She’s going to be 20 next July.”
a) going to
b) 20
c) next
460

d) next July
461

Regular and Irregular Adverbs
Definition
Adverbs generally correspond to an adjective, so that when we want to apply
the adjective’s meaning to a verb (or to an adjective or another adverb), we
have a straightforward way to do so. Regular adverbs are formed by adding
“-ly” or some variation thereof onto the end of the adjective. Sometimes the
adjective’s spelling needs to be altered slightly to accommodate this, but the
rules of doing so are fairly straightforward.
Irregular adverbs, on the other hand, are adverbs that are not formed
from standard English spelling conventions. Because they do not follow the
“rules,” there is no trick to using them: you simply have to memorize them.
Here is a table of the most common irregular adverbs and their adjectival
counterparts:
Adjective Irregular
Adverb
Sources of Confusion
fast
fast
 
hard
hard
Hardly (ever) is an adverb of frequency, meaning
“almost never.”
straight
straight
 
lively
lively
Lively still exists as an adverb in phrases like “step
lively.” However, it is more often used in the
adverbial prepositional phrase “in a lively manner.”
late
late
Lately is a different adverb that means “recently.”
daily
daily
 
early
early
 
friendly
no adverb
Can be used in the adverbial prepositional phrase
“in a friendly manner.”
timely
no adverb
Can be used in the adverbial prepositional phrase
“in a friendly manner.”
462

good
well
Well is the adverb form of good; it can also
function as a predicative adjective.
First, let’s examine the normal rules for making regular adverbs, and then
we’ll examine more closely the irregular adverbs above that do not follow
these rules.
Regular adverbs
Regular adverbs are formed by taking an adjective and adding some form of
the suffix “-ly.” Sometimes the spelling of the adjective changes to
accommodate this suffix; sometimes the suffix itself must change. As with
most spelling rules in English, though, there are exceptions even to these
patterns. We’ll look at these rules individually, and highlight any exceptions
to each.
Adjective + “-ly”
The most straightforward rule is to simply add “-ly” to the end of an
adjective, without changing the spelling at all. This occurs when an adjective
ends in a consonant (except for “-ic”) or a consonant + “-e” (except for “-le”).
For example:
• “She is a beautiful singer.” 
• “She sings beautifully.”
• “He is a slow walker.” 
• “He walks slowly.”
• “This is the last item we need to discuss.”
• “Lastly, let’s discuss the impact on the environment.”
Adjectives ending in “-ic”
Sometimes the spelling of a word will have to change slightly so as to better
accommodate the extra “-ly.” If the adjective ends in “-ic,” for instance, it will
become “-ically”:
• “They are enthusiastic students.” 
• “They work enthusiastically.”
• “There are some drastic differences between these.”
463

• “These are drastically different.”
The one exception to this rule is the adjective public, which becomes the
adverb publicly.
Adjectives ending in “-y”
If the adjective ends in a “-y,” it is replaced with “-ily”:
• “The children are happy when they are playing.” 
• “The children are playing happily.”
• “Why are you so noisy when you eat?”
• “Quit eating so noisily!”
Adjectives ending in “-le” and “-
ue”
For adjectives ending in “-le” or “-ue,” the “e” on the end is dropped and is
replaced with “-ly”:
• “He is a terrible golfer.”
• “He plays golf terribly.”
• “You will get what is due so long as you are true to your word."
• “It is duly noted that the defendant is truly remorseful.”
Irregular Adverbs
The majority of adverbs end in “-ly,” but as we will see, there are some
irregular ones that need to be memorized.
Spelling doesn’t change
Fast is one of the irregular adverbs—the adjective and the adverb are the
same. For example:
• “A Ferrari is a fast car.
• “He drives fast.”
Hard is another irregular adverb. If we say, “I work hardly,” it could impede
understanding. The listener may think you mean, “I hardly work,” which has
the opposite meaning (hardly (ever) is a frequency adverb and means “very
464

rarely”). The correct use of hard as an adverb would simply be “I work hard.”
Other exceptions to the spelling rules include straight, lively, late, and early,
which all have the same spelling whether they are used as adjectives or as
adverbs. For example:
• “Draw a straight line.”
• “We drove straight.”
• “It was a lively game.”
• “Step lively,* everyone!”
• “I think I need to have an early night.”
• “I’m going to bed early tonight.”
Late vs. Lately
A common source of confusion is the proper use of the words “late” and
“lately.” Late, as already mentioned, is both an adjective and an adverb.
Lately, on the other hand, is only an adverb of time meaning “recently.” For
example:
• “Why are you always late?” (adjective)
• “We arrived late.” (adverb)
• “I’ve been feeling unwell lately.” (adverb of time)
• Incorrect: “I hope the guests don’t arrive lately.”
Only adjectives
Timely and friendly are only adjectives. To use these as adverbs, we simply
use them in an adverbial prepositional phrase, such as “in a ______
way/manner”:
• “Please arrive in a timely manner.”
• “He spoke to me in a friendly way.”
*Though lively still exists as an adverb in phrases like “step lively,” it is more
often used in an adverbial prepositional phrase, such as:
• “The boys all played in a lively manner.”
Adverbs of frequency
Adverbs of frequency that deal with specific measures of time and end in
465

“-ly” can function both as adjectives and adverbs. Examples of these include
yearly, weekly, daily, and hourly. For instance:
• “It’s good to have a daily routine.” (adjective)
• “I make sure to exercise daily.” (adverb)
• “I want weekly updates, Jenkins!” (adjective)
• “I update the boss weekly.” (adverb)
Wrong vs. Wrongly
The adjective wrong can become the adverb wrongly, but we can use wrong
as an irregular adverb as well—both are acceptable. However, wrong as an
adverb must come after the verb if modifies, as in:
• “I guessed wrong.”
• “He filled out the form wrong.”
Wrongly, on the other hand, can be used either before or after the word it
modifies:
• “He was wrongly accused.”
• “They judged wrongly.”
Good vs. Well
Good is an adjective used to describe a noun; well is the adverb derived
from good and describes how you do something. For example:
✖ “I speak English good.” (incorrect)
✔ “I speak English well.” (correct)
✖ “I did good on the English exam.” (incorrect)
✔ “I did well on the English exam.” (correct)
“I speak English good” is incorrect, as we need to use an adverb when
describing a verb. In the second example, “I did good” is incorrect because
we need an adverb to describe how the speaker did on the exam. The phrase
“do good” is especially tricky, because it can also mean “to do that which is
good or virtuous.” (Good in this sense is a noun acting as the object of the
verb.)
Adjectives after linking verbs
466

It is important to remember that linking verbs (such as be, become, get, and
the sense verbs feel, taste, look, sound, smell, and seem) are followed by
predicative adjectives, not adverbs. For example:
• “You seem happy.”
• “She sounds English.” (An opinion based on her voice.)
• “We became tired.”
• “You look good.”
• “You look well.”
Notice that the last two examples are both correct. Not only is well an
adverb, but it also functions as an adjective. Its opposite adjective is ill, while
the opposite of good is bad. When we say, “You look good,” we are referring
to the person’s physical appearance. If, on the other hand, we say, “You look
well,” we are referring to the health or well-being of the person. To learn
more about adjectives that follow linking verbs, as well as the “good/well”
distinction, see the chapter on Predicative Adjectives.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the most common way to make an adverb from an adjective?
a) Use the adjective in the prepositional phrase “in a ______ manner”
b) Use the adjective before a verb
c) Add “-ly” to the end of the adjective
d) Add “-ically” to the end of the adjective
 
2. What is the irregular adverb of the adjective late?
a) late
b) lately
c) in a late manner
d) latterly
 
3. How does the usage of wrong as an adverb differ from wrongly?
a) Wrong must come before the verb it modifies, while wrongly must come
after
b) Wrong must come after the verb it modifies, while wrongly must come
before
467

c) Wrong must come before the verb it modifies, while wrongly can come
before or after
d) Wrong must come after the verb it modifies, while wrongly can come
before or after
4. How are adjectives ending in “-le” or “-ue” changed to become adverbs?
a) By adding “-ly” to the end
b) By replacing the “e” at the end with “-ly”
c) By replacing the “e” at the end with “-ily”
d) By replacing the “e” at the end with “-ically”
5. Which of the following is an irregular adverb?
a) lastly
b) publicly
c) early
d) lately
6. Which of the following is not an irregular adverb?
a) lively
b) friendly
c) early
d) hourly
Degrees of Comparison
Definition
Just like adjectives, adverbs have comparative and superlative degrees;
adverbs in their basic forms are sometimes known as being in the positive
degree.
Comparative adverbs express a higher (or lower) degree of how an action
is performed, usually in comparison to another person or thing.
Superlative adverbs, on the other hand, are used to identify the highest
(or lowest) degree of how an action is performed.
Forming the comparative and
468

superlative degrees
Adverbs are commonly categorized in three ways: one-syllable adverbs, “-ly”
adverbs, and irregular adverbs. We create the comparative and superlative
forms of each category in different ways.
One-syllable adverbs
One-syllable adverbs are formed into comparatives by adding the suffix “-er”
to the end of the word. The superlative form is created by adding the suffix “-
est” to the end.
Adverb (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
fast
faster
fastest
hard
harder
hardest
high
higher
highest
late
later*
latest*
long
longer
longest
low
lower
lowest
wide
wider*
widest*
 
(*Spelling note: When the adverb already ends in the letter “e,” simply add “-
r” or “-st” to the end.)
Adverbs ending in “-ly”
Many adverbs are formed by adding “-ly” to the end of an adjective. If an
adverb has been created according to this pattern, we simply use the words
more and less to create the comparative degree, and we use the word most or
least to make the superlative degree. For example:
Adjective
Adverb (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
469

careful
carefully
more/less carefully most/least
carefully
efficient
efficiently
more/less
efficiently
most/least
efficiently
happy
happily
more/less happily
most/least
happily
horrible
horribly
more/less horribly
most/least
horribly
recent
recently
more/less recently
most/least
recently
sad
sadly
more/less sadly
most/least sadly
strange
strangely
more/less
strangely
most/least
strangely
 
Irregular adverbs
Of course, the rules we’ve just looked at have some exceptions, which are
known as irregular verbs. Below are the degrees of comparison for some of
the most common irregular adverbs:
Irregular adverb (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
badly
worse
worst
early
earlier
earliest
far
farther/further
farthest/furthest*
little
less
least
well
better
best
 
(*Although 
farther/farthest 
and 
further/furthest 
are 
often 
used
interchangeably, there are differences between them. In American English,
farther/farthest is preferred when comparing physical distances, and
further/furthest is preferred when comparing figurative distances; in British
470

English, further/furthest is preferred for both uses.)
To learn more about irregular adverbs, see the chapter section covering
Regular and Irregular Adverbs.
Adverbs with two forms
There are a few adverbs that have two generally accepted forms. In these
cases, they also have two commonly used comparative and superlative
degrees. Some of the most prevalent of these exceptions are:
Adverb (positive
degree)
Comparative degree
Superlative degree
cheap or cheaply
cheaper or more/less
cheaply
cheapest or most/least
cheaply
loud or loudly
louder 
or 
more/less
loudly
loudest 
or 
most/least
loudly
quick or quickly
quicker or more/less
quickly
quickest or most/least
quickly
slow or slowly
slower 
or 
more/less
slowly
slowest 
or 
most/least
slowly
 
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following suffixes is used to shift a one-syllable adverb to the
superlative degree?
a) -ed
b) -er
c) -est
d) -en
 
2. Which of the following pairs of words is used to shift an “-ly” adverb to the
comparative degree?
a) more/less
b) most/least
c) much/many
471

d) most/less
3. What is the comparative form of the irregular adverb well?
a) good
b) better
c) worse
d) best
4. What is the superlative form of the adverb slowly?
a) slower
b) slowest
c) more/less slowly
d) most/least slowly
e) A & C
f) B & D
Comparative Adverbs
Definition
Comparative adverbs, like comparative adjectives, are used to
describe differences and similarities between two things. While comparative
adjectives describe similarities and differences between two nouns (people,
places, or objects), comparative adverbs make comparisons between two
verbs—that is, they describe how, when, how often, or to what degree an
action is done. For example:
• “John is faster than Tim.” (comparative adjective) 
• “John runs faster than Tim.” (comparative adverb)
• “John is more careful than Tim in his work.” (comparative adjective)
• “John works more carefully than Tim.” (comparative adverb)
Comparative adverbs and comparative adjectives sometimes have the same
form (as in faster above); other times, they have different forms (as in
careful/carefully). However, even when the forms are the same, we can
tell the difference between the two by looking at what they modify. While the
comparative adjectives describe differences between the physical or personal
characteristics of John and Tim, the comparative adverbs describe
differences in how they carry out actions (run, work).
472

Forming Comparative Adverbs
We form comparative adverbs by adding the ending “-er” to the base adverb,
or by adding the word more (or less) before the base adverb. There are
simple rules that tell us which method is correct.
One syllable + “-er”
In general, when the adverb has only one syllable, we add “-er” to the end of
it. The table below shows some of the most common one-syllable adverbs
and their comparative forms:
Adverb (base form) Comparative Adverb
fast
faster
hard
harder
high
higher
late
later
long
longer
low
lower
wide
wider*
 
(*Spelling note: When the adverb already ends in the letter “e,” just add “-r,”
not “-er.”)
More +“-ly” adverb
Many adverbs are formed by adding “-ly” to the end of an adjective. If an
adverb has been created according to this pattern, we insert the word more
or less to form the comparative. For example:
Adjective
Adverb
Comparative Adverb
careful
carefully
more/less carefully
efficient
efficiently more/less efficiently
happy
happily
more/less happily
473

horrible
horribly
more/less horribly
recent
recently
more/less recently
sad
sadly
more/less sadly
strange
strangely
more/less strangely
 
Irregular comparative adverbs
Of course, there are some exceptions to the rules we’ve just looked at. These
are some of the most common irregular comparative adverbs:
Adverb Comparative Adverb
badly
worse
early
earlier
far
farther/further*
little
less
well
better
 
(*Although farther and further are often used interchangeably, there are
differences between these two forms. In American English, farther is
preferred when comparing physical distances and further when comparing
figurative distances; in British English, further is preferred for both.)
To learn more about irregular adverbs, see the chapter section covering
Regular and Irregular Adverbs.
Comparative adverbs with two
forms
There are a few adverbs that have two generally accepted forms. In these
cases, they also have two commonly used comparative forms. Some of the
most prevalent of these exceptions are:
Adverb
Comparative Adverb
474

cheap/cheaply cheaper/more cheaply
loud/loudly
louder/more loudly
quick/quickly
quicker/more quickly
slow/slowly
slower/more slowly
 
Although traditional grammarians often consider these adverb forms without
“-ly” to be incorrect, they are commonly used in modern English. However,
they are still considered less formal than their “-ly” equivalents.
Using Comparative Adverbs
Now that we have seen how to form comparative adverbs, let’s look at how
they are used within the context of affirmative, negative, and interrogative
statements.
Affirmative statements
We can describe change or differences between two things within one
sentence, using the word than. For example:
• “An airplane moves faster than a car.”
• “I eat more neatly than my sister.”
• “I work more carefully than I used to.”
Note that while the first two examples describe differences between how two
things or people carry out an action, the third example describes a change in
how one person has carried out an action. Also, in each of the examples, the
person or thing that does the action to a greater degree comes first in the
sentence. We can also use the opposite adverbs to achieve the same meaning
in a different order:
• “A car moves slower/more slowly than an airplane.”
• “My sister eats more sloppily than me.”
• “I used to work less carefully than I do now.”
Negative Statements
It’s easy to form negative statements with comparative adverbs. We just
475

follow the regular patterns for negatives: if the statement contains an
auxiliary or modal verb, or if it uses a form of the linking verb be, we insert
the word not (either in its full or its contracted form). For example:
• “My brother can run faster than me.” (affirmative) 
• “My brother can’t run faster than me.” (negative)
• “Sam is learning to read more quickly than Jen.” (affirmative) 
• “Sam is not learning to read more quickly than Jen.” (negative)
If a statement contains only a main verb, we add the auxiliary verb
do/does/did and not. For example:
• “Tom sings more beautifully than Sam.” (affirmative)
• “Tom does not sing more beautifully than Sam.” (negative)
• “Cats hide better than dogs.” (affirmative) 
• “Cats don’t hide better than dogs.” (negative)
Interrogatives
We form interrogatives with comparative adverbs using normal question
formation. For example:
• “Did you always run faster than your brother?”
• “Has she ever performed better than you on a test?”
• “Can monkeys jump higher than cats?”
We can also ask questions by placing a question word at the beginning of
the sentence, and adding the two people or things at the end. For example:
• “Who runs faster, you or your brother?”
• “Who performs better on tests, you or Jen?”
• “Which animal can jump higher, a cat or a monkey?”
Note that in this type of question, we do not include the word than. We tend
to use than with a question word if the second person or thing is unknown,
as in:
• “Who runs faster than you?”
• “Who performs better on tests than Jen?”
• “What animal can jump higher than a monkey?”
Omitting one of the nouns
476

Often, we don’t need to explicitly mention both of the people or things that
we’re comparing because it’s already obvious from the context. If the speaker
already knows who or what we’re talking about, we can omit one of the
nouns. If we do this, we also omit the word than. For example:
• Speaker A: “Who swims faster, you or your brother?”
• Speaker B: “My brother does, but I can run faster.”
Speaker B doesn’t need to say “than my brother” at the end, because it’s
already clear from the context.
Gradability
We can only make comparisons using gradable adverbs, meaning adverbs
that are able to move up and down on a scale of intensity. The majority of
adverbs are gradable. For example, quickly is gradable because a person can
run quickly, very quickly, or extremely quickly.
As with comparative adjectives, we can state differences in scale by using
words and phrases like a bit, a little (bit), much, a lot, and far before the
comparative adverb. For example:
• “Tom can run much faster than his brother.”
• “Monkeys jump a lot higher than cats.”
• “Sam drives a little (bit) more carefully than Tom.”
Not all adverbs are gradable in nature. For example, absolutely, completely,
totally and utterly are all ungradable adverbs. These are used to modify
ungradable adjectives, and they cannot move up and down on a scale. They
do not have a comparative form, and therefore cannot be used to draw
comparisons.
Expressing 
equality 
and
inequality using as … as
Another way of expressing similarities, differences, or changes with
comparative adverbs is by using the structure “as … as.” To describe two
things as equal, we use the construction as + adverb + as. For example:
• “I still run as slowly as I used to.”
• “Tom always drives as carefully as you’d want him to.”
477

• “Sam finished as quickly as his brother.”
We can use the same construction to say that two actions are unequal by
adding an auxiliary verb and the word not.
• I don’t run as slowly as I used to.”
• “Tom doesn’t always drive as carefully as you’d want him to.”
• “Sam didn’t finish as quickly as his brother.”
Finally, we can inquire as to whether two actions are equal by adding the
auxiliary verbs do/does or did to the beginning of the sentence and forming a
question:
• “Do you still run as slowly as you used to?”
• “Does Tom drive as carefully as you’d want him to?”
• “Did Sam finish as quickly as his brother?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following facts about comparative adverbs is correct?
a) They always take a different form than a comparative adjective.
b) They always take the same form as a comparative adjective.
c) They sometimes take the same form as a comparative adjective.
d) They never take the same form as a comparative adjective.
2. Which of these adverbs has an irregular comparative form?
a) fast
b) badly
c) carefully
d) sadly
3. Which of these is an incorrect comparative adverb?
a) more beautifully
b) more quickly
c) more carefully
d) more higher
4. Which of the following sentences is correct?
478

a) “He runs fast as his brother.”
b) “He runs as fast as his brother.”
c) “He runs faster as his brother.”
d) “He faster runs as his brother.”
 
5. Which of the following sentences is correct?
a) “She studies hardlier than her sister.”
b) “She studies harder than her sister.”
c) “She studies harder as her sister.”
d) “She studies hard as her sister.”
Superlative Adverbs
Definition
Superlative adverbs, like superlative adjectives, are used to describe
differences among three or more people or things. But while superlative
adjectives describe the highest (or lowest) degree of an attribute among a
multiple nouns (people, places, or objects), superlative adverbs describe the
action of a person or thing compared to that of several others—that is, they
describe how, when, how often, or to what degree an action is done. For
example:
• “John is the fastest runner of the group.” (superlative adjective) 
• “John runs the fastest of the group.” (superlative adverb)
• “Out of all the students in the class, Sally is the most careful with her
work.” (superlative adjective)
• “Out of all the students in the class, Sally works most carefully.”
(superlative adverb)
Superlative adverbs and superlative adjectives sometimes have the same
form (as in fastest above); other times, they have different forms (as in
careful/carefully above). However, even when the forms are the same, we
can tell the difference between the two by looking at what they modify.
While the superlative adjectives describe the characteristics of John and
Sally, the superlative adverbs describe how they carry out actions (run,
work).
Forming Superlative Adverbs
479

We form superlative adverbs by adding the ending “-est” to the base adverb,
or by adding the word most before the base adverb. There are simple rules
that tell us which is the correct method.
One syllable + “-est”
In general, when the adverb has only one syllable, we add “-est” to the end of
it. The table below shows some of the most common one-syllable adverbs
and their superlative forms:
Adverb (base form) Superlative Adverb
fast
fastest
hard
hardest
high
highest
late
latest
long
longest
low
lowest
wide
widest*
(*Spelling note: When the adverb already ends in the letter “e,” just add “-st,”
not “-est.”)
“-ly” adverbs
Many adverbs are formed by adding “-ly” to the end of an adjective. If an
adverb has been created according to this pattern, we add the word most or
least to make the superlative form(s). For example:
Adjective
Adverb
Superlative Adverb
careful
carefully
most/least carefully
efficient
efficiently most/least efficiently
happy
happily
most/least happily
horrible
horribly
most/least horribly
recent
recently
most/least recently
480

sad
sadly
most/least sadly
strange
strangely
most/least strangely
Irregular superlative adverbs
Of course, there are some exceptions to the rules we’ve just looked at. These
are some of the most common irregular superlative adverbs:
Irregular Adverb Irregular Superlative Adverb
badly
worst
early
earliest
far
farthest/furthest*
little
least
well
best
(*Although farthest and furthest are often used interchangeably, there are
differences between these two forms. In American English, farthest is
preferred when comparing physical distances, and furthest is preferred when
comparing figurative distances; in British English, furthest is preferred for
both.)
To learn more about irregular adverbs, see the chapter section covering
Regular and Irregular Adverbs.
Superlative adverbs with two
forms
There are a few adverbs that have two generally accepted forms. In these
cases, they also have two commonly used superlative forms. Some of the
most prevalent of these exceptions are:
Adverb
Superlative Adverb
cheap or cheaply cheapest or most/least cheaply
481

loud or loudly
loudest or most/least loudly
quick or quickly
quickest or most/least quickly
slow or slowly
slowest or most/least slowly
Although traditional grammarians often consider these adverb forms without
“-ly” to be incorrect, they are commonly used in modern English. However,
they are still considered less formal than their “-ly” equivalents.
Using Superlative Adverbs
We usually use superlative adjectives when describing an action of someone
or something among a group of several others, either in a collective group or
among several individuals.
Superlative adverbs come after the verb in a sentence, and they are almost
always preceded by the word the. For example:
• “Cars and motorcycles can go fast, but an airplane moves the fastest.”
• “I eat the most neatly among my siblings.”
• “She works the least carefully in her class.”
Omitting 
the 
group 
of
comparison
When we use superlatives, it is very common to omit the group that
something or someone is being compared to because that group is implied by
a previous sentence. For example:
• “My brothers are all fast swimmers. John swims the fastest, though.”
We can also identify a superlative attribute of a subject’s action compared to
itself in other contexts or points in time. In this case, we do not have another
group to identify, and we generally do not use the word the. For example:
• “I work best by myself.” (compared to when other people are involved)
• “The engine runs most smoothly after it has warmed up for a while.”
(compared to when the engine is cold)
• “Flowers bloom most beautifully in the spring.” (compared to the other
seasons)
482

Expressing the lowest degree
As we’ve seen, “-ly” adverbs can either take most or least to indicate the
highest and lowest degrees of comparison. For example:
• “Though he performed the least compellingly among the other actors on
stage, he was the most authentically dressed.”
Irregular (non-“ly”) adverbs, on the other hand, have only one superlative
form that expresses the highest degree of its characteristic. When we want to
express the lowest quality of an irregular adverb, we could technically just
use the word least before its basic form, as in:
• “John runs the fastest in his class, but he swims the least fast.”
However, this construction is rather awkward, and it is best just to use
another superlative adverb with the opposite meaning, as in:
• “John runs the fastest in his class, but he swims the slowest.”
Most as an intensifier
We often find the adverb most being used as an intensifier of other
adverbs, especially in formal speech or writing. Rather than indicating a
superlative adverb (i.e., in comparison to others in a group), it simply adds
intensity to the word, having approximately the same meaning as the adverb
very. For example:
• “You sang most beautifully, Jack.”
• “The play was most tastefully performed.”
We can see in the above examples that most is not identifying the
subsequent adverbs as being of the highest degree among other people or
things—it simply intensifies their meaning.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Superlative adverbs describe the highest or lowest degree of how an action
is performed among a group of __________ people or things.
a) Two
b) Two or three
c) Three or more
483

d) Five or more
 
2. Which of the following facts about superlative adverbs is correct?
a) They always take a different form than a superlative adjective.
b) They always take the same form as a superlative adjective.
c) They sometimes take the same form as a superlative adjective.
d) They never take the same form as a superlative adjective.
3. Which of these adverbs has an irregular superlative form?
a) fast
b) badly
c) carefully
d) sadly
 
4. Which of these is an incorrect superlative adverb?
a) most beautifully
b) most quickly
c) least carefully
d) least higher
 
5. Which of the following sentences is correct?
a) “He runs fast of all his brothers.”
b) “He runs the fastest of all his brothers.”
c) “He runs faster of all his brothers.”
d) “He fastest runs of all his brothers.”
Order of Adverbs
Definition
Because adverbs are used to modify verbs, adjectives, other adverbs,
phrases, clauses, or even entire sentences, they are able to function nearly
anywhere in the sentence, depending on their type and what it is they are
modifying.
If we use more than one adverb to describe a verb, though, there is a general
order in which the different categories of adverbs should appear—this is
484

known as the order of adverbs (sometimes called the royal order of
adverbs):
1. Manner
2. Place
3. Frequency
4. Time
5. Purpose
Of course, it is uncommon to use five adverbs in a row to modify the same
word, but if a sentence uses two or three, then it is best to follow this order to
avoid sounding unnatural.
First, let’s briefly summarize the different categories of adverbs, and then
we’ll look at how we can use them together in sentences.
(*Note: For the sake of conciseness, both single-word adverbs and adverbial
phrases will be referred to together as “adverbs” throughout this section.)
Categories of Adverbs
Adverbs of Manner
Adverbs of manner tell us how something happens, how someone does
something, or give character to a description. They are usually formed by
adding “-ly” to an adjective, as in:
• “She sings beautifully.”
• “He walks slowly.”
• “The children are playing happily.”
If an adjective already ends in “-ly,” we can give it an adverbial function by
simply using it in the prepositional phrase “in a ______ manner”:
• “They played in a lively manner.”
• “Please arrive in a timely manner.”
Adverbs of Place
Adverbs of place tell us about an aspect of location associated with the
action of a verb, specifying the direction, distance, movement, or position
485

involved in the action.
For example:
• “He kicked the ball into the field.”
• “Let’s drive down a bit farther.”
• “Everyone gazed upwards at the meteor shower.”
• “I’ve looked everywhere for my book.”
Adverbs of Frequency
Adverbs of frequency (sometimes called frequency adverbs) tell us
how often something happens or is the case. They are sometimes used to
describe definite frequency, as in:
• “I run eight miles daily.”
• “Every year, our office holds a big raffle for charity.”
More often, though, these adverbs are used to describe indefinite
frequency. For example:
• “We usually go to the movies on Sundays.”
• “Bethany always runs late for work in the morning.”
Adverbs of Time
Adverbs of time tell us when or for how long something happens or is the
case. They are similar to but distinct from adverbs of frequency.
For example:
• “I’m going to the movies tomorrow.”
• “Next year, I’m going to run for president.”
• “We’ve been dating for 10 years, and not once has he proposed!”
• “Are you still working on that project?”
Adverbs of Purpose
Adverbs of purpose (sometimes called adverbs of reason) tell us why
something happens or is the case. They are generally made up of
conjunctive adverbs, prepositional or infinitive phrases, 
or
adverbial clauses. For example:
486

• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; as a result, she didn’t recommend it.”
• “The clothing is handcrafted and hence expensive.”
• “Given the huge amount of public interest, they are extending the
program for another three months.”
• “I went to the store to buy some milk.”
• “I am exhausted because I was working all night.”
Using multiple adverbs
Remember, the order of adverbs is manner, place, frequency, time, and
purpose.
As we already noted, it is unusual to find several adverbs consecutively
modifying the same word. However, if we were to make a sentence with all
five categories of adverbs together, it might look like this:
• “I have to run quickly (manner) down the street (place) each morning
(frequency) after breakfast (time) in order to catch my bus to school
(purpose).”
Even though the string of adverbs is unusually long, the sentence still sounds
smooth and logical because the order is correct. Now let’s try rearranging the
order of the adverbs:
• “I have to run each morning (frequency) quickly (manner) after
breakfast (time) in order to catch my bus to school (purpose) down
the street (place).”
By changing the order of the adverbs, we’ve actually changed the meaning of
the sentence, or at least made original meaning nearly incomprehensible.
This is especially apparent with the adverb of purpose in order to catch my
bus to school: by placing it before the adverb of place, it now sounds as
though it’s the school that’s down the street. There is not such a drastic shift
in meaning for the adverbs of frequency, manner, and time, but they still
sound awkward and unnatural in the new order.
When we can change the order
There is a great deal of flexibility regarding where in a sentence an adverb
can appear, regardless of its content and the rules of order that we looked at
above. While the order of adverbs is useful to keep in mind, it is a guide,
rather than a law.
487

Introductory adverbs
As you may have noticed when we looked at the different categories of
adverbs, adverbs can appear in different places in a sentence. When an
adverb is used at the beginning a sentence, it results in a great deal of
emphasis. Depending on the sentence, we can do this with nearly any
category of adverb regardless of the order of adverbs—although we must
always be careful that doing so does not make the sentence awkward or alter
its meaning.
For example, let’s look at the example sentence again, this time slightly
shifting where in the sentence the adverbs appear:
• “In order to catch my bus to school (purpose), I have to run quickly
(manner) down the street (place) each morning (frequency) after
breakfast (time).”
Placing the adverb of purpose at the beginning of the sentence doesn’t alter
the meaning in any way—instead, it gives the adverb extra emphasis and
highlights the purpose of the entire sentence.
In this particular sentence, we can move the adverb of frequency to the
beginning of the sentence as well:
• “Each morning (frequency), I have to run quickly (manner) down the
street (place) after breakfast (time) in order to catch my bus to
school (purpose).”
We can also do this with the adverb of time, but in this instance it has to be
moved with the adverb of frequency; otherwise, the sentence sounds
awkward. For example, compare these two sentence constructions:
✔ “Each morning (frequency) after breakfast (time), I have to run
quickly (manner) down the street (place) in order to catch my bus to
school (purpose).” (correct)
✖ “After breakfast (time), I have to run quickly (manner) down the
street (place) each morning (frequency) in order to catch my bus to
school (purpose).” (incorrect)
We can see that the adverb of time sounds awkward when it is placed by
itself at the beginning of this particular sentence.
Adverbs of manner and place can also sometimes go at the beginning of the
sentence, but we have to be careful with how the sentence sounds as a
488

whole. For example, neither would work well at the beginning of the example
above because the emphasis placed on them would sound unnatural as a
result. However, in a different sentence, this emphasis might be suitable. For
example:
• “On my father’s ranch (place), I often (frequency) helped gather the
animals at the end of the day (time).”
• “Impatiently (manner), I waited by the bank (place) for my father to
arrive (purpose).”
Short vs. long adverbs
Generally speaking, we also tend to put adverbs that are shorter and more
concise before those that are longer, regardless of which category they belong
to (though we must make sure that the information’s meaning doesn’t
change as a result). For example:
• “I lived with my parents (place) to save money (purpose) while I
working on my Ph.D. (time).”
• “He dances every night (frequency) in the most extraordinary way
(manner).”
Multiple adverbs of the same
category
When we use multiple adverbs of the same category to modify the same verb,
we order them based on how specific the information is that they provide.
For example:
• “On my father’s ranch (place), I often (frequency) helped gather the
animals at the end of the day (specific time) when I was younger (non-
specific time).”
• “I lived at home (more specific place) with my parents (less specific
place) to save money (purpose) while I working on my Ph.D. (time).”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is an adverb of manner?
a) in my mother’s yard
489

b) in a beautiful way
c) in a few hours
d) given the way he talks
 
2. Which of the following is an adverb of purpose?
a) to be more healthy
b) for a while
c) infuriatingly
d) seldom
 
3. Complete this sentence using correct adverb order: “He sang beautifully
_______ every night.”
a) to impress his parents
b) for a week
c) at the opera
d) last year
 
4. Choose the sentence that uses the most correct order of adverbs:
a) “I must drive to the store after we’re finished with dinner to pick up a few
things for breakfast.”
b) “I must after we’re finished with dinner drive to the store to pick up a few
things for breakfast.
c) “After we’re finished with dinner, I must drive to the store to pick up a few
things for breakfast.”
d) “To pick up a few things for breakfast, I must drive to the store after we’re
finished with dinner.”
e) A & C
f) B & D
 
5. Choose the sentence that uses the most correct order of adverbs:
a) “I don’t want to go to work again tomorrow.”
b) “Again I don’t want to go to work tomorrow.”
c) “I don’t want to go to work tomorrow again.”
d) “Tomorrow, I don’t want to go to work again.”
Prepositions
490

Definition
Prepositions are used to express the relationship of a noun or pronoun (or
another grammatical element functioning as a noun) to the rest of the
sentence. The noun or pronoun that is connected by the preposition is
known as the object of the preposition.
Some common prepositions are in, on, for, to, of, with, and about, though
there are many others.
Prepositional Phrases
Prepositions and their objects together form prepositional phrases, which
can function as either adjectives or (more commonly) adverbs.
For example:
• “There is a film at noon we could see.” (adjectival, modifying the noun
film)
• “He hit the nail with a hammer.” (adverbial, modifying the verb hit)
A prepositional phrase always contains at least a preposition and its object (a
noun or pronoun), but it can also contain modifiers that add additional
meaning to the object. These can even be other prepositional phrases
functioning as adjectives. For example:
• “He arrived to school in a red car.”
• “We keep the lawnmower in the shed out back.”
Adjective complements
Occasionally, adverbial prepositions are used to modify predicative
adjectives to complete or elaborate upon their meaning. When they are
used in this way, they function as adjective complements. For example:
• “Megan was afraid of thunderstorms.”
• “Philip is upset about what was said.”
• “We are very pleased with the number of donations we received.”
Choosing 
the 
appropriate
491

preposition
Common Prepositional Errors
Prepositions can be very difficult to navigate because many of them are used
to express multiple kinds of relationships, and it’s easy to use one in the
wrong context. For example:
✖ “I had breakfast with cereal and milk.” (incorrect)
✔ “I had cereal and milk for breakfast.” (correct)
The first sentence is a common error. It implies that you, the cereal, and the
milk all had breakfast together. You can have breakfast with your friends or
your family, but not with cereal and milk. However, we can use with to show
a connection between cereal and milk, as in:
✔ “I had cereal with milk for breakfast.”
Another similar error is:
✖ “I go to work with my car.”
✔ “I go to work by car.”
In the first sentence, it implies that you and your car go to work together.
You can go to work with a person, but when speaking about a means of
transportation, we often use the preposition by. If the object is modified by a
possessive determiner, we can also use the preposition in, as in:
✔ “I go to work in my car.”
When choosing the appropriate preposition in a sentence, we must consider
their various categories as well as what the prepositional phrase is going to
modify.
Categories of prepositions
Prepositions can be broadly divided into eight categories: time, place,
direction or movement, agency, instrument or device, reason or purpose,
connection, and origin.
The following table highlights the most common categories of
prepositions and how they are used to form adjectival or adverbial
prepositional phrases in a sentence:
492

Category
Preposition
Example sentences
Time
at, in, on, for, during, since, by,
until, before, after, to, past
• “There is a film at noon
we could see.” (adjectival)
• “We’re meeting him in an
hour.” (adverbial)
Place
at, in, on, by/near/close to, next
to/beside, between, behind, in
front 
of, 
above/over,
below/under
• “The cat on the roof was
hissing at us.” (adjectival)
• “Try looking behind the
shed.” (adverbial)
Direction
or
Movement
to, from, over, under, along,
around, across, through, into,
out of, toward(s), away from,
onto, off, up, down
• “The house down the
road 
is 
being 
sold.”
(adjectival)
• “They drove across the
country.” (adverbial)
Agency
by, with
• 
“The 
book 
by 
the
famous author is a big
hit.” (adjectival)
• “Her heart is filled with
emotion.” (adverbial)
Instrument
or Device
by, with, on
• “The journey by boat is
long 
and 
arduous.”
(adjectival)
• “He hit the nail with a
hammer.” (adverbial)
Reason or
Purpose
for, through, because of, on
account of, from
• 
“I 
have 
a 
separate
computer 
for 
work.”
(adjectival)
• “They left early because
of the storm.” (adverbial)
Connection of, to, with
• 
“A 
well-written 
cover
letter to employers helps
your 
chances 
of 
being
hired.” (adjectival)
• “I think she decided to go
with Victor.” (adverbial)
493

Origin
from, of
• “Tom is of German
descent.” (adjectival)
• “We started our trip from
Italy.” (adverbial)
 
Notice that many prepositions fall under two or more categories. To
determine what type of preposition is being used in a sentence, you must
look closely at the context and what the prepositional phrase is modifying.
Remember that prepositional phrases can be used with verbs, with nouns,
and with adjectives.
Continue on to the rest of the sections in this chapter to learn more about
how and when prepositions are (and are not) used.
Prepositions vs. Infinitives
The word to is a very common preposition, used to express time, direction,
and connection. To is also used, however, as a particle to introduce the
infinitive form of verbs—e.g., to run, to play, to think, to be, etc.
For example:
• “I often ride my bicycle to work.” (preposition of direction)
• “I often ride my bicycle to stay healthy.” (infinitive)
Because they share the same introductory word, it’s easy to mistake one for
the other. Just remember that infinitives always use the word to with the
base or bare form of a verb, while the preposition to is always followed by a
noun, pronoun, or a grammatical element functioning as a noun.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is the primary function of a preposition?
a) To describe the characteristics of a noun or pronoun
b) To describe the relationship of a noun or pronoun to another part of the
sentence
c) To introduce a dependent clause
d) To connect clauses together in a sentence
 
2. A prepositional phrase must contain at least which of the following?
494

a) A preposition and a noun
b) A preposition and a pronoun
c) A preposition and an adjective
d) Both A and B
e) Either A or B
 
3. Which of the following is the term for a prepositional phrase that
completes the meaning of an adjective?
a) Adjective complement
b) Adjective modifier
c) Adverbial complement
d) Adverbial modifier
4. Which of the following is not one of the main categories of prepositions?
a) Time
b) Condition
c) Direction
d) Purpose
Prepositional Phrases
Definition
A prepositional phrase is made up of at least a preposition and its object,
which can be a noun, pronoun, or a noun phrase. Often times, the object will
have a modifier or modifiers (such as adjectives, noun adjuncts, etc.) that
appear between it and the preposition. These specify or describe the object,
but, unlike prepositions, they do not serve to connect the object
grammatically to the rest of the sentence.
Examples
• on the ground — On describes the location in relation to the ground.
• of the bedroom — Of specifies that whatever is being discussed is
particular to the bedroom.
• down the dark alley — Down describes the direction of movement in
relation to alley, while the adjective dark is a modifier specifying that the
495

alley is not well lit.
• into an empty parking lot — To describes the direction of movement in
relation to the compound noun parking lot. The adjective empty is a
modifier specifying that the parking lot doesn’t have people or cars in it.
• because of the nasty weather — Because of is a compound preposition
describing the reason why something happened—in this case, the nasty
weather.
Prepositional phrases can behave in two ways in a sentence: as an adjective
modifying a noun, or as an adverb modifying a verb, adjective, or adverb.
Adjectival Prepositional Phrases
When a prepositional phrase modifies a noun, pronoun, gerund, or noun
phrase (all of which function grammatically as nouns), it is considered to
function as an adjective within the sentence. We call these adjectival
prepositional phrases, or sometimes just adjective prepositional
phrases.
Adjectival prepositional phrases always follow the noun they are modifying.
And, like an adjective, this kind of prepositional phrase answers one or more
of the following questions about the noun:
• Which one?
• What kind?
• How many or how much?
Examples
• “The cat on the shed is black.”
On the shed is a prepositional phrase—on is a preposition describing the
position of its object, the shed. The prepositional phrase is adjectival because
it modifies the noun cat (which it follows directly in the sentence) by
answering the question “Which cat?”
• “I would like to buy some flowers in a glass vase.”
The prepositional phrase here is in a glass vase—in is a preposition
describing the object a vase. Glass is a modifier of vase, appearing between
the preposition and the noun that it modifies. The prepositional phrase in
this sentence is adjectival because it immediately follows the noun that it
496

describes (flowers), and it tells us what kind of flowers the speaker would
like to buy.
• “People from many different countries have visited here.”
From many different countries is a prepositional phrase modifying the noun
people. It immediately follows that noun, and it answers the question what
kind of people (people from different countries). But it also indirectly
answers the question how many, because it tells the reader that a large
number of people have visited.
Adverbial Prepositional Phrases
When a prepositional phrase modifies a verb, adjective, or adverb, it is
considered to have the function of an adverb within the sentence. We call
these adverbial prepositional phrases, or sometimes just adverb
prepositional phrases, adverb phrases, or even just adverbs.
If an adverbial phrase is describing an adjective or an adverb, it will follow
that word in the sentence. However, adverbial prepositional phrases don’t
always immediately follow the verb they are modifying. Like normal adverbs,
adverbial prepositional phrases answer the questions:
• When?
• Where?
• How (in what way)?
• Why (for what purpose)?
• To what extent?
Examples
Verbs
• “She will leave after a short run.”
Here the prepositional phrase after a short run follows the word it modifies,
the verb leave. It describes a point in time (albeit a nonspecific one),
answering the question of when the action will happen.
• “I ran a mile down the road.”
Even though the prepositional phrase down the road follows the noun mile,
497

it actually describes the verb run. Here it is answering the question where:
“Where did you run (a mile)?” “Down the road.”
An adverbial preposition can also be placed at different places in the
sentence when modifying a verb, such as at the beginning. For example:
• “Because of my operation, I had to cancel my flight.”
The prepositional phrase because of my operation, which opens the
sentence, is describing the verb cancel—in this instance, it is describing why
the speaker had to cancel.
Adjectives and adverbs
Adverbial prepositional phrases that modify adjectives and adverbs can be
harder to identify because the adjectives and adverbs are usually paired with
verbs. Remember that these prepositional phrases always follow the
adjective or adverb and will contain information specific to the
adjective and adverb.
• “I was delighted with the results.”
In this sentence, the prepositional phrase with the results is describing the
predicative adjective delighted, and it answers the question “Why are
you delighted?” Even though delighted is paired with the linking verb was,
the prepositional phrase very clearly describes the adjective rather than the
verb.
• “I can get there more quickly on my new bike.”
Here, on my new bike describes the adverb more quickly, answering the
question “How?” or “In what manner?” It could also seem that the
prepositional phrase is describing the verb get, but the information in the
prepositional phrase is specific to getting there quickly.
Multiple Prepositional Phrases
Sentences can (and often do) have more than one prepositional phrase. What
kind of prepositional phrase each one is depends on what it is modifying,
which is generally indicated by where it is placed in the sentence and what
kind of information it is providing. For instance, verbs often take multiple
adverbial prepositional phrases as modifiers, while an adjectival prepositional
phrase can modify the objects of other prepositional phrases. It can seem a
little bit complicated, but if you break the sentence down into parts, you can
498

still apply the rules that were outlined above.
Examples
• “During the Christmas break, I visited my old school behind our
house.”
There are two prepositional phrases in this sentence.
The first, during the Christmas break, is an adverbial prepositional phrase.
We know this because it comes at the very beginning of the sentence, and it
describes the verb visited (answering the question “When?”).
The second prepositional phrase is behind our house. It is an adjectival
prepositional phrase, modifying the noun school and answering the question
“Which one?”
• “We ended our game with the neighbors at once when we heard our
parents calling.”
Here, two prepositional phrases occur one after the other. The first one, with
the neighbors, describes the noun game, so it is adjectival.
The second prepositional phrase, at once, describes the verb ended, even
though it comes quite a bit later in the sentence. Because it describes a verb,
it is an adverbial prepositional phrase.
• “While I was home for the summer after my first semester of
college, I decided to work in a store to earn some extra cash.”
This sentence features four prepositional phrases, three of which occur in
succession.
The first is for the summer. It is functioning as an adverb to describe the verb
phrase was home, specifying when the speaker was at home. (In this case it
is describing a duration of time.)
Even though the second prepositional phrase, after my first semester, seems
to describe the first one, it is actually also describing the verb phrase to
further clarify when the speaker was home. In this instance, you can reverse
the prepositional phrases—“While I was home after my first semester for the
summer”—and still have the clause make complete sense (even if it’s not as
clearly written).
However, the third prepositional phrase, of college, is an adjectival
prepositional phrase—it is describing the noun phrase my first semester,
which is the object of the second prepositional phrase. Here, it serves to
499

answer the question which (or even what kind) about the semester being
discussed. As such, it is “tied” to that preposition: it would not make sense to
place it elsewhere in the sentence. For instance, “While I was home for the
summer of college after my first semester” does not make sense.
The final prepositional phrase, in a store, is much easier to understand. It is
an adverbial prepositional phrase modifying the verb work, and specifies
where the speaker is going to work.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What does a prepositional phrase have to include? (Select the answer that
is most correct.)
a) A preposition, a verb, and an object
b) A preposition and a modifier
c) A preposition, an object, and a modifier
d) A preposition and an object
2. What does an adverbial prepositional phrase modify?
a) A noun
b) A verb, an adjective, or an adverb
c) A noun, a verb, an adjective, or an adverb
d) Another prepositional phrase
3. Which of the following prepositional phrases (in bold) is an adjectival
prepositional phrase?
a) “I always eat toast in the morning.”
b) “While we were on our vacation, we visited the home of my youth.”
c) “After the game, I had to run quickly across the field.”
d) “I’ve been really hungry because of my new diet.”
4. Identify the prepositional phrase in the following sentence:
“I had to go home early due to a big storm.”
a) due to a big storm
b) had to go
c) go home early
d) early due
500

5. How many prepositional phrases (both adjectival and adverbial) are in
the following sentence?
“After the game, we had to go to the library to get a book for my mother, who
was waiting for us in the parking lot.”
a) Three
b) Two
c) Four
d) Five
501

Categories of Prepositions
Defining Categories
Most prepositions have multiple usages and meanings. Generally speaking,
prepositions can be divided into eight categories: time, place, direction or
movement, agency, instrument or device, reason or purpose, connection,
and origin. The following table highlights the most common prepositions
and their categories*:
Category
Preposition
Time
at, in, on, for, during, since, by, until, before, after, to, past
Place
at, in, on, by/near/close to, next to/beside, between, behind,
in front of, above/over, below/under
Direction or
Movement
to, from, over, under, along, around, across, through, into,
out of, toward(s), away from, onto, off, up, down
Agency
by, with
Instrument
or Device
by, with, on
Reason 
or
Purpose
for, through, because of, on account of, from
Connection
of, to, with
Origin
from, of
 
*Many prepositions will fall under two or more categories. To determine
what type of preposition is being used in a sentence, you must look closely at
the context and what is being described.
Prepositions of time
A preposition of time describes when or for how long something occurred
or will occur. The three most common prepositions of time are at, in, and on.
Each preposition of time refers to a different increment of or point in time, as
shown below:
502

Preposition
of Time
What it Describes
Example Sentences
at
specific and short times of day
“Let’s meet at noon.”
“Chris 
arrived 
at 
one
o’clock.”
in
months, years, and specific
times of day
“Beth 
starts 
school 
in
August.”
“In 2008, the U.S. held a
presidential election.”
“I would rather work on the
project in the afternoon.”
on
days and dates
“On Tuesday, Dad went to
the grocery store.”
“Valentine’s 
Day 
is 
on
February 14.”
for
durations of time
“He lived abroad for many
years.”
during
simultaneous events
“We’re 
not 
supposed 
to
study during class.”
since
a continuous event originating
from a specific point in the
past
“She’s been waiting to hear
back from the office since
yesterday.”
by
a specific point in the future
before which an event must be
completed
“You must wake up by six
o’clock tomorrow morning.”
until
a continuous event that will
terminate at a specific point in
the future
“Daniel can’t sneak out of
the house until his parents
go to bed.”
before
something prior to a specific
time or event
“The moon rose before
sunset.”
after
something following a specific
time or event
“Katrina made a promise to
help out after work today.”
503

to
time in relation to the next
hour of the day
“My watch says it’s 10
minutes to three right now.”
past
time 
in 
relation 
to 
the
previous hour of the day
“Ideally, the party would
start no later than a quarter
past eight.”
Prepositions of place
A preposition of place describes where something is located in reference
to something else, or where something occurred or will occur. Like
prepositions of time, the most common prepositions of place are also at, in,
and on. The usages of these and other prepositions of place are explained
below:
Preposition
of Place
What it Describes
Example Sentences
at
specific 
points 
or
locations
“Ben is planning on staying the night
at a hotel.”
in
enclosed spaces
“The rice is in the cabinet.”
on
surfaces or tops of
things
“Leave the towel on the counter.”
by, 
near,
close to
lack of distance
“The library is by/near/close to the
train station.”
next 
to,
beside
adjacency
“Many people consider it rude to sit
next to/beside a stranger in a movie
theater.”
between
something 
in 
the
middle of two people
or things
“To make a sandwich, simply put
something between two slices of
bread.”
behind
something 
at 
the
back of something
“I stood behind my sister while we
waited in line.”
in front of
something 
situated
before something
“Let’s put the dresser in front of the
window.”
504

above, over*
something 
higher
than something
“The arch above/over the hallway
reminded Natalie of a castle she’d
visited.”
below,
under**
something 
lower
than something
“All 
children 
fear 
the 
monsters
below/under their beds.”
 
*Over and above both describe something higher than something else, but
over can also describe something directly in contact with and covering
something beneath it. For example: “I draped my jacket over the couch” is
correct, whereas “I draped my jacket above the couch” is incorrect.
**Under and below can both describe something lower than something else,
but under can also describe something that is directly in contact with
something on top of it. For example: “The puppy hid under the blanket” is
correct, whereas “The puppy hid below the blanket” is incorrect.
Prepositions 
of 
direction 
or
movement
A preposition of direction or movement describes how, where, or in
what way something moves. The following table highlights the most common
prepositions of direction and movement, as well as their different usages:
Preposition of
Direction or
Movement
What it Describes
Example Sentences
to
movement with a specific
aim, 
direction, 
or
destination
“My 
brother 
went 
to
Europe with his friends.”
from
movement with a specific
point of origin
“She told stories about the
time she walked to Spain
from France.”
over
movement higher than and
across something else
“The bird flew over the
trees.”
above
movement 
to 
a 
point
higher than something else
“He shot his arrow above
the target.”
505

under/beneath
movement 
lower 
than
something
“That large worm went
under/beneath the dirt.”
along
movement on a straight
line or edge
“The childhood friends rode
their bicycles along the
road.”
around
movement in a circular
direction
“The couple held hands and
skated around the rink.”
across
movement from one end to
the other
“I walked across the flimsy
bridge.”
through
movement from one side of
an enclosed space and out
of the other
“The burglar entered the
house 
through 
the
basement window.”
into
movement ending inside
something
“If you jump into the water
like this, you can make a
big splash.”
out of
movement ending outside
something
“Get out of that cave
before 
the 
bear 
comes
back!”
toward(s)*
movement 
closer 
to
something
“Laughing, she threw up
her 
hands 
and 
ran
toward(s) the park.”
away from
movement 
farther 
from
something
“Get away from the fire
before you get burned.”
onto
movement ending on top
of something
“Be careful climbing onto
that ledge.”
off
movement down or away
from something
“Parents are always yelling
at their kids to get off the
furniture.”
up
movement heading up
“When you use a fireplace,
smoke 
goes 
up 
the
chimney.”
506

down
movement heading down
“He jumped down and
hurt his knee.”
*Toward and towards are interchangeable. In formal American English,
“toward” is preferred.
Prepositions of agency
A preposition of agency describes a person or a thing that has caused or is
causing something to occur. Sentences containing prepositions of agency are
usually written in the passive voice and employ the prepositions by (for
people) and with (for things). For example:
• “The house was built by the three siblings.” (passive)
• “The three siblings built the house.” (active)
• “Her heart is filled with emotion.” (passive)
• “Emotion filled her heart.” (active)
Prepositions of instrument or
device
A preposition of instrument or device is used when describing certain
technologies, machines, or devices. These prepositions are by, with, and on.
Typically, by refers to methods of transportation, whereas with and on
describe the use of machines and other devices. For example:
• “Aunt Patricia returned home by ferry.”
• “She opened the locked door with an old key.”
• “May I finish my homework on your computer?”
Prepositions 
of 
reason 
or
purpose
A preposition of reason or purpose describes why something has
occurred or will occur. Common prepositions of reason or purpose include
for, through, because of, on account of, and from. For example:
• “Everything I did was for you.”
507

• “Through her bravery, we were able to escape unharmed.”
• “Because of the delay, I was late to the parade.”
• “The employees refused to work on account of their low pay.”
• “He knows from experience how to deal with them.”
Prepositions of connection
A preposition of connection describes possession, relationships, or
accompaniment. Of is used for possession, to for relationships between
people or things, and with for accompaniment. For example:
• “The Statue of Liberty is located in New York Harbor.”
• “A well-written essay is impressive to teachers.”
• “Lisa wanted to go to the concert with Victor.”
Origin
When we describe a person or thing’s origin (such as nationality,
hometown/state, ethnicity, the place where something was built or designed,
etc.), we typically use the preposition from (and, to a lesser degree, of). For
example:
• “I met the most delightful couple from Italy.”
• “I’m from New York originally, but I’ve lived in Dallas for many years.”
• “The new professor is of Turkish descent.”
• “The new computer from the tech giant should be revolutionary.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not one of the prepositions of time?
a) in
b) at
c) on
d) with
2. Which of the following sentences contains a preposition of place?
a) “She struggled to play the song on her guitar.”
508

b) “The kitten fell asleep beside me.”
c) “Nathan didn’t think the plan would work on account of its hasty
development.
d) “The sound of voices could be heard coming through the vents.”
 
3. Which of the following sentences contains a preposition of agency?
a) “Emma couldn’t believe the song had been written for her.”
b) “Those roses were sent by Grandma.”
c) “The meeting will take place at 10 o’clock.”
d) “She decided to move away from her home city.”
 
4. Which of the following sentences contains a preposition of reason or
purpose?
a) “I trekked across the country alone.”
b) “The book is on the desk.”
c) “Let’s talk about this again after the show.”
d) “He kept going because of his desire to succeed.”
Common Prepositional Errors
Due to the large number of prepositions in English, as well as the fact that
many prepositions serve multiple purposes, it can be quite difficult to
determine which preposition to use in a particular situation. This is
especially tricky for the prepositions we use after verbs.
In this section, we’ll look at some common errors that arise when trying to
determine the appropriate preposition to use with a particular kind of verb,
as well as identifying patterns to help us make the correct choice.
Verbs of motion — to vs. in
Verbs that describe the movement from one place to another generally take
the preposition to. However, when a verb describes a movement from one
place into another, we use the prepositions in or into. This can lead to
confusion between the two prepositions when using a motion verb that can
describe either scenario. For example:
✖ “I went in London last year.” (incorrect)
✔ “I went to London last year.” (correct)
509

When we use a motion verb this way, we use the preposition of movement
to. The only exception to the rule is the verb phrase go home, where home is
an adverbial noun that modifies the verb. Otherwise we need to use to to
express going from A to B.
Here are some more examples of motion verbs that take the preposition to:
• “Walk to school.”
• “Run to the store.”
• “Move to the left.”
• “Turn to the right.”
• “Swim to the shore.”
• “Drive to the country.”
• “Cycle to work.”
Of course we can use other prepositions of movement when we describe
different relationships between the verb and the object of the preposition.
For example:
• “Walk across the road.”
• “Run along the river.”
• “Cycle round the park.”
• “Drive over the bridge.”
• “Swim up and down the pool.”
• “Went in the school.”
Static verbs — at vs. to
✖ “I arrived to the airport late.” (incorrect)
✔ “I arrived at the airport late.” (correct)
Remember, we use to with motion verbs when we describe the movement
from one location to another. Arrive, however, is considered a “static” verb,
meaning it indicates no movement from point A to point B. In this case, we
need to use the preposition at, which is used to indicate being in a location.
Other examples of static verb are be and stay; we also use at rather than to
with these verbs, as in:
✖ “I was to the theater last night.” (incorrect)
510

✔ “I was at the theater last night.” (correct)
✖ “I stayed to my brother’s house last night.” (incorrect)
✔ “I stayed at my brother’s house last night.” (correct)
Possession and access — to vs. of
The prepositions to and of can both be used to signify that something
belongs to or is a property of another thing. However, we use to to indicate
that something grants access or leads into another thing, which is a
relationship that of does not describe. For example:
✖ “This is the key of my room.” (incorrect)
✔ “This is the key to my room.” (correct)
There are also certain instances in which we could use either preposition and
still have a correct sentence, but the meaning would be subtly different:
✔ “This is the main door of the house.” (correct—meaning the primary door
belonging to the house)
✔ “This is the main door to the house.” (also correct—meaning the primary
door to gain access to the house)
Different media — in vs. on
Another pair of similar prepositions is in and on, which can both be used to
describe the medium by which something is seen. We use in when we are
talking about something appearing in printed media, while on is used to
talk about something appearing on televised or digital media. Let’s look
at two sets of examples to better see this difference:
✖ “I saw it on the newspaper.” (incorrect)
✔ “I read it in the newspaper.” (correct)
✖ “I saw it in TV.” (incorrect)
✔ “I saw it on TV.” (correct)
Containment and nativity — in
vs. of
✖ “The Nile is the longest river of the world.” (incorrect)
✔ “The Nile is the longest river in the world.” (correct)
511

Remember that of relates to belonging, while in refers to being inside or
within someplace. We speak about countries and things being in the world,
not of the world. On the other hand, when we describe someplace to which a
person or thing is native, we use of and not in. For example:
✖ “He is a citizen in Greece.” (incorrect)
✔ “He is a citizen of Greece.” (correct)
✖ “The gray wolf in North America is a beautiful creature.” (incorrect)
✔ “The gray wolf of North America is a beautiful creature.” (correct)
Performance — in vs. at
When we describe how well someone does something, we often use the verb
phrase is good followed by the preposition at. However, if we use the verb
phrase does well, we usually use the preposition in, which can lead to a
confusion between the two. For example:
✖ “My brother is good in English.” (incorrect) 
✔ “My brother is good at English.” (correct)
✖ “My sister does well at school.” (incorrect) 
✔ “My sister does well in school.” (correct)
When we are talking about a particular subject, we use is good at, but if
we’re talking about a particular setting, we use does well in.
Over, on, and at the weekend
When we talk about our plans for an upcoming weekend, there are a number
of prepositional constructions we can use. In American English, the most
common prepositions to use are over and on. In British English, the most
common preposition is at, though over is also used. Note that the
preposition during is not used in either American or British English.
• “I will do my homework on the weekend.” (American English)
• “I will do my homework over the weekend.” (American and British
English)
• “I will do my homework at the weekend.” (British English)
Transitive and intransitive verbs
We must be careful with prepositions when it comes to transitive and
intransitive verbs. Remember, transitive verbs can take direct (and
512

sometimes indirect) objects, while intransitive verbs cannot.
Prepositions 
with 
intransitive
verbs
If we want to express a direct relationship between an intransitive verb and
something that seems to be receiving its action, we often use a preposition.
For example:
✖ “I listened the radio last night.” (incorrect)
✔ “I listened to the radio last night.” (correct)
✖ “I’ll wait you.” (incorrect) 
✔ “I’ll wait for you.” (correct)
If we leave out the prepositions to and for, we make the radio and you the
objects of the intransitive verbs listen and wait, which is incorrect.
Prepositions 
with 
transitive
verbs
Likewise, we must be careful not to use a preposition with the objects of
transitive verbs:
✖ “I’ll answer to the phone.” (incorrect)
✔ “I’ll answer the phone.” (correct)
✖ “She is going to marry with a lawyer.” (incorrect) 
✔ “She is going to marry a lawyer.” (correct)
✖ “I asked to him to* buy some bread.” (incorrect)
✔ “I asked him to* buy some bread.” (correct)
(*Note that to buy in the last two examples is an infinitive, not a
prepositional phrase; it is functioning as an adverb of purpose to modify
the verb ask.)
The verb ask can also be an intransitive verb in some instances, in which
case we can use the preposition for:
✔ “I asked Jeff.” (transitive)
✔ “I asked for Jeff.” (intransitive)
Be careful, though, because this changes the verb’s meaning. When we use
513

ask with just a person’s name, as in the first example, it means to ask the
person something, such as a question. When we ask for someone, it means
we are requesting to see or speak to that person.
Prepositions and indirect objects
Some transitive verbs are able to take both direct objects and indirect
objects (people or things that receive the direct object of the verb). If a verb
is capable of taking an indirect object, that person or thing appears
immediately after the verb and before the direct object. We can also place it
after the direct object with the preposition to, in which case it is no longer a
true indirect object but an adverbial prepositional phrase. For example:
✔ “John sent me a letter.” (correct—indirect object)
✔ “John sent a letter to me.” (correct—adverbial prepositional phrase)
However, not all transitive verbs can take indirect objects. If a verb is unable
to have a true indirect object, we have to put the person or thing receiving
the direct object in a prepositional phrase with to. For instance:
✖ “I’ll explain you the problem.” (incorrect)
✔ “I’ll explain the problem to you.” (correct)
Verbs that take both to and at
Many verbs are able to take multiple prepositions after them. However, this
often results in a change in the sentence’s meaning. The most common of
these pairs is to and at—a large number of verbs are able to take both. We’ll
look at a number of such constructions below.
Shout to vs. shout at
When you shout to someone, you raise your voice to ensure that he or she
can hear you. If, on the other hand, you shout at someone, you raise your
voice because you are angry with him or her. For example:
• “I shouted to Mary, but she was too far away to hear me.”
• “He just kept shouting at me, even though I had apologized.”
Throw to vs. throw at
If you throw something to someone, such as a ball, you intend for that
514

person to catch it. For example:
• “She threw the ball to the dog. He caught it and ran away with it.”
If you throw something at someone, you want to hit them with it. This could
be because you are angry with them, as in:
• “She was so angry with her husband that she threw her wedding ring at
him.”
Point to vs. point at
You can point to or at a person as well as an object.
If we point to someone or something, we are indicating a location or
direction. For example:
• “She pointed to the sky.”
If we point at someone or something, we draw attention to that specific
person or thing, as in:
• “‘You’re the one who stole my bag!’ she shouted, pointing at the thief.”
Sometimes the difference between the two is very subtle, and we can use
either preposition with little to no change in meaning.
• “He pointed at/to his watch and said, ‘I must go. It’s very late.’”
Learning 
the 
correct
prepositions
In this guide, we provide some general guidelines for determining which
preposition to use in a given situation. However, the use of prepositions is
particularly varied and flexible in English, so the best way to learn correct
prepositional use is to pay close attention to the way people speak and write.
Prepositions with Nouns
Definition
Certain prepositions can be used in conjunction with nouns to connect,
emphasize, or provide clarification for ideas expressed in sentences. In this
combination, the preposition always comes directly after the noun. Here are
515

some of the most common prepositions used with nouns:
to
for
of
in
on
at
from
with
about
between
Rules
There is no clear-cut rule that determines which prepositions connect to
which nouns; however, we can look at how synonymous nouns and
associated verbs pair with prepositions to observe patterns or make an
educated guess.
Synonymous nouns
Synonymous nouns typically employ identical prepositions. For example,
when the noun respect is replaced with its synonyms (such as admiration or
esteem), the preposition for remains the same:
• “I could never lose respect for you.” (original)
• “I could never lose admiration for you.”
• “I could never lose esteem for you.”
In the above case, the preposition does not change, regardless of what
synonym is being used.
This is not always the case, however, so do not take this as a concrete rule.
The examples below demonstrate cases in which the preposition changes
with synonyms of the original noun:
• “My addiction to coffee is unhealthy.” (original)
• “My obsession with coffee is unhealthy.”
• “My dependence on coffee is unhealthy.”
516

Verbs with prepositions
For many words, the prepositions used with nouns are the same prepositions
used with those nouns’ associated verb forms. For example:
• “He discussed his reaction to the results.” (noun)
• “He discussed how he reacted to the results.” (verb)
• “I have knowledge of that particular issue.” (noun)
• “I know of that particular issue.” (verb)
Be careful not to rely on this pattern, though, because in some cases
changing a noun into its verb form alters the preposition:
• “I have deep sympathy for him.”
• “I deeply sympathize with him.”
• “She has an obsession with that comic book.”
• “She obsesses over that comic book.”
Examples of common pairings
Although there are some tricks we can use, there is no specific way of
determining which prepositions pair with particular nouns—we just have to
know them by heart. The only way to do this is by seeing them used in
everyday writing and speech.
Below we will look at examples of the most common prepositions that pair
with nouns.
Noun + to
One of the most common prepositions used with nouns is to. The following
table contains examples of combinations you might see:
Noun +
to
Example Sentence
access to
“I couldn’t enter the building without access to the door’s
password.”
addiction
to
“Alison has an addiction to football.”
answer to
“Her answer to the teacher’s question was incorrect.”
517

approach
to
“Professor Smith’s approach to the experiment was incredibly
innovative.”
damage to “The damage to the car is worse than I thought it’d be.”
dedication
to
“Ned has intense dedication to his schoolwork.”
devotion
to
“Everyone admired the doctor’s devotion to her patients.”
reaction to “The child had an adorable reaction to the kitten.”
response
to
“She gave no response to the question I’d asked her.”
solution to “No one could come up with a solution to the math problem.”
threat to
“Climate change is a potential threat to certain species.”
Noun + for
Another common preposition used with nouns is for. Examples can be seen
in the table below:
Noun +
for
Example Sentence
admiration
for
“Penny has so much admiration for her mother.”
cure for
“Health officials recently announced that a cure for the fatal
disease had been found.”
desire for
“My desire for success is more important than my desire for
romance.”
hope for
“Youths often have high hopes for humanity.”
need for
“The need for social interaction is a basic human trait.”
passion for “Simply having a passion for writing doesn’t necessarily mean
you will become a best-selling author.”
reason for
“There is always a reason for change.”
518

respect for
“Certain cultures promote respect for elders.”
room for
“There’s room for one more person at this table.”
sympathy
for
“You should always have sympathy for strangers.”
talent for
“Greg has a talent for stand-up comedy.”
 
Noun + of
The preposition of can be used with many nouns. Here are some common
combinations:
Noun + of
Example Sentence
advantage of “Most people seem to underestimate the advantage of
majoring in philosophy.”
disadvantage
of
“The disadvantage of becoming an entrepreneur is the
amount of debt you can accumulate.”
fear of
“My niece has a fear of the dark.”
habit of
“I used to have a habit of biting my fingernails.”
intention of
“Do you have any intention of going out today?”
knowledge
of
“Timothy’s knowledge of beekeeping is impressive.”
lack of
“The police cannot arrest him due to a lack of evidence.”
memory of
“I have no memory of my first year in school.”
process of
“The process of elimination is a popular technique when
taking multiple-choice tests.”
smell of
“I love the smell of freshly baked cookies.”
sound of
“Can you hear the sound of birds chirping?”
taste of
“The taste of cooked octopus is an acquired one.”
519

Noun + in
Several nouns take the preposition in, examples of which can be seen in the
following table:
Noun +
in
Example Sentence
belief in
“It is not uncommon to have a belief in a higher power.”
change in
“Scientists detected little change in the atmosphere.”
decrease
in
“A decrease in taxes would dramatically affect the economy.”
delay in
“There appears to have been a delay in processing your
payment.”
experience
in
“She has little experience in backpacking.”
increase in “I’m hoping for an increase in environmentally friendly
products.”
interest in
“Even as a child, the girl had an interest in archaeology.”
pleasure
in
“He took pleasure in playing the piano.”
reduction
in
“Meredith was forced to take a reduction in her pay.”
rise in
“After he won the jackpot, his hometown witnessed a sharp
rise in sales of lottery tickets.”
 
Noun + on
The preposition on is less commonly paired with nouns, but there are
instances where it is used. Here are some examples of on being used with
nouns:
Noun +
on
Example Sentence
520

advice on “I read magazines for advice on relationships.”
attack on “Some view the new law as an attack on our rights.”
ban on
“The early 20th century saw a short-lived ban on alcohol.”
emphasis
on
“She is studying East Asian cultures with an emphasis on
Japanese society.”
focus on
“His focus on success has hindered his social life.”
report on “The report on fast food made people more aware of the
number of calories they consume.”
 
Noun + at
The preposition at is only paired with a few nouns. For example:
• “Though new to skiing, he made an attempt at the highest slope.”
• “I have no chance at winning this game.”
Often, we use the preposition in conjunction with which, as in:
• “This is the age at which you are eligible for military service.”
• “There’s always a point at which trying to reason with him becomes
futile.”
Noun + from
From is only occasionally used with nouns. The preposition usually refers to
two things at opposition with each other, or specifies an origin or starting
point when used in conjunction with to:
• “The town sought protection from bandits.”
• “His transition from pauper to prince was something out of a fairy tale.”
Noun + with
Generally, nouns combined with the preposition with point to relationships
and connections between two or more things. For example:
• “What’s the matter with you?”
• “I noticed a small problem with the story you submitted.”
521

• “Her close relationship with her sister is enviable.”
• “If you’re having trouble with the assignments, consult your teacher.”
Noun + about
When paired with a noun, about means concerning or in regards to. For
example:
• “His anxiety about public speaking is so bad that he sweats when he’s
onstage.”
• “Do you have any information about the changes in the schedule?”
• “She wants to hear the story about her favorite superhero again.”
Noun + between
A noun that takes the preposition between forms a comparison between
two things. Here are some common combinations:
• “For her thesis, Stacy submitted a comparison between classical music
and contemporary rock.”
• “The connection between good and evil is fascinating.”
• “Is there a difference between green onions and scallions?”
Nouns 
with 
multiple
prepositions
Some nouns are capable of combining with more than one preposition. In
some of these cases, the meaning does not change no matter which
preposition is chosen:
• “My opinion of her is the same as yours.”
• “My opinion about her is the same as yours.”
• “Abby is an expert in changing tires.”
• “Abby is an expert at changing tires.”
• “I appreciate his newfound love for animals.”
• “I appreciate his newfound love of animals.”
In other cases, however, the meaning changes entirely when a different
preposition is substituted:
522

• “No one can deny the positive impact of France.” (France has a positive
influence.)
• “No one can deny the positive impact on France.” (Something positively
affects France.)
• “Her transition from vegetarian to vegan wasn’t difficult.” (She started as
a vegetarian and ended as a vegan.)
• “Her transition to vegetarian from vegan wasn’t difficult.” (She started as
a vegan and ended as a vegetarian.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following prepositions is most commonly paired with
nouns?
a) along
b) up
c) of
d) without
 
2. Which of the following sentences contains a noun + preposition
combination?
a) “I walked in and ordered a drink.”
b) “It’s OK to take pride in your home country.”
c) “My nephew is interested in joining a club.”
d) “Did you look in the cupboard?”
 
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain a preposition with a
noun?
a) “Did you laugh at Larry’s jokes?”
b) “My knowledge of comic books is limited.”
c) “The woman’s talent for singing is unmistakable.”
d) “Everyone deserves a chance at love.”
4. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “Gina found it difficult to satisfy her desire for adventure.”
b) “Gina found it difficult to satisfy her thirst for adventure.”
c) “Gina found it difficult to satisfy her interest for adventure.”
523

d) “Gina found it difficult to satisfy her longing for adventure.”
Prepositions with Verbs
Definition
Certain verbs require prepositions in order to connect to their sentences’
objects. These combinations, also known as prepositional verbs, allow the
prepositions to act as necessary links between verbs and nouns or gerunds.
The prepositions used in these combinations are sometimes called
dependent prepositions.
Here are some of the prepositions most commonly used with verbs:
• for
• to
• about
• with
• of
• in
• at
• on
• from
Usage
Prepositional verbs always take a direct object (either a noun or gerund) after
the preposition and cannot be separated by it. For example:
✖ “He listens classical music every night.” (Incorrect — the verb listens
requires a preposition to connect to its object, classical music.)
✖ “He listens classical music to every night.” (Incorrect — listens and its
preposition to cannot be separated by the object, classical music.)
✔ “He listens to classical music every night.” (Correct — the prepositional
verb is not separated, and the object comes directly after the preposition.)
Prepositional verbs vs. phrasal
verbs
Sometimes, a phrasal verb may be mistaken for a prepositional verb.
524

Although both combinations employ verbs and prepositions, you can
differentiate the two grammar structures by looking at the literal meaning
of the verb and the word order.
Literal meaning of the verb
Prepositional verbs use the literal meanings of verbs, whereas phrasal verbs
tend to be idiomatic. For example, the meaning of the verb ask doesn’t
change when combined with the preposition for; however, it changes
dramatically when combined with the preposition out:
• “Kelly asked for a raise.” (The literal meaning of to ask is to inquire. Kelly
inquired about a raise, making it a prepositional verb.)
• “Kelly asked out Chad.” (Ask out means to invite someone on a date,
making it an idiomatic phrasal verb.)
Word order
The order of a verb’s preposition and its object can also help determine
whether a verb is prepositional or phrasal. As previously stated, the object of
prepositional verbs always comes immediately after the preposition, which
in turn comes immediately after the verb. Note that an exception to this rule
is when an adverb is used to modify the prepositional verb, in which case it
can appear between the verb and the preposition. However, the object must
still follow the preposition. For example:
✔ “Kelly asked for a raise.” (correct)
✔ “Kelly asked politely for a raise.” (correct)
✖ “Kelly asked a raise for.” (incorrect)
For phrasal verbs, however, prepositions and objects can often be rearranged
without issue:
✔ “Kelly asked out Chad.” (correct)
✔ “Kelly asked Chad out.” (also correct)
Examples of common pairings
Because there are no established rules or methods to determine which
prepositions accompany which verbs, we have to settle on memorizing some
of the most common verb + preposition combinations.
The following sections contain numerous examples of commonly used
525

prepositional verbs.
Verb + for
The preposition for can be used with a number of verbs, often to emphasize
purpose or reason. For example:
Verb + for
Example Sentences
apologize for “Brittany never apologizes for her behavior.”
ask for
“The student asked for a pencil.”
beg for
“The man begged for a second chance.”
care for
“I don’t care for salads.”
fight for
“Many generations of people have fought for freedom."
hope for
“The family is hoping for a miracle.”
long for
“The man longed for the days of his youth.”
pay for
“Who’s going to pay for these tickets?”
provide for
“Parents are expected to provide for their children.”
search for
“Did you search for the missing piece yet?”
wait for
“I’m waiting for the bus.”
wish for
“Some people wish for nothing but fame.”
work for
“She works for the government.”
Verb + to
To is commonly used with verbs and usually refers to direction (literal or
metaphorical) or connections between people or things. For example:
Verb + to
Example Sentences
adjust to
“You’ll adjust to your new school in no time.”
admit to
“He admitted to reading her diary.”
526

belong to
“The wallet belongs to that woman over there.”
travel to
“I am traveling to England tomorrow.”
listen to
“Grace is listening to music in her room.”
go to
“Anthony, please go to the back of the classroom.”
relate to
“I can’t relate to this character at all.”
respond to “Josh responded to his friend’s email.”
talk to
“He talked to the manager for more than an hour.”
turn to
“Turn to page 46 for a diagram of the procedure.”
Verb + about
Many verbs take the preposition about when referring to things, events, or
gerunds. For example:
Verb + about
Example Sentences
ask about
“I asked about the company’s job opening.”
care about
“She doesn’t seem to care about going to college.”
complain about “The boy complained about his early curfew.”
forget about
“I forgot about the wedding reception.”
hear about
“Did you hear about the renovation project?”
joke about
“Kim often jokes about her high-pitched voice.”
know about
“What do you know about physics?”
laugh about
“The friends laughed about their terrible luck.”
learn about
“Michelle is learning about film production.”
talk about
“What are you talking about?”
think about
“We’ll need to think about hiring some more staff.”
worry about
“So many adults worry about getting older.”
527

write about
“Dean wrote about his day in his journal.”
Verb + with
Verbs using the preposition with usually point to connections and
relationships between people or things. For example:
Verb + with
Example Sentences
agree with
“I don’t agree with his opinions.”
argue with
“The two argued with each other for several minutes.”
begin with, start
with
“Let’s begin with a short quiz.”
“I shouldn’t have started with a salad.”
collide with
“It is possible, albeit unlikely, for an asteroid to collide
with Earth.”
compare with
“How does the restaurant’s soup compare with
Vera’s?”
compete with
“When I run races, I only compete with the clock.”
cope with
“It’s not easy to cope with failure.”
disagree with
“She disagrees with my suggestion.”
interfere with
“Be careful not to interfere with the conference
upstairs.”
meet with
“When will you meet with her?”
 
Verb + of
The preposition of can be used with a variety of verbs. For example:
Verb + of
Example Sentences
approve of
“Ellen doesn’t approve of her sister’s friends.”
consist of
“Pizza consists of bread, cheese, and tomato sauce.”
dream of
“I dream of visiting Europe.”
528

hear of
“Have you heard of this new TV show?”
take care of “Who will take care of your goldfish while you’re away?”
think of
“If you only think of failure, you’ll never take any risks.”
Verb + in
The preposition in accompanies several verbs and tends to point to
involvement or connections between people or things. For example:
Verb + in
Example Sentences
believe in
“The majority of children believe in Santa Claus.”
engage in
“Maurice likes to engage in political debates.”
invest in
“Now is the time to invest in as many companies as possible.”
live in
“Haley lives in Seattle.”
participate
in
“What sports did you participate in as a kid?”
result in
“The hotel’s failure to exterminate the bed bugs resulted in
fewer customers.”
specialize
in
“English majors can choose to specialize in creative writing or
literature.”
succeed in “Steven succeeded in earning a scholarship.”
Verb + at
At is commonly used with verbs to indicate places, skills, and reactions. For
example:
Verb + at
Example Sentences
arrive at
“We arrived at the hotel in the morning.”
balk at
“Melissa balked at the news.”
529

excel at
“My five-year-old niece already excels at math and science.”
laugh at
“The boy couldn’t stop laughing at Isabella’s joke.”
look at
“Look at the whiteboard, please.”
nod at
“She nodded at her coworkers.”
shout at
“He could hear someone shouting at the TV.”
smile at
“My son smiles at me every time I walk through the door.”
stare at
“It’s uncomfortable when people stare at you.”
Verb + on
The preposition on is used with a number of different verbs. For example:
Verb + on
Example Sentences
agree on
“The committee finally agreed on a solution.”
bet on
“I wouldn’t bet on that happening.”
comment on
“The lawyer briefly commented on the lawsuit.”
concentrate 
on,
focus on
“He’s trying to concentrate on his work.”
“I'm too tired to focus on this assignment.”
decide on
“He eventually decided on a career path.”
depend on, rely
on
“You can’t depend on him forever.”
“Too many students rely on the Internet to conduct
research.”
elaborate on
“This paragraph elaborates on the previous one’s
claims.”
 
experiment on
“The company offered assurances that it does not
experiment on animals.”
insist on
“She insisted on joining us.”
operate on
“Aspiring surgeons learn how to operate on people.”
plan on
“Do you plan on attending the concert tomorrow?”
530

 
Verb + from
The preposition from is commonly used with verbs to identify a point of
origin or a connection or disconnection between people or things. For
example:
Verb +
from
Example Sentences
benefit
from
“Aspiring musicians benefit from getting public exposure for
their music.”
come from
“Saya comes from Japan.”
differ from
“How does milk chocolate differ from white chocolate?”
escape
from
“The prisoners escaped from their captors.”
recover
from
“The girl recovered from her illness.”
refrain
from
“Could you please refrain from shouting?”
resign from “The CEO resigned from her position after 25 years with the
company.”
retire from
“He retired from his job last year.”
suffer from “Many people suffer from social anxiety.”
 
Verb + other prepositions
Other prepositions can be used to create prepositional verbs. Some of these
prepositions are against, into, and like. For example:
• “We decided against visiting my aunt.”
• “The car nearly crashed into a tree.”
• “I feel like going on an adventure.”
531

Verbs with multiple prepositions
Certain verbs can take multiple prepositions without changing the overall
meaning of the sentence. For example, the verb talk can use the prepositions
to and with interchangeably:
• “I need to talk to the principal.”
• “I need to talk with the principal.”
On the other hand, some verbs’ meanings do change when a different
preposition is introduced. For example, the verb dream can mean to aspire
when it is used with the preposition of; however, when it is used with the
prepositions about, it means to see images during sleep. For example:
• “She dreams of becoming a pilot.” (aspiration)
• “She often dreams about flying.” (image during sleep)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following prepositions is commonly paired with verbs?
a) at
b) on
c) about
d) from
e) all of the above
2. Which of the following sentences contains a prepositional verb?
a) “I would be honored to give a speech.”
b) “He forgot about daylight saving time.”
c) “She had an allergic reaction to peanut butter.”
d) “Mitch has an obsession with comic books.”
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain a prepositional
verb?
a) “I’m responsible for cleaning the office.”
b) “Let’s drink to your good fortune.”
c) “She begged for his forgiveness.”
d) “He looked at the sky.”
532

4. Which of the following sentences uses an incorrect preposition?
a) “He insisted on doing everything himself.”
b) “Haggis consists of meat, onions, oatmeal, and spices.”
c) “Consult a doctor if you suffer with bronchitis.”
d) “I don’t really care for chocolate.”
Prepositions with Adjectives
Definition
Prepositions can sometimes appear after adjectives to complete or
elaborate on the ideas or emotions the adjective describes. Prepositions used
in this way are known as adjective complements. The preposition always
comes directly after the adjective and is typically followed by a noun or
gerund to form a prepositional phrase.
The most common prepositions used alongside adjectives include the
following:
of
to
about
for
with
at
by
in
from
Rules
There are no definite rules when it comes to combining adjectives with
prepositions, but a few patterns exist. One trick is to look at how
synonymous adjectives and antonymous adjectives pair with
prepositions; another is to memorize the prepositions used with adjectives’
associated noun forms.
533

Synonymous adjectives
Synonymous adjectives generally take the same prepositions. For example,
when the adjective afraid is replaced with its synonyms scared and terrified,
the preposition of stays the same:
• “Megan was afraid of the thunderstorm.” (original)
• “Megan was scared of the thunderstorm.”
• “Megan was terrified of the thunderstorm.”
Be careful, though, as some similar-sounding adjectives may require
different prepositions:
• “Philip is upset about what was said.” (original)
• “Philip is displeased with what was said.”
• “Philip is hurt by what was said.”
Antonymous adjectives
Like synonymous adjectives, the majority of antonymous adjectives use the
same prepositions:
• “It was smart of him to go on vacation.”
• “It was stupid of him to go on vacation.”
• “She’s good at skateboarding.”
• “She’s bad at skateboarding.”
Noun forms with prepositions
We can also examine the prepositions used with associated nouns, as the
same prepositions are often used with the adjective forms as well. For
example:
• “I am interested in astronomy.” (adjective)
• “I have an interest in astronomy.” (associated noun)
• “He is addicted to playing tennis.” (adjective)
• “He has an addiction to playing tennis.” (associated noun)
• “Julie is obsessed with that movie.” (adjective)
• “Julie has an obsession with that movie.” (associated noun)
On occasion, an adjective and its associated noun form may not share the
534

same preposition, as in the example below:
• “He is fond of animals.” (adjective)
• “He has a fondness for animals.” (associated noun)
Examples of common pairings
Because there are no distinct rules for determining how adjectives combine
with prepositions, the best way to learn correct adjective + preposition
combinations is by memorizing some of the most common pairings.
Below are various examples of combinations you may come across in
everyday English.
Adjective + of
An adjective paired with the preposition of can identify causes of mental and
physical states (e.g., fear, exhaustion, anxiety, etc.) or offer descriptions for
actions and people. For example:
Adjective + of
Example Sentences
afraid of, frightened of, scared of,
terrified of
“Sam is afraid of dogs.”
“Many kids are frightened of clowns.”
“Are you scared of airplanes?”
“The poor baby was terrified of her
crib.”
kind of, nice of, sweet of,
thoughtful of
“How kind of you to come early.”
“That was nice of your sister to treat us
to dessert.”
“It’s very sweet of John to send a gift.”
“It is thoughtful of passengers to thank
their drivers.”
odd of, strange of
“How odd of that man to wear
sunglasses inside.”
“It’s strange of you to change your
mind like that.”
proud of
“Mom told me she is proud of my
accomplishments.”
535

rude of
“I thought it rude of her to interrupt
me.”
smart of
“That’s very smart of you.”
sick of, tired of
“I am so sick of doing laundry every
week.”
“Olivia confessed that she is tired of
dating Mike.”
silly of
“It was silly of me to assume I was
right.”
stupid of
“How stupid of that boy to drop out of
high school.”
Adjective + to
When paired with an adjective, the preposition to can describe behaviors,
states, or connections between things and people. For example:
Adjective + to
Example Sentences
accustomed to
“He quickly became accustomed to
city life.”
addicted to
“I think I'm addicted to 
action
movies.”
committed 
to, 
dedicated 
to,
devoted to
“She is committed to the art of dance.”
“How dedicated to your studies are
you?”
“Lucy is devoted to her family.”
friendly to, good to, kind to, nice
to
“Henry is friendly to everyone.”
“Was she good to you?”
“You should always be kind to others.”
“Mrs. Roberts was nice to the cashier.”
married to
“Cassie is married to Nick.”
536

mean to, rude to, unfriendly to
“Don’t be mean to your classmates.”
“The couple was rude to the waitress.”
“A lot of cats are unfriendly to
humans.”
opposed to
“I am opposed to these changes.”
similar to
“His idea is similar to mine.”
 
Adjective + about
The preposition about typically accompanies emotive adjectives in regards to
specific situations or events. For example:
Adjective + about
Example Sentences
angry about, furious about, mad
about
“My neighbor is angry about the loud
music we played last night.”
“That woman is furious about having
to wait in line.”
“You’re 
always 
mad 
about
something.”
anxious about, nervous about,
stressed about, worried about
“Joe is anxious about studying
abroad next semester.”
“She seemed nervous about the
test.”
“Rachel is stressed about finding a
job.”
“Dad is worried about filing taxes.”
excited about
“I am excited about a new book that’s
coming out soon.”
happy about
“Aren’t you happy about the way
things turned out?”
sad about, depressed about
“She might be sad about her grades.”
“Bobby was depressed about his
parents’ divorce.”
sorry about
“I’m sorry about yesterday.”
537

upset about
“He’s probably upset about losing the
soccer match.”
Adjective + for
For can be used with adjectives to demonstrate purpose or reason. For
example:
• “Texas is famous for rodeos.”
• “Australia is known for its large kangaroo population.”
• “Coach Brown is responsible for the football team.”
Of may also be used to emphasize someone’s feelings toward a specific event,
thing, or person. This combination follows the basic form feel/be + adjective
+ for + someone/something. For example:
• “Marianne feels bad for her coworker.”
• “Kyle is happy for his brother.”
• “The company felt hopeful for the future.”
Adjective + with
When used with an adjective, the preposition with can indicate the cause of
an emotional state or a connection between things or people. For example:
Adjective + with
Example Sentences
angry with, furious with
“Nicole is angry with her mother.”
“I heard he’s furious with you!”
annoyed with, fed up
with
“I’m annoyed with this traffic.”
“She’s fed up with having to clean toilets all
day.”
bored with
“It’s hard not to be bored with long lectures.”
content with, fine with,
OK with
“Taylor was content with moving to Chicago.”
“I’m 
fine 
with 
having 
to 
rewrite 
the
introduction.”
“Are you sure you’re OK with this?”
538

disappointed 
with,
displeased with
“Molly 
seems 
disappointed 
with 
her
performance.”
“The boy’s parents are displeased with his
behavior.”
pleased with
“We are very pleased with the number of
donations we received.”
 
With may also be employed in passive sentences to describe the states of
people or things:
• “Paris is especially crowded with tourists in the summertime.”
• “The cake is filled with fresh blueberries.”
• “The piñata is stuffed with hundreds of pieces of candy.”
Adjective + at/by
Most adjectives that take the preposition at can also take the preposition by.
When combined with adjectives, these prepositions illustrate causes for
specific reactions or emotional responses. By can be used in place of at only
because these sentences require passive voice. For example:
• “The man was amazed at/by the number of people offering to help him.”
• “She was astonished at/by the movie’s poor ratings.”
• “I’m shocked at/by his behavior.”
• “Flight attendants were surprised at/by the plane’s abrupt landing.”
At can also describe skills and abilities when paired with positive and
negative adjectives, such as good/bad and wonderful/terrible. In this case,
by cannot be used in place of at, as the sentences are not passive. For
example:
✔ “James is good at playing the guitar.” (correct)
✖ “James is good by playing the guitar.” (incorrect)
✔ “I’m terrible at golf.” (correct)
✖ “I’m terrible by golf.” (incorrect)
Adjective + in
Some adjectives can be paired with the preposition in to show connections or
539

relationships between people and things. For example:
• “Bernard is interested in joining the school band.”
• “Is she involved in politics?”
Adjective + from
Adjectives taking the preposition from can emphasize a point of opposition
or the result of an action. For example:
• “Turquoise is different from blue.” (point of opposition)
• “We were protected from the storm.” (point of opposition)
• “I became tired from studying all night.” (result of an action)
Adjectives 
with 
multiple
prepositions
Many adjectives can be paired with multiple prepositions. While some
prepositions may change the meaning of a sentence, others can behave
interchangeably (such as at and by). Here are some sentence pairs that use
different prepositions but have identical meanings:
• “She’s very sorry about the mistake.”
• “She’s very sorry for the mistake.”
• “Mark is disappointed with the decision.”
• “Mark is disappointed in the decision.”
In some cases, however, the prepositions are not interchangeable and can
only be used to describe specific nouns or gerunds. For example, when
paired with adjectives, with and for generally refer to people, whereas about
usually refers to things, events, or gerunds:
• “I’m so happy for them.” (people)
• “I’m so happy about the wedding.” (thing/event)
• “Dad is angry with Elizabeth.” (person)
• “Dad is angry about Elizabeth’s sneaking out.” (gerund)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following prepositions is most commonly paired with
540

adjectives?
a) outside
b) around
c) over
d) about
2. Which of the following sentences contains a preposition paired with an
adjective?
a) “I feel responsible for what happened.”
b) “She went to the park to walk her dog.”
c) “Something flew over the pond.”
d) “Anna is preparing dinner for her family.”
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain a preposition paired
with an adjective?
a) “Ken has an obsession with skydiving.”
b) “It would be fun to go on a road trip this weekend.”
c) “She’s upset about her computer breaking.”
d) “Is he satisfied with the new employee?”
4. Which of the following sentences is correct?
a) “Dr. Donnelly is excited for conduct the experiment.”
b) “Dr. Donnelly is excited with conduct the experiment.”
c) “Dr. Donnelly is excited about conduct the experiment.”
d) “Dr. Donnelly is excited to conduct the experiment.”
Prepositions in Idioms
Definition
Many prepositions can be used with certain words or phrases to form
idioms (expressions that have a unique meaning that cannot be inferred
from their constituent parts). These prepositional idioms typically begin
or end with a preposition. Prepositional idioms can function adverbially,
adjectivally, or verbally and may come at the beginning, middle, or end of a
sentence. For example:
• “Turn down the volume, please.” (verbal idiom at the beginning of a
541

sentence)
• “She plays tennis on average three times a month.” (adverbial idiom in
the middle of a sentence)
• “All the elevators are out of order.” (adjectival idiom at the end of a
sentence)
Types of idioms
Prepositional idioms combine prepositions with verbs, nouns, or phrases to
create idiomatic expressions. These expressions can be divided into two
categories: idioms that start with prepositions and idioms that end
with prepositions.
Idioms 
that 
start 
with
prepositions
Idioms that start with prepositions are usually prepositional phrases and
function adverbially or adjectivally. As with non-idiomatic prepositional
phrases, idiomatic prepositional phrases consist of two or more words and
always include a noun or phrase after the preposition. For example:
• “Chuck visits his grandparents from time to time.” (adverbial
prepositional phrase)
• “The city is in danger.” (adjectival prepositional phrase)
Some idioms behave similarly to idiomatic prepositional phrases but are
instead followed by an adverb or adjective. (Because they do not contain a
noun, they are not complete prepositional phrases.) For example:
• “Answer me at once.” (preposition + adverb)
• “She explained the project details in brief.” (preposition + adjective)
Adverbial 
vs. 
adjectival
prepositional phrases
Certain idiomatic prepositional phrases can behave both adverbially and
adjectivally. For example, look at how the prepositional idiom in depth is
used below:
542

• “He researches rainforests in depth.” (In depth is an adverbial
prepositional phrase that modifies the verb researches.)
• “He conducts in-depth research of rainforests.” (In-depth* is an adjectival
prepositional phrase that modifies the noun research.)
(*We usually insert a hyphen when an adjective consists of two or more
words and comes directly before the noun it modifies.)
Adding modifiers
Various adverbs and adjectives may be used as modifiers and placed inside
idiomatic prepositional phrases for emphasis or clarification. For example:
• “Small electronics are in demand.”
• “Small electronics are in high demand.”
• “The user downloaded a virus by accident.”
• “The user downloaded a virus by complete accident.”
Idioms 
that 
end 
with
prepositions
An idiom that contains a verb and ends with a preposition can be classified as
a phrasal verb. Like normal verbs, phrasal verbs describe an action in the
sentence; they are written as verb + preposition or verb + particle +
preposition. For example:
• “I turned down the job offer.” (verb + preposition)
• “He is beginning to get along with his stepfather.” (verb + particle +
preposition)
See the section about Phrasal Verbs in the chapter on Verbs to learn more
about how these are formed and used.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In what part of a sentence can you insert a prepositional idiom?
a) at the beginning
b) in the middle
c) at the end
543

d) all of the above
2. Which of the following characteristics describes the function of an
idiomatic prepositional phrase?
a) adverbial
b) verbal
c) adjectival
d) a and c
e) b and c
3. Which of the following characteristics describes the function of a phrasal
verb?
a) adverbial
b) verbal
c) adjectival
d) a and c
e) b and c
4. What does a prepositional idiom require to be considered an idiomatic
prepositional phrase?
a) a verb
b) a noun
c) a preposition
d) an adverb
 
5. How does the prepositional idiom function in the following sentence?
“She talked in detail about her trip to New Zealand.”
a) adverb
b) adjective
c) verb
d) none of the above
Idioms 
that 
Start 
with
Prepositions
544

Definition
Most idioms that start with prepositions are prepositional phrases and
consist of a preposition followed by a noun or noun phrase. (Some
idioms may take an adjective or adverb instead, but these are not
considered prepositional phrases because they do not have a noun or noun
phrase.) This type of prepositional idiom can be used adverbially or
adjectivally and may come at the beginning, middle, or end of a sentence.
Examples 
of 
common
prepositional idioms
Here are some of the most common prepositions found at the beginning of
prepositional idioms:
• in
• on
• out of
• at
• for
• by
• from
As there is no way to decipher a prepositional idiom’s meaning simply by
looking at it, it is best to memorize as many combinations as possible. The
following sections contain examples of some of the most common
prepositional idioms that start with the above prepositions.
This is not an exhaustive list, however. There are other prepositions that can
be used at the start of idioms, and many more combinations than the ones
listed below. To learn more idioms, phrases, and phrasal verbs, check out
The 
Free 
Dictionary’s 
Collection 
of 
Idioms 
and 
Phrases 
at
idioms.thefreedictionary.com.
Idioms that start with in
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition in:
545

Idiom
that
Starts
with In
Meaning
Example Sentence
in
advance
ahead of time; before
“Sue paid for her gift in advance.”
in brief
concisely; in a few words
“This textbook explains World War
II in brief.”
in bulk
in large amounts
“We always buy toilet paper in
bulk.”
in
common
sharing 
a 
trait 
with
someone or something else
“Dogs and wolves have several
traits in common.”
in danger
prone 
to 
danger 
or
threatened by a dangerous
situation; 
about 
to 
be
harmed
“Those little kids are in danger.”
in debt
owing money
“Many students are in debt due to
the expense of higher education.”
in
demand
desired; 
wanted; 
sought
after 
(usually 
skills 
or
products)
“Computer skills are really in
demand these days.”
in depth
thoroughly;
comprehensively
“Students 
must 
discuss 
their
proposals in depth with their
advisers.”
in detail
thoroughly;
comprehensively
“Writers describe everything in
detail.”
in 
the
end
finally; at last
“In the end, what matters most is
honesty.”
in fact
really; actually
“The man who is dressed in a T-
shirt and jeans is in fact the CEO.”
in
general
usually; most of the time
“In general, owners should feed
their pets at least twice a day.”
546

in 
a
minute
very soon
“Angela will arrive in a minute.”
in
particular especially
“I love history in general, but I
would like to learn more about
European history in particular.”
in reality
really; actually
“Oftentimes, the most talkative
people are in reality quite shy.”
 
Idioms that start with on
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition on:
Idiom that
Starts with
On
Meaning
Example Sentence
on average
usually; 
typically;
normally
“Bruce works out on average four
times a week.”
on board
located 
on 
a 
ship,
train, or airplane
“The ship will depart once everyone
is on board.”
on demand
immediately available
when 
asked 
for 
or
requested
“Most people prefer to watch movies
on demand.”
on display
being 
shown,
showcased, 
or
exhibited
“A famous painting is now on
display at the museum.”
on fire
in flames; burning
“A building was on fire yesterday.”
on hand
available, accessible
“Do you have a notepad on hand?”
on the other
hand
in 
contrast 
(to 
a
previously stated point
of view)
“It’s fun to see movies, but on the
other hand tickets can be quite
expensive.”
on purpose
intentionally;
deliberately
“Liz left without us on purpose.”
547

on sale
being sold, especially
at a reduced price
“The hat you wanted is on sale at
the mall.”
on schedule
functioning as planned
or scheduled
“The buses seem to be on schedule
today.”
on time
at 
the 
planned 
or
expected time (e.g., of
arrival)
“Alfred never arrives on time.”
 
Idioms that start with out of
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition out of:
Idiom that
Starts
with Out
of
Meaning
Example Sentence
out of the
blue
without prior indication; unexpectedly
“He showed up at our
house out of the
blue.”
out 
of
breath
tired; exhausted; panting
“She became out of
breath 
after
trudging 
up 
the
stairs.”
out 
of
character
contrary to one’s personality
“Teresa 
has 
been
acting 
out 
of
character lately.”
out 
of
harm’s way
safe
“I’m just glad the
baby 
is 
out 
of
harm’s way.”
out of order
not functioning or working properly;
temporarily 
broken 
or 
unusable
(usually referring to machinery)
“This printer is out
of order.”
548

out of the
ordinary
unusual; not normal
“His methods are out
of the ordinary.”
out of print
no longer published or printed (usually
referring to books)
“Unfortunately, that
book 
is 
out 
of
print.”
out of the
question
impossible or unlikely; unreasonable
“Your request is out
of the question.”
out 
of
season
not ripe or readily available (usually
fruits or vegetables)
“Grapes are out of
season this time of
year.”
out of style
not fashionable or hip
“Perms 
have 
been
out 
of 
style 
for
decades.”
out of time
having no more (remaining) time
“We are almost out
of time.”
out of town
temporarily away at a location in a
different vicinity
“Brian will be out of
town this weekend.”
out of work
unemployed
“Most of my friends
are 
unfortunately
out of work.”
Idioms that start with at
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition at:
Idiom that
Starts with
At
Meaning
Example Sentence
at all times
always
“Wear 
your 
seatbelt 
at 
all
times.”
at fault
responsible for something
bad; culpable
“She is the only one at fault.”
549

at first
in the beginning; initially
“At first, she attempted to speak
to everyone individually."
at hand
near in space or time
“Always keep your passwords
close at hand.”
at last
finally
“He made it to the airport at
last.”
at once
immediately
“Go to your room at once!”
at rest
motionless
“An object at rest stays at rest
unless acted on by an outside
force.”
at risk
prone 
to 
danger 
or
threatened 
by 
a
dangerous situation
“Families 
residing 
near 
the
volcano are especially at risk.”
 
Idioms that start with for
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition for:
Idiom
that
Starts
with For
Meaning
Example Sentence
for certain
surely;
definitely;
positively
“Is Desmond coming to the party tomorrow
for certain?”
for
example
as an example;
for instance
“English isn’t the only international language;
for example, 
French 
is 
the 
national
language of many different countries.”
for fun
as a hobby; for
enjoyment
“What do you usually do for fun?”
for good
permanently or
for an extended
period of time
“I’ve decided to leave this city for good.”
550

for a living as an occupation “Herman cleans houses for a living.”
for now
temporarily; for
the time being
“Please go to the waiting room for now.”
for sale
being 
sold;
available to be
purchased
“Is this diamond ring for sale?”
Idioms that start with by
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition by:
Idiom that
Starts with
By
Meaning
Example Sentence
by accident
unintentionally; 
not
deliberately
“The kids broke the vase by
accident.”
by all means
definitely; certainly
“Prospective students are by all
means encouraged to visit the
campus.”
by hand
without the use of
machinery
“He makes intricate sculptures by
hand.”
by mistake
unintentionally; 
not
deliberately; 
as 
a
mistake
“I went to the wrong location by
mistake.”
by the way
incidentally (used to
introduce a different
topic)
“By the way, have you written
your essay yet?”
Idioms that start with from
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that start
with the preposition from:
551

Idiom that
Starts with
From
Meaning
Example Sentence
from afar
from a distance; coming from
far away
“I could hear music from
afar.”
from head to
toe
all over the body
“She was covered in mud
from head to toe.”
from scratch
from the beginning and using
only the basic elements or
ingredients
“Bob 
made 
raspberry
cupcakes from scratch.”
from time to
time
occasionally; infrequently
“They 
return 
to 
their
home country from time
to time.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following prepositions is not commonly found at the
beginning of prepositional idioms?
a) from
b) out of
c) toward
d) on
2. Which of the following sentences contains an idiom that starts with a
preposition?
a) “He’s going to end his addiction for good.”
b) “Wade went to a baseball game yesterday.”
c) “I made this card for my friend.”
d) “Our car broke down on the highway.”
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain an idiom that starts
with a preposition?
a) “She stepped down from her position at the firm.”
b) “My cousins have so many things in common.”
552

c) “In general, summers become hottest around mid-July.”
d) “The circus troupe traveled from afar.”
4. Which of the following sentences uses a prepositional idiom incorrectly?
a) “Many books written over 100 years ago are out of print today.”
b) “Do you think the dress is on sale?”
c) “We must leave at once.”
d) “Perhaps she did it on mistake.”
553

Idioms 
that 
End 
with
Prepositions
Definition
Idioms that end with prepositions are typically phrasal verbs and consist of
a verb followed by either a preposition, a particle, or a particle with a
preposition. This type of prepositional idiom is used like a normal verb
(describing the action of a subject) and may come at the beginning, middle,
or end of a sentence.
Examples 
of 
common
prepositional idioms
Here are some of the most common prepositions found at the end of
prepositional idioms:
• up
• down
• on
• off
• with
To determine the meanings of idiomatic phrasal verbs, we must memorize as
many combinations as possible. The following sections contain examples of
prepositional idioms that end with the most common prepositions.
This is not an exhaustive list, however: there are other prepositions that can
be used to form phrasal verbs, and many more combinations than the ones
listed below. Additionally, many phrasal verbs have several completely
unrelated meanings, which we can only learn by encountering them in
writing and speech. See the section on Phrasal Verbs to learn more about
how they are formed, and see the section Common Phrasal Verbs to find
more examples.
To learn more idioms, phrases, and phrasal verbs and their meanings, check
out The Free Dictionary’s Collection of Idioms and Phrases at
idioms.thefreedictionary.com.
554

Idioms that end with up
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that end
with the preposition up:
Idiom
that
Ends
with
Up
Meaning
Example Sentence
act up
to misbehave
“The toddlers have been
acting up lately.”
blow
up
to explode; to detonate or make explode
“Demolition 
workers
blew up an old building
to make room for a new
mall.”
bring
up
to mention (in conversation)
“It’s a good idea to bring
up your career goals
during a job interview.”
come
up
to happen (usually unexpectedly)
“Something 
came 
up
yesterday, 
so 
I 
was
unable to attend the
event.”
give
up
to stop (doing something); to quit
“Leah is trying to give
up smoking.”
hang
up
to end a phone call
“Always hang up if a
telemarketer tries to sell
you something.”
make
up
“make up” has two unrelated meanings:
to create (something) through one’s
imagination, or to come to terms or
settle an argument (with someone)
“I made up a fairy tale
to tell my children at
bedtime.”
“The 
siblings 
finally
made up after two days
of fighting.”
555

mix up
“mix up” has two similar meanings: to
confuse, or to or assemble something
out of order
“I always mix up the
twins when I see them—
one of these days I’ll
learn to tell them apart.”
“Someone 
must 
have
mixed up the photo
albums, because these
pictures are all out of
order.”
show
up
to come, arrive, or appear
“The groom waited all
day, but the bride never
showed up.”
shut
up
to stop talking; to be quiet
“If you don’t shut up,
I’m leaving!”
throw
up
to vomit
“The girl became sick and
threw up several times.”
turn
up
to (re)appear; to be found
“I’m sure your diary will
turn up somewhere.”
Idioms that end with down
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that end
with the preposition down:
Idiom
that
Ends
with
Down
Meaning
Example Sentence
556

break
down
“break down” has two unrelated meanings:
to stop functioning due to a mechanical
failure, or to start crying or become
overwhelmingly 
emotional 
(about
something)
“My car broke down
on the way here, so I
had to walk the rest
of the way.”
“The 
boy 
broke
down 
when 
he
realized he’d failed
the exam.”
die
down
to lessen in intensity or become weaker
“The wind has died
down a bit.”
let
down
to disappoint
“I feel like I’ve let
down my parents.”
pipe
down
to be less loud
“Pipe down or I’m
sending you to your
room!”
play
down
to make something seem less important
than it truly is
“Successful 
people
often 
play 
down
their achievements to
avoid 
sounding
arrogant.”
step
down
to resign or retire from a position
“A 
prominent
political 
figure
recently 
stepped
down in response to
a scandal.”
turn
down
to reject
“She 
has 
turned
down many marriage
proposals.”
wind
down
to relax
“Let’s wind down
with some popcorn
and a movie.”
 
Idioms that end with on
557

The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that end
with the preposition on:
Idiom
that
Ends
with On
Meaning
Example Sentence
catch 
up
on
to 
get 
informed 
about
something; to get up to
date with something
“Helen plans to catch up on her
reading tonight.”
count on
to rely or depend on
“I can always count on you to
lend me a hand when I need it
most.”
drag on
to continue for a long time
and become boring or
tedious
“The man’s speech dragged on
for well over an hour.”
go on
to continue
“It might seem like the end of the
world, but life still goes on after
setbacks like this.”
grow on
to eventually become liked
by
“This new flavor of ice cream has
really grown on me.”
hang on
to wait; to be patient
“Could you hang on a moment?”
move on
to stop focusing on the
past and continue with
one’s life
“Gerald struggled to move on
after losing the tennis match.”
pick on
to tease; to make fun of or
bully
“You shouldn’t pick on your little
brother.”
tell on
to report someone else’s
wrongdoing to a person of
authority
“She went to the teacher to tell on
her friend.”
try on
to put on a garment or
piece of clothing to see
how it fits
“I’d like to try on this shirt,
please.”
558

Idioms that end with off
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that end
with the preposition off:
Idiom
that
Ends
with
Off
Meaning
Example
Sentence
back
off
to withdraw or retreat
“Some 
salespeople
don’t know when to
back off.”
brush
off
to ignore something; to pretend something
important is not important
“You 
can’t 
just
brush 
off 
what
happened 
between
you two.”
call off
to cancel
“Employees 
were
forced to call off
the strike.”
drop
off
to take to and deposit at some location
“Dustin 
usually
drops off his shirts
at the dry cleaner
before work.”
kick off to begin
“They 
say 
the
festival should kick
off around noon.”
lay off
to terminate employees
“Oil companies have
had to lay off many
workers.”
nod off to doze; to fall asleep
“I always nod off
during 
long
ceremonies.”
559

pull off to successfully complete a difficult task
“Penny pulled off
the 
challenging
dance routine.”
show
off
“show off” has two distinct meanings: to
display something one is proud of, or to act
as if one is superior to others
“Parents 
love 
to
show 
off 
their
children’s artwork.”
“That girl is always
showing off.”
take off
“take off” has two related but distinct
meanings: to become successful or popular
(usually for businesses), or to depart or go
into the air (e.g., an airplane)
“My online business
really took off after
it was mentioned on
the news.”
“The plane took off
an hour late.”
wear
off
to lose effectiveness; to stop having an effect
“I think the pain
medicine is starting
to wear off.”
 
Idioms that end with with
The table below shows various examples of prepositional idioms that end
with the preposition with:
Idiom that
Ends with
With
Meaning
Example Sentence
come down
with
to become sick; to fall ill
“Dimitri came down with a
terrible cold.”
come 
up
with
to 
think 
of, 
suggest, 
or
develop (an idea)
“Scientists are trying to come
up with a solution to climate
change.”
do 
away
with
to stop or abolish; to get rid
of
“Some people want to do
away with taxes.”
get 
along
with
to have a good or friendly
relationship with someone
“They don’t seem to get
along with each other.”
560

get 
away
with
to avoid punishment for a
wrongdoing
“The 
criminals 
didn’t 
get
away with the robbery.”
go 
through
with
to undertake or complete
(usually an undesirable or
difficult action)
“Will your family go through
with the move to Texas?”
keep up with to stay up to date; to stay
informed about
“I 
can’t 
keep 
up 
with
celebrity gossip.”
put up with
to tolerate
“She shouldn’t put up with
her 
brother’s 
pranks
anymore.”
Idioms 
that 
end 
with 
other
prepositions
Numerous other prepositions can be used with verbs and adverbs to create
idiomatic phrasal verbs. The table below shows various examples of idioms
that end with some of these less commonly used prepositions:
Idiom
Meaning
Example Sentence
come
across
to find something unexpectedly;
to 
meet 
or 
see 
someone
unexpectedly
“He came across a bizarre
inscription on the base of the
statue.”
“You might come across
some of my relatives if you
move to London.”
come to to regain consciousness
“Minutes passed before he
came to.”
get at
to mean or to express
“What is he trying to get at?”
get by
to barely manage to deal with a
problem or extreme situation
“The hiker managed to get by
on a single bottle of water.”
561

get over to recover from or successfully
deal with something (usually an
illness or difficult situation)
“She’s finally getting over her
cold.”
“He can’t get over his self-
esteem issues.”
go
through
to 
experience 
(something
difficult)
“Dad is going through a mid-
life crisis.”
hang
out
to socialize or get together (with
someone)
“Do you want to hang out this
weekend?”
root for
to cheer for someone; to support
or take sides with someone
“You’d better root for me if I
make it to the semi-finals.”
sink in
to become clearly and gradually
understood
“He let the college’s rejection
sink in before deciding to
reapply the following year.”
stick
around
to wait, stay, or remain (in a
place)
“Is she sticking around for
the next act?”
tag
along
to accompany
“My little sister likes to tag
along when I go out with my
friends.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following prepositions is not commonly found at the end of
prepositional idioms?
a) off
b) up
c) with
d) amid
2. Which of the following sentences contains an idiom that ends with a
preposition?
a) “Oranges are out of season right now.”
b) “The cat jumped off the tree branch.”
c) “I’d like to travel to China one day.”
562

d) “He likes to wind down with a glass of wine.”
 
3. Which of the following sentences does not contain an idiom that ends
with a preposition?
a) “We should probably do away with these old plates.”
b) “Come to my birthday party tomorrow.”
c) “Never turn down a chance at love.”
d) “Action movies are starting to grow on me.”
4. Which of the following sentences uses an idiomatic phrasal verb
incorrectly?
a) “I came around an interesting book recently.”
b) “Did the two of you make up yet?”
c) “He has no choice but to call off the trip.”
d) “The neighbor’s dogs are acting up again.”
Conjunctions
Definition
Conjunctions are used to express relationships between things in a
sentence, link different clauses together, and to combine sentences.
Without conjunctions, we would be forced to use brief, simple sentences that
do not express the full range of meaning we wish to communicate. Only
using simple sentences would sound unnaturally abrupt and disjointed.
By using different kinds of conjunctions, however, we are able to make more
complex, sophisticated sentences that show a connection between actions
and ideas.
There are four main types of conjunctions: coordinating conjunctions,
subordinating 
conjunctions, 
correlative 
conjunctions, 
and
conjunctive adverbs. We’ll briefly examine each kind below.
Coordinating Conjunctions
The most common conjunctions are the coordinating conjunctions: and,
but, or, yet, for, so and nor. We use coordinating conjunctions between:
563

Individual words
• “I like to run and swim.”
• “Do you want pepperoni or anchovies on your pizza?”
Phrases
• “The president has been praised for both his willingness to negotiate and
his strength in defending his principles.”
• “I am a big fan of playing sports but not watching them.”
Independent clauses
• “It was raining, so I took an umbrella.”
• “We went for a hike, but I didn’t bring the right shoes.”
Subordinating Conjunctions
Subordinating conjunctions connect a subordinate clause to an independent
clause. For example:
• “Although it was raining, I didn’t take an umbrella.”
• “Even though she didn’t like pepperoni, she still ate the pizza.”
• “I went to work in spite of being sick.”
• “I intend to go to South America next month, provided that I can get the
time off work.”
Correlative Conjunctions
Correlative conjunctions are pairs of conjunctions that work together to
indicate the relationship between two elements in a sentence. For example:
• “Sports are a great way to bring people together, whether you like to play
or just watch.”
• “I like neither pepperoni nor anchovies on my pizza.”
Conjunctive Adverbs
Conjunctive adverbs join two independent clauses. These can either be two
separate sentences, or they can be joined into a single complex sentence with
564

a semicolon. For example:
• “The English language school offers discounted English language courses.
There’s also a library where you can study and borrow books.”
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; nevertheless, she recommended it to her
friend.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What can coordinating conjunctions link together?
a) words
b) phrases
c) independent clauses
d) all of the above
 
2. How are independent clauses joined with conjunctive adverbs?
a) As separate sentences
b) As two independent clauses joined by a comma
c) As two independent clauses joined by a semicolon
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) B & C
 
3. How are independent clauses joined with coordinating conjunctions?
a) As separate sentences
b) As two independent clauses joined by a comma
c) As two independent clauses joined by a semicolon
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) B & C
 
4. What kind of conjunction is used in the following sentence?
“You can either take the exam again or receive a score of 0.”
a) Coordinating conjunction
b) Subordinating conjunction
c) Correlative conjunction
d) Conjunctive adverb
565

Coordinating Conjunctions
Definition
Coordinating conjunctions are used to join two or more words, phrases,
or independent clauses. The two elements being joined must be
grammatically equal or similar in both importance and structure. There are
seven coordinating conjunctions in English, which can be remembered using
the acronym FANBOYS:
For
And
Nor 
But
Or
Yet
So
Some coordinating conjunctions are more flexible than others. For example:
and, but, or, and yet can join words, phrases, or independent clauses; for,
nor, and so are more limited, as we’ll see.
Let’s look at each coordinating conjunction separately:
For
For is used to give a reason for something. It can normally only join two
independent clauses, introducing the second clause as the reason for the first
one.
We can use for whenever we mean because, but it’s considered quite formal,
literary, and even antiquated. For example:
• “I believe you, for you have never lied to me before.”
• “He didn’t come to the party, for he felt sick.”
• “I wish you had been there, for we had a wonderful time.”
And
And is used to add one element to another. It can join words, phrases, and
entire independent clauses. For example:
566

• “James and Jack are coming to the party.”
• “He ran, swam, and played with the other children.”
• “Her beautiful long hair and dark brown eyes caught their attention.”
• “The family moved into the new house, and the neighbors welcomed them
warmly.”
Nor
Nor is one of the most limited coordinating conjunctions. It’s used to present
an additional negative idea when a negative idea has already been stated. For
example:
• “He doesn’t like football, nor does he enjoy hockey.”
• “I’ve never seen that movie, nor do I want to see it.”
• She hasn’t been to Paris, nor has she travelled to Rome.”
Note that when nor is used to join two independent clauses, as in the
examples above, negative inversion must be used in the second clause.
There is disagreement over whether nor should be used to join two elements
that are not independent clauses. Therefore, the examples below would be
considered correct according to some style guides and incorrect according to
others:
• “I haven’t seen nor heard from Mike in days.”
• “He can’t play football nor basketball.”
• “She said she wasn’t going to sing nor dance at the party.”
For those who consider the above sentences to be incorrect, or would be the
preferred coordinating conjunction, as in:
• “I haven’t seen or heard from Mike in days.”
• “He can’t play football or basketball.”
• “She said she wasn’t going to sing or dance at the party.”
But
But is used to present a contrast with previous information. It can be used to
join an independent clause to a phrase or another independent clause. For
example:
567

• “I want to go shopping but I can’t.”
• “He was upset but didn’t cry.”
• “I would love to travel more, but I just don’t have the time.”
Or
Or is used to present alternative choices or options. For example:
• “Would you like the chicken, the pork, or the beef?”
• “Which sport do you think is more exciting, football or hockey?”
• “We can go to the movies tonight, or we can just hang out at home.”
Yet
Yet, like but, is used to present contrast. However, there is a subtle
implication when we use yet that the information is surprising in light of
what we already know. For example:
• “The movie was depressing yet uplifting at the same time.”
• “It’s poured rain all day, yet they haven’t canceled the football game.”
• “I’ve read thousands of books since high school, yet The Catcher in the Rye
is still my favorite.”
So
So is generally only used to join two independent clauses, where the second
clause is a result of the first. For example:
• “He was exhausted, so he went to bed early.”
• “She was the most qualified candidate, so we gave her the job.”
• “He’s been working harder lately, so his grades are improving.”
Punctuation
Between independent clauses
When a coordinating conjunction joins two independent clauses, a comma
normally precedes it, as in:
568

• “They moved into the new house, and the neighbors welcomed them
warmly.”
• “I’ve never seen that movie, nor do I want to see it.”
• “We can go to the movie theater, or we can just hang out at home.”
Although it’s never incorrect to use a comma between two independent
clauses, the comma is optional if the two clauses are very short and concise,
and there is no possibility of confusion for the reader. For example:
• “He plays sports, and he’s fit.”
or
• “He plays sports and he’s fit.”
Between words or phrases
When coordinating conjunctions are used to join words or phrases that are
not independent clauses, we don’t use a comma. For example:
• “James and Jack are coming to the party.”
• “Would you like the chicken or the beef?”
• “The movie was depressing yet uplifting at the same time.”
Before the last item in a list
A coordinating conjunction, usually and, is often used before the last item in
a list. When we use a comma before this coordinating conjunction it is called
a serial comma or Oxford comma. There are strong opposing opinions
over whether this comma should ever be used. Neither side is right or wrong;
it’s simply a stylistic preference. Therefore, all of the following sentences
could be considered correct:
• “I like apples, bananas, pears, and figs. 
• “I like apples, bananas, pears and figs.
• “She’s smart, beautiful, and witty.” 
• She’s smart, beautiful and witty.”
• “We have always wanted to buy a boat, sell everything, and set sail.” 
• “We have always wanted to buy a boat, sell everything and set sail.”
It should be noted that certain varieties of English use the serial comma
more than others. For example, most American English style guides
569

recommend its use. On the other hand, the majority of British English style
guides recommend against it, with the most important exception being the
Oxford Style Manual (from which the “Oxford comma” received its name).
Beginning a sentence with a
coordinating conjunction
Many of us have been taught at some point that we should never begin a
sentence with a coordinating conjunction. However, most grammarians and
nearly all style guides state that this is not a grammatical rule, but a personal
preference.
Writers often begin a sentence with a coordinating conjunction to emphasize
an afterthought, lengthen a pause, or signify a shift in thinking. Commas are
not used after coordinating conjunctions when they start sentences. For
example:
• “She’s smart and beautiful. And she’s witty, too.”
• “We’ve never won anything before. So I doubt we’ll win this time.”
• “I think we should get Indian food. But maybe I want Italian instead.”
When we do start a sentence with a coordinating conjunction, we must take
extra care that the sentence is not a fragment, but contains a subject, verb,
and complete thought.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Coordinating conjunctions are used to join ________.
a) words
b) phrases
c) independent clauses
d) A & B
e) all of the above
2. Which of the following words is not a coordinating conjunction?
a) for
b) and
c) therefore
570

d) but
 
3. Complete the following sentence with the correct coordinating
conjunction:
“I had studied a lot, ________ I did really well on the test.”
a) so
b) for
c) but
d) yet
 
4. Which of the following sentences is written correctly?
a) “He has hiked, climbed, and kayaked all over the country.”
b) “He has hiked, climbed and kayaked all over the country.”
c) “He has hiked, climbed, and, kayaked all over the country.”
d) A & B
e) All of the above
 
5. Which of the following sentences is written correctly?
a) “I have never seen a bat, nor have I seen an owl.”
b) “I have never seen a bat nor I have seen an owl.”
c) “I have never seen a bat or I have seen an owl.”
d) “I have never seen a bat nor have I seen an owl.”
Correlative Conjunctions
Definition
Correlative conjunctions, or paired conjunctions, are sets of
conjunctions 
that 
are 
always 
used 
together. 
Like 
coordinating
conjunctions, they join words, phrases, or independent clauses of similar
or equal importance and structure. Unlike coordinating conjunctions, they
can only join two elements together, no more. Some of the most common
correlative conjunctions are:
both … and
either … or
just as … so
571

neither … nor
not … but
not only … but also
whether … or
Functions 
of 
correlative
conjunctions
both … and
We use both … and when we want to put emphasis on two elements that are
true in a sentence. We could also use the coordinating conjunction and, but
it doesn’t achieve the same emphatic effect. Compare:
• “This house is large and cozy.” 
• “This house is both large and cozy.”
• “She cleaned her room and washed the dishes.” 
• “She both cleaned her room and washed the dishes.”
• “My mother and father are bookworms.” 
• “Both my mother and my father are bookworms.”
In the above examples, the sentences using both … and are more emphatic.
Note, however, that the both … and construction doesn’t join independent
clauses, only words or phrases.
either … or
We use either … or to present two options. Again, it emphasizes the fact that
the choice is limited to only the two given options. For example:
• “I want to paint the house either white or green.”
• “Let’s either go swimming or go shopping.”
• “Either your father will pick you up, or you’ll get a ride home with a
friend.”
neither … nor
We use neither … nor to negate two options. For example:
572

• “I have neither the time nor the patience for silly TV programs.” (I don’t
have time, and I don’t have patience.)
• “Neither James nor Mike enjoys playing basketball.” (James and Mike
both do not enjoy playing basketball.)
• “Neither does he understand, nor does he care.” (He doesn’t understand,
and he doesn’t care.)
Note that when neither and nor begin two independent clauses, we must use
negative inversion (the reversal of the subject and auxiliary verb) for each,
as in the third example.
not … but
We use not … but to express a contradiction, negating the first option while
emphasizing the second. For example:
• “He’s not happy but thrilled!”
• “She did not like but loved her new earrings.”
• “Not just one friend turned up to help, but the entire team arrived.”
not only … but also
We use not only … but also to emphasize an additional element in the
sentence, especially when its occurrence seems contradictory or surprising in
light of what we already know. For example:
• “This house is not only large but also cozy.” (The speaker believes that
large houses are not usually cozy.)
• “She not only cleaned her room, but she also washed the dishes.” (The
speaker is surprised that she did both chores.)
• “Not only is she an award-winning singer, but she also runs track.” (The
speaker is impressed that she is able to do these two unrelated activities.)
Note that when not only is used to introduce an independent clause, as in
the third example, we must use negative inversion (like with neither … nor).
When but begins the second independent clause, the subject comes between
it and also.
just as … so
573

We use just as … so to indicate that the two elements being joined are
similar. Usually, just as begins an independent clause, and so is followed by a
second independent clause. Traditionally, the clause after so should be
inverted, as in:
• “Just as I love films, so does my brother love sports.”
• “Just as Americans love baseball, so do Europeans love soccer.”
• “Just as French is spoken in France, so is English spoken in England.”
However, it’s also common (especially in informal writing and speech) for
this structure to occur without inversion, as in:
• “Just as I love films, so my brother loves sports.”
• “Just as Americans love baseball, so Europeans love soccer.”
• “Just as French is spoken in France, so English is spoken in England.”
whether … or
We use whether … or to express doubt between two possible options.
Whether has the same meaning as if in this regard. For example:
• “I don’t know whether the white paint or the green paint is better.”
• “He’s not sure whether he’ll be able to attend the game or not.”
We also use whether … or to indicate that something will happen no matter
which choice is made. For example:
• “Whether we stay home and eat a pizza, or we go out and watch a film,
I’m sure we’ll have a good time.”
• “I’m going to help you whether you like it or not.”
Using correlative conjunctions
Parallel Structure
When we use correlative conjunctions, it’s important to use parallel
structure, especially in formal writing. Parallel structure requires both
elements that are joined by the correlative conjunction to be equal. For
example:
• “This house is both large and cozy.” (Two adjectives are joined.)
574

• “Let’s either go swimming or go shopping.” (Two verb phrases are
joined.)
• “Either your father will pick you up, or you’ll get a ride home with a
friend.” (Two independent clauses are joined.)
Using correlative conjunctions to join non-parallel structures is considered
incorrect. For example:
✖ “It was both a long movie and boring.” (Incorrect—a noun phrase is
joined with an adjective phrase.)
✖ “I’m not sure whether the white paint or painting it green would be
better.” (Incorrect—a noun phrase is joined with a verb phrase.)
✖ “Either your father will pick you up or a friend.” (Incorrect—an
independent clause is joined with a noun phrase.)
Although the sentences above may be heard in everyday speech, they are
considered incorrect.
Punctuation
When we use a correlative conjunction to join two independent clauses, we
separate the two clauses with a comma, as in:
• “Either your father will pick you up, or you’ll get a ride home with a
friend.”
• “Not only is she an award-winning singer, but she also runs track.”
• “She not only cleaned her room, but she also washed the dishes.”
We generally do not use commas when the two elements being joined are
not independent clauses. For example:
• “This house is both large and cozy.”
• “I want to paint the house either white or green.”
• “Neither James nor Mike enjoys playing basketball.”
Subject-verb agreement
When we join two subjects with a correlative conjunction, subject-verb
agreement can be tricky. Luckily, there are some widely accepted rules to
help us.
575

Two singular subjects
In general, when we join two singular subjects using a correlative
conjunction, the verb that follows should be singular. For example:
• “Neither the plumber nor the electrician is here yet.”
• “Not only Mike but also Daniel is coming with us.”
One exception to this rule is when using both … and. In this case, we use a
plural subject:
• “Both Mike and Daniel are coming with us.”
Two plural subjects
When we join two plural subjects, the verb that follows should also be plural.
For example:
• “Neither the plumbers nor the electricians are here yet.”
• “Not only Mike’s friends but also Daniel’s friends are coming with us.”
One singular and one plural
subject
Sometimes, we join a singular subject to a plural subject. In this case, the
majority of style guides state that the verb should agree with the noun that is
closest to it. For example:
• “Every day both the cat and the dogs wake me up.” (Wake is plural because
the dogs is plural.)
• “Neither my cousins nor my mom likes swimming.” (Likes is singular,
because mom is singular.)
However, there are also those who believe that if either of the subjects is
plural, then the verb should also be plural. According to this preference, the
second sentence above would require the plural form of the verb because the
first subject, my cousins, is plural:
• “Neither my cousins nor my mom like swimming.”
If this is confusing or you’re not sure which style you should use, you can
avoid the problem entirely by switching the order of the subjects so that the
576

plural subject comes closest to the verb. In this way, we satisfy both styles:
• “Neither my mom nor my cousins like swimming.”
Pronoun agreement
Just as we have to take extra care with subject-verb agreement, we also have
to be careful with pronoun agreement when using correlative conjunctions.
Two singular subjects
When we join two singular subjects, we should use a singular pronoun. For
example:
• “Neither Mike nor Daniel found his shoes.”
• “Not only Jen but also Sara lost her book.”
Again, both … and presents an exception. We normally use a plural pronoun
with this correlative conjunction:
• “Both Mike and Daniel found their shoes.”
Two plural subjects
When we join two plural subjects, we should use a plural pronoun to refer
back to them. For example:
• “Neither Mike’s friends nor Daniel’s friends brought their shoes.”
• “I don’t know whether the girls or the boys have had their breakfast.”
One singular subject and one
plural subject
When we join a singular subject and a plural subject, we run into the same
problem that we had with subject-verb agreement. Again, the most widely
accepted practice is that the pronoun should agree with whichever noun is
closest to it. For example:
• “Neither Mike nor his friends stated their opinion.” (Their agrees with his
friends.)
• “Neither Mike’s friends nor Mike stated his opinion.” (His agrees with
Mike.)
577

As with subject-verb agreement, the other side of the argument is that if
either of the subjects is plural, the pronoun should be plural. In this case, the
second example above would be rewritten as:
• “Neither Mike’s friends nor Mike stated their opinion.”
Again, we can avoid the issue entirely by rewriting the sentence so that the
plural subject is closest to the pronoun:
• “Neither Mike nor his friends stated their opinion.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Correlative conjunctions are conjunctions that join ________ together.
a) one element
b) two elements
c) three elements
d) three or more elements
 
2. Which of the following word pairs is not a correlative conjunction?
a) either … or
b) neither … nor
c) not only … but also
d) and … but
 
3. Complete the following sentence with the correct correlative conjunction:
“________ my friend studied a lot ________ he’s a genius, because he got
an A+ on the test.”
a) Either … or
b) Neither … nor
c) Not only ... but also
d) Not … but
 
4. Complete the following sentence with the correct correlative conjunction:
“He’s ________ a great rock climber ________ an expert skier.”
a) just as … so
b) whether … or
c) not only … but also
d) all of the above
578

5. Which of the following sentences must have a comma?
a) “Not only Mike but also Daniel is coming with us.”
b) “I think that we should not only go skiing but also go kayaking.”
c) “The house is not only large but also cozy.”
d) “Not only do I need you to come home early but I also need you to pick up
dinner.”
Subordinating Conjunctions
Definition
Subordinating conjunctions are used to create complex sentences
containing one independent clause, or main clause, and one
dependent, or subordinate, clause. The subordinating conjunction does
two things: it introduces and subordinates the dependent clause (telling
the reader that it’s less important than the independent clause), and it
explains what relationship it has to the independent clause. Consider the
following example:
• “I went to the supermarket. We were out of milk.”
Both of these sentences can stand on their own. However, there is no clear
relationship between them. Instead, we can join them together with a
subordinating conjunction, which would sound more natural:
• “I went to the supermarket since we were out of milk.”
The subordinating conjunction since transforms the second clause from an
independent clause into a dependent clause—it subordinates it. “Since we
were out of milk” can no longer stand alone, but is dependent on the
independent clause that it’s now connected to.
The word since also clarifies that the relationship between the two clauses is
one of cause and effect, and it tells the reader that the independent clause, “I
went to the supermarket,” is more important.
Structure and punctuation
When we use subordinating conjunctions to join two clauses, it doesn’t
matter which clause comes first: the subordinating conjunction may appear
either at the beginning or in the middle of the new sentence. Therefore, the
579

following two sentences are both correct:
• “I went to the supermarket since we were out of milk.”
• “Since we were out of milk, I went to the supermarket.”
Note that if when we place the subordinate conjunction in the middle of the
sentence, as in the first example, we normally don’t need a comma. On the
other hand, when we place the subordinating conjunction at the beginning of
the sentence, as in the second example, we normally do need to use a
comma.
For the sake of consistency, the independent clause will appear first in the
examples we look at below, but remember that this order is reversible.
Functions 
of 
subordinating
conjunctions
As mentioned, one of the jobs of a subordinating conjunction is to establish
the relationship between the two clauses—which conjunction we use
depends on the nature of that relationship. Below are some of the most
common subordinating conjunctions and their functions:
Cause
Comparison /
Concession
Condition
Place
Reason
Time
as
(just) as
even if
where
in order
that
after
because although
if
wherever so that
before
since
even though
as long as
 
 
as 
soon
as
 
though
in case
 
 
once
 
whereas
provided
that
 
 
until
 
while
providing
 
 
when
 
 
 
 
 
whenever
 
 
 
 
 
while
580

Examples 
of 
subordinating
conjunctions
Cause
We use as, because, and since interchangeably to state the cause of
something. For example:
• “The project was successful as you all worked very hard.”
• “The project was successful because you all worked very hard.”
• “The project was successful since you all worked very hard.”
Each of the three examples expresses the same causal relationship, although
as is a bit more formal in tone than because or since.
Comparison and concession
Similarities
We can use as to state that two ideas are similar. We can also use just as to
add extra emphasis to this statement. For example:
• “It’s pouring rain, as I thought it would.”
• “She was late again, just as we expected.”
• “He didn’t turn up, as you told me he wouldn’t.”
Note that the examples above flow better with a comma, even though the
subordinating conjunction is not in the initial position.
Expressing 
contrasts 
and
concessions
While and whereas both express contrast. For example:
• “My brother worked really hard, while I didn’t make much of an effort.”
• “I can’t stand watching tennis, whereas I love watching basketball.”
While and whereas can be used interchangeably, but whereas is often
581

considered more formal. Note also that, like with (just) as above, we use a
comma between the clauses even though these subordinating conjunctions
are not in the initial position.
We use although, though, and even though to say that something occurred
in spite of something else. Though and although are interchangeable, while
even though adds extra emphasis. For example:
• “I went to that restaurant though/although I was told it wasn’t very
good.”
• “I went to that restaurant even though I was told it wasn’t very good.”
Condition
We use the subordinating conjunctions even if, if, as long as, in case,
provided that, and providing when referring to a hypothetical situation.
If is the most common conjunction for hypothetical sentences. We use it
when one action is required for another to occur. For example:
• “I will buy you a pizza if you help me move my furniture.”
• “You should buy a new TV if you get a bigger apartment.”
As long as, provided, provided that, and providing all mean the same as if,
but they emphasize the requirement of the conditional action. We can use
them interchangeably:
• “I will buy you a pizza as long as/provided you help me move my
furniture.” (I will only buy you a pizza if you help me.)
• “You should buy a new TV providing/provided that you get a bigger
apartment.” (You should only buy a new TV if you get a bigger apartment.)
We use even if when an outcome will occur despite a hypothetical action.
For example:
• “I will buy you a pizza even if you don’t help me move my furniture.” (I will
buy the pizza anyway.)
• “He’s going to pass his test even if he doesn’t study.” (He will pass despite
not studying.)
We use in case to suggest a precaution against a hypothetical possibility. For
example:
• “I’m bringing an umbrella in case it starts raining.” (I’m worried it might
rain, so I’m bringing an umbrella.)
582

• “She put her phone on silent in case it rang during the movie.” (She was
concerned her phone would ring in the middle of the movie, so she silenced
it.)
Place
When the dependent clause is related to a place, we use where and
wherever, but they are not interchangeable.
For most situations, we use where, as in:
• “He lives where it’s always sunny.” (He lives in a place that is sunny.)
• “Can we go where it’s a little quieter?” (Can we go to a place that is
quieter?)
We use wherever to emphasize that we mean any or every place, rather than
a specific location. For example:
• “I want to go wherever it’s quieter.” (I want to go to any place quieter; I
don’t mind where.)
• “He bikes wherever he goes.” (He bikes to every place that he goes.)
Reason
We use in order that, so that, and so to give a reason. They are
interchangeable in meaning, but differ in formality. Compare the following
sentences:
• “Our boss asked us to take detailed notes in order that nothing would be
forgotten.” (formal)
• “Our boss asked us to take detailed notes so that nothing would be
forgotten.” (neutral)
• “Our boss asked us to take detailed notes so nothing would be forgotten.”
(less formal)
Time
Previously
To state that the action of the independent clause occurred first, we use
before. For example:
583

• “I went shopping before I came home.” (I went shopping first.)
• “He won first prize in a spelling bee before starting fifth grade.” (He won
the prize first.)
Concurrently
When two actions occur at the same time, there are several subordinating
conjunctions we can use, but each has a slightly different meaning. If we are
not adding any particular emphasis, we use when:
• “I was sleeping when the phone rang.”
• “I saw my brother when he was out with his friends.”
However, to emphasize that two actions occurred (or will occur) at exactly
the same time, or in rapid succession, we use once or as soon as:
• “Please clean your room once you get home.”
• “Call me back as soon as you can.”
Subsequently
When the action of the independent clause happens second in a series of
actions, we use after:
• “I went shopping after I finished work.” (I finished work first, then went
shopping.)
• “He won first prize in a spelling bee after he started fifth grade.” (He
started fifth grade first, then won a spelling bee.)
Up to a certain time
To state that one action stops when another one begins, we use until. For
example:
• “He ran track until he moved here.” (He stopped running track when he
moved here.)
• “You can borrow my jacket until I need it.” (You must stop using it when I
need it.)
Any time or every time
Finally, we use whenever to state that the time doesn’t matter, or that two
584

actions always happen together. For example:
• “Call me whenever you get home.” (Call me when you get home, but I
don’t mind when that is.)
• “She cries whenever she sees a sad movie.” (She cries every time she sees
a sad movie.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Subordinating conjunctions are conjunctions that join ________
together.
a) two words
b) two independent clauses
c) an independent clause and a dependent clause
d) A & B
 
2. Which of the following words is not a subordinating conjunction?
a) and
b) if
c) when
d) because
 
3. Complete the following sentence with the correct subordinating
conjunction:
“You can only play outside ________ your father gets home.”
a) because
b) whereas
c) until
d) in case
 
4. Complete the following sentence with the correct subordinating
conjunction:
“I’d rather not see that movie again ________ we just saw it last week.”
a) where
b) as soon as
c) though
d) because
585

 
5. Which of the following sentences is punctuated correctly?
a) “He worked harder in order that he would get the promotion.”
b) “In order that he would get the promotion he worked harder.”
c) “In order that he would get the promotion, he worked harder.”
d) A & B
e) A & C
Other parts of speech
In addition to the seven primary parts of speech—nouns, pronouns,
verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, and conjunctions—there are
several classes of words that have unique grammatical functions but do not
fit neatly into a single specific category. They often share characteristics with
one or more other parts of speech, but do not properly belong to the same
class.
We’ll give a brief introduction to these other parts of speech below;
continue on to their individual sections to learn more about each.
Particles
A particle is a word that does not have semantic meaning on its own, but
instead relies on the word it is paired with to have meaning. It is very similar
to a preposition—in fact, they are almost always identical in appearance.
However, prepositions are used to establish a relationship between their
objects and another part of a sentence, while particles are only used to create
infinitives and to form certain phrasal verbs.
Articles
There are three grammatical articles: the, a, and an (though a and an are
sometimes considered a single article with two forms).
The definite article the is used to identify a specific or unique person,
place, or thing, while the indefinite articles a and an identify nonspecific
or generic people, places, or things.
Determiners
Determiners are used to introduce a noun or noun phrase and give
586

determining information about it. Determiners often behave similarly to
adjectives in that they modify the noun they precede, but they differ in how
they signal that a noun will follow.
Gerunds
Gerunds are nouns that are formed from verbs. They are identical in
appearance to present participles (the base form of the verb + “-ing”).
Because they function as nouns, gerunds can be subjects or objects, and they
can also act as adjective complements.
Interjections
Interjections are words, phrases, or sounds used to convey emotions such
as surprise, excitement, happiness, or anger. They are grammatically
unrelated to any other part of a sentence, so they are set apart by commas.
They are also often used alone as minor sentences.
Particles
Definition
A particle is a word that does not have semantic meaning on its own, but
instead relies on the word it is paired with to have meaning. A particle cannot
inflect—that is, its form does not change to reflect grammatical person,
number, case, gender, tense, mood, aspect, or voice.
A particle is very similar to a preposition—in fact, they are almost always
identical in appearance. However, prepositions are used to establish a
relationship between their objects and another part of a sentence, and so
they have a unique lexical meaning of their own. Particles, on the other
hand, are only used to create infinitives and to form phrasal verbs.
Infinitive to
The particle to is the only particle in English that can be used to create the
infinitive form of a verb.
To is paired with the base form (uninflected form) of a verb to create the
infinitive, which can function as a noun, adjective, or adverb. For example:
587

• “To love another person is a wonderful thing.” (noun—subject)
• “I would like to be alone.” (noun—direct object)
• “I’m going to the store to buy milk.” (adverb—modifies the verb going)
• “This is a good place to start reading.” (adjective—modifies the noun
place)
(Go to the section on Infinitives in the Verbs chapter to learn more about
how they are used.)
Phrasal Verbs
A phrasal verb consists of a verb followed by either a preposition or a
particle to create a unique, idiomatic meaning. Since particles and
prepositions look identical, it can be tricky to know when a phrasal verb is
using one or the other.
However, particles are used more like adverbs, modifying and uniquely
expanding the meaning of the verbs they are paired with. For this reason,
particles are sometimes referred to as adverbial particles, or even just
adverbs. The key difference between particles and prepositions is that
particles do not (and cannot) introduce a prepositional phrase, while the
preposition in a phrasal verb always will.
Take the following sentence, for example:
• “My table takes up too much room.” (The table occupies too much space.)
Takes up is made up of the verb take + up. Up changes the meaning of the
verb, but it does not introduce a prepositional phrase expressing direction,
location, time, or possession—therefore, it is functioning as a particle.
Let’s look at another example:
• “Please look over the proposal and let me know what you think.” (Please
quickly examine the proposal.)
Again, the particle over is changing the meaning of the verb look, but it is not
introducing a prepositional phrase.
Here are some other examples of phrasal verbs formed with particles:
• “I can’t believe that you’re giving up!” (I’m surprised that you’re going to
stop trying.)
• “We have to wait for the fire to die down before we can enter the
building.” (We have to wait for the fire to become less intense.)
588

• “The plane took off an hour late.” (The plane began its flight later than
scheduled.)
• “She is always making up excuses.” (She is always inventing excuses that
are not true.)
Now let’s look at some examples of phrasal verbs made with prepositions
so we can see the difference more clearly:
• “He has been looking after his mother.” (He has been caring for his
mother.)
• “I came across that old watch of mine when I was cleaning out the
drawers.” (I found my old watch unexpectedly.)
• “Stop picking on your brother like that!” (Stop teasing or harassing your
brother in that way.)
We can see that the phrasal verb in each of the above examples is formed
using a preposition rather than a particle, because the information that
comes immediately after the phrasal verb completes a prepositional phrase
(in italics). Without these prepositional phrases, the sentences would be
incomplete.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is the only particle that can be used to create
infinitives?
a) on
b) in
c) to
d) with
 
2. Which of the following is something a particle cannot do?
a) Conjugate to reflect tense
b) Introduce a prepositional phrase
c) Pair with a noun or adjective
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
 
3. Is the word in italics in the following sentence functioning as a particle or
589

a preposition?
“My husband cared for me while I was sick.”
a) Particle
b) Preposition
4. Is the italicized word in the phrasal verb (in bold) in the following
sentence functioning as a particle or a preposition?
“We’re looking for a substitute teacher to fill in next semester.”
a) Particle
b) Preposition
590

Articles
Definition
Articles identify whether a noun is definite (specific or particular) or
indefinite (general or unspecific). For this reason, articles are divided into
two categories: the definite article, the, and the indefinite articles, a
and an.
The
The definite article the is used to identify a specific person, place, or thing.
For instance:
• “I’m looking forward to the game.” (There is a specific game that the
speaker is looking forward to.)
• “Would you pass me the phone?” (There is a specific phone that the
speaker is asking for.)
• “She turned on the lamp next to her bed.” (There is a specific lamp next to
her bed that she turned on.)
• “He’s going to the play later.” (There is a specific play that he is going to
see.)
We can also use the to refer to plural nouns, when they are being referenced
specifically, as in:
• “The dogs next door keep me awake with their barking.”
• “She’s looking for the papers she printed last night.”
• “I see that the students have already arrived.”
A/An
A and an, on the other hand, are used to identify a person or thing that is
unspecific or generic—the speaker is not referring to someone or something
in particular, or the person or thing may not be specifically known to the
speaker. Unlike the, a/an can only be used before singular nouns. For
instance:
• “I’m looking for a pen.” (There is not a specific pen that the speaker is
591

looking for.)
• “Would you please turn on a light?” (There is not a specific light the
speaker is asking to be turned on.)
• “There is an angry student waiting to speak with you.” (Although there is a
particular student, he or she is unknown to the speaker.)
• “I’m waiting for an answer.” (There is not one specific answer the speaker is
waiting for.)
Other parts of speech
Articles always modify nouns. For this reason, they are often considered a
sub-class of determiners. However, an article can also precede a noun
phrase, even if it begins with an adjective or an adverb. For example:
• “That was an exciting night.” (noun phrase beginning with an adjective)
• “The truly remarkable thing is how long the deal took to happen.”
(noun phrase beginning with an adverb)
Articles can’t precede verbs, however, as verbs are not used to create noun
phrases.
Vowel 
Sounds 
vs. 
Consonant
Sounds
We use the indefinite article a when it precedes a word beginning with a
consonant sound, and we use an when the article precedes a word beginning
with a vowel sound. Note that this rule applies to the sound of the noun,
rather than the specific spelling. For example:
✖ “What a unusual discovery!” (incorrect)
✔ “What an unusual discovery!” (Correct—the word begins with the vowel
“u,” and it makes the vowel sound “uh.”)
✖ “What an unique discovery!” (incorrect)
✔ “What a unique discovery!” (Correct—the word begins with the vowel
“u,” but it makes the consonant sound “yu.”)
✖ “It is a honor to meet you.” (incorrect)
✔ “It is an honor to meet you.” (Correct—the word begins with the
consonant “h,” but it makes the vowel sound “ah.”)
592

✖ “There was an heap of food left over.” (incorrect)
✔ “There was a heap of food left over.” (Correct—the word begins with the
consonant “h,” and it makes the consonant sound “he.”)
Here are a few other examples where a word’s spelling goes against its
pronunciation:
an hour — makes the vowel sound “ow”
an honest man — makes the vowel sound “awh”
a university — makes the consonant sound “yu”
a European citizen — makes the consonant sound “yu”
a once-in-a-life-time chance — makes the consonant sound
“wuh”
Herbs and History
One area of difficulty comes from dialectical differences between different
speakers of English.
For example, the word herb is pronounced as “erb” (ɜːrb) in American
English, with a silent “h,” so we would say “an herb.” However, in British
English, herb is pronounced with a hard consonant “h” as “herb” (hɜːb), so “a
herb” would be correct.
Similarly, some people pronounce the word “historic” and “historically” with
a silent “h” in certain contexts. It is not unusual to read or hear “an historic
moment” or “an historically important event,” for instance. Uniquely, the “h”
is never silent if these words are preceded by anything other than an
indefinite article, as in “the moment is historic” or “the historically significant
moment.”
Some writers and grammarians believe it is never correct to pronounce
historic or historically with a silent “h,” though, insisting that it can only
take the indefinite article a, rather than an. In more formal or professional
writing, it is advisable to follow this more strict guideline and always use the
indefinite article a.
There are plenty of other oddities regarding spelling and pronunciation in the
English language. To learn more about the various conventions, exceptions,
and irregularities, see the guide on English Spelling and Pronunciation.
Other uses
593

Identifying a profession
In addition to identifying an unspecific noun, we also use the indefinite
article a/an to talk or inquire about someone’s profession.
For example:
✖ “Are you teacher?” (incorrect)
✔ “Are you a teacher?” (correct)
✖ “John is engineer.” (incorrect)
✔ “John is an engineer.” (correct)
We only use the definite article the if we are referring to a particular person
in that profession. For instance:
• “Are you a doctor?” (Unspecific—inquires about the person’s profession in
general.)
• “Are you the doctor?” (Specific—inquires if this person is a particular
doctor that the speaker was waiting or looking for.)
• “Mary is a technician for the gas company.” (Unspecific—Mary’s general
profession is as a technician for the specific gas company.)
• “Mary is the technician for the gas company.” (Specific—Mary is either the
sole technician for the gas company, or else she is a specific technician the
speaker is referencing.)
Uncountable nouns
In addition to plural nouns, the indefinite article a/an cannot be used with
uncountable nouns (also known as mass nouns or non-count nouns).
These are nouns that cannot be divided or counted as individual elements or
separate parts. They can be tangible objects (such as substances or collective
categories of things), or intangible or abstract things such as concepts or
ideas.
For example:
✖ “Would you like a tea?” (incorrect)
✔ “Would you like tea?” (correct)
✖ “Do you have an information?” (incorrect)
✔ “Do you have (some/any) information?” (correct)
(We often use the words some or any to indicate an unspecified quantity of
uncountable nouns.)
594

Uncountable nouns can sometimes take the definite article the, as in:
• “Have you heard the news?”
• “The furniture in my living room is old.”
However, this is only the case if a specific uncountable noun is being
described. For example:
✖ “I am looking for an accommodation.” (incorrect)
✖ “I am looking for the accommodation.” (incorrect)
✔ “I am looking for accommodation.” (correct)
✔ “I am looking for the accommodation listed in this advertisement.”
(correct—references specific accommodation)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which article is usually used when something specific is being referenced?
a) the
b) a
c) an
2. Complete the following sentence with the correct article:
“I know you have ___ long way to travel.”
a) the
b) a
c) an
3. Complete the following sentence with the correct article:
“Have you seen ___ blue pen that I like.”
a) the
b) a
c) an
4. Which of the following can the indefinite article a/an not precede?
a) noun phrases
b) adjectives
c) adverbs
d) uncountable nouns
595

e) all of the above
f) none of the above
 
5. Which of the following can the definite article the not precede?
a) noun phrases
b) adjectives
c) adverbs
d) uncountable nouns
e) all of the above
f) none of the above
Determiners
Definition
Determiners are used to introduce a noun or noun phrase. There are
several classes of determiners: articles, demonstrative adjectives,
possessive 
adjectives, 
interrogative 
adjectives, 
distributive
determiners, pre-determiners, quantifiers, and numbers.
Determiners do two things. First, they signal that a noun or noun phrase will
follow. Then, they give information about the item. They may tell us whether
the item is general or specific, near or far, singular or plural; they can also
quantify the item, describing how much or how many are referred to; or they
can tell us to whom the item belongs. We’ll look at each class of determiners
separately.
Articles
There are two types of articles in English: the definite article, the, and the
indefinite article, a/an. We’re just going to cover the basic rules regarding
when to use definite and indefinite articles. If you would like to learn more,
please see the section on Articles.
The
In general, we use the definite article, the, to refer to an item or individual
that is specific and unique. For example:
• “Close the door quietly; the baby is sleeping.” (There is a specific door.)
596

• “Please pass the salt.” (The speaker is requesting specific salt.)
• “Jen is the woman wearing red.” (There is a unique individual wearing red
clothing who is identified as Jen.)
A/an
The indefinite article, a/an, is used to precede a noun that is not a specific
person, place, or thing. Instead, it indicates that it is a general member of a
class of nouns. For example:
• “I’d love to have a pet dog.” (No specific or unique dog is being discussed.)
• “I heard that a famous musician is going to be there.” (The musician is
unspecified because he or she is unknown.)
• “She had never been in an airplane before.” (The speaker is talking about
airplanes in general, rather than a specific aircraft.)
Note that a is used before consonant sounds, and an is used before vowel
sounds.
Demonstrative Adjectives
Demonstrative adjectives, or demonstrative determiners, are used to
specify which item or individual is being referred to when it could be
confused with others of the same type. There are four demonstrative
adjectives, which we choose from based on whether they introduce a singular
noun or a plural noun, and whether the item is near or far in relation to the
speaker.
 
Near
Far
Singular this
that
Plural
these
those
 
For example:
• “This pen is mine.” (The pen is nearby, perhaps in my hand.)
• “That penis mine.” (The pen is far away, perhaps across the room.)
• “These pens are mine.” (The pens are nearby.)
• “Those pens are mine.” (The pens are far away.)
597

To learn more, go to the section on Demonstrative Adjectives in the
chapter about Adjectives.
Possessive Adjectives
Possessive adjectives, also known as possessive determiners, are used
to indicate whom an item belongs to. The possessive adjectives are:
 
Singular
Plural
1st person
my
our
2nd person your
your
3rd person
his / her / its their
For example:
• “My house is on Steven Street.” (The house belongs to me.)
• “Please give your sister back her pencil.” (The pencil belongs to her.)
• “Look at the dog! Its tail is wagging like crazy!” (The tail belongs to the
dog.)
• “Can you fix the table? Its leg is wobbly.”* (The leg belongs to the table.)
*Note that according to certain styles, its is typically only used when the
owner is animate, such as the dog in the example above. To avoid using its
with inanimate objects, some writers would use the … of the … structure. For
example:
• “The leg of the table is wobbly. Can you fix it?”
In addition to the possessive adjectives listed, we can also create possessive
determiners from nouns using apostrophes. We attach the possessive
apostrophe to the end of the noun or pronoun that names the owner. If the
noun is singular, the apostrophe is usually followed by an “s.”
This possessive noun introduces and modifies the owned object, and so it is
considered a determiner as well. For example:
• “Dave’s car could use a bit of work.” (The car belongs to Dave.)
• “Could you help me find Jen’s keys for her?” (The keys belong to Jen.)
• “My parents’ house is on a beautiful lake.” (The house belongs to my
parents.)
598

To learn more about using apostrophes to indicate possession, see the
chapter on Apostrophes.
Interrogative Adjectives
Like 
all 
adjectives, 
interrogative 
adjectives 
(also 
known 
as
interrogative determiners) modify nouns and pronouns. English has
three interrogative adjectives: what, which, and whose. They are called
“interrogative” because they are usually used to ask questions. For example:
• “What book are you reading?
• “Which shirt are you going to buy?”
• “Whose computer is this?”
In each of the examples, the interrogative adjective modifies the noun it
immediately precedes: book, shirt, and computer.
To learn more, please see the section on Interrogative Adjectives in the
chapter about Adjectives.
Distributive Determiners
Distributive determiners, also known as distributive adjectives, are
used to refer to individual members within a group or within a pair. The
distributive determiners are each, every, either and neither. They are used to
modify singular nouns or noun phrases.
Each
Each is used when one condition applies to all members of a group equally.
For example:
• “Each student must attend a meeting with a guidance counselor.”
• “Each person in my family does a fair share of the chores.”
• “Please give a pen and paper to each attendee.”
Every
Every is also used when a condition applies to all members of a group. It can
normally be used interchangeably with each. For example:
• “Every student must attend a meeting with a guidance counselor.”
599

• “Every person in my family does a fair share of the chores.”
• “Please give a pen and paper to every attendee.”
However, every puts a slight emphasis on the group as a whole, while each
emphasizes the individual.
Either
Either is used when a condition applies to one or the other in a pair. When
we use either, we imply that there are two options.
• “Either girl could win this competition.” (There are two girls. One will
win.)
• “We could give the new collar to either dog.” (There are two dogs. One will
receive the new collar.)
• “Either book would be a great present.” (There are two books. One will be
chosen as a gift.)
Neither
We use neither to state that not one or the other option is viable. For
example:
• “Neither book would be a great present.” (There are two books; both
would be unsuitable as gifts.)
• “Neither table will fit in our kitchen.” (There are two tables; both are too
large for the kitchen.)
• “Neither question is easily answered.” (There are two questions; both have
difficult answers.)
Pre-determiners
Pre-determiners are words that come before another determiner to give
us more information about the noun that follows. They usually come before
the articles a/an and the. Pre-determiners can be multipliers, fractions,
intensifiers, or the words both and all.
Multipliers
Multipliers are words and expressions that modify uncountable nouns and
600

plural countable nouns by multiplying quantity. For example:
• “I now earn double my previous wage.”
• “For this recipe, we need three times the sugar.”
• “This airplane holds twice the passengers as the other model.”
Fractions
Fractions are similar to multipliers, but instead of multiplying the quantity of
the noun, they divide it. We usually use of between the fractional expression
and the other determiner, but it is not always necessary. For example:
• “I used to earn half (of) my current salary.”
• “For this recipe, we need a quarter (of) the sugar as last time.”
• “One-tenth of the respondents answered ‘yes’ to my question.” (Of is
necessary in this construction.)
Intensifiers
The most common intensifiers are what, quite, rather, and such. For
example:
• “What a gorgeous horse!”
• “She’s such a sweet girl.”
• “It’s quite a beautiful house, don’t you think?”
• “They’re rather a nice group of students.”
Usage note: The words quite and rather, when used as intensifiers, are much
more common in certain varieties of English than in others. For example,
British English uses them often, while American English uses them much
less frequently.
Both & all
Both and all can also occur as pre-determiners. Both is used when we refer to
two out of two options, while all is used to refer to an entire amount. We
often use of between both/all and the other determiner, but it is not
required. For example:
• “Both (of) my brothers are coming with me.” (I have two brothers, and
each one is coming.)
601

• “Both (of) the books have beautiful illustrations.” (There are two books and
each one has beautiful illustrations.)
• “All (of) my brothers are coming with me.” (I have several brothers; every
one of them is coming.)
• “All (of) the books have beautiful illustrations.” (There are many books,
and they all have beautiful illustrations.)
Quantifiers
Quantifiers are used to indicate the number or quantity of the noun being
referred to. The quantifier we choose depends on whether it introduces a
countable noun (sometimes called a count noun), or an uncountable
noun (also known as a mass noun). Below, we’ll look at some of the most
common quantifiers:
With countable nouns
These are some of the most common quantifiers for countable nouns only,
listed in order from largest to smallest quantity:
many
each
several
a few*
a couple (of)
both
few*
not many
none of the
Note that when we use quantifiers with countable nouns, we use the plural
form of the noun after the quantifier.
For example:
• “There are many private schools in this town.”
• “Both girls went to the party.”
• “Not many people came to the book launch.”
*Usage Note: There is an important distinction between a few and few.
602

While a few has a more positive connotation of signifying that there is
enough of an item, few has the more negative connotation of signifying that
there is not enough of an item. Compare the following two sentences:
• “There were a few people at the meeting.” (more positive)
• “There were few people at the meeting.” (more negative)
With uncountable nouns
These are some of the most common quantifiers for uncountable nouns only,
in order from largest to smallest quantity:
a good/great deal of (formal)
a load of / loads of / heaps of / tons of (informal)
a lot of (neutral)
a (little) bit of
a little*
little*
not much
For example:
• “We have a lot of coffee already, so don’t buy anymore.”
• “Could you lend me a bit of sugar?”
• “Not much effort is needed.”
*Usage Note: A little and little have the same important distinction as a few
and few. A little has the positive connotation of signifying that there is
enough of an item, while little has the negative connotation of indicating that
there is not enough. Compare the following two sentences:
• “We still have a little milk left.” (We have enough, but not much.)
• “We have little milk left.” (We need more.)
With 
either 
countable 
or
uncountable nouns
Finally, these are some of the most common quantifiers that can be used
with either countable or uncountable nouns:
all of the
603

most of the
a lot of / lots of / plenty of
enough
some
a lack of
no
For example:
• “All of the recipes call for sugar.” (countable)
• “All of the sugar is needed.” (uncountable)
• “Don’t worry, we have enough cars to get us all there.” (countable)
• “Don’t worry, we have enough time to get there.” (uncountable)
Numbers
Numbers can also be determiners when they are used to introduce and
modify a noun. Both cardinal numbers (numbers signifying an amount of
something) and ordinal numbers (numbers signifying rank or position in a
list) are able to function in this way.
Cardinal numbers
Cardinal numbers are used to count the specific quantity of a noun. As such,
they can only be used with countable nouns.
In writing, a common rule is to spell out the numbers one through nine, and
use numerals for the numbers 10 and higher. For example:
• “My father’s company has 10 cars and 20 drivers.”
• “I’m taking 12 shirts and three pairs of jeans on my vacation.”
• “There were 160 participants in the competition.”
An alternate rule is to spell out one-word numbers and use numerals for
multi-word numbers. So, the examples above would be rewritten:
• “My father’s company has ten cars and twenty drivers.”
• “I’m taking twelve shirts and three pairs of jeans on my vacation.”
• “There were 160 participants in the competition.”
However, there are many variations of style for writing numbers. In the end,
604

it is best to be consistent, or to follow the style guide best suited to the type
of writing you are doing.
Ordinal Numbers
Ordinal numbers do not represent quantity, but are used to indicate the rank
or position of a noun in a list or series. They have two written forms: spelled
out, or numeral + suffix:
Spelling
Numeral & Suffix
first
1st
second
2nd
third
3rd
fourth
4th
fifth
5th
sixth
6th
seventh
7th
eighth
8th
ninth
9th
tenth
10th
eleventh
11th
twelfth
12th
thirteenth
13th
fourteenth
14th
fifteenth
15th
sixteenth
16th
seventeenth
17th
eighteenth
18th
nineteenth
19th
605

twentieth
20th
twenty-second 22nd
twenty-third
23rd
twenty-fourth
24th
thirtieth
30th
fiftieth
50th
hundredth
100th
Note that numbers ending in one, two, and three have different suffixes than
the rest of the numbers. A common rule in writing is to spell out first
through ninth and to use the numeral + suffix for numbers 10 and higher.
For example:
• “He won first prize!”
• “I went to Las Vegas for my 30th birthday.”
• “I was the 42nd person in line.”
An alternate rule is to spell out one-word ordinal numbers, but to use the
numeral + suffix equivalent for multi-word ordinal numbers. So, the
examples above would be written as follows:
• “He won first prize!”
• “I went to Las Vegas for my thirtieth birthday.”
• “I was the 42nd person in line.”
Again, no matter which way you choose to write them, the key is to be
consistent.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Determiners introduce ________.
a) verbs
b) nouns
c) adjectives
d) clauses
606

2. Which of the following words cannot function as a determiner?
a) some
b) the
c) when
d) ten
3. Complete the following sentence with the correct determiner:
“Can you buy ________ more sugar? We don’t have much left.”
a) ten
b) a
c) the
d) some
4. Complete the following sentence with the correct determiner:
“I’m afraid we need to go shopping. There’s very ________ milk left.”
a) little
b) much
c) a lot
d) some
 
5. Complete the following sentence with the correct determiner:
“Please give me ________ glass of water. I can’t reach it.”
a) this
b) that
c) these
d) those
Possessive Determiners
Definition
Possessive determiners, also known as possessive adjectives, are a
class of determiners that are used to modify nouns to denote possession.
They take the place of the definite article the, and state whom or what an
item belongs to. We use a different possessive determiner to correspond with
each personal pronoun. The main possessive determiners in English are:
Personal Pronoun Possessive Determiner
607

I
my
you
your
he
his
she
her
it
its
we
our
they
their
 
The word whose and the structure noun + possessive apostrophe also
function as possessive determiners, as we will see.
Using Possessive Determiners
Sentence placement
Possessive determiners are usually placed in front of the noun they modify.
For example:
• “You remember Hannah, right? This is her brother, Richard.”
• “Please return my books as soon as possible.”
• “Have they found their tickets yet?”
• “The Earth spins on its* axis.”
If the noun is further modified by one or more other determiners, the
possessive determiner is placed first. For example:
• “You remember Hannah, right? This is her little brother, Richard.”
• “Please return my three library books as soon as possible.”
• “Have they found their train tickets yet?”
• “The Earth spins on its invisible axis.”
(*Usage Note: A common mistake is to use an apostrophe with the word it
when we want to indicate possession. It’s is a contraction that we use
instead of writing out it is or it has. If we want to denote possession, we must
use its without an apostrophe.)
608

Whose*
Whose is used as a possessive determiner in interrogative sentences to
inquire about possession, as well as in indirect questions when the identity of
the owner is unknown. For example:
• “Whose coat is this?”
• “Do you know whose idea this was?”
• “I need to find out whose car this is. They keep parking in my spot.”
(*Usage Note: Similar to the issue with its, a common mistake is to use who’s
rather than whose when we want to inquire about possession. Who’s is a
contraction of who is; if we want to denote possession, we must use the
possessive determiner whose.
The possessive apostrophe
We can form possessive determiners from other pronouns, nouns, and noun
phrases by adding the possessive apostrophe + “s” (or just the apostrophe
for plural nouns). For example:
• “Caring for one’s family is very important.”
• “Hannah’s car is parked outside; she must have already arrived.”
• “The former Attorney General’s recommendations were included in the
report.”
• “Our school takes parents’ concerns very seriously.”
Differences 
with 
possessive
pronouns
Possessive determiners are often confused with possessive personal
pronouns (mine, yours, his, hers, its, ours, theirs). Although some of the
forms overlap, there are important distinctions between the two types of
possessives.
While possessive pronouns can stand on their own, taking the place of a
noun, possessive determiners cannot. For example:
• Speaker A: “Whose is this book?”
✔ Speaker B: “It’s mine.” (correct)
609

✖ Speaker B: “It’s my.” (incorrect)
The second example is incorrect because possessive determiners, such as my,
can modify a noun, but cannot replace one. We would need to include the
noun book in order to use the possessive determiner, as in:
• Speaker A: “Whose is this book?”
✔ Speaker B: “It’s my book.” (correct)
Note, however, that possessive determiners formed using “-’s” can function
both as determiners and pronouns, as in:
• Speaker A: “Whose is this book?”
✔ Speaker B: “It’s Jane’s book.” (correct) 
or
✔ Speaker B: “It’s Jane’s.” (correct)
Another distinction is that although the structure of + possessive pronoun
can be used to create a possessive sentence, a possessive determiner gives
the noun a more definite meaning. Compare the following two sentences:
• “A friend of mine is going to come with us.”
• “My friend is going to come with us.”
The first example gives the impression that either the speaker is unsure
which friend is going to come, or that the listener has never met the friend.
On the other hand, the second example, which uses the possessive
determiner my to directly modify the noun friend, gives the impression that
the speaker has a definite friend in mind, and/or the listener is familiar with
this friend.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Possessive determiners modify ________.
a) nouns
b) verbs
c) adjectives
d) adverbs
 
2. Which of the following is a possessive determiner?
a) it’s
b) Hank’s
610

c) who’s
d) they’re
3. Which of the following words is not a possessive determiner?
a) my
b) his
c) their
d) hers
4. Complete the following sentence with the possessive determiner that is
most correct:
“Your sister is worried that ________ phone might be lost. She hasn’t been
able to find it since last night.”
a) his
b) their
c) our
d) her
5. Complete the following sentence with the possessive determiner that is
most correct:
“We should go shopping; ________ fridge is looking empty.”
a) our
b) her
c) their
d) its
6. Complete the following sentence with the possessive determiner that is
most correct:
“Look at that dog! ________ eyes are so blue!”
a) your
b) my
c) its
d) their
Gerunds
611

Definition
A gerund is the “-ing” form of a verb when it functions grammatically as a
noun in a sentence. Gerunds are identical in appearance to present
participles, but they are not used to form tenses of the verb or provide
adjectival information.
Gerunds can either stand alone, or they can take a noun (the object of the
gerund) and/or modifier(s) to form a gerund phrase.
Functions in a sentence
Because they act like nouns, gerunds can be used as the subject of a
sentence, the subject complement of the linking verb be, the object of a
preposition, or the object of a verb. They can also be used to form
compound nouns.
As the subject
Just like a normal noun, a gerund or gerund phrase can be the subject of a
sentence. For example:
• “Swimming is an excellent form of exercise!” (gerund only)
• “Eating vegetables gives you a lot of extra energy.” (gerund + object)
• “Studying too hastily will result in a poor grade.” (gerund + adverb(s))
• “Reading romantic literature proves to be an unpopular pastime
among academics.” (gerund + adjective + noun)
• “Working from home allows me to spend more time with my family.”
(gerund + prepositional phrase)
Adverbs modifying gerunds
Notice that in our third example, the gerund studying is being modified by
an adverb, hastily (itself modified by too). Likewise, working in the last
example is modified by the adverbial prepositional phrase from home.
This may seem contradictory, since gerunds act like nouns, and adverbs
can’t modify nouns. However, in this case, it is the gerund phrase that is
functioning as a noun, so the gerund itself can still be modified by an adverb
in the same way as a normal verb.
612

Present participial clauses
It’s often easy to confuse present participles for gerunds because they look
identical and operate in very similar ways. For instance, the present
participles of verbs can be used to create dependent clauses that modify the
rest of the sentence. For example:
• “Singing in the shower, I was oblivious to the doorbell ringing.” (I was
singing.)
• “Having seen the movie before, I wouldn’t want to see it again.”
Although they look quite similar, these clauses function like an adjective,
whereas the gerund phrases we looked at above act like nouns functioning as
the subjects of their sentences.
As a subject complement
Like predicative adjectives, gerunds can act as subject complements after
the linking verb be. In this case, the gerund acts as a kind of modifier that
gives more information about the sentence’s subject. For example:
• “My main responsibility here is operating the forklift.” (operating
complements the noun responsibility)
• “My favorite thing about being in Japan is eating sushi.” (eating
complements thing)
• “The best thing in life is spending time with loved ones.”
Again, we have to be careful that we don’t mistake a gerund for the present
participle of a verb. This can be easy to do, because the present participle is
paired with the verb be to form the present continuous tense and the
past continuous tense of verbs, as in:
• “I am running five miles tomorrow.” (present continuous tense)
• “I heard you are operating the forklift at work now.” (present
continuous tense)
• “I was singing in the shower when the doorbell rang.” (past continuous
tense)
• “She was eating dinner when I called.” (past continuous tense)
Remember that a gerund or gerund phrase functions as a noun—if the
sentence still makes grammatical sense after the word or phrase is replaced
613

by a normal noun, then we are dealing with a gerund; if it does not make
sense after being replaced by a normal noun, then it is a present participle.
As objects
Of prepositions
Gerunds are used as the objects of prepositions to describe an action that
modifies another action, thus creating adverbial prepositional phrases.
These can occur at the beginning, middle, or end of the sentence. For
example:
• “After sneezing, I always get the hiccups.”
• “I’m going to improve my health by running six miles every night.”
• “She started going crazy from so much waiting.”
• “He’s not against marrying me, he just isn’t ready.”
Of verbs
Gerunds can also act as the direct object of some verbs. Here a few examples:
• “Do you mind watching my seat for me while I go to the bathroom?”
• “I really love hiking in the mountains.”
• “I enjoy eating at restaurants, but Jenny prefers cooking at home.”
• “He remembered turning off the oven, but his husband thought he’d left
it on.”
• “They couldn’t help feeling sorry for Bob.”
(If you want to see more examples, go to the section Gerunds as Objects
of Verbs.)
Of phrasal verbs
Just like they do with normal verbs, gerunds can also function as the object
of phrasal verbs. For example:
• “I am counting on getting tickets to that new movie.”
• “They’re looking forward to meeting you later.”
614

Forming compound nouns
Gerunds can be paired with regular nouns to become compound nouns, as
in:
• “His new running shoes were already covered in mud.”
• “I’m hoping she can give me a helping hand.”
• “The working conditions are very poor here.”
These are distinct from gerund phrases, where the noun is functioning as the
object of the gerund, as in our previous example of “Eating vegetables is
good for your health.”
They should also not be confused with present participles that are
functioning as adjectives. Though they look quite similar, adjectival present
participles imply action on the part of the noun being modified. For example:
• “She soothed the crying baby.” (The baby is crying).
• “The speeding car crashed into the tree.” (The car was speeding.)
As an object complement
For certain factitive verbs, gerunds can also act as object complements.
Object complements function by renaming or reclassifying a direct object, or
by stating what the direct object has become or is doing. Gerunds can only
function as object complements that state what the direct object is or was
doing.
In the following examples, the verb or phrasal verb is italicized, the direct
object is underlined, and the gerund or gerund phrase (as object
complement) is in bold:
• “We came across him lying in the yard.”
• “My mother noticed the baby walking by himself.”
• “I can’t believe the bosses caught you napping.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In which of the following ways is a gerund not able to function?
a) As the subject of a sentence
615

b) As the object of a verb
c) As an adjective clause
d) As a subject complement
2. Which of the following linking verbs can a gerund follow as a subject
complement?
a) be
b) become
c) seem
d) appear
3. In which of the following sentences is the word talking a gerund?
a) “I’ll be talking to your teacher after school.”
b) “I really love talking with my friends.”
c) “The talking students were oblivious to the principal.”
d) “Talking with her parents, it seems like there might be some issues at
home.”
4. When gerunds function as the objects of prepositions, where can they
occur in a sentence?
a) At the beginning
b) In the middle
c) At the end
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
5. Which of the following sentences does not use a gerund?
a) “His love of eating is going to lead to serious health problems.”
b) “One of the best things about spring is smelling all the flowers.”
c) “They had been driving for hours before they found a hotel.”
d) “We began shouting at the top of our lungs for the bus to stop.”
Gerunds as Objects of Verbs
Definition
Gerunds very frequently function as the direct objects of “true” verbs.
616

However, there are some verbs that are more likely to take gerunds as objects
than others.
In this section, we’ll look at some common verbs that take gerunds as their
direct object to get a sense of how they’re used.
Stative vs. Action Verbs
Stative verbs that take gerunds
Stative verbs, also known as verbs of feeling, are very likely to take
gerunds as their objects.
Here are some examples of common stative verbs that take gerunds (keep in
mind that this is not an exhaustive list):
Stative
verb
Example with a gerund as an object
love
“I love going to the movies.”
like
“I like living by the ocean.”
enjoy
“Do you enjoy working in retail?”
mind
“Would you mind watching my seat for me while I go to the
bathroom?”
feel like
“I feel like staying home tonight.”
stand
“She can’t stand being around him.”
imagine
“Imagine winning the lottery. It would be great!”
Action verbs that take gerunds
Certain action verbs (also called dynamic verbs) can also take a gerund
as their object if describing a secondary action. For instance:
Action verb
Example with a gerund as an object
admit (to)
“He admitted (to) cheating on the exam.”
avoid
“He always tries to avoid doing his homework.”
617

consider
“He is considering moving to London.”
delay
“He delayed paying his phone bill.”
deny
“He denied stealing the money.”
insist on
“He insisted on giving me a ride to the train station.”
keep/continue “Please, keep/continue telling me your story.”
mention
“She mentioned meeting him for a coffee earlier.”
practice
“She practices speaking English whenever she gets the
chance.”
recommend
“I recommend going to the mountains in the
summer.”
resist
“She resisted sneaking out to the party down the
road.”
suggest
“They suggested staying at a five-star hotel.”
 
Again, the above is not a complete list. There are many other dynamic verbs
that will take a gerund as their object.
Gerunds vs. Infinitives
Gerunds and infinitives are both verb forms that can function as nouns,
and, as such, they are both often used as the objects of “main” verbs. In
many cases, we can use either the infinitive or the gerund in addition to
“standard” nouns.
Some verbs, however, can only be followed by infinitives and not gerunds. In
each example below, we can see how a gerund does not fit with the main
verb:
✔ Infinitive (Correct)
✖ Gerund (Incorrect)
“They promised to be quiet in the
car.”
“They promised being quiet in the
car.”
“I agreed to leave him alone.”
“I agreed leaving him alone.”
618

“She asked to see the landlord
about the faulty stove.”
“She asked seeing the landlord
about the faulty stove.”
 
Likewise, some verbs are followed only by gerunds and not infinitives. In
most cases, these are action verbs. For example:
✔ Gerund (Correct)
✖ Infinitive (Incorrect)
“I recall seeing an advertisement
for that somewhere.”
“I recall to see an advertisement
for that somewhere.”
“I recommend reading Moby
Dick at some point in your life.”
“I recommend to read Moby Dick
at some point in your life.”
“He’ll consider hearing your side
of the story later, if he has time.”
“He’ll consider to hear your side
of the story later, if he has time.”
 
Unfortunately, there is not a set of rules to determine which verbs can take
which forms as their objects.
Verbs followed by both gerunds
and infinitives
For other verbs, we can use either the infinitive or the gerund.
Most of the time, there is no difference in meaning when we substitute the
infinitive for the gerund. This is especially true for stative verbs. For
example, each of the following pairs mean the same thing:
Gerund
Infinitive
“I like hiking.”
“I like to hike.”
“I love swimming.”
“I love to swim.”
“I 
prefer 
going 
out 
on 
the
weekend.”
“I prefer to go out on the
weekend.”
With some verbs, we can use both the infinitive and the gerund, but the
meaning of the sentence changes subtly as a result. In this case, we have to
use context to understand the meaning completely. For example:
619

Infinitive
Gerund
“I 
remembered 
to 
close 
the
window.” (I didn’t forget to do this)
“No, I didn’t leave the window
open. I remember closing it.” (I
recall doing this)
“I forgot to read this book for
school.” (I didn’t remember to do this,
so it didn’t happen)
“I forget reading this book for
school.” (I don’t recall this fact)
“I’ve been trying to call you all day,
but the line has been busy.” (Attempt
to do something)
“Try calling my cell phone next
time.” (This is a possible solution
to the problem)
“I stopped drinking sugary drinks
because of my health.” (I don’t drink
sugary drinks anymore)
“I stopped to drink at the well.”
(I interrupted what I was doing to
drink from the well)
 
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following verbs will not take a gerund as its object?
a) deny
b) neglect
c) recommend
d) love
 
2. Which kind of verb is more likely to take a gerund as its object?
a) linking verb
b) auxiliary verb
c) stative verb
d) dynamic verb
 
3. Identify the gerund in the following sentence.
“I am waiting to see if the doctor recommends getting a transplant.”
a) waiting
b) to see
c) recommends
620

d) getting
4. True or false: All gerunds can be replaced by infinitives when they
function as the objects of verbs.
a) true
b) false
Interjections
Definition
An interjection, also known as an exclamation, is a word, phrase, or
sound used to convey an emotion such as surprise, excitement, happiness, or
anger. Interjections are very common in spoken English, but they appear in
written English as well. Capable of standing alone, they are grammatically
unrelated to any other part of a sentence.
Primary Interjections
Primary interjections are interjections that are single words derived not
from any other word class, but from sounds. Nonetheless, primary
interjections do have widely recognized meaning. Some common primary
interjections are:
Primary Interjection
Emotion
aah
fear
aha
triumph, sudden understanding
argh
frustration
brr
being cold
eww
disgust
grr
anger
hmm
thinking
ooh
amazement, being impressed
phew
relief
621

yay
approval, happiness
Secondary Interjections
Secondary interjections are interjections derived from words that do
belong to other word classes—they may be adjectives, nouns, or entire
clauses. Again, they have nothing to do with the grammar of the sentences
that come before or after them. Some common secondary interjections are:
bless you
congratulations
good grief
hell
hey
hi
oh my
oh my God
oh well
shoot
well
what
Curse words (vulgar or offensive words; also called swear words) are also
considered interjections when they are not linked grammatically with
another part of a sentence.
Sentence Placement
Interjections are more commonly used in speech; however, we sometimes do
need to express them through writing, especially if we are trying to capture
dialogue. Usually, the interjection is placed before the sentence that explains
the cause of the emotion. For example:
• “Ooh, that’s a beautiful dress.”
• “Brr, it’s freezing in here!”
• “Oh my God! We’ve won!”
• “Wow! What a great achievement!”
622

Punctuation
As mentioned, interjections can stand alone. Therefore, they can be
punctuated with a period, an exclamation point, or a question mark. The
punctuation we choose depends on the emotion that we want to convey.
However, since interjections are not complete sentences, some writers prefer
to attach them to a complete sentence with a comma. Ultimately, it is up to
preference.
Exclamation point
We use an exclamation point when the emotion we want to convey is very
strong and is not a question. For example:
• “Hooray! I got accepted to my top choice university!”
• “Yuck! I hate coconuts!”
• “Congratulations! That was an impressive victory.”
Period or comma
When the expression is weaker, we can use a period or a comma. For
example:
• “Well, isn’t that nice?”
• “Oh well, I’m sure we’ll have better luck next time.”
• “Shoot. I really thought we were going to win.”
Question mark
If the interjection expresses disbelief, uncertainty, or is interrogative, we
should use a question mark. For example:
• “Huh? You’re not coming?”
• “Well? Are we going to watch a movie?”
• “What? You don’t like coconuts?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Interjections are ________ to the grammar of the sentence that follows.
623

a) somewhat related
b) related
c) not related
 
2. Which of the following is a primary interjection?
a) well
b) oh my god
c) ugh
d) hello
3. Complete the following sentence with the most appropriate
interjection:
“________! I really thought we were going to lose!”
a) Phew
b) Oh no
c) Yuck
d) Argh
4. Complete the following sentence with the most appropriate
interjection:
“________. I’m still not sure of the right answer.”
a) Eew
b) Phew
c) Hmm
d) Congratulations
5. Complete the following sentence with the most appropriate
interjection:
“________. That bread is all moldy.”
a) Yay
b) Eww
c) Phew
d) Ooh
624

Inflection (Accidence)
Definition
Grammatical inflection (sometimes known as accidence or flection in
more traditional grammars) is the way in which a word is changed or altered
in form in order to achieve a new, specific meaning.
Verbs are the most commonly inflected words, changing form to reflect
grammatical tense, as well as mood, voice, aspect, person, and speech.
Collectively, this is known as conjugation.
The other parts of speech that can undergo inflection are nouns, pronouns,
adjectives, and adverbs. These are categorized collectively under the term
declension.
Most inflection is done according to consistent rules and patterns, but, as
we’ll see, there are many words that are irregularly inflected.
We’ll look at the basics of conjugation and declension below, and then briefly
discuss regular vs. irregular declension. Continue on to the individual
sections to learn more about them in greater detail.
Conjugation
Below, we’ll give a brief overview of the different elements used in
conjugation. Continue on to Conjugation or go to its individual sections
to learn more about each.
Tense
When we discuss conjugating verbs, we are usually referring to how a verb
changes according to tense—that is, when an action happened in time.
Verbs in their basic form are naturally in the present tense (specifically
known as the present simple tense). For example:
• “She walks to work.”
• “We live in the city.”
• “They work too hard.”
• “He sings for an hour.”
Verbs can only be truly inflected for the past tense (specifically the past
625

simple tense). Most verbs are changed by adding “-d” or “-ed” to their end
(which also forms their past participle form). However, many verbs are
considered irregular and have past tense and past participle forms that
cannot be predicted. For example:
• “She walked to work.” (regular verb)
• “We lived in the city.” (regular verb)
• “He sang for an hour.” (irregular verb)
Using auxiliary verbs and verb participles, we can also create the
continuous, perfect, and perfect continuous forms of either the past or
present tense. For instance:
• “She is walking to work.” ( present continuous tense)
• “We have lived in the city.” (present perfect tense)
• “They had been working too hard.” (past perfect continuous tense)
• “He had sung for an hour.” (past perfect tense)
Finally, we can also form an approximation of the future tense. Verbs do
not have a specific form to reflect future action, so we use other verb
constructions to achieve this meaning, usually the modal auxiliary verb
will, as in:
• “She will walk to work.” (future simple tense)
• “We will be living in the city.” (future continuous tense)
• “They will have worked too hard.” (future perfect tense)
• “He will have been singing for an hour.” (future perfect continuous
tense)
Aspect
Grammatical aspect is concerned with how an action, state of being, or
event occurs in time; we use it with tense to create specific forms of verbs in
relation to time.
Each verb tense has four aspects, or temporal structures: the simple, the
perfect, the continuous, and the perfect continuous. These coincide with the
different verb tenses we looked at above. When we form the present
continuous tense (“I am walking”), for instance, we are actually using
the continuous aspect of the present tense.
626

Continue on to the Aspect section in this chapter to learn more about how
aspect is used with verb tenses.
Mood
Most of the time when we speak or write, we are discussing or asking what is
true, real, or actually happening. This is known as the indicative mood.
For instance:
• “I ate breakfast at 3 o’clock.”
• “We are going swimming this afternoon.”
• “Will they be there tonight?”
When discussing an unreal, hypothetical, or desired situation, we use what’s
known as the subjunctive mood. This is usually marked by putting the
verb in the past tense, as in:
• “I wish it was/were* Saturday.”
• “If I had a million dollars, I would move to the Bahamas.”
(*Traditionally, the verb be always conjugates to were in the subjunctive
mood, regardless of the subject of the sentence. However, it is becoming
common in modern English to use was if the subject is singular.)
When we make direct commands to someone, we use what’s known as the
imperative mood to form imperative sentences. They have no subject
(it is implied), and the verb is in the base or bare infinitive form. For
example:
• “Close that window!”
• “Sit down, please.”
Voice
Voice has to do with the relationship between a verb and its source of
agency—the person or thing performing or controlling the action of the verb.
This is usually the subject of the sentence or clause, which is known as
being in the active voice. For instance:
• “He wrote the book.”
• “The Millers are preparing dinner.”
We can also construct sentences in which the subject of the sentence is not
627

the agent of the verb, but rather the object of its action. If the agent is
identified, it is only in a prepositional phrase at the end of the sentence. This
is known as passive voice. For example:
• “The book was written (by him).”
• “Dinner was prepared (by The Millers).”
Grammatical Person
Grammatical person refers to whether the subject is the speaker or writer
(first person), someone being directly addressed (second person), or a person
or thing that is being spoken or written about (third person). Each of these
can be either singular or plural.
Almost all verbs are conjugated a specific way only if the subject is in the
third person, is singular, and is in the present tense. We do so by adding an “-
s” or “-es” to the end of the verb, as in:
• “I walk everywhere.” (first-person singular)
• “She/he/it walks everywhere.” (third-person singular)
The exception to this is the verb be, which has several unique conjugations
for grammatical person and tense. For example:
• “I am outside.” (first-person singular, present tense)
• “She/he/it is outside.” (third-person singular, present tense)
• “I/she/he/it was outside.” (first/third-person singular, past tense)
• “You/we/they are outside.” (first/second/third-person plural, present
tense)
• “You/we/they were outside.” (first/second/third-person plural, past tense)
Speech
Speech refers to the quotation of or reference to something said or written
by someone else. When we say exactly what someone said (known as direct
speech or direct quotation), we use quotation marks, as in:
• Mary said, “I want to have another baby,” which took him by surprise.
When we are only paraphrasing or summarizing what someone said, it is
known as reported or indirect speech and we do not use quotation
marks. For example:
628

• Mary told me that she hadn’t been serious.
Declension
While conjugation only deals with the inflection of verbs, declension covers
the inflection of nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs.
Declension of nouns
Generally, we only decline nouns to mark plurality—that is, whether there
is more than one person, place, or thing being discussed. We usually do so by
adding an “-s” or “-es” to the end of the noun, as in books, watches, toys,
cars, etc. There are a few other spelling patterns that apply, and there are a
number of irregular plurals that do not follow any conventions at all—go
to the section on Plurals to learn more.
We can also decline certain nouns to reflect gender, as in prince
(masculine) vs. princess (feminine). However, the majority of nouns in
English are not inflected for gender.
Declension of pronouns
For the most part, only personal pronouns are subject to inflection. We
decline personal pronouns based on grammatical person, number,
gender, and case. The pronouns who and whoever can also be declined to
whom and whomever to reflect the objective case; however, this is
becoming less common in everyday speech and writing.
The table below provides a quick breakdown of the various personal
pronouns. ( Reflexive pronouns, though not technically a type of personal
pronoun, are so closely related in form that they have been included as well.)
Continue on to the Declension chapter or go to their individual sections in
the chapter on Personal Pronouns to learn more about how they are
formed and when they are used.
Person Number
Gender
Subjective
Case
Objective
Case
Po
De
First
Person
Singular
Masculine/feminine I
Me
My
First
Person
Plural
Masculine/feminine We
Us
Ou
629

Second
Person
Singular/Plural Masculine/feminine You
You
You
Third
Person
Singular
Feminine
She
Her
Her
Third
Person
Singular
Masculine
He
Him
His
Third
person
Singular
Neuter
It
It
Its
Third
person
Plural
Neuter 
(Gender
Neutral)
They
Them
The
Declension 
of 
adjectives 
and
adverbs
We decline both adjectives and adverbs in the same way to create
comparative and superlative forms. As the name suggests, comparative
adjectives and adverbs are used to compare two people or things. Superlative
adjectives and adverbs, on the other hand, identify someone or something
with the highest (or lowest) degree of a certain attribute.
We inflect these modifiers by adding the suffix “-r” or “-er” to form the
comparative degree, and “-st” or “-est” to form the superlative degree.
Collectively, these are known as the degrees of comparison. For example:
Degrees of Comparison -
Adjectives
Degrees of Comparison -
Adverbs
“My cat has sharp claws.”
“I like to drive fast.”
“His cat has sharper claws than
mine.”
“My sister drives faster than me.”
“Their cat has the sharpest claws of
them all.”
“My dad drives the fastest in our
family.”
630

For some modifiers, we simply add the words more/less or most/least rather
than changing the adjective or adverb itself.
To learn the specific rules that govern the declension of adjectives and
adverbs, go to the Degrees of Comparison section for Adjectives or
Adverbs.
Regular and Irregular Inflection
Inflection is usually determined by clear, consistent rules or patterns. This is
known as regular inflection. All the examples we’ve looked at so far have
been according to regular inflection.
However, there are also many instances of irregular inflection, in which
the way the word changes is completely unique and does not follow (or seem
to follow) any predetermined rules.
For instance, irregular inflection occurs with many of the plurals of nouns.
Words like children or mice are irregular plural forms of child and mouse.
It also occurs with adjectives and adverbs when we decline them for the
comparative and superlative forms. For example, the adjective good becomes
better (comparative) and best (superlative), which are also the inflected
forms of the adverb well.
Some adverbs that are formed from adjectives are also irregular—well, for
instance, is the irregular adverb form of the adjective good.
Verbs are the most notorious for their irregular inflection, which is defined as
having past tense and past participle forms that a) are different from one
another, and b) have different spellings than the usual “-d” or “-ed” endings.
For instance, the past tense of the verb sing is sang, while its past participle
is sung.
Go to the section Regular and Irregular Inflection in this chapter to
learn more about these tricky exceptions.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is the purpose of inflection?
a) To modify a word with other words in order to create a new meaning
b) To change the form of a word in order to create new meaning
c) To create words that form the subject of the sentence
631

d) To create words that act as the objects of verbs
 
2. Which of the following is not something we conjugate verbs for?
a) Tense
b) Mood
c) Gender
d) Person
3. What is the most common reason personal pronouns are inflected?
a) To establish the gender of the pronoun
b) To establish the plurality of the pronoun
c) To establish the grammatical person of the pronoun
d) To establish the grammatical case of the pronoun
e) All of the above
f) None of the above
 
4. The subjunctive mood can be used to express which of the following?
a) Wishes
b) Statements of facts
c) Direct commands
d) All of the above
 
5. Which of the following is the term for inflection that does not follow
predictable rules or patterns?
a) Improper inflection
b) Inexact inflection
c) Irregular inflection
d) Implied inflection
Conjugation
Definition
Conjugation refers to the way we inflect (change the form of) verbs to
create particular meanings.
When we discuss conjugating verbs, we usually refer to ways in which we
632

change a verb in order to reflect grammatical tense, but we also conjugate
verbs to reflect aspect, mood, voice, person, and speech.
We’ll very briefly look at the ways verbs are conjugated below. Continue on to
the individual sections in this chapter to learn more about each.
Tense
Grammatical tense refers to the conjugation of a verb to reflect its place in
time—that is, when the action occurred.
There are technically only two grammatical tenses in English: the past tense
and the present tense. Verbs in their basic form inherently describe the
present time, and they can be conjugated into a unique form that describes
the past.
Using auxiliary verbs and verb participles, we can also create the
continuous (or progressive) tenses, the perfect tenses, and the
perfect continuous (or perfect progressive) tenses. These are
technically different aspects of tense, but they are commonly included
among the verb tenses.
English has no future tense in the strict sense (there is no unique verb form
to denote future action). Nevertheless, we commonly refer to several
structures that are used for future meaning as belonging to the future
tense.
We’ll look at a couple of examples of each verb tense below, but each section
has more information on how they are formed and used.
Present Tense
Present Simple Tense
“I go to work every day.”
“He works in finance.”
“I don’t go out very often.”
“Do you eat breakfast every morning?”
“They are hungry.”
Present Continuous Tense
633

“John is sleeping at the moment.”
“Am I wearing the right uniform?”
“Jack isn’t coming to the movie with us.”
“Are you still reading that book?”
“We’re flying to Spain tomorrow.”
Present Perfect Tense
“I have lived in Italy for many years.”
“She has been here since 8 o’clock.”
“Have you been here since this morning?”
“We haven’t been to the movies in a long time.”
“Have you seen my jacket anywhere?”
Present 
Perfect 
Continuous
Tense
“I’ve been writing for over an hour.”
“How long have you been writing?”
“They haven’t been living in Spain for very long.”
“She’s tired because she’s been working a lot.”
“That bag looks new. Have you been shopping?”
Past Tense
Past Simple Tense
“She worked in finance before this job.”
“We lived in China for six years after I graduated from college.”
“They didn’t watch the movie last night.”
“I went to the park yesterday.”
“I was their accountant at the time.”
Past Continuous Tense
634

“I was reading a book when they arrived.”
“What were you talking about when I arrived?”
“She was worrying we wouldn’t be able to afford the
wedding.”
“I wasn’t feeling well.”
“Were you sleeping when I called?”
Past Perfect Tense
“The movie had already ended when I turned on the TV.”
“I was sad to leave the house I had lived in for so many years.”
“Until this morning, I had never been on a plane.”
“Had you ever been on a tractor before working on our farm?”
“I hadn’t eaten Parmesan cheese before going to Italy.”
Past Perfect Continuous Tense
“When I arrived at the bus stop, the other people there had been
waiting for nearly an hour.”
“We hadn’t been talking for very long before she had to leave.”
“My eyes were tired because I had been working on the
computer.”
“Had she been living in Italy for a long time?”
“He had been feeling unwell, so he went to lie down.”
Future Tense
The most common constructions of the future tenses use the modal
auxiliary verb will or the verb phrase be going to. We can also use the
modal verb shall to create the future tense, but this is generally reserved for
more formal or polite English, and it is not very common in everyday speech
and writing, especially in American English.
Future Simple Tense
“The Queen will be in Rome tomorrow.”
“She won’t do her homework.”
“Will they be late?”
635

“I am going to wash my hair after dinner.”
“Are you going to mow the lawn today?”
Future Continuous Tense
“I’ll be flying to Boston tomorrow, so I can’t come to lunch.”
“People are going be consuming even more natural resources by
the year 2030.”
“Is she going to be working from home now?”
“I’m not going to be living in New York for much longer.”
“You shouldn’t call their house now; they will be sleeping.”
Future Perfect Tense
“By October we will have lived in this house for 20 years.”
“After this next race, I will have completed 10 triathlons.”
“You will have heard by now that the company is going bankrupt.”
“Will they have read the memo ahead of the meeting?”
“Why are you going to the airport so early? Her flight will not have
arrived yet.”
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
“She’ll have been waiting for nearly an hour by the time we
arrive.”
“I will have been living in this country for 10 years this
November.”
“Will they have been looking through our tax returns for the last
few years?”
“How will he have been coping on his own for all these years?”
“He won’t have been sleeping for very long, but I have to wake
him up.”
Aspect
Grammatical aspect is often confused with tense. While tense is concerned
with when an action, state of being, or event occurs (past, present, or future),
aspect is concerned with how it occurs in time.
636

We use aspect with tense to reflect each construction of a verb in relation to
time. When we form the present continuous tense, for instance, we are
actually using a specific aspect of the present tense. It is through aspect that
we understand whether an action takes place at a single point in time, during
a continuous range of time, or repetitively.
Perfective 
and 
imperfective
aspect
The perfective aspect is used when we draw attention to an action as a
whole, summarizing it. The perfective aspect may occur in past, present, or
future actions and events. For example:
• “I ate dinner.”
• “I swim like a fish.”
• “We will help you tomorrow.”
The imperfective aspect, on the other hand, is used to draw attention to
the action as having an internal structure (rather than as a whole, complete
action)—for example, an action that is in progress at the moment of speaking
or which happened habitually in the past, as in:
• “I was washing dishes when she came through the door.”
• “We used to go traveling a lot.”
Aspects of verb tenses
Each verb tense has four aspects, or temporal structures: the simple, the
perfect, the continuous, and the perfect continuous. These coincide with the
different verb tenses we looked at above.
Aspects of the present tense
Aspect
Structure
Examples
Simple
Subject + present verb
“I 
go 
shopping 
on
Tuesdays.” 
“She runs fast.”
637

Perfect
Subject + have/has + past
participle
“I 
have 
eaten 
here
before.”
“She has lived here for a
long time.”
Continuous
Subject 
+ 
is/are 
+ 
present
participle
“We 
are 
cooking
dinner.” 
“He is singing a song.”
Perfect
Continuous
Subject + have/has + been +
present participle
“He has been thinking
about it.”
“I have been taking an
art class.”
Aspects of the past tense
Aspect
Structure
Examples
Simple
Subject + past verb
“I 
went 
shopping 
on
Tuesday.” 
“She ran fast.”
Perfect
Subject + had + past participle
“I had eaten there before.”
“She had lived here for a
long time.”
Continuous
Subject + was/were + present
participle
“We 
were 
cooking
dinner.”
“He was singing a song.”
Perfect
Continuous
Subject + had + been +
present participle
“He had been thinking
about it.”
“I had been taking an art
class.”
Aspects of the future tense
Aspect
Structure
Examples
638

Simple
Subject + will/be going to +
infinitive
“I will go shopping on
Tuesday.”
“She is going to run
fast.”
Perfect
Subject + will have + past
participle
“I will have eaten before
arriving.” 
“She will have lived
here for a long time.”
Continuous Subject + will/be going to + be +
present participle
“We are going to be
cooking dinner.” 
“He will be singing a
song.”
Perfect
Continuous
Subject + will/would + have +
been + present participle
“He’ll 
have 
been
thinking about it.”
“I would have been
taking an art class.”
Mood
Grammatical mood refers to the way in which a verb is used to express
certain meaning by the speaker or writer—that is, to express what is actually
the case or what is unreal or hypothetical, or to command or request
something to be done in the future.
There are three main grammatical moods: the indicative mood, the
subjunctive mood, and the imperative mood.
Indicative mood
The indicative mood expresses facts, statements, opinions, or questions. It
is used to form declarative sentences (i.e., statements or declarations) or
interrogative sentences (i.e., questions). For example:
• “She graduated last year with a doctorate in neuroscience.”
• “He isn’t taking his exam at the new testing center.”
• “Are you going to give your speech tomorrow?”
639

Subjunctive Mood
The subjunctive mood uses specific verb constructions to describe
hypothetical or non-real actions, events, or situations, such as wishes,
suggestions, or possible outcomes that depend on certain conditions.
For example:
• “I wish I didn’t have to go to work.” (wish)
• “I recommend that she study harder next time.” (suggestion)
• “If I had been more prepared, I would have passed that test.”
Imperative Mood
We use the imperative mood when we form imperative sentences, such
as direct orders, commands, or general instructions.
When we make an imperative sentence, we use the infinitive form of the verb
(without to), and, uniquely, we omit the subject of the verb.
For example:
• “Turn off the light before you leave.”
• “Go to bed!”
• “Please close the door.”
• “Pay attention!”
Voice
Grammatical voice describes the relationship between the verb and the
subject (also known as the agent) in a sentence.
There are two main types of voice: active voice and passive voice. A third
type called “middle” voice also exists, but it is less common.
Active Voice
A verb is in the active voice when the agent of the verb (the person or thing
that performs the action specified by the verb) is also the subject of the
sentence.
For example:
640

• “The boy sang a song.” (the boy is the agent of the verb sang)
• “I am watching a movie.” (I is the agent of the verb am watching)
• “Vivian writes well.” (Vivian is the agent of the verb writes)
Passive Voice
A sentence uses the passive voice when the subject is acted upon by the
verb. The object of the verb’s action becomes the subject of the sentence,
while the agent of the action (if there is one) is identified by the preposition
by. For example:
• “A famous piano piece will be performed by Angie tomorrow night.”
• “His new book has already been read by thousands of people.”
• “The light bulb was patented in 1880.” (no agent)
“Middle” Voice
The “middle” voice describes a type of voice in which the agent performs
the verb’s action on itself. Verbs in the middle voice are often followed by
reflexive pronouns. For example:
• “My girlfriend always checks herself in the mirror before we go out.”
• “The dog bit itself on the tail.”
“Middle” voice can also be used to describe some intransitive verbs that
act upon their agents. For example:
• “The lasagna cooked in the oven for several hours.”
• “The bicycle broke without warning.”
Grammatical Person
Grammatical person refers to the degree of involvement of a participant
in an action, event, or circumstance. There are three degrees of grammatical
person: first person (the speaker), second person (someone being
spoken to), and third person (anyone/anything not being directly
addressed).
The vast majority of verbs only conjugate for third-person singular
subjects (e.g., he, she, and it) by taking the suffix “-s” or “-es,” as in:
• “I eat pasta.” (first-person singular)
641

• “We eat pasta.” (first-person plural)
• “You eat pasta.” (second-person singular/plural)
• “She/he/it eats pasta.” (third-person singular)
• “They eat pasta.” (third-person singular)
However, the verb be is unique in that it has five different conjugations
according to the grammatical person of its subject and the tense of the verb.
• “I am happy.” (first-person singular, present tense)
• “I was happy.” (first-person singular, past tense)
• “We are happy.” (first-person plural, present tense)
• “We were happy.” (first-person plural, past tense)
• “You are happy.” (second-person singular/plural, present tense)
• “You were happy.” (second-person singular/plural, past tense)
• “She/he/it is happy.” (third-person singular, present tense)
• “She/he/it was happy.” (third-person singular, past tense)
• “They are happy.” (third-person plural, present tense)
• “They were happy.” (third-person plural, past tense)
To learn more about the way that other verbs conjugate for the third-person
singular, go to the section on Grammatical Person
Speech
Grammatical speech refers to how we report what another person said,
which affects the conjugation of the verbs that are used. We almost always
use reporting verbs (such as say, tell, or ask) to form grammatical speech.
There are two primary types of speech: direct speech and reported
speech (also known as indirect speech). There are also two other sub-
categories, known as free indirect speech and silent speech.
Direct speech
Direct speech, sometimes known as quoted speech, refers to the direct
quotation of something that someone else said.
Because the quotation happened in the past, we put the reporting verb into
the past simple tense, but we don’t change the verbs used within the
642

quotation.
When used in writing, we indicate the quoted speech with quotation
marks ( “ ” ), and we usually set it apart with one or two commas (unless
we are quoting a fragment that blends in with the overall sentence). For
example:
• John said, “I’ll never live in this city again.”
• Mary told him, “I want to have another baby,” which took him by
surprise.
• John said he feels “really bad” about what happened.
(There are a number of other nuances surrounding punctuating that occur
when we use direct speech in certain circumstances, as well as if we are
writing in American English or British English. Continue on to the
section dealing with Speech to learn more.)
Reported (Indirect) Speech
In many instances, we merely paraphrase (or restate) what someone said,
rather than directly quoting them. This is known as reported or indirect
speech.
In reported speech, we do not use quotation marks. According to
conventional rules, we must also shift the paraphrased information one
degree into the past. If a statement was originally made in the present
simple tense, for instance, we would shift it to the past simple tense. For
example:
Non-reported
sentence
Verb shift
Reported speech
I 
live 
in
Germany.
present 
simple 
tense
shifts to past simple tense
He said he lived 
in
Germany.
I 
was 
a
carpenter
before I moved
here.
past simple tense shifts to
past perfect tense
She said that she had
been a carpenter before
she moved here.
He is writing a
letter 
to 
our
friend.
present 
continuous
tense 
shifts 
to 
past
continuous tense
She told us he was
writing a letter to our
friend.
643

She 
was
sleeping when
you called.
past 
continuous 
tense
shifts 
to 
past 
perfect
continuous tense
He told me you had
been sleeping when I
called.
 
 
 
However, in modern English, this rule is not always observed, and the
meaning of your sentence would usually not be affected if you didn’t shift the
tense. To learn more about how we change (or do not change) the tense and
wording of sentences, go to the section on Reported Speech.
Free Indirect and Silent Speech
Free indirect speech is used to indicate the thoughts or mental processes
of a character, usually in the form of a rhetorical question. We do not use
reporting verbs or quotation marks. For example:
• He had no money, no job, and no friends. How had his life arrived to
such a desperate point?
Silent speech refers to something that is said internally (i.e., silently) by
someone to him- or herself. We still use reporting verbs, but we can use
either quotation marks or italics to indicate the silent speech, or nothing at
all—it is up to the writer’s preference. For example:
• “I’m never coming back to this town again,” he murmured to himself.
• She thought, What a beautiful country.
• It will be quiet around here when the kids go to college, Dan
thought.
Conjugation vs. Declension
Remember that conjugation is the specific term used for the inflection of
verbs—no other part of speech is conjugated. For any kind of word that goes
through inflection (nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs), we use the
term declension. Head to that section to learn more.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not something we conjugate verbs for?
644

a) Tense
b) Mood
c) Gender
d) Person
2. Which of the following types of conjugation describes when the action of a
verb takes place in time?
a) Tense
b) Mood
c) Person
d) Speech
e) Voice
3. Which of the following types of conjugation describes the relationship
between the verb and the agency of the verb’s subject?
a) Aspect
b) Mood
c) Person
d) Speech
e) Voice
 
4. The subjunctive mood can be used to express which of the following?
a) Wishes
b) Suggestions
c) Hypotheticals
d) All of the above
 
5. Grammatical tense is used in conjunction with which other type of
conjugation to describe a verb’s relationship with time?
a) Mood
b) Aspect
c) Person
d) Speech
e) Voice
Tense
645

Definition
Grammatical tense refers to the conjugation of a verb to reflect its place in
time—that is, when the action occurred.
There are technically only two grammatical tenses in English: the past and
the present. Verbs in their basic form inherently describe the present time,
and they can be conjugated into a unique form that describes the past. We
can then use auxiliary verbs and verb participles to create different
aspects of the past and present tenses, which describe if an action is or was
continuous, or if it began at an earlier point in the past.
However, verbs do not have a specific conjugated form to reflect the future,
and, for this reason, English is considered not to have a true future tense.
Nevertheless, although English has no future tense in the strict sense, we
commonly refer to several structures that are used for future meaning as
belonging to the “future tense.” The most common of these structures begin
with will or be going to. For the sake of consistency, we will be referring to
such constructions as the future tense in this chapter.
Summary of the Main Tenses
Below, we’ll provide a very brief summary of each of the variations of the
present, past, and future tenses. Go to the individual sections to learn more
about each variation.
The Present Tense
Present Simple Tense
The present simple tense (also called the simple present) is used to express
habits, facts, and timetables.
Structures of the present simple
tense
Affirmative: The base form of the verb. It is usually conjugated for the
third-person singular by adding “-s” or “-es” to the end of the verb (except for
irregular verbs).
646

Question: Use the auxiliary verb do (or does for the third-person
singular) before the main verb.
Negative: Use do not (contracted as don’t) or does not (contracted as
doesn’t) before the main verb.
Examples:
“I go to work every day.”
“He works in finance.”
“I don’t go out very often.”
“Do you eat breakfast every morning?”
“The sun rises in the East.”
“The sun doesn’t rise in the West.”
“The train leaves at 9:30 tomorrow morning.”
“It doesn’t leave from platform 12.”
“Does the train for Detroit leave at 9 AM tomorrow?”
With the verb be
The linking verb be has three different conjugations for grammatical
person in the present tense: am (first-person singular); are (first-person
plural, second person, and third-person plural); and is (third-person
singular). Be does not need do when making questions or negative
statements in the present simple tense.
Affirmative: “I am from the United States.”
Question: “Is he Canadian?”
Negative: “They are not British.”
Present Continuous Tense
The present continuous tense (also called the present progressive tense)
is used for something in progress at the moment of speaking; it describes
something that is happening in the present moment and also for expressing
future arrangements. It can only be used with action verbs.
Structures 
of 
the 
present
647

continuous tense
Affirmative: The auxiliary verb be plus the present participle of the
main verb. We conjugate be, rather than the main verb, for grammatical
person.
Question: Invert be with the subject of the sentence.
Negative: Use not after auxiliary be (contracted as isn’t or aren’t; am not is
not normally contracted) before the present participle of the main verb.
Examples:
Present moment
Affirmative: “John is sleeping at the moment.”
Question: “Am I wearing the right uniform?”
Negative: “Jack isn’t coming to the movie with us.”
Present moment
Affirmative: “The managers are working on the new project.”
Question: “Are you still reading that book?”
Negative: “I am not living in New York anymore.”
Future arrangement
Affirmative: “We’re flying to Spain tomorrow.”
Question: “Are you meeting Tom for lunch on Wednesday?”
Negative: “They’re not having the party on Saturday anymore.”
Present Perfect Tense
The present perfect tense (sometimes called the present perfect simple
tense) is used to give general information about something that happened at
an indefinite point in the past. We also use the present perfect with the
prepositions for and since when we speak about something that started in
the past and is still true now.
Structures of the present perfect
tense:
648

Affirmative: The auxiliary verb have plus the past participle of the
main verb. Have conjugates as has for the third-person singular.
Question: Invert have/has with the subject of the sentence.
Negative: Use not after have/has (often contracted as haven’t/hasn’t)
before the past participle of the main verb. We can also use never instead of
not.
Examples:
“I have lived in Italy for many years.”
“She has been here since 8 o’clock.”
“Have you been here since this morning?”
“We haven’t been to the movies in a long time.”
“I’ve lost my pen.”
“Have you seen my jacket anywhere?”
“She hasn’t been in work for a few weeks.”
“I have seen this movie already.”
“Have you ever tried Indian food?”
“She has never flown on an airplane before.”
Present 
Perfect 
Continuous
Tense
We use the present perfect continuous tense (also called the present perfect
progressive tense) to talk about that which began in the past and is still
happening in the present. We often use it to emphasize the length of time
that has passed while something is happening. We can also use it to talk
about something that has been happening lately or only finished very
recently. It can only be used with action verbs.
Structures of the present perfect
continuous tense
Affirmative: The auxiliary verb have (or has with third-person singular
subjects) + been + the present participle of the main verb.
Question: Invert have/has with the subject of the sentence.
649

Negative: Use not after have/has (often contracted as haven’t/hasn’t)
before the past participle of the main verb.
Example:
“I’ve been writing for over an hour.”
“How long have you been writing for?”
“They haven’t been living in Spain for very long.”
“She’s tired because she’s been working a lot.”
“That bag looks new. Have you been shopping?”
“He hasn’t been sleeping a lot lately.”
The Past Tense
Past Simple Tense
We use the past simple tense to express finished actions. It is often used with
an expression of past time to give more complete information.
Structures of the past simple
tense
Affirmative: The past-tense conjugation of the verb. This is generally
accomplished by adding “-d” or “-ed” to the end of the verb, but there are
many specific forms for irregular verbs.
Question: Use did (the past tense of the auxiliary verb do) before the
main verb. Did does not conjugate differently for third-person singular.
Negative: Use did not (often contracted as didn’t) before the main verb.
Examples:
“She worked in finance before this job.”
“We lived in China for six years after I graduated from college.”
“They didn’t watch the movie last night.”
“I went to the park yesterday.”
“Did he wake up early yesterday morning?”
“I didn’t go to the supermarket this morning.”
650

With the verb be
The linking verb be has two different conjugations for grammatical person
in the past tense: was (first-person and third-person singular) and were
(first-person plural, second person, and third-person plural). Be does not
need did when making questions or negative statements in the present
simple tense.
Affirmative: “I was their accountant at the time.”
Question: “Were you in the military?”
Negative: “He was not serious.”
Past Continuous Tense
The past continuous tense (also called the past progressive tense) is used
for something in progress at a certain moment in the past. It can only be
used with action verbs.
Structures of the past continuous
tense
Affirmative: Was or were (the past tense of the auxiliary verb be) followed
by the present participle of the main verb.
Question: Invert was/were with the subject.
Negative: Add not after was/were (often contracted as wasn’t/weren’t).
Examples:
“I was reading a book when they arrived.”
“What were you talking about when I arrived?”
“She was worrying we wouldn’t be able to afford the
wedding.”
“I was not feeling well.”
“Were you sleeping when I called?”
“My ex-husband was always leaving dirty dishes in the sink.”
“I guess things weren’t improving.”
651

Past Perfect Tense
The past perfect tense expresses the idea that something occurred before
another action in the past. It can also show that something happened before
a specific time in the past.
Structures of the past perfect
tense
Affirmative: Had (the past tense of the auxiliary verb have) + the past
participle of the main verb.
Question: Invert had with the subject of the verb.
Negative: Add not after had (often contracted as hadn’t). We also often
make the past perfect negative by using the word never instead of not.
Examples:
“The movie had already ended when I turned on the TV.”
“I was sad to leave the house I had lived in for so many years.”
“Until this morning, I had never been on a plane.
“Had you ever been on a tractor before working on our farm?”
“I hadn’t eaten Parmesan cheese before going to Italy.”
“I hadn’t ever ridden on a rollercoaster before going to the
amusement park yesterday.”
Past Perfect Continuous Tense
The past perfect continuous tense (also called the past perfect
progressive tense) is used to express something that began and was in
progress until a moment in the past or until another past action occurred.
Structures of the past perfect
continuous tense
Affirmative: Had + been + the past participle of the main verb.
Question: Invert had with the subject of the verb.
652

Negative: Add not after had (often contracted as hadn’t).
Examples:
“When I arrived at the bus stop, the other people there had been
waiting for nearly an hour.”
“How long had you been standing there before they let you in?”
“We hadn’t been talking for very long before she had to leave.”
“I saw that it had been raining outside.”
“My eyes were tired because I had been working on the
computer.”
“Had she been living in Italy for a long time?”
“He had been feeling unwell, so he went to lie down.”
The Future Tense
The most common constructions of the future tenses use the modal
auxiliary verb will or the verb phrase be going to. We can also use the
modal verb shall to create the future tense, but this is generally reserved for
more formal or polite English, and it is not very common in everyday speech
and writing, especially in American English.
Future Simple Tense
We use the future simple tense to describe an intended action, make a
prediction, state future facts, make promises, or offer to do something.
Structures of the future simple
tense
Affirmative: The modal verb will or the verb phrase be going to + the base
form of the verb. If using be going to, we must conjugate be to reflect
grammatical person in the present tense (is, am, or are).
Question: Invert the subject with will or be.
Negative: Add not after will (often contracted as won’t) or between be and
going.
Examples:
“The Queen will be in Rome tomorrow.”
653

“I will definitely arrive on time.”
“He’ll help you with that heavy suitcase.”
“She won’t do her homework.”
“Will they be late?”
“I am going to wash my hair after dinner.”
“We aren’t going to join the gym after all.”
“I think it’s going to rain tomorrow.”
“Are you going to mow the lawn today?”
Future Continuous Tense
The future continuous tense (also known as the future progressive) is
used to describe an unfinished action occurring in the future. This action can
either begin in the future, or it can already be in progress in the present and
continue into the future. The future continuous can only be used with
action verbs.
Structures 
of 
the 
future
continuous tense
Affirmative: The modal verb will or the verb phrase be going to + the
auxiliary verb be + the present participle of the main verb. If using be
going to, we must conjugate be to reflect grammatical person; we do not
conjugate be before the present participle, however.
Question: Invert the subject with will or be.
Negative: Add not after will (often contracted as won’t) or between be and
going.
Examples:
“You shouldn’t call their house now; they will be sleeping.”
“I’ll be flying to Boston tomorrow, so I can’t come to lunch.”
“People are going be consuming even more natural resources by
the year 2030.”
“We won’t be leaving until the evening.”
“Is she going to be working from home now?”
“I’m not going to be living in New York for much longer.”
654

“Will you be graduating this year?”
Future Perfect Tense
We use the future perfect tense to say that something will finish or complete
at a specific point in the future, often indicating how long something will
have been happening once a future moment in time is reached. We can also
use the future perfect to make a prediction that something has or should
have happened in the past.
Structures of the future perfect
tense
Affirmative: The modal verb will + the auxiliary verb have + the past
participle of the main verb. We can also use be going to instead of will, but
it is less common with the future perfect tense.
Question: Invert the subject with will.
Negative: Add not after will (often contracted as won’t).
Examples:
“By October we will have lived in this house for 20 years.”
“After this next race, I will have completed 10 triathlons.”
“You will have heard by now that the company is going bankrupt.”
“Will they have read the memo ahead of the meeting?”
“Why are you going to the airport so early? Her flight will not have
arrived yet.”
“How long will you have worked there before your maternity leave
begins?”
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
Like the future perfect, we use the future perfect continuous tense (also
known as the future perfect progressive tense) to indicate how long
something has been happening once a future moment in time is reached; the
emphasis is on the continual progression of the action. It can also be used to
indicate the cause of a possible future result. We can only use the future
perfect continuous with action verbs.
655

Structures of the future perfect
continuous tense
Affirmative: The modal verb will + the auxiliary verb have + been + the
present participle of the main verb. We can also use be going to instead of
will, but it is less common with the future perfect continuous tense.
Question: Invert the subject with will.
Negative: Add not after will (often contracted as won’t). However, it is not
very common to make negative constructions of the future perfect
continuous tense.
Examples:
“She’ll have been waiting for nearly an hour by the time we
arrive.”
“I will have been living in this country for 10 years this
November.”
“He’s not going to have any energy for the kids because he’ll have
been working so hard this week.”
“Will they have been looking through our tax returns for the last
few years?”
“How will he have been coping on his own for all these years?”
“He won’t have been sleeping for very long, but I have to wake
him up.”
Indicative Mood vs. Subjunctive
Mood
All of the above tenses that we’ve looked at have been in what's called the
Indicative Mood (also known as the Realis Mood), which is used to talk
about what is factual or really happening.
There is also another mood in English called the subjunctive mood, which
deals with things that are not objective facts, such one’s state of mind,
opinions, beliefs, intentions, desires, and so on. It is one of the Irrealis
Moods, so called because they deal with what is not objectively real.
The subjunctive mood has all of the tenses that the indicative mood deals
656

with, but it is used in much more specialized circumstances. When we talk
about verb tense in this chapter, we will be focusing on the indicative
mood; to learn about the subjunctive mood and its tenses, go to the section
on the Irrealis Moods in the chapter about Grammatical Mood.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. How many grammatical tenses does English technically have?
a) one
b) two
c) three
d) four
2. Identify the tense form that is made using the following structure:
Had + been + the past participle of the main verb
a) Present continuous tense
b) Past perfect tense
c) Present perfect tense
d) Past perfect continuous tense
 
3. Which of the following sentences uses the future simple tense?
a) “John goes for a walk every morning.”
b) “The train is leaving tomorrow at 10 AM.”
c) “Her flight is going to arrive a little later than expected.”
d) “I will be working for my Uncle this summer.”
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses the present perfect tense?
a) “I have lived in this town my entire life.”
b) “She had been staying with a friend for a few weeks.”
c) “We’ll have worked something out by the time you get here.”
d) “They have been saying the same thing for years.”
 
5. Which of the following is not used to create the future tense?
a) will
b) shall
c) do
657

d) be going to
Present Tense
Definition
The present tense is mostly used to identify the action of a verb as taking
place in the present time. However, depending on which way we form the
present tense, it can also be used to describe things that happened in the
past, or even certain events that are planned to happen in the future.
There are four forms of the present tense that can accomplish these tasks.
We will give a brief summary of each below, but go to the appropriate section
to learn about them more in-depth.
Present Simple Tense
The present simple tense is used to describe that which is done habitually,
that which is generally true, that which is always the case, or that which is
scheduled to happen. It is made up of only the basic form of the verb: the
infinitive (+ -(e)s if used with the third-person singular). It is called "simple"
because it does not rely on any modal or auxiliary verbs to accomplish its
meaning.
Examples:
• "I come from Berlin."
• "The train leaves at 2 PM."
• "He has breakfast every morning."
• "We like ice cream."
Present 
Continuous 
Tense
(Progressive)
The present continuous or present progressive tense is used to speak
about actions that are currently happening. It can also be used to describe
actions or events that are planned for the future, but which are not
definitively fixed in time.
658

We create the present continuous tense by using the present participle (-
ing form) of the "main" verb after the present-tense form of the auxiliary
linking verb “be.” The present participle creates the continuous forms of
verbs, which is where "present continuous" gets its name.
Examples:
• "She is running for president next year."
• "They are not watching television."
• "We are eating ice cream."
• "Are you reading that book?"
Present Perfect Tense
Present perfect tense (sometimes called the present perfect simple
tense is used to talk about things that happened sometime in the past, but
which are not given a specific time or date.
We form the present perfect by using the present tense of the auxiliary verb
“have” (or “has,” if used with third-person singular pronouns) along with the
past participle of the “main” verb. Using forms of an auxiliary verb (such as
"have") together with the past participle of the main verb is called the
perfect aspect in English, which is where the "present perfect" gets its
name. (To learn more about the perfect and other aspects, see the chapter on
Aspect.)
Examples:
• “I have seen that movie already.”
• "She’s been to Prague.”
• "He has lost his keys."
• "Jenny's lived in Dubai for 10 years!"
Present 
Perfect 
Continuous
Tense
The present perfect continuous is used in a very similar way to the present
perfect simple tense. It is used to talk about that which began in the past and
659

is still happening in the present, with an emphasis on the continued action
and/or the amount of time it is taking. We can also use it to talk about
something that is only temporary, has been happening lately, or only
finished very recently.
The present perfect continuous tense (sometimes called the present
perfect progressive tense) is formed by using the present tense of the
auxiliary verb “have” (or “has,” if used with third-person singular pronouns)
along with “been” (the past participle of the linking verb “be”) and the
present participle (-ing form) of the “main” verb.
Examples:
• “I have been living in New York City.”
• "We have been walking for four hours!"
• “They have been working in the shop for 10 years."
• “Bill has been coming into work late a lot.”
• "I'm so sweaty because I have been exercising."
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What can the present tense be used to describe?
a) Things are happening in the present moment in time.
b) Things that happened at an unspecified time in the past.
c) Things that will happen in the future.
d) Things that began in the past and are still happening now.
e) A & C
f) B & D
g) All of the above
h) None of the above
 
2. Which form of the present tense is used to describe a habit or general
truth?
a) Present Simple
b) Present Continuous
c) Present Perfect
d) Present Perfect Continuous
660

3. Which of the following is not in the present tense?
a) I hear that he is living in Saudi Arabia.
b) They haven't been talking for years.
c) She had been spending some time with her father.
d) He's left the kids with their nanny.
4. What form(s) of present tense does the following sentence use?
"I can't believe that he has lost his keys again!"
a) Present Simple
b) Present Continuous
c) Present Perfect
d) Present Perfect Continuous
e) A & B
f) A & C
g) A & D
Present Simple Tense
Definition
The present simple tense (also called the simple present tense) is used
when we speak about habits, general facts, and timetables. However, just
because something is true does not necessarily mean it takes the present
simple tense, nor does something have to be occurring in the present
moment in time for it to be in the present simple tense.
It is called the present “simple” because its basic form consists of one word
only—that is, it does not require an auxiliary verb to achieve its meaning.
Most verbs in the present simple tense are in the same form as the infinitive
verb. However, if it is in the third-person singular form, then it usually
takes the ending -(e)s.
For example:
• “I live in London.” (Fact: I live permanently in London.)
• “Hans comes from Berlin.” (Fact: Hans is originally from Berlin.)
• “Mary has breakfast every morning.” (Habit)
661

Now let’s see how the form and meaning of the verbs change if we add the
auxiliary verb “be:”
• “I am living in London.” (Still a fact, but it now highlights that I am only
living in London temporarily—this wasn’t always the case, and it might
change in the future.)
• “Hans is coming from Berlin.” (Hans is currently travelling from Berlin.)
• “Mary is having breakfast.” (Mary is currently in the process of eating
breakfast.)
These are examples of the present continuous tense. As you can see, their
meaning is altered in comparison to those in the present simple tense. (To
learn more about this tense, please refer to the chapter section on Present
Continuous Tense.)
Present simple can also be used for future events that are fixed to happen,
such as in timetables. For example:
• “The train leaves at 7 PM.”
This is a fixed timetable where the present simple is used to indicate a future
event. We can also say: “We leave for Berlin tomorrow at 7 PM,” as the
speaker sees this as a fixed event similar to a timetable.
Normally we use stative verbs (also called state verbs) to express a fact.
Here are some examples of common stative verbs:
Like
Dislike
Love
Enjoy
Hate
Have
Know
Need
Want
Seem
Of course, some action verbs (also called dynamic verbs) used for habits
can also be seen as a state or general truth. For example:
• “I play tennis.” (State/fact/general truth)
662

• “I play tennis every week.” (Habit)
However, verbs with a stative meaning cannot be used to indicate habit. For
example:
✔ “I know John.” (correct – state/fact)
✖ “I know John every week.” (incorrect – can’t be expressed as a habit)
Some stative verbs can also function as action verbs in different contexts:
• “I enjoy soup.” (Stative verb—expresses a state/fact.)
• “I enjoy soup once in a while.” (Action verb—expresses a habit. “Enjoy” in
this sense means to actively consume.)
We also use the present simple with the zero conditional, which means
something is always true. For example:
• “If you drop an egg, it breaks.” (Any egg will break if it is dropped.)
Present simple can be used in a variety of sentence formations, such as
positive, negative, interrogative, and negative interrogative. We’ll
briefly explain each and provide examples with the present simple tense.
Positive sentences
Simply put, positive sentences indicate what is the case, as opposed to what
is not. In the present simple tense, they look like this:
• “I jog every day.”
• “He lives in Chicago.”
• “Dogs bark, while cats meow.” (Third-person plural.)
• “Janet writes songs for a living.”
Negative sentences
The opposite of a positive sentence, a negative sentence describes what is
not (or no longer) the case. We form these by adding the auxiliary verb do
(or does in the third-person singular) and the word not after the subject of
the sentence. These can also be contracted to don’t or doesn’t. For example:
• “I don’t jog every day.”
• “He doesn’t live in Chicago anymore.”
• “Dogs do not meow, and cats do not bark.”
663

• “Janet does not write many songs these days.”
Interrogative sentences
Interrogative sentences ask a question. They are marked by the question
mark punctuation (“?”) at the end instead of a period. Simple interrogative
questions also use the auxiliary verb do (or does in the third-person
singular), but before the subject instead of after. Generally speaking, it is
uncommon to use a first-person subject in an interrogative sentence in the
present simple.
• “Do you jog every day?”
• “Does he still live in Chicago?”
• “Do dogs bark, or do cats?” (The second “bark” is implied.)
• “Does Janet write songs anymore?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expects the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
We form these by adding the auxiliary verb do/does before the subject of the
sentence and the word not after the subject. Again, these can be contracted
to don’t or doesn’t; if they are, the contraction comes before the subject:
• “Do you not jog every day?”
• “Does he not still live in Chicago?”
• “Don’t dogs normally bark?”
• “Doesn’t Janet write songs for a living?”
Unlike the interrogative sentences, negative interrogative sentences are
much more likely to be used in the first-person, with do and not typically
contracted:
• “Don’t I look good in this dress?”
(For more information about different types of sentences, go to the chapter
about Sentences in the part of the guide on Syntax.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
664

1. Which of the following sentences is not in the present simple tense?
a) “I walk home each day.”
b) “He always reads good books.”
c) “She will talk to her mother at 5 o’clock.”
d) “I go jogging every morning.”
2. The following sentence is in present simple tense. What kind of sentence
is it?
“Does he not have a car of his own?”
a) Interrogative sentence.
b) Positive interrogative sentence.
c) Negative sentence.
d) Negative interrogative sentence.
3. What kind of verb (usually) cannot be used to indicate habit?
a) Stative verbs.
b) Action verbs.
c) Passive verbs.
d) Sense verbs.
4. Which of the following sentences is in the present simple tense?
a) “We are leaving tomorrow on the 10 AM bus.”
b) “We will leave tomorrow on the 10 AM bus.”
c) “We leave tomorrow on the 10 AM bus.”
d) “We are going to leave tomorrow on the 10 AM bus.”
Present 
Continuous 
Tense
(Progressive)
Definition
We create the present continuous tense by using the present participle (-
ing form) of the verb after the present-tense form of the auxiliary verb be.
Unlike the present simple tense, which is used to express things that are
always the case or are at a fixed time in the future, we use the present
665

continuous (also called the present progressive) tense to speak about
actions that are currently happening, whether generally or at the exact
moment of speech. It can also be used to describe actions or events that are
planned for the future (but are not definitively fixed in time, such as a
timetable).
Actions 
happening 
at 
the
moment of speech
The most common occurrence of the present continuous is when someone or
something is performing an action at the very moment being described. In
this case, the object of the verb is usually in the presence of or very near to
the speaker. For example:
• “I am going home now.”
• “He is crying because of the movie.”
• “We are heading to the park.”
• “It is raining outside.”
Actions happening currently, but
not at the moment of speech
The present continuous can also indicate something that is currently
happening but which is not at the exact moment of speech. It generally refers
to something that the person or thing is currently engaged in doing that is
taking place continuously over a longer period of time, but which is not
(necessarily) permanent. For example:
• “John is working in telemarketing.”
• “She is running for president.”
• “I am living in London.”
Actions or events planned for the
future
Like the present simple tense, the present continuous can also describe
666

future events. However, unlike the present simple, it describes that which
someone is planning or expecting to do, as opposed to that which is at a
fixed point in time in the future. The formation of the verb does not change
to reflect this; rather, information from the rest of the sentence informs the
future intention.
• “She is running for president next year.”
• “I am taking my driving test after the Christmas break.”
• “We are watching a movie later.”
With adverbs
We can also add adverbs relating to time between be and the present
participle to specify or clarify when or how frequently something happens or
occurs.
• “I am already leaving.” (I am leaving sooner than I expected.)
• “She is still living next door.” (She continues to live next door, perhaps
longer than was expected.)
The adverb always
There is also a special usage when the adverb always is used between be and
the present participle. Rather than literally meaning that the action always
happens (as you might expect), it instead means that that action very often
happens. We use this as a means of adding hyperbolic emphasis to how
frequently something happens or occurs, and it usually implies that the
action or event is questionable or undesirable to some degree. For example:
• “My husband is always leaving dirty dishes in the sink!”
• “The used car I bought is always breaking down.”
• “You are always losing your phone!”
Negative sentences
A negative sentence in the present continuous describes what is not
currently happening. We form these by adding the word not after the
auxiliary verb be. For second-person, third-person, and first-person plural
(but not first-person singular), be and not can also be contracted.
For example:
667

• “I am not watching the movie.”
• “He is not crying.”
• “You aren’t leaving until the house is clean.”
• “She isn’t going home for Thanksgiving this year.”
✖ “I amn’t reading that anymore.” (incorrect)
Not can also be replaced with the adverbial phrase no longer to indicate
that someone or something was doing something, but that is not the case
now. For instance:
• “She is no longer living in New York.”
Interrogative sentences
Interrogative (question) sentences in the present continuous tense are
formed by reversing the verb be and the subject. If adverbs are used to clarify
or specify the time, they come before the main verb or at the end of the
sentence.
• “Is she sleeping?”
• “Are you seeing this?”
• “Are they going home already?”
• “Is it still raining outside?”
The present continuous can also be used with the question words who,
what, where when, why, and how:
• “When is she taking the exam?”
• “What are you watching?”
• “Why is he leaving?”
• “Who’s talking?”
• “How are they getting to the station?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expects (or expected) something to be the case. They can be used to
express surprise if something is no longer happening.
We form these by inverting be and the subject, and then adding the word not
668

after the subject. Again, be and not can be contracted; if they are, the
contraction comes before the subject. This can serve to make the sentence
sound less formal and stuffy. And adverbs can still be used to specify or
clarify time. For example:
• “Is she not painting anymore?”
• “You want to play outside? Isn’t it raining?
• “Wait, aren’t they still dating?
Like the negative sentence, no longer can be used instead of not. Just note
that you do not use other adverbs in this case:
• Are Tim and John no longer living together?
• Is it no longer raining outside?
Negative interrogative sentences in the present continuous can also be used
with the question words why and how. Again, it expresses the speaker’s
surprise (and sometimes dismay) that something is not the case:
• “Why is she not leaving today?”
• “How are you not watching the match on TV?”
• “Why are we not abandoning this foolish enterprise?”
• “It’s the middle of December. How is it not snowing yet?”
(For more information about different types of sentences, go to the chapter
on Sentences in the part of the guide on Syntax.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which auxiliary verb is used in the present continuous tense?
a) Do
b) Will
c) Be
d) May
2. Which of the following sentences is in the present continuous tense?
a) “She will walk home alone.”
b) “She walks home alone.”
c) “She has walked home alone.”
d) “She is walking home alone.”
669

 
3. In the present continuous tense, which question word or words can be
used in negative interrogative sentences?
a) Who
b) Where
c) Why
d) How
e) A & B
f) B & D
g) C & D
h) All of the above
i) None of the above
4. In which grammatical person (first person, second person, third person) is
it not correct to contract “be” with “not”?
a) First-person singular
b) First-person plural
c) Second person
d) Third-person singular
e) Third-person plural
5. What kind of action is the following sentence describing?
“My brother William is always talking about his great political ambitions.”
a) An action happening at the moment of speech.
b) An action or event planned for the future.
c) An action happening currently, but not at the exact moment of speech.
d) An action that happens very often, especially something questionable or
undesirable.
6. Which of the following questions is not in the present continuous tense?
a) “Is she still living in San Francisco?”
b) “Will we be seeing you tonight?”
c) “Aren’t we meeting them later?”
d) “Sorry, John is working right now.”
Present Perfect Tense
670

Definition
The present perfect tense (sometimes referred to as the present perfect
simple tense) is formed by using the present tense of the auxiliary verb
have (or has, if used with third-person singular pronouns) along with the
past participle of the “main” verb. Despite its name, the present perfect is
used to give general information about something that happened in the past
(anytime “before now”), but which did not occur at a definitive point in time.
For example:
• “I have seen that movie already.”
• “She has been to Prague.”
• “They’ve decided where they want to go for their honeymoon.”
• “John’s lied to us too many times.”
Present Perfect vs. Past Simple
The present perfect tells us about something that occurred at some indefinite
period in the past. However, if something happened at a specific point in
time in the past (“last night,” “two years ago,” “yesterday,” etc.), then we
must use the past simple tense.
For example:
✖ “I have seen Titanic on TV last night.” (incorrect)
✔ “I saw Titanic on TV last night.” (correct)
✖ “She’s been to Prague when she was a little girl.” (incorrect)
✔ “She went to Prague when she was a little girl.” (correct)
If the focus moves to when, then we cannot use the present perfect anymore
because the attention shifts to that particular point in time.
When we say “I have seen Titanic,” we are giving general information about
something that happened anytime “before now.” The focus is on the fact that
“I saw Titanic” and not on when I saw it.
The same applies to the second example from above:
• Present perfect: “She’s been to Prague.” (Generally, at some point in her
lifetime.)
• Past simple: “She went to Prague when she was a little girl.” (We say
when because the exact point in time is specified.)
671

True in the past and still true
now
In English, we use the present perfect simple with the prepositions for and
since when we speak about something that started in the past and is still true
now. For is used to specify the duration of time leading up to the present;
since clarifies the point in time at which something began. Let’s look at some
examples:
• “I can’t believe Jenny has lived in Dubai for 10 years!”
• “He’s had that car since he was in high school.”
• “We’ve known each other (for) our whole lives, but we’ve only been
friends since 2006.”
Even though a point in time is being specified in these cases, we still use the
present perfect because the information in the sentence is still true now.
The “for” and “since” join the past situation to a present one. If we were to
use the past simple tense for any of the above, “for” would change to mean
the duration of the event before it finished, and we would be unable to use
“since” at all:
• “I can’t believe Jenny lived in Dubai for 10 years!” (Jenny no longer lives in
Dubai.)
• “He had that car in high school.” (He owned it then, but does not now.)
• “We knew each other for our whole lives, but we only became friends in
2006.” (The two people are no longer acquainted; perhaps the other person
is no longer living.)
Present 
Perfect 
vs. 
Present
Perfect Continuous Tense
There is another, very similar tense that is used to talk about something that
has been happening in the past and which is still happening now. It is called
the present perfect continuous (or progressive) tense, and it is used to
emphasize the action of the sentence (as opposed to the result).
It is formed by using have/has along with been (the past participle of be) and
the present participle of the main verb. For example:
672

• “I have been writing many letters.” (This emphasizes the action of
writing, in which the speaker is still engaged.)
This is slightly different from “I have written many letters” (present perfect),
which emphasizes the result of many letters having been completed.
In some cases, either the present perfect or present perfect continuous can
be used with almost no difference to the meaning of the sentence:
• “I can’t believe Jenny has lived in Dubai for 10 years!” (present perfect)
• “I can’t believe Jenny has been living in Dubai for 10 years!” (present
perfect continuous)
However, though quite similar to present perfect simple, the usages of
present perfect continuous can be a bit different. See the chapter section
Present Perfect Continuous Tense to learn more.
Before now or not long ago
Let’s compare “I lost my keys” with “I’ve lost my keys.”
Taken on its own, the first sentence is less correct because we are expecting
the speaker to say when he or she lost the keys; for example, “I lost my keys
yesterday.”
“I lost my keys” can be correct on its own, but only if it answers a question.
For example:
• A: “Why are you late?”
• B: “(Because) I lost my keys.”
Otherwise, if there is no question or no specification of time, we say: “I’ve
lost my keys.” This carries the meaning that the keys were lost just before
now or not long ago.
Let’s take a look at another example:
• A: “Would you like a coffee?”
• B: “No, thanks, I’ve had one.”
This refers to not long ago. We don’t say when because the time is not
important—we understand that the person had the coffee a short while ago.
Again, if the time is being specified, then you have to put the sentence in
past simple tense (i.e., “No, thanks, I had one an hour ago”).
Here are some more examples:
673

• “I’m not hungry, I’ve had lunch.”
• “He’s taken the dog to the park.”
• “She has left the kids with her sister.”
Remember, when the time becomes more important than the fact or the
event, we need to use the past simple tense:
• Present perfect: “I’ve had lunch.” (Meaning just now or not long ago.)
• Past simple: “I had lunch at 12 o’clock.” (Referring to exactly when the
speaker had lunch.)
It is incorrect to say: “I’ve had lunch at 12 o’clock.”
Negative sentences
You can also make the present perfect negative by simply adding not (or, in
certain uses, never) between have/has and the main verb:
• “I have never seen Titanic.”
• “I’m so hungry; I haven’t had lunch yet!”
• “He has not been home since he finished high school.”
• “I regret that we’ve never traveled to Paris.”
Interrogative sentences
If an interrogative (question) sentence is in the present perfect tense, the
subject and the auxiliary verb have are inverted. For example:
• “Have you seen this movie?”
• “Has she heard any news?”
• “Have they started the movie yet?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expected the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
Negative interrogative sentences in the present perfect have the same form,
simply with the negative word (usually not, but also never) placed after the
subject.
• “Have you never seen this movie?”
674

• “Has she not heard any news?”
Not can also come after have/has, but it is almost always contracted:
• “Haven’t they started the movie yet?”
• “Hasn’t his license expired?”
However, never cannot be used in this way.
With a question word
Interrogative sentences using question words (who, what, where, when,
why, which, and how) maintain the same structure. Have/has can also be
contracted with the question word:
• “When have you been to Italy?”
• “Where has she gone?”
• “What’ve they done?”
They can also be negative, but then they are straightforward questions of
who, what, where, when, why, which, or how something is not the case:
• “Which book have you not read?”
• “Why haven’t you eaten your dinner yet?”
have got and has got
There is one tricky phrase that defies the normal form: have/has got. We
would expect it to be in the present perfect, because it is in the form
have/has plus the past participle of get. However, even though it is in the
present perfect tense in form, in meaning, have got is actually in the present
tense. It is used to indicate possession, in nearly the same manner as the
verb have (especially in more informal speech or writing); got simply adds a
certain level of emphasis to the possession.
For example, the following pairs of sentences mean almost exactly the same
thing.
• “I have got three classes on Monday.”
• “I have three classes on Monday.”
• “I hear she’s got lots of money.”
• “I hear she has lots of money.”
• “You’ve got a lot of nerve coming here.”
675

• “You have a lot of nerve coming here.”
However, we can never use have got interchangeably with have when it is
used to describe an action. For example:
✔ “I have breakfast every morning.” (correct)
✖ “I’ve got breakfast every morning.” (incorrect)
To create the past perfect meaning of get, we use its other past participle
—gotten. We use this form to describe a process, such as receipt or
acquisition, or some other action. For example:
• “I have gotten word that my father is ill.”
• “He’s gotten a lot of positive feedback about his play.”
• “Those dang kids have gotten a Frisbee stuck in our tree again.”
Note, however, that have/has gotten is not used to describe possession:
• “I hear she has gotten lots of money.” (Implies acquisition or receipt of
lots of money, rather than outright possession.)
Gotten is almost exclusively used in American English. It very rarely used in
British English, where have got is sometimes used as the past perfect
(informally). One such example is:
• “You’ve got taller.” (British English)
• “You’ve gotten taller.” (American English)
Regardless, have/has got and have/has gotten, though correct, are often
seen as being less formal or professional sounding, so depending on what
you’re writing, you may be better off rewording the sentence to avoid the
phrases altogether.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following sentences uses the present perfect tense?
a) “I worked in the factory for a few months before I quit.”
b) “She has been living with her father until recently.”
c) “I hear he has left his wife.”
d) “I had written to her years ago, but I never expected a response.”
2. Which preposition is used with the present perfect to talk about something
that was true in the past and is still true now?
676

a) For
b) In
c) At
d) Since
e) A & B
f) A & D
g) B & D
3. When is the present perfect not used?
a) For something that happened just before now.
b) For something that happened at a specific point in time in the past.
c) For something that was true in the past and is still true now.
d) For something that happened at some general time in the past.
4. Which auxiliary verb is used to form the present perfect tense?
a) Have
b) Be
c) Can
d) Do
Present 
Perfect 
Continuous
Tense
Definition
The present perfect continuous tense (sometimes called the present
perfect progressive tense) is formed by using the present tense of the
auxiliary verb have (or has, if used with third-person singular pronouns)
along with been (the past participle of the auxiliary verb be) and the present
participle (-ing form) of the “main” verb. For example:
• “I have been living in New York City.”
The present perfect continuous is very close in meaning to how we use the
present perfect tense. However, there are some key differences that
distinguish when and how the present perfect continuous is preferable.
Generally, we use the present perfect continuous to talk about that which
began in the past and is still happening in the present; the focus is on
677

something that continues to happen, as opposed to something which
happened (finished) sometime in the past. We can also use the present
perfect continuous to emphasize the length of time that has passed while
something is happening, or that something is only temporary. We can also
use it to talk about something that has been happening lately or only finished
very recently.
That which began in the past and
continues in the present
The present perfect continuous is often used to talk about something that
began happening in the past (anytime “before now”) and which is still
happening (unfinished) in the present. We usually specify the duration of
time involved, especially using the prepositions “for” or “since.” Sometimes
we can use different adverbials; sometimes we don’t have to specify the
duration at all. For example:
• “I have been living in New York City.”
• “I have been living in New York City for three years.”
• “I have been living in New York City since I was 18.”
• “I have been living in New York City all my life.”
In each of the above examples, it is understood implicitly that the speaker
still lives in New York City; the only thing that changes is the duration of
time. In this usage, the present perfect continuous is nearly identical in
meaning to the present perfect tense, and, indeed, most of these examples
would make perfect sense either way:
• “I have lived in New York City for three years.”
• “I have lived in New York City since I was 18.”
• “I have lived in New York City all my life.”
The only sentence that changes in meaning is the very first example: to say “I
have lived in New York City” without any further elaboration gives the
impression that the speaker used to live there, but no longer does.
This distinction between something being completed as opposed to still
happening is important, because it highlights when you might choose to use
the present perfect continuous instead of the present perfect simple in
certain instances.
678

Let’s look at the very first example again, but this time using a different
adverbial:
✔ “I have been living in New York City while I finish my Ph.D.” (correct)
✖ “I have lived in New York City while I finish my Ph.D.” (incorrect)
We can see that this sentence does not make sense at all in the present
perfect simple tense, because the adverbial “while I finish my Ph.D.” requires
the action to still be taking place. In cases like this, we must use the present
perfect continuous tense to get across the meaning correctly.
This distinction can also be particularly useful when we are giving a response
to someone:
• Person A: “Let's take the longer trail when we're hiking back down.”
• Person B: “But we have walked for three hours!” (present perfect)
• Person B: “But we have been walking for three hours!” (present perfect
continuous)
We can see that the response is more appropriate in the present perfect
continuous, because it lays emphasis on the continuous action of walking. It
also puts emphasis on the amount of time that the speaker has been doing
something.
Emphasizing length of time
The present perfect continuous is especially useful for putting emphasis on
the length of time that has passed while something is happening. This is
particularly true when the meaning of the sentence could otherwise be
expressed in the present perfect simple. Here are some examples:
• “They have studied for three weeks for this exam.” (present perfect) 
• “They have been studying for three weeks for this exam.” (present
perfect continuous)
• “The girl has worked for five hours.” (present perfect) 
• “The girl has been working for five hours.” (present perfect
continuous)
The difference between these is slight, but noticeable. In both sets of
examples, the present perfect continuous puts the emphasis on how long the
action has taken, as well as the fact that it is still happening. The present
679

perfect is simply reporting the completed result and how long it took.
Let’s look at another example:
• “He has talked on the phone for almost an hour.”
• “He has been talking on the phone for almost an hour.”
The first sentence is merely reporting how long the person was talking. With
the present perfect continuous, the focus naturally shifts to the fact that an
hour is a rather long period of time—and that he might continue talking for
even longer!
That 
which 
is 
happening
temporarily
Another subtle difference between the two tenses is that the present perfect
is better at indicating that something is permanent, while the present perfect
continuous is better at suggesting something is only temporary. For example:
• “I have worked in the shop for three years.”
• “I have been working in the shop for three years.”
The first sentence simply reports the length of time the speaker has been
working in the shop. It does not suggest that he or she intends to stop
working there at any point. The second sentence, however, makes the
situation sound much less permanent. We can see the difference more
clearly if we add a bit more information:
• “I have worked in the shop for three years, but I hope to find something
else soon.”
• “I have been working in the shop for three years, but I hope to find
something else soon.”
The first sentence sounds less natural than the second, because the new
information specifically relates to the situation being a temporary one. In this
case, the present perfect continuous is preferable.
That which has been happening
lately or finished very recently
The present perfect continuous can also be used to express that which has
680

been happening lately, but is not necessarily happening at the present
moment in time. For example:
• “Bill has been coming into work late a lot.”
• “Don't you think Mary has been spending too much time on the
computer lately?”
It can also be used without an adverbial to indicate that something was
happening until only recently:
• “My neighbors are angry because my dog has been barking.”
• “Sorry I'm so sweaty! I’ve been exercising all morning.”
The action is not taking place at the exact moment of speech (in which case
we would just use the present simple tense), but we can infer that it had
been happening until very recently.
Negative sentences
Present perfect continuous sentences can be made negative by using the
word not. It appears after have/has, and the two can be (and very often are)
contracted.
• “I have not been writing much recently.”
• “She hasn't been trying to find work since her divorce.”
• “I need to get up earlier, because I haven't been making it to work on
time lately.”
We generally do not use never with the present perfect continuous.
Interrogative sentences
Like the present perfect tense, an interrogative (question) sentence in the
present perfect continuous has the subject and the auxiliary verb have
inverted. For example:
• “Where have you been living lately?”
• “Has she been feeling OK?”
• “Why have you been lying to me?”
We can also make negative interrogative sentences in the present perfect
continuous by adding not between the subject and been. We can also
contract have/has and not:
681

• “Haven't you been writing a new book?”
• “Has she not been feeling well?”
• “Why haven't they been working on their homework?”
As we see in the first example, the meaning of the question can become
rhetorical, implying that the speaker expected the answer to be “yes.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. The past participle of which auxiliary verb is used to form the present
perfect continuous tense?
a) Have
b) Be
c) Can
d) Do
 
2. The main verb of the present continuous tense is in what form?
a) Present participle
b) Past participle
c) Continuous participle
d) Future participle
 
3. Which of the following is something the present perfect continuous tense
can be used for? (Choose the answer that is most correct.)
a) Talking about something that is always the case.
b) Talking about something that finished sometime in the past.
c) Talking about something that began in the past and is still happening.
d) Talking about something that is happening right now.
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses the present perfect continuous
tense?
a) “I am writing to my sister in New England.”
b) “She has spoken to her boss in the hopes of getting a raise.”
c) “The train usually arrives at 3 PM, but it was late yesterday.”
d) “I have been leaving earlier than usual this week.”
e) “He hasn't seen the results of the test yet.”
682

Past Tense
Definition
The past tense is used to describe or indicate an action that began in the
past. Depending on how we form the past tense, it might describe actions
that happened or were completed in the past, were occurring at the same
time as something else in the past, or continued to happen until or near the
present time.
There are four forms of the past tense that can accomplish these tasks. We
will give a brief summary of each below. To learn more about each of them,
you can go to the appropriate section.
Past Simple Tense
The past simple tense (also called the simple past tense, or simply the
past simple) is used to express completed actions. It is known as the past
simple because it does not require any auxiliary verbs to complete its
meaning; its structure is simply the past-tense form of the verb. The past
simple tense only uses the auxiliary verb did when it is used in a question
or becomes negative.
Examples
• “I went to the park yesterday.”
• “I did not eat the cookie.”
• “I called my sister over an hour ago, but she didn’t call back.”
• “Did they mow the lawn yet?”
• “What did you wear last night?"
Past Continuous Tense
Also called the past progressive, the past continuous tense, is used to
describe something that was in progress at a certain moment in the past and
either finished in the past or continued until the present moment.
It is called the past continuous because it uses the past tense of the auxiliary
verb be (was or were) followed by the present participle of the main verb
683

(which is used to describe an action that is or was continuously happening).
Examples
• “We were working on our assignment when our parents came home.”
• “The phone rang as they were leaving.”
• “She was still writing her thesis at 2 o’clock in the morning.”
• “My roommates were fighting all the time, so I decided to move out.”
• “His memory was fading as he got older.”
• “Sorry I’m so muddy; I was working in the garden.”
Past Perfect Tense
The past perfect tense expresses the idea that something occurred before
another action in the past. It can also show that something happened before
a specific time in the past. To form the past perfect, we use had (the past
tense of the auxiliary verb have) + the past participle of the main verb.
Because we use the past perfect to highlight two separate points in the past,
we often use the conjunctions before, when, because, until, or by the time to
specify the order in which they occurred in time.
Examples:
• “The film had already ended when I switched on the TV.”
• “Unfortunately, he had left his keys in the house when he left.”
• “The construction had been going quite smoothly before the earthquake.”
• “I hadn’t dreamed of living in Ireland before I visited the country.”
• “Had you ever ridden on a tractor before working on the farm?”
• “What had you done that forced you to move abroad?”
Past Perfect Continuous Tense
The past perfect continuous tense (also called the past perfect
progressive tense) is used to describe an action that began and was still in
progress in the past before another past action started.
We usually use the present perfect continuous tense to emphasize the
684

duration of the past action before the second action or event occurred. We
can also use it to talk about a past action that caused or resulted in a past
event or situation.
To form the past perfect continuous, we use had been + the present
participle of the main verb.
Examples
• “We had been waiting for a long time before the bus finally came.”
• “I had been working on the ranch for more than half my life when I
retired.”
• “I’d been cleaning all day, so I was too tired to go out last night.”
• “She had been traveling around Europe when she heard about her
mother’s illness.”
• “He hadn’t been feeling well, so he went to lay down.”
• “I was covered in mud as I’d been digging in the back yard.”
• “He needed to study harder, because he hadn’t been doing very well on
his exams.”
• “Where had you been staying at the time of the incident?”
The Subjunctive Mood
So far, we’ve seen examples of the past tense being used to describe what did
or did not actually happen. This is known as the Indicative Mood.
However, we can also use the past tense to describe hypothetical scenarios,
conditions, and desires—this is known as the subjunctive mood, one of the
Irrealis Moods in English.
Expressing Wishes
We generally use one of the past tenses to describe a wish or desire for a
hypothetical alternative, even if it is for something in the present or the
future.
For example:
• “I wish it weren’t Monday.”
• “I wish I hadn’t agreed to work on Sunday.”
685

• “We both wish you weren’t moving to Europe for college.”
Conditional Sentences
We can also use the different past tenses to create conditional sentences,
which describe possible (but unreal) outcomes based on hypothetical
conditions. For example:
• “If I won the lottery, I would buy a new house.”
• “If you were older, you could stay up as late as you want.”
• “If I didn’t live in London, I could never speak English so well.”
• “If she had been there, she could have helped you.”
• “What might you have done had you known the truth?”
• “Had you been listening, you would have heard that the report was
needed on Monday.”
• “I might have lost my job if my brother hadn’t been working in the head
office at the time.”
Go to the sections related to the subjunctive mood if you want to learn
more about using the past tense to describe hypothetical actions, events, and
situations.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following cannot be described by one of the past tenses?
a) An action that began in the past and will continue into the future
b) An action in the past that was interrupted by another past action
c) An action that began and ended in the past
d) Things that began in the past and continued until the present moment
e) A & D
f) None of the above
2. Which form of the past tense is used to indicate the cause of a past result?
a) Past simple tense
b) Past continuous tense
c) Past perfect tense
d) Past perfect continuous tense
686

3. Which of the following sentences uses one of the past tenses?
a) “I regret to inform you that I shall be submitting my resignation soon.”
b) “They’ve been trying to get a loan.”
c) “She had been spending some time with her father.”
d) “He’ll have been working in this factory for nearly 30 years next March.”
4. Which form of the past tense does the following sentence use?
"I hadn’t considered her as a possible candidate for the job."
a) Past simple tense
b) Past continuous tense
c) Past perfect tense
d) Past perfect continuous tense
5. When do we use the past tense to describe a wish or desire?
a) For things happening in the past
b) For things happening in the present
c) For things happening in the future
d) All of the above
687

Past Simple Tense
Definition
The past simple tense (also called the simple past tense, or simply the
past simple) is used to express completed actions. We often use the past
simple with an adverb or adverbial phrase that specifies a time from the past,
such as yesterday, last year, an hour ago, etc.
Structure
This tense is known as the past simple because, like the present simple
tense, it does not require any auxiliary verbs to complete its meaning; its
structure is simply the subject + the past tense form of the verb.
For example:
• “I went to the park.”
The speaker’s action of going to the park has been completed. The verb go is
therefore put in the simple past tense, went.
However, we do not know anything about when the action was completed.
We often add adverbs or adverbial phrases that provide additional
information about past time, which can be placed at the beginning or end of
the sentence. If appearing at the beginning of the sentence, these adverbs are
often set apart by commas (although this is not necessary if the information
is only one or two words). However, this information can’t come between the
subject and the verb, and it usually does not come between the verb and any
information that is necessary to complete the verb’s meaning (such as its
direct object or an adverbial complement). For example:
✔ “I went to the park yesterday.” (correct)
✔ “Yesterday I went to the park.” (correct)
✔ “Yesterday, I went to the park.” (correct)
✖ “I yesterday went to the park.” (incorrect)
✖ “I went yesterday to the park.” (incorrect)
In more stylized writing, however, adverbials relating to time will sometimes
come between a verb and its complement, which gives them extra emphasis
in the sentence. For example:
• “I wrote over an hour ago to my sister, but have yet to hear a reply.”
688

Notice that the tone becomes much more formal and the sentence sounds a
bit more convoluted. In most cases, it is best to avoid this structure.
Types of sentences
Positive (affirmative) sentences
The types of past simple tense sentences we’ve looked at so far have all been
examples of positive sentences, also known as affirmative sentences.
These tell the reader what did happen. We can also create negative,
interrogative, and negative interrogative sentences in the past simple tense;
however, the structure of the sentence changes slightly in each case.
Negative sentences
In contrast to positive sentences, negative sentences in past simple tense tell
the reader what did not happen. To form negative sentences in the past
simple tense, we must use the auxiliary verb did (the past tense of do)
together with not before the main verb of the sentence. The main verb,
meanwhile, goes back to present simple tense, which is the infinitive form of
the verb without to. For example:
• “I did not eat the cookie.”
• “She didn’t enjoy the movie.”
• “He didn’t have to leave so early.”
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
Like negative sentences, we have to use the auxiliary verb did to make
interrogative sentences (sentences that ask questions) in the past simple
tense. In this case, however, did comes before the subject, rather than the
verb.
We can see this construction more clearly if we compare affirmative vs.
interrogative constructions:
• Affirmative: “I went to the park.”
• Interrogative: “Did you go to the park?”
689

• Affirmative: “Janet saw a great movie on Friday.”
• Interrogative: “Did Janet see a movie on Friday?”
• Affirmative: “They mowed the lawn already.”
• Interrogative: “Did they mow the lawn yet?”
With question words
We can also use question words (such as who/whom, what, where, etc.)
before did if we are asking for specific information. For example:
• “Who/whom did you see?”
• “What did you wear last night?"
• “When did they arrive?”
Additionally, we can use who without the auxiliary did in interrogative
sentences in the past simple tense. In this case, it is functioning as an
interrogative pronoun and acts as the subject of the sentence. Because
we no longer need did to complete the sentence’s meaning, we use the past
tense of the main verb once again.
• “Who went to the movie with you?”
• “Who left their wallet behind?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expects the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
We form these by adding the auxiliary verb did before the subject of the
sentence and the word not after the subject. Did and not are very often
contracted, in which case didn’t comes before the subject:
• “Didn’t you go to Europe last year?”
• “Did Jessie not try the cake we baked for her?”
• “Did I not tell you to clean your room an hour ago?”
• “Didn’t he say he was leaving in the morning?”
Other types of sentences
The types of sentences we’ve covered above are the most common uses of the
past simple tense. However, there are a couple of other ways we can use the
690

past simple to express specific meanings.
Emphatic did – the past emphatic
tense
There is another way that we can form a positive sentence in the past simple
tense. It is known as the past emphatic tense, and it is formed by using did
before the main verb, which is in present tense. It is the same construction
as negative sentences in the past simple tense, except that we leave out the
word not.
This form places special emphasis on the fact that something happened in
the past, which is usually used as a means of explanation or to convince
someone of something. For example:
• “But I’m telling you, I did clean my room when you asked me to!”
• “John was in a sorry state last night. I suppose he did have a lot to
drink.”
We can hear the emphasis that is placed on the word did in these sentences if
we read them aloud, and it is this stress that creates the explanatory
intonation in the text.
Using the past simple tense for
hypotheticals 
(the 
subjunctive
mood)
If we are expressing a wish or desire, we usually use the past tense; for a
present wish, we use the past simple.
For example:
• “I wish it weren’t/wasn’t Monday.”
• “I wish I didn’t have to go to work.”
This is an example of what’s called the subjunctive mood in English, which
is used for expressing things that are hypothetical or not objectively factual.
To learn more about how the past simple tense is used in this way, see the
section on subjunctive mood under the chapter on Mood.
691

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What do we primarily use the past simple tense for?
a) To express what will happen
b) To express what did happen
c) To express what did not happen
d) To express what should have happened
 
2. In which of the following types of sentences do we need the auxiliary verb
did to make the past simple tense?
a) Negative sentences
b) Interrogative sentences
c) Positive sentences
d) A & B
e) B & C
3. Select the sentence below that is correct:
a) “I knew where to go.”
b) “He didn’t studied hard enough.”
c) “But I did washed the dishes!”
d) “I wish it isn’t raining.”
 
4. Where does the auxiliary verb did appear in an interrogative sentence
that does not use question words?
a) Immediately before the main verb
b) Immediately after the main verb
c) Immediately before the subject
d) Immediately after the subject
5. Which of the following sentences is not in the past simple tense?
a) “He found a way of keeping possession of the house.”
b) “We didn’t travel to Rome after all.”
c) “Well, you can be sure that he does have a solution in mind.”
d) “Did he not know that we were coming?”
692

Past Continuous Tense
Definition
Also called the past progressive, the past continuous tense is used to
describe something that was in progress at a certain moment in the past.
It is called the past continuous because it uses the past tense of the auxiliary
verb be (was or were) followed by the present participle of the main verb
(which is used to describe an action that is or was continuously happening).
Structure
To form the past continuous, we order the sentence like this: subject +
was/were + present participle of main verb.
For example:
• “I was working.”
• “She was reading a book.”
These sentences are both complete, but they give very little information.
Often, the past continuous tense is used with additional information to
convey a more complete story about what surrounded a continuous action or
event.
Functions of the past continuous
There are a number of functions for which we use the past continuous tense
in speech and writing. Let’s look at some examples of these various
functions.
Before and after another action
or event happened
• “We were busy working on our assignment when our parents came
home.”
• “I was watching the lovely sunset as a flock of birds soared by.”
693

Interrupted by another action or
event
• “He was having the most wonderful time on the beach when the weather
suddenly turned awful.”
• “As they were leaving, the phone rang.”
Before and after a certain time
• “Two years ago, I was working at a bar in New York City.”
• “She was still up writing her thesis at 2 o’clock in the morning.”
For a certain length of time
(whether specific or undefined)
• “My head was throbbing.” (undefined length of time)
• “You were eating that sandwich for an hour!” (specific length of time)
Repeatedly and frequently
• “My parents were fighting all the time when I decided to leave.
• “I was often worrying we wouldn’t be able to afford the wedding in the
months leading up to it.”
A source of irritation
We can also indicate that things that happened repeatedly were a source of
irritation by using the adverbs of frequency always or constantly, as in:
• “My ex-husband was always leaving dirty dishes in the sink.”
• “The old boss was constantly berating employees over silly issues.”
To show development, growth, or
other change(s) over time
694

• “Things were changing; there was no denying that.”
• “I thought her condition was improving, but I guess not.”
• “His memory was fading as he got older.”
Narrating a story or describing
an atmosphere
• “As they walked into the sunshine, the birds were singing and the breeze
was softly blowing.”
• “I was working in a New York City bar when all of this took place.”
Sentence types
All of the examples above have used the past continuous in positive
sentences. As with the other tenses, we can use the past continuous in
negative, imperative, and negative imperative sentences, with slight changes
in structure as a result.
Negative sentences
To make a sentence negative in the past continuous, we simply add “not”
between the auxiliary verb (was/were) and the present participle of the main
verb. Not is often contracted with the auxiliary verb to make wasn’t/weren’t.
For example:
• “I was not feeling well.”
• “The kids weren’t sleeping when we got home.”
• “She wasn’t working for two years after the baby was born.”
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
To form an interrogative sentence (i.e., one that asks a question) in the past
continuous tense, simply invert the subject with the verb.
For example:
• Positive: “I was sleeping when you called.”
695

• Interrogative: “Were you sleeping when I called?”
• Positive: “They were watching a movie last night.”
• Interrogative: “Were you watching a movie last night?”
• Positive: “She was working on her thesis at the time.”
• Interrogative: “Was she working on her thesis at the time?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expects the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
We form these by adding the word not after the subject. Was/were and not
are very often contracted into wasn’t/weren’t, in which case they both come
before the subject:
• “Was she not looking for a new place to live?”
• “Weren’t you watching a movie last night?”
• “Wasn’t he keeping track of the inventory?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following auxiliary verbs is used to form the past
continuous tense?
a) can
b) do
c) be
d) will
 
2. What form of the main verb is used in the past continuous tense?
a) present participle
b) past participle
c) future participle
d) infinitive form
 
3. Which of the following sentences is in the past continuous tense?
a) “I had been watching a movie when they walked in.”
b) “He knew a lot of people who had seen the movie.”
c) “She was waiting to hear from her sister in New York.”
696

d) “I am certainly trying to find a solution.”
 
4. Which of the following sentences is not in the past continuous tense?
a) “I was always trying to find the best opportunities.”
b) “They left without saying goodbye.”
c) “Weren’t we looking for something just like this?”
d) “Sure, he’s doing his best, but is it good enough?”
Past Perfect Tense
Definition
The past perfect tense expresses the idea that something occurred before
another action in the past. It can also show that something happened before
a specific time in the past.
Consider these two sentences, for instance:
• “When she arrived at the airport, she realized she dropped her passport.”
• “When she arrived at the airport, she realized she had dropped her
passport.”
She arrived at the airport in a moment in the past, but the moment she
dropped her passport happened before this past moment. Because the first
sentence only uses the past simple tense, it sounds as if both moments
happened at the same time in the past, and the sentence becomes confusing.
By using the past perfect tense in the second sentence, we are able to
distinguish that one event happened earlier than the other.
Structure
To form the past perfect tense, we use had (the past tense of the auxiliary
verb have) + the past participle of the main verb.
Because we use the past perfect to highlight two separate points in the past,
we often use the conjunctions before, when, because, until, or by the time to
specify the order in which they occurred in time.
An 
action 
or 
event 
before
697

another action or event
If we are highlighting that the action or event in the past perfect tense
came before another action or event, this second verb is often (but not
always) in the past simple tense. For example:
• “When I turned on the TV, the film had ended.”
• “I had dreamed of living in Ireland even before I visited the country.”
• “She was sad when she left the house she had lived in for so many years.”
• “Unfortunately, he had not taken his keys before he left the house.”
Notice that the past perfect can appear in a sentence either before or after a
later action or event. Regardless of its position, the past perfect always refers
to an earlier time.
This is especially important to remember when using the conjunction when,
because 
it 
will 
help 
distinguish 
between 
events 
that 
happened
simultaneously in the past and events that happened sequentially. For
example, consider these two subtly (but distinctly) different sentences:
• “Mary cooked dinner when the kids came home.”
• “Mary had cooked dinner when the kids came home.”
In the first sentence, it sounds like Mary started cooking at the same time as
the kids arrived home. By using the past perfect in the second sentence, it is
made clear that Mary had already cooked dinner before the kids arrived.
Omitting the past perfect
The past perfect is not always necessary, however, when we use the
conjunctions before or after to link two clauses of past events. This is
because these two words already specify an order of time. If this is the case,
both verbs can be in the past simple tense. For example:
• “I packed a bag of snacks before I left for the airport.” (correct)
• “I had packed a bag of snacks before I left for the airport.” (correct, but
not necessary)
Although not absolutely necessary, the past perfect still gives a greater sense
of time than the past simple alone. The first sentence above is completely
correct and easy to understand. The second sentence is equally correct, but it
lets us know that the earlier event did not happen immediately before the
698

later one. In this particular example, it gives the impression that the speaker
had the foresight to pack a bag of snacks, rather than simply doing so just
before he or she left for the airport.
This distinction is subtle, and its impact on the sentence is somewhat minor,
but using the past perfect tense in this way creates a more rich and nuanced
meaning.
An action or event before a
specific point in time
If we are talking about a past perfect action that came before a certain point
in time in the past, then we use an adverbial prepositional phrase to specify
exactly when we are talking about.
For example:
• “Until that afternoon, she had never considered living abroad.”
• “The construction had gone quite smoothly before the earthquake.”
• “I had expected to be married by this morning.”
• “I hadn’t used a hammer before working in construction.”
(Note that, in the last example, “working in construction” acts as the object
of the preposition before. Working is a gerund in this case, so it does not
have to be in the past simple tense, as with the other verbs we examined in
the previous section.)
Other types of sentences
All of the above sentences are either positive sentences (also known as
affirmative sentences) or negative sentences—as we can see, the
negative sentences are formed by simply inserting not or never between had
and the past participle of the main verb.
However, there is another way we can construct negative sentences in the
past perfect. We’ll briefly look at how this is used, and then we’ll examine the
other types of sentences that can be made in the past perfect tense.
Negative sentences – alternative
699

construction
Most of the time, we make the past perfect negative by simply adding not or
never after the auxiliary verb had.
If we want to emphasize that something never happened before a given time,
event, or action in the past, we can also place the word never before the verb
had. In this case, both never and had come before the subject of the clause.
For instance:
• “Never had I felt so alive.”
• “Never had she imagined that love like this could exist.”
If we want to add even more emphasis, we can also include the word before
between never and had, as in:
• “Never before had she seemed so beautiful to him.”
Such sentences are much more literary in style—they typically would not be
found in academic, professional, or colloquial speech or writing. Because of
this literary usage, the construction is also primarily used with stative verbs
(e.g. feel, imagine, appear) as opposed to action verbs. For example, the
statement “never before had I run so far” sounds rather over-embellished or
hyperbolic.
Finally, you may have noticed that none of the above sentences include
another action, event, or point in time to which the past perfect is referring.
This again is due to the literary usage of such a construction. In such cases,
the past perfect often alludes to something that has already been mentioned
elsewhere in the narrative.
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
To form interrogative sentences (sentences that ask questions) in the past
perfect, the auxiliary verb had again comes before the subject, which is then
followed by the past participle of the main verb. Most of the time, we use the
word ever before the main verb to ask if something had happened or been
the case at any time before something else. It is usually constructed with the
conjunction or preposition before.
For example:
700

• “Had you ever been on a tractor before starting work on the farm?”
• “Before the war, had you ever considered living abroad?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expects the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
We form these by adding the word not or never after the subject.
Had and not are very often contracted, in which case hadn’t comes before
the subject.
Negative interrogative sentences in the past perfect are not very common in
everyday speech and writing. Like the alternative use of never that we looked
at above, it would be more common to hear them in a story or narrative. For
example:
• “I began to panic. It was nearly midnight. Hadn’t the train arrived yet?”
Negative interrogative sentences in the past perfect might also occur if
someone is asking another person a question about a story they are telling.
For example:
• Person A: “It was nearly midnight by the time I got home, with still more
work ahead of me.”
• Person B: “Hadn’t you at least gotten close to finishing by then?”
• Person A: “No, I was barely even halfway done!”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. We use the past tense of which auxiliary verb to form the past perfect?
a) be
b) will
c) have
d) do
 
2. Which of the following is not something we use the past perfect tense to
describe?
a) An action or event before a specific point in time
b) An action in the past that was happening until recently
701

c) An action or event before another action or event
d) A hypothetical situation in the past that might have led to a different
outcome
3. Which of the following types of sentences is more likely to be found in
literary writing when it is in the past perfect tense?
a) Negative interrogative
b) Conditional
c) Positive
d) Interrogative
4. Which of the following sentences is in the past perfect tense?
a) “I had been hitchhiking for miles before someone picked me up.”
b) “I have seen some weird things out here on the road.”
c) “Unfortunately, I hadn’t eaten before I left home that day.”
d) “I felt awful by the time I finally got home.”
5. Which of the following is not in the past perfect tense?
a) “Had she ever been in this bar before today?”
b) “He hadn’t seen her when he first came in.”
c) “Never before had he met someone so interesting.”
d) “He had a strong hope that they would meet again.”
Past Perfect Continuous Tense
Definition
The past perfect continuous tense (also called the past perfect
progressive tense) is used to describe an action that began and was still in
progress in the past before another past action started. In contrast to the
past perfect tense, which describes a past action that finished before the
second action started, the past perfect continuous emphasizes the
continuous progress of that action.
We usually use the present perfect continuous tense to emphasize the
duration of the past action before the second action or event occurred. We
can also use it to talk about a past action that caused or resulted in a past
event or situation.
702

To form the past perfect continuous, we use had been + the present
participle of the main verb. It is nearly identical in structure to the present
perfect continuous tense, except that the modal auxiliary verb have is
now in the past tense. For example:
• “We had been waiting for a long time when the bus finally came.”
• “My little sister had been sitting very quietly, but then she started to cry.”
• “I’d been cleaning all day, so I was too tired to go out last night.”
Like the past continuous tense, the past perfect continuous is generally
only used with action verbs, not stative verbs.
Using 
the 
Past 
Perfect
Continuous
Actions interrupted in the past
The most common use of the past perfect continuous tense is to describe an
action that was in progress in the past before another past action or event
occurred. When the second action happens, it interrupts and marks the
completion of the first one. For example:
• “I had been teaching English in Tokyo when the earthquake hit.”
• “They’d been living in New York before she got the job in Washington,
D.C.”
• “She had been traveling around Europe when she heard about her
mother’s illness.”
Past durations of time
When we use the past perfect continuous tense in this way, we often describe
the duration of the continuous past action. The meaning is very similar to
the present perfect continuous tense in this way. However, whereas the
present perfect continuous describes an action that was happening up until
the present moment, the past perfect continuous highlights an action that
was finished when another action or event in the past occurred. Consider, for
example, these two sentences:
• “She has been waiting for over an hour for him to arrive.” (present
703

perfect continuous tense)
• “She had been waiting for over an hour for him to arrive.” (past perfect
continuous tense)
The meaning of both sentences is quite similar. However, in the first
sentence, she began waiting an hour ago in the past, and is still waiting; in
the second sentence, she began waiting an hour ago in the past, but the
waiting was completed, either when he arrived or when she decided to stop
waiting.
Here are some other examples using the future perfect continuous tense:
• “I had been working on the ranch for more than half my life when I
retired.”
• “She had been studying Japanese for four years by the time she moved to
the country.”
• “When the teacher came back, we had been reading for half an hour.”
Cause of past results
We can also use the past perfect continuous to indicate that the continuous
action that finished in the past was the cause of a condition, situation, or
event in the past. Used in this way, the past continuous action was not
interrupted by a second action or event. For example:
• “She was very sweaty because she had been running for nearly an hour.”
• “I didn’t have any energy to play with the kids because I had been
working so hard all the week.”
• “I could tell you had been swimming all morning because you looked like
a prune!”
We can also use the past perfect continuous in this way without an
expression of duration, as in:
• “He had been feeling unwell, so he went to lay down.”
• “I was covered in mud as I had been digging in the back yard.”
Past continuous vs. Past perfect
continuous
We can use the past continuous tense in a similar way to show causation,
704

but the difference is that the past continuous describes an action that
finished just now or very recently, while the past perfect continuous
describes an action that may have finished further in the past. For example:
• “My eyes were tired because I was working on the computer.” (past
continuous)
The action finished just now or very recently.
• “My eyes were tired because I had been working on the computer.” (past
perfect continuous)
The action likely finished at a point further in the past.
With action verbs
Because it describes continuous, dynamic action, the past perfect continuous
can only be used with action verbs; it cannot be used with stative verbs
(such as linking verbs or verbs of the senses), which describe non-
continuous actions. For stative verbs, we can only use the past simple or
past perfect tenses. For example:
✔ “We were married for 10 years before we had kids.” (correct—past simple
tense)
✔ “We had been married for 10 years before we had kids.” (correct—past
perfect tense)
✖ “We had been being married for 10 years before we had kids.” (incorrect
—past perfect continuous tense)
✔ “By the next morning, it all seemed like just a bad dream.” (correct—past
simple tense)
✔ “By the next morning, it all had seemed like just a bad dream.” (correct
—past perfect tense)
✖ “By the next morning, it all had been seeming like just a bad dream.”
(incorrect—past perfect continuous tense)
Other types of sentences
So far we’ve only looked at affirmative sentences—declarative sentences
that describe an action that did happen. Let’s look at some of the other types
of sentences we can make with the past perfect continuous.
Negative sentences
705

Sentences in the past perfect continuous tense can be made negative by
using the word not after had; the two words are often contracted into hadn’t.
For example:
• “I didn’t mind her coming over; I hadn’t been getting much work done
anyway.”
• “She hadn’t been living there for very long before she had to move back
home.”
• “He needed to study harder, because he hadn’t been doing very well on
his exams.”
We generally do not use never with the past perfect continuous tense.
Interrogative sentences
When we make questions with the past perfect continuous tense, the subject
and the auxiliary verb had are inverted. For example:
• “Where had you been working at the time of the incident?”
• “Had she been living in Italy for a long time?”
• “Why had they been telling me I was doing a good job if they were
planning on firing me?”
We can also make interrogative sentences negative by adding not between
the subject and been, or we can contract had and not into hadn’t:
• "Hadn't you been writing a novel before you got this job?"
• "Had he not been feeling well at the time?
• "You had plenty of money, so why hadn’t you been paying your bills?”
As we see in the first example, a negative interrogative question can
sometimes be used rhetorically, implying that the speaker expects the
answer to be “yes.”
Conditional sentences
Conditional sentences describe a hypothetical action or outcome that
might happen if a certain condition is or was met. Conditional sentences that
use the past perfect continuous tense are known as third conditionals,
which establish a hypothetical situation in the past followed by a
hypothetical outcome that did not really happen.
706

There are two ways we can use the past perfect continuous to form
conditional sentences. We can either use the normal form in a conditional
clause that begins with if, or we can invert had with the subject to create a
conditional clause, which adds a bit more formality to the tone of the
sentence.
For example:
• “If I had still been living there when the earthquake hit, I probably
would have lost everything I owned.”
• “We would have gone hiking on Saturday if it hadn’t been snowing in the
mountains.”
• “Had you been listening, you would have heard that the report was
needed on Monday.”
• “I could have lost my job had my brother not been working in the head
office at the time.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What form of the main verb is used to create the past perfect continuous
tense?
a) infinitive
b) base form
c) present participle
d) past participle
 
2. Which of the following is a function of the past perfect continuous tense?
a) To describe how long something had been happening by a specific point in
the past
b) To indicate the cause of a past result
d) To indicate a continuous action that began in the past and continues into
the future
d) To indicate a continuous action that finished in the present
e) A & B
f) B & C
g) C & D
 
3. Where does not appear in a negative sentence in the past perfect
707

continuous tense?
a) After the subject
b) After had
c) After been
d) After the present participle of the main verb
4. Which of the following uses the past perfect continuous tense to form a
conditional sentence?
a) “Had you been waiting for long before your brother arrived?”
b) “I hadn’t been studying for more than an hour when they closed the
library.”
c) “Had we been digging just a few feet from here, we would have hit a gas
line.”
d) “He had been living in Rome for eight years, so he spoke perfect Italian.”
5. Which of the following types of verbs cannot be used in the past perfect
continuous tense?
a) action verbs
b) stative verbs
c) factitive verbs
d) conditional verbs
e) A & B
f) B & C
g) C & D
Future Tense (Approximation)
Definition
Grammatically speaking, there are no future tenses in the English
language; verbs do not inflect (conjugate) a certain way to reflect future
actions. There are really only aspects of the future tense—that is, ways of
expressing the future using other grammatical elements and constructions.
To talk about other future events or actions, we use different sentence
constructions to achieve a future point of view. This is most often
accomplished by using the modal auxiliary verb will or the verb phrase be
going to. These constructions make up what are commonly referred to as the
708

future tenses.
Future Simple Tense
The future simple tense is used in a few different ways to describe things that
have not happened yet—it can be used to predict something, to make
promises, to describe a future fact, to describe unplanned actions, or to offer
to do something.
The simplest way we create the future simple tense is by using will/be going
to + the base form (the infinitive without to) of the main verb of the
sentence. For example:
• “I will walk to work.”
• “The president will be in Portland tomorrow.”
• “Don’t worry, I’m going to pay for the coffee.”
• “I am going to drive to work tomorrow, if you want a ride.”
Future Continuous Tense
The future continuous tense (also known as the future progressive) is
used to describe an unfinished action occurring in the future; this action can
either begin in the future, or it can already be in progress in the present and
continue into the future. We can also use the future continuous tense to
make predictions about an action we think will still be happening in the
future.
To form the future continuous, we usually use will/be going to + the
auxiliary verb be + the present participle of the main verb. For example:
• “I will be running 10 miles tomorrow.”
• “This is your captain speaking; the plane will be landing in 10 minutes.”
• “We are going to be buying our own house soon.”
• “They’ll be sleeping by the time we return home.”
• “In 10 years, people are going to be consuming even more natural
resources.”
Future Perfect Tense
We use the future perfect tense to say that something will finish or
709

complete at a specific point in the future. We also often include durations of
time to indicate how long something has been happening once a future
moment in time is reached.
In addition, we can use the future perfect tense to make a present prediction
about something that we believe has or should have happened in the past.
The most common way we create the future perfect tense is by using will +
have + the past participle of the verb. For example:
• “This June, I will have lived in New York for four years.”
• “You will have heard by now that the company is going bankrupt.”
• “She’ll have slept for the whole day if she doesn’t get up soon!”
(We can also use be going to instead of will, but this construction is less
common and cannot be used to make a present prediction about a past
action.)
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
Like the future perfect tense, we use the future perfect continuous
tense (also known as the future perfect progressive tense) to indicate
how long something has been happening once a future moment in time is
reached, emphasizing the continuous nature of the action. It can also be
used in this way to indicate the cause of a possible future result.
The most common way we create the future perfect continuous tense is by
using will + have been + the present participle of the verb. For example:
• “By June, I will have been living in New York for four years.”
• “She’s going to miss half the day because she’ll have been sleeping for so
long!”
• “By the time I get there, she will have been waiting for over an hour.”
• “I will have been working on this ranch for more than half my life when
I turn 40.”
• “I’m not going to have any energy to play with the kids because I’ll have
been working so hard this week.”
(Like the future perfect tense, we can also use be going to instead of will, but
this construction is less common.)
Using shall
710

In addition to will and be going to, the modal verb shall can also be used to
form each of the future tenses. Although will is generally preferred in
modern English (especially American English), using shall adds an additional
degree of politeness or formality to the sentence sometimes lacking with will
or be going to.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following cannot be described by the future tenses?
a) Things that began in the past and will continue into the future
b) Things that we believe have already happened
c) Things that are going to happen in the future
d) Things that began in the past and continued until the present moment
e) A & C
f) B & C
g) None of the above
 
2. Which form of the future tense is used to indicate the cause of a possible
future result?
a) Future simple tense
b) Future continuous tense
c) Future perfect tense
d) Future perfect continuous tense
 
3. Which of the following sentences does not use one of the future tenses?
a) “I regret to inform you that I shall be submitting my resignation soon.”
b) “They’re going to see if they can get a loan.”
c) “She had been spending some time with her father.”
d) “He’ll have been working in this factory for nearly 30 years next March.”
 
4. Which form of the future tense does the following sentence use?
“I won’t be coming here ever again!”
a) Future simple tense
b) Future continuous tense
c) Future perfect tense
d) Future perfect continuous tense
711

Future Simple Tense
Definition
English verbs do not have unique forms for the future tense; instead, we use
different sentence constructions to describe actions that will occur in the
future. There are two ways we do this for the future simple tense.
The simplest way we create the future simple tense is by using the modal
verb will + the bare infinitive (without to) of the main verb of the sentence,
as in, “I will walk to work.”
We can also form the future simple tense by using be going to + the bare
infinitive of the main verb, as in “I am going to walk to work.” However,
the usages of this construction are slightly different.
For now, we will focus on will constructions; a little later on, we’ll look at
how going to can be used to create subtle differences in meaning.
Uses of the future simple tense –
will constructions
The future simple tense can be used in a few different ways to describe
things that have not happened yet. The structure of the sentence does not
change, though, so we generally rely on context or other parts of the
sentence to create these differences in meaning.
To predict something
Example:
• “I think it will rain today.”
This is a prediction; it may be based on fact (i.e., because there are dark
storm clouds), or perhaps on current, less tangible evidence (i.e., it “feels”
like rain is coming).
• “Our team will win the game.”
This is also a prediction, which may or may not be based on facts or past
experience. We often use the future simple tense for simple predictions that
are based on desires.
712

To make promises
Example:
• “I will definitely come to the party. You have my word.”
• “I’ll wash the dishes later.”
Neither of these is a prediction; each is an assurance that something is going
to happen. The adverb definitely in the first sentence solidifies this promise,
while later in the second sentence lets the reader/listener know when the
dishes will be washed.
To describe a future fact
Example:
• “The president will be in Portland tomorrow.”
• “I will drive to work tomorrow, if you want a ride.”
These are neither predictions nor promises, but rather are factual statements
of thing that are going to happen.
Unplanned actions or decisions
We can also use the future simple when we decide to do something at the
moment of speaking, rather than something that was already planned or
decided.
For example:
• Person A: “There’s no milk left.” 
• Person B: “I will get some the next time I’m out.”
• Person A: “The TV isn’t working, so you won’t be able to watch the football
game.”
• Person B. “I’ll just read a book instead.”
To offer to do something
Example:
Imagine you see your neighbor coming out of the supermarket carrying two
heavy shopping bags. You might say:
• “I’ll help you. Give me one of the bags and I will carry it for you.”
713

If your friend is low on money when you are both out at a coffee shop, you
might say:
• “Don’t worry, I’ll pay for the coffee.”
Negatives
We can achieve strong negative meanings for most of the above uses by
adding not or never to will, as in:
• “Our team will never win the game.” (negative prediction)
• “I won’t wash the dishes later.” (negative promise; also used for refusals)
• “He won’t drive to work tomorrow.” (negative future fact)
However, we generally don’t put unplanned decisions or offers in the
negative with the will construction, because the sentence ends up describing
a negative promise, a refusal, or a negative future fact:
• “I’ll never read a book.” (negative promise)
• “I won’t pay for the coffee.” (refusal or negative fact)
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
To form questions in the future simple tense, we simply move will before the
subject of the sentence. For example:
• “Will it rain today?” (question of a prediction)
• “Will you come to the party?” (question of an intention, promise, or
assurance)
• “Will the president be in Portland tomorrow?” (question of a future fact)
• “Will you get some milk the next time you are out?” (an unplanned
request, phrased as a question)
We can also use shall instead of will in questions when making offers, as in:
• “Shall I carry that bag for you?”
• “Shall I get some milk the next time I’m out?”
This makes the question more formal and polite.
714

Going to constructions
In several of the cases we looked at above, we can use be going to in place of
will.
For example:
• “I think it is going to rain today.”
• “I am going to come to the party.”
• “The president is going to be in Portland tomorrow.”
Going to for intended future
actions
Unlike the will construction, we do not use going to to describe unplanned
decisions or offers; instead, we use this construction to express intended,
pre-planned actions, as in:
• Person A: “There’s no milk left.” 
• Person B: “I’m going to get some the next time I’m out.”
• Person A: “I don’t have any cash.” 
• Person B: “Don’t worry, I am going to pay for the coffees.”
This is also the case if we use going to in one of our previous examples that
described a future fact:
• “I’m going to drive to work tomorrow, if you want a ride.”
When we used the will construction, we were describing something that is
considered a concrete fact; now, however, it expresses a planned intention.
We can see this in other examples as well:
• “She’s going to play soccer later.” (She has already decided that this is
what she wants to do later.)
• “He is going to make a cake for us tomorrow.” (This is his plan of action.)
We can also use going to when something is certain or very likely to happen,
but not in the immediate future.
For example:
• “Look at those black clouds. It’s going to rain.” (This is very likely due to
the evidence of the weather.)
715

• “My mama told me that she’s going to have a baby.” (This is a certainty,
but it will not happen right away.)
• “Hurry up! We’re going to be late.” (This is also evident and very likely.
Although it will happen soon, it will not happen immediately.)
Finally, children often use the going to construction when they speak about
what they want to be when they grow up, as in:
• “When I grow up, I’m going to be a police officer.” (At this moment, that
is what I intend to be.)
Interrogative 
sentences 
using
going to
To form interrogative sentences in the future simple tense using the going to
construction, we simply put the linking verb be before the subject of the
sentence. This is also the case if we use question words. For example:
• “Are you going to see Jennifer later?”
• “Is it going to rain?”
• “What are you going to say to him?”
• “Where are they going to stay?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which modal auxiliary verb is commonly used to create the future
simple tense?
a) can
b) do
c) will
d) would
 
2. What is the main function of the going to construction (as compared to
the will construction)?
a) To express intended action
b) To express certainty in predictions
c) To express an unplanned decision
d) To make a refusal
716

 
3. What is the following sentence describing?
“I’ll drive to the airport to pick you up, if you like.”
a) A prediction
b) An unplanned action
c) A future fact
d) An offer
 
4. What other auxiliary verb can be used instead of will in interrogative
sentences in the future simple tense?
a) can
b) shall
c) would
d) going
 
5. Which construction would we most likely use to describe something that
is certain or very likely to happen, but not in the immediate future?
a) will + bare infinitive
b) be going to + bare infinitive
c) Either A or B
d) Neither A nor B
Future Continuous Tense
Definition
The future continuous tense (also known as the future progressive) is
used to describe an unfinished action occurring in the future. This action can
either begin in the future, or it can already be in progress in the present and
continue into the future.
Structure
As with all so-called future tenses, English verbs do not inflect into a unique
“future form”—rather, we must use auxiliaries and participles in other tenses
to describe future events or actions.
To form the future continuous, we use will be or is/are going to be + the
717

present participle of the main verb.
For example:
• “I will be running 10 miles tomorrow.”
• “He is going to be leaving the company soon.”
Much of the time, either construction may be used with no appreciable
difference in the meaning of the sentence. However, as with the future
simple tense, we sometimes use the will be construction for actions or
events that are more certain to happen, whereas the going to be construction
can be used to imply an intended action or event.
Using 
the 
future 
continuous
tense
The future continuous is primarily used in three ways:
1. To say that something will be in progress from a certain moment in the
future.
2. To predict that something will be in progress at some point in the future
(i.e., not starting at a specific time).
3. To describe something that is expected or predicted to continue happening
from the present for an uncertain amount of time into the future.
Let’s look at examples of each of these uses.
From a certain point in the
future
In this usage, we describe something that will definitely be happening in the
future—that is, it is not a prediction or an expectation. Because it is a
certainty, we often reference specific points in time.
For example:
• “This is your captain speaking; the plane will be landing in 10 minutes.” 
This means that it will begin to land progressively starting 10 minutes from
now.
• “Please make your way to checkout counters, as the store will be closing
in five minutes.” 
718

This means that in five minutes’ time, the store will begin to close.
• “I just wanted to let you know that I’ll be arriving in Milan on Saturday.” 
In this example, the action of arriving will begin on Saturday.
We can also use more vague references in time, so long as they are not too
vague or too far in the future. For instance:
• “I need to get this report finished, as the boss is going to be leaving
shortly.”
The progressive future action is going to begin happening (it is not a
prediction), but the time frame is not exact.
We can see, however, that this can easily turn into a prediction when we use
vague time references:
• “We will be buying our own house soon.”
• “Our kids are going to be leaving for college eventually.”
Predictions of future actions
The future continuous is often used to predict actions that we think or
presume will be happening at an uncertain or generic point in the future.
• “Don’t call Paul after 7 PM; he’ll be having dinner.” 
We predict that this will be in progress at some point after 7 o’clock.
• “In 10 years, people are going to be consuming even more natural
resources.” 
We predict this to be in progress at a certain point in the future. Even though
a specific time is referenced, it is far enough in the future that we can assume
this isn’t a certainty.
• “By the time we arrive home, they’ll be sleeping.” 
Again, we predict this action will be in progress at a future point (when we
arrive home); we have reason to believe this, but it is not an absolute
certainty.
In progress now and into the
future
We can also use the future continuous to predict that an event or action is
currently happening, and that it will continue for an uncertain amount of
719

time into the future. For example:
• “Don’t call the house now, as John will be sleeping.” 
We predict this to be in progress now, and that it will continue to be
happening in the near future.
If we want to describe something that is definitely happening now and will
(or is expected to) continue to happen in the future, we use the adverb still
after will or before going. For instance:
• “I’m so behind on this assignment. The sun is going to rise and I will still
be working on it.”
• “No matter who is elected, we’re still going to be dealing with the
effects of the recession for years to come.”
Types of sentences
So far, we’ve looked at examples of positive sentences using the future
continuous tense. As with the other tenses, we can also form negative,
interrogative, and negative-interrogative sentences.
Negative sentences
We form the negative of the future continuous by adding not after will or
before going in the sentence. (Will and not are often contracted to won’t.)
We form the negative to achieve the opposite meaning of all the uses we’ve
looked at so far. For example:
• “Contrary to our previous announcement, the store will not be closing in
five minutes.” (negative certainty of a future action)
• “Don’t bother trying to get a hold of Paul after 7; he won’t be taking calls
then.” (negative prediction of a future action)
• “I may be behind on this assignment, but I am not going to be working
past 5 o’clock.” (negative intention of allowing a current action to progress
into the future)
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
We create questions in the future continuous by inverting will or be with the
720

subject. This is also the case if we use question words—what, where, when,
etc. (An exception is the word who, which becomes the subject of the
sentence but remains at the beginning.)
We most often use interrogative sentences in the future continuous tense to
politely inquire about information:
• “Will you be joining us after dinner?”
• “What will they be doing in Mexico?”
• “Who is going to be performing at the concert?”
Negative interrogative sentences
Negative interrogative sentences also ask a question, but they imply that the
speaker expects the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
Again, in the future continuous, this is done to create a polite inquiry.
We form these by using the interrogative form we looked at above, and
adding the word not after the subject. However, this is considered a formal
construction—more often in modern English, will and the forms of be are
contracted with not to create won’t, isn’t, or aren’t, all of which come before
the subject.
• “Will you not be joining us after dinner?” (more formal, but less
common)
• “Won’t we be leaving after the concert?” (less formal, but more common)
• “Is he not going to be studying for an exam?” (more formal, sometimes
used for emphasis)
• “Aren’t you going to be working next week?” (less formal, but more
commonly used)
We do not use question words with negative interrogative sentences in the
future continuous tense.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which auxiliary verb is often used to create the future continuous tense?
a) will
b) be
c) have
721

d) A & B
e) A & C
f) All of the above
 
2. Which of the following is not a usage of the future continuous tense?
a) To say that something will be in progress from a certain moment in the
future.
b) To say that something will end sometime in the near future.
c) To predict that something will be in progress at some point in the future.
d) To describe something that is happening in the present and will continue
into the future.
 
3. What form does the main verb take in the future continuous tense?
a) Infinitive
b) Past participle
c) Present participle
d) Present tense
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses the future continuous tense?
a) “I told him we will be coming home on Saturday.”
b) “She said she'll work weekends while Mike is out sick.”
c) “They said they would be arriving at 8 PM.”
d) “I'm traveling to France next week.”
 
5. Which of the following sentences does not use the future continuous
tense?
a) “I'm sure he'll be trying as best he can to be there tomorrow.”
b) “That no-good snitch is going to be sleeping with the fishes by the
morning.”
c) “She told him she would be working at the warehouse this week.”
d) “I heard Daniel is going to be moving to Canada soon!”
Future Perfect Tense
Definition
We use the future perfect tense to say that something will finish or be
722

completed at a specific point in the future. We also often include durations of
time to indicate how long something has been happening once a future
moment in time is reached.
In addition, we can use the future perfect tense to make a present prediction
about something that we believe has or should have happened in the past.
The most common way we create the future perfect tense is by using the
modal auxiliary verb will + have + the past participle of the verb. For
example:
• “This June, I will have lived in New York for four years.”
• “You will have heard by now that the company is going bankrupt.”
• “She’ll have slept for the whole day if she doesn’t get up soon!”
Functions of the Future Perfect
Actions completed in the future
We often use an adverbial expression of a future point in time with the future
perfect tense to describe when an action will be completed or accomplished.
This adverbial phrase can occur either before or after the future perfect verb.
For example:
• “With the way you’re spending money, you will have gone through your
savings in less than a month.”
• “After this next race, I will have completed 10 triathlons.”
Future spans of time
The future perfect tense is often used to indicate a point in the future at
which a certain action or situation will have been happening for a given
length of time. For example:
• “It’s hard to believe that by next month we’ll have been married for 10
years.”
• “I will have worked on this ranch for more than half my life when I turn
40.”
As we can see above, the adverbial phrase expressing the duration of time
(“for 10 years,” “for more than half my life”) usually comes after the future
perfect tense construction. The expression of the future point in time (the
723

point at which the duration is accomplished) can appear either before or
after the future perfect tense.
Present 
predictions 
of 
past
actions
We also use the future perfect for a present prediction of something we
believe has already happened in the past. If we include adverbials related to
time, we generally include expressions related to the present time rather
than the future. For example:
• “You will have seen on page 18 how to set up the computer.”
• “Your mother will have left the dentist’s by now.”
• “At this stage, everyone will have heard the rumors already.”
Other sentence types
Negative sentences
To describe something that will not be completed at a point in the future, we
make the future perfect tense negative by adding not after the modal verb
will (usually contracted as won’t). For example:
• “Why are you going to the airport so early? Her flight will not have
arrived yet.”
• “At this rate, I won’t have finished half of the work I need to get done by
tomorrow.”
Interrogative sentences
We can ask whether an action will be complete in the future by inverting will
with the subject, as in:
• “Will they have read the memo ahead of the meeting?”
• “Will you have had something to eat before you arrive?”
We can also ask about specific aspects of a future action by using different
question words or phrases. Remember, we still invert will with the subject in
this case:
724

• “What will we have learned from such tragic events as these?”
• “Who will have prepared the notes for the seminar?”
• “How much money will we have spent trying to get this car working?”
• “How long will you have worked there before your maternity leave
begins?”
Other constructions
Although we most commonly use the modal verb will, there are two other
ways we can form the future perfect tense: be going to and shall.
Be going to
Be going to can only form the future perfect tense when it is used to describe
an action that finishes in the future—in this way, it is interchangeable with
will in meaning.
We usually contract be with the subject when we use be going to. For
example:
• “She’s going to have won nine championship titles by the time she’s 25.”
• “If you keep reading at that pace, you’re going to have finished the
book before the rest of the students.”
However, using be going to can sometimes result in an awkward
construction, and it is not as common as will. We also cannot use the be
going to construction when talking about something that we predict to have
happened in the past.
Shall
We can also use the modal verb shall instead of will to form the future
perfect tense in formal speech or writing. Unlike be going to, we can use
shall for all uses of the future perfect. For example:
• “By next spring, I shall have lived on my own for nearly a decade.”
• “The students shall have finished their evaluations this time next week.”
• “You shall have heard, no doubt, the unflattering remarks made about
my character.”
However, this creates a very formal tone that is not common in modern
725

English; as a result, will + have + past participle remains the most common
construction of the future perfect tense.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following modal auxiliary verbs is used to create the
future perfect tense?
a) would
b) may
c) will
d) can
2. Which of the following is not a function of the future perfect tense?
a) To say that something will be completed or achieved at a specific point in
the future
b) To indicate how long something will have been occurring by a specific
point in the future
c) To make a present prediction about something that happened in the past
d) To indicate a continuous action that began at a specific point in the future
3. How does the structure of the future perfect tense change in an
interrogative sentence?
a) will inverts with the subject
b) have inverts with the subject
c) will inverts with a question word
d) have inverts with a question word
4. For what purpose can we use shall instead of will to form the future
perfect tense?
a) To make the sentence a question
b) To make the sentence more formal
c) To make a present prediction about something that happened in the past
d) To indicate an intention to do something in the future
5. When are we not able to use be going to instead of will to form the future
perfect tense?
726

a) When saying that something will be completed or achieved at a specific
point in the future
b) When indicating how long something will have occurred by a specific
point in the future
c) When making a present prediction about something that happened in the
past
Future Perfect Continuous Tense
Definition
Like the future perfect tense, we use the future perfect continuous
tense (also known as the future perfect progressive tense) to indicate
how long something has been happening once a future moment in time is
reached. It can also be used in this way to indicate the cause of a possible
future result.
The most common way we create the future perfect continuous tense is by
using the modal auxiliary verb will + have been + the present
participle of the verb. For example:
• “By June, I will have been living in New York for four years.”
• “She’s going to miss half the day because she’ll have been sleeping for so
long!”
Using 
the 
Future 
Perfect
Continuous
The future perfect continuous tense is used in a very similar way to the
future perfect to describe the duration of a completed future action. They
both carry the same meaning when used in this way, but the future perfect
continuous emphasizes the continuous nature of the action. Consider, for
example, these two sentences:
• “By the time I get there, she will have waited for over an hour.” (future
perfect tense)
• “By the time I get there, she will have been waiting for over an hour.”
(future perfect continuous tense)
The meaning is technically the same in both examples above; however, the
727

second sentence stresses the fact that she was continuously waiting during
the future period by the time I get there. The change in meaning is subtle,
but it adds greater depth to the sentence. Here are some other examples
using the future perfect continuous tense:
• “I will have been working on this ranch for more than half my life when
I turn 40.”
• “She’ll have been studying Japanese for four years by the time she
graduates.”
• “When the teacher comes back, we’ll have been reading for nearly two
hours.”
With action verbs
Because it describes continuous, dynamic action, the future perfect
continuous can only be used with action verbs; it cannot be used with
stative verbs (such as linking verbs or verbs of the senses), which
describe non-continuous actions. For stative verbs, we can only use the
future perfect tense instead. For example:
✔ “Next month we’ll have been married for 10 years.” (correct)
✖ “Next month we’ll have been being married for 10 years.” (incorrect)
✔ “By tomorrow morning, this all will have seemed like just a bad
dream.” (correct)
✖ “By tomorrow morning, this all will have been seeming like just a bad
dream.” (incorrect)
Cause of future results
We can also use the future perfect continuous to indicate that the
continuous action that finishes in the future will be the cause of something
in the future. For example:
• “I bet he’ll be hungry because he will have been studying straight
through lunch.”
• “I’m not going to have any energy for the kids because I’ll have been
working so hard this week.”
• “You’re going to look like a prune since you will have been swimming all
afternoon!”
728

Other sentence types
Negative sentences
To describe something that will not be completed over a certain span of time
into the future, we make the future perfect continuous tense negative by
adding not after the modal verb will (usually contracted as won’t). For
example:
• “Why are you bringing your book to the airport? We won’t have been
waiting for very long before her plane arrives.”
• “He will not have been working here for very long if he is fired over this
incident.”
However, it’s not very common to make negative constructions of the future
perfect continuous tense.
Interrogative sentences
We can ask whether an action will be completed in the future after a certain
duration by inverting will with the subject, as in:
• “Will they have been searching for us for very long?”
• “Will she have been working in Japan for the whole time she’s lived
there?”
We can also ask about specific aspects of a future action by using different
question words or phrases. Remember, we still invert will with the subject in
this case:
• “Who’ll have been writing the notes for the class while the teaching
assistant is absent?”
• “How long will you have been working there before your maternity
leave begins?”
Other constructions
Although we most commonly use the modal verb will, there are two other
ways we can form the future perfect continuous tense: be going to and shall.
Be going to
729

Be going to is interchangeable with will in meaning when we make the
future perfect continuous tense. However, using be going to can sometimes
result in a wordy, awkward construction, and it is not as common as will.
We usually contract be with the subject when we use be going to. For
example:
• “She’s going to have been working for nearly 18 hours by the time she’s
finished with her shift tonight.”
• “I’m going to have been reading this book for nearly six months if I
don’t finish it soon!”
Shall
We can also use the modal verb shall instead of will to form the future
perfect continuous tense in more formal speech or writing. For example:
• “By next spring, I shall have been living on my own for nearly a decade.”
• “The students shall have been reading their books for the entire
period.”
• “You shall have been hearing, no doubt, the unflattering remarks made
about my character.
However, this creates a very formal tone that is not common in modern
English. Among the three options available, will is the most common way to
construct of the future perfect continuous tense.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What form of the main verb is used to create the future perfect
continuous tense?
a) infinitive
b) base form
c) present participle
d) past participle
2. Which of the following is a function of the future perfect continuous
tense?
a) To indicate how long something will have been occurring by a specific
point in the future
730

b) To indicate the cause of a future result
c) To make a present prediction about something that happened in the past
d) To indicate a continuous action that began at a specific point in the future
e) A & B
f) B & C
g) C & D
 
3. Where does not appear in a negative sentence in the future perfect
continuous tense?
a) After will
b) After have
c) After been
d) After the present participle of the main verb
4. Which of the following is the most common way to form the future
perfect tense?
a) be going to have been + the present participle of the main verb
b) will have been + the present participle of the main verb
c) shall have been + the present participle of the main verb
d) Each is equally common
 
5. Which type of verb cannot be used in the future perfect continuous
tense?
a) action verb
b) factitive verb
c) conditional verb
d) stative verb
e) A & B
f) B & C
g) C & D
Aspect
Definition
Aspect is a grammatical element that has to do with how an action, state of
being, or event as described by a verb relates to time. Aspect is often
731

confused with tense. While tense is concerned with when the action, state
of being, or event occurs (past, present, or future), aspect is concerned with
how it occurs in time. It is through aspect that we understand whether an
action takes place at a single point in time, during a continuous range of
time, or repetitively.
Sometimes aspect is conveyed by a sentence’s structure, through a
combination of particles, verbs, and verb phrases; other times, sentence
structure may be used for more than one aspect, so we rely on the overall
sentence to understand its temporal meaning.
Perfective 
and 
imperfective
aspect
The most common distinction made regarding aspect is between the
perfective and imperfective aspects. While other languages mark the
difference by using two separate verb forms, English does not.
The perfective aspect can be conveyed through a variety of verb structures.
It is used when we draw attention to an action as a whole, summarizing it.
The perfective aspect may occur in past, present, or future actions and
events. For example:
• “I ate dinner.”
• “I swim like a fish.”
• “I have never been there before.”
• “We will help you tomorrow.”
The imperfective aspect, on the other hand, is used to draw attention to
the action as having an internal structure (rather than as a whole, complete
action). Like the perfective, this is the case regardless of when the event
occurs.
One instance of the imperfective is when we relate an action that is
considered to be in progress at the moment of speaking (or at the time of
another event). This is usually conveyed through the continuous aspect.
For example:
• “I was washing dishes when she came through the door.”
We also use the imperfective when we describe actions or events as occurring
repetitively, either now or in the past:
732

• “We used to go traveling a lot.”
• “John runs five miles every day.”
This is known as the habitual aspect.
Aspects of verb tenses
Traditionally, each verb tense is said to have four aspects, or temporal
structures: the simple, the perfect, the continuous, and the perfect
continuous. These traditional aspects of the tenses do not always coincide
with theory on perfective aspect and imperfective aspect—it should be
remembered that certain structures may express perfective aspect in some
cases and imperfective aspect in others, depending on the intended meaning.
Aspects of the present tense
The present tense is used for repeated actions, and for actions occurring or
having a result in the present. The different aspects of the present tense can
be found in the table below:
Aspect
Structure
Examples
Simple
Subject + present verb
"I 
go 
shopping 
on
Tuesdays." 
"She runs fast."
Perfect
Subject + have/has + past
participle
"I 
have 
eaten 
here
before." 
"She has lived here for a
long time."
Continuous
Subject + is/are 
+ 
present
participle
"We 
are 
cooking
dinner." 
"He is singing a song."
Perfect
Continuous
Subject + have/has + been +
present participle
"He has been thinking
about it." 
"I have been taking an
art class."
 
Usually, the simple and the perfect aspects match up with the perfective
aspect in grammatical theory. However, as mentioned, this is not always the
733

case. It could be argued in this case that the simple aspect of the present
tense actually corresponds with the imperfective aspect, since it is usually
used to convey habitual acts, as in:
• “I go to school every day.”
• “We go shopping on Saturdays.”
Aspects of the past tense
Like the present, the past tense also has four traditional aspects, which can
be found in the table below:
Aspect
Structure
Examples
Simple
Subject + past verb
"I 
went 
shopping 
on
Tuesday." 
"She ran fast."
Perfect
Subject + had + past participle
"I had eaten here before." 
"She had lived here for a
long time."
Continuous
Subject + was/were + present
participle
"We 
were 
cooking
dinner." 
"He was singing a song."
Perfect
Continuous
Subject + had + been +
present participle
"He had been thinking
about it." 
"I had been taking an art
class."
The simple and perfect simple tenses generally correspond with the
perfective aspect, while the continuous and perfect continuous correspond
with the imperfective aspect. Again, these do not always match up along
clear lines, and we should consider what the verb phrase conveys overall to
decide whether the sentence has perfective or imperfective aspect.
Aspects of the future tense
Although English does not have an inflected verb form for future tense, there
are several structures that we use to convey future meaning, namely
734

will/would/be going to + verb. The different aspects of these structures are
found in the table:
Aspect
Structure
Examples
Simple
Subject + will/would/be going to +
infinitive
"I will go shopping
on Tuesday." 
" She is going to
run fast."
Perfect
Subject + will have + past participle
"I will have eaten
before arriving." 
"She 
will 
have
lived here for a long
time."
Continuous Subject + will/would/be going to + be
+ present participle
"We are going to
be cooking dinner."
"He will be singing
a song."
Perfect
Continuous
Subject + will have/would have/be
going to + have + been + present
participle
"He’ll have been
thinking about it." 
"I 
would 
have
been taking an art
class."
 
Again, the simple and perfect aspects generally correspond with perfective
aspect in the future, while the continuous and perfect continuous structures
correspond with the imperfective.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In grammar, aspect is concerned with ________ .
a) when events occur on a timeline
b) how events occur on a timeline
c) why events occur on a timeline
 
2. The perfective aspect is used when we view an action as ________.
a) a whole
735

b) a part
c) a continuous event
d) a habitual event
 
3. The imperfective aspect is used when we view an action as ________.
a) habitual
b) in progress
c) a whole
d) A & B
e) all of the above
 
4. Which of the following sentences conveys the continuous aspect?
a) “I went to the doctor on Tuesday.”
b) “She’s going to take me on a vacation.”
c) “They’ve been watching that TV all day.”
d) “We haven’t seen that movie yet.”
 
5. Which of the following sentences uses the perfect aspect?”
a) “I was reading.”
b) “He went home.”
c) “She is eating.”
d) “They have gone home.”
736

Perfective 
and 
Imperfective
Aspect
Definition
Aspect is a grammatical term that has to do with how an action, state of
being, or event unfolds in relation to time. The greatest distinction is made
between the perfective aspect, which focuses on actions and events as
whole elements, and the imperfective aspect, which deconstructs how an
event is structured and located in time.
While other languages may mark the difference with an inflected verb form,
English instead relies on a combination of particles, verbs, verb phrases, and
lexical clues to determine whether the overall meaning of the action is
perfective or imperfective.
Perfective aspect
The perfective aspect highlights actions, states, or events as a whole,
presenting the actions from an outside perspective as complete, bounded
events.
The perfective aspect is encountered in all of the tenses—past, present, and
future—but it is easiest to illustrate in the past. For example:
• “I went to the supermarket yesterday.” (past simple tense)
• “She sang in the choir.” (past simple tense)
• “We had eaten already.” (past perfect tense)
In all of the above examples, the action is presented as a complete event in
the past. We are simply told that the event occurred, with no clues as to how
often the actions happened or how long they took.
As mentioned, the perfective aspect also occurs in other tenses. For example:
• “I have a dog.” (present simple tense)
• “She’ll be there soon.” (future simple tense)
• “They will have finished by then.” (future perfect tense)
737

Imperfective aspect
The imperfective aspect, on the other hand, is used when we focus on the
internal structures of an action, state, or event as it relates to time, such as
being continuous or habitual (repeating). Again, this has nothing to do with
when the event occurs, and, as with the perfective, there is no separate verb
form in English for the imperfective aspect.
Instead, it is expressed through different grammatical structures, which
change depending on what we are saying about the temporal structure of the
action.
We sometimes classify these structures as the continuous aspect and the
habitual aspect, both of which are subclasses of the imperfective.
Continuous Aspect
The continuous aspect, also called the progressive aspect, is a subclass
of the imperfective that emphasizes the progressive nature of the verb,
looking at it as an incomplete action in progress over a specific period of
time.
The continuous aspect does not indicate the duration of the action, nor how
often it occurs. It simply shows that the action or event is in progress, either
at the time of speaking, or at the time that another event occurs. It can be
used with the past, present, and future tenses, and it is usually conveyed
using a form of the verb be + the present participle. For example:
Past
• “I was talking to my mother when you called.” 
• “They had been living here for a long time when they moved.”
Present
• “I’m cooking dinner at the moment, so I’ll have to call you back.” 
• “She’s been playing outside with her friends all day.”
Future
• “He’ll be sleeping by 10 o’clock, hopefully.”
• “Next month we’ll have been living in New York City for 10 years.”
It should be noted that stative verbs do not normally occur using the be +
present participle structure. For example, you could not say “I am knowing
John a long time” or “She is appearing unwell.”
738

Other constructions
There is disagreement over whether structures using be + the present
participle are the only structures that depict the continuous aspect. It is
often argued, for example, that the past simple often conveys the continuous
aspect. For example:
• “I stayed up all night.”
• “We were outside for hours.”
Others would argue that since it is the additional information in the
examples above (all night and for hours) that gives the continuous aspect to
the sentence as a whole, the verb phrases themselves should not be
considered to convey continuous aspect.
Habitual Aspect
The habitual aspect, like the continuous aspect, is also a subclass of the
imperfective aspect. It is used when an action occurs repetitively and
(usually) predictably. English only has two marked ways of expressing
habitual aspect: would + base form of the verb (the infinitive without to) and
used to + base form of the verb. When we use these structures, we imply that
the action occurred habitually in the past, but does not anymore. For
example:
• “When I was young I used to walk to school.”
• “When I was young I would walk to school.”
Although the meaning in the two examples above is the same, used to and
would are not always directly interchangeable. For example, used to,
standing alone, conveys habitual aspect, but would doesn’t. Observe what
happens if we remove the time marker when I was young:
• “I used to walk to school.”
• “I would walk to school.”
When we remove when I was young from the examples, the example using
used to retains its habitual aspect, but the example with would doesn’t. Since
would can also be used in conditional constructions, we need to include a
time marker to clarify when it is being used for the habitual past.
In addition, while used to can be used with both action verbs and stative
verbs, would can only be used with action verbs. For example:
739

✔ “When I was young, I used to love movies.” (correct)
✖ “When I was young, I would love movies.” (incorrect)
Other constructions
Although used to + base form and would + base form are the only structures
that explicitly mark habitual aspect, we often use other verb tenses to convey
it as well. For example, we often use the present simple tense to indicate
habitual actions, as in:
• “I go to school every day.”
• “She attends karate class on Sundays.”
• “They work six days a week.”
However, other verb tenses can be used with an implied habitual aspect. For
example:
• “I walked to school every day for 10 years.” (past simple tense)
• “I had lived in the same town my whole life before I decided to move to
Tokyo.” (past perfect tense)
• “She has eaten the same sandwich for lunch for as long as I’ve known
her.” (present perfect tense)
When the habitual aspect is unmarked, as above, it is often accompanied by
a time marker that clarifies how often the action occurs, such as every day,
on Sundays, six days a week, etc.
Future habits
English does not have an explicit habitual aspect marker for the future
either. Most often, we use the future simple tense along with a time marker
to indicate habit. For example:
• “I will work extra shifts every evening until I save enough money.”
• “I will go for a run every day after school this year.
• “We will eat fruit and cereal every morning next month.”
As with the alternate constructions of the perfective aspect, there is
disagreement over whether unmarked verb forms can be considered to
express habitual aspect, since it may simply be the additional information in
the sentence that expresses the habitual meaning, rather than the verb
740

phrases themselves.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following sentences conveys the perfective aspect?
a) “I have eaten breakfast already.”
b) “I’ve been eating breakfast.”
c) “I was eating breakfast.”
d) “I used to eat breakfast in the late morning.”
2. Which of the following sentences conveys the imperfective aspect?
a) “He finished his homework.”
b) “He had already finished his homework.”
c) “He will finish his homework later.”
d) “He’s finishing his homework.”
3. Which of the following sentences conveys the habitual aspect?
a) “I attended a ballet lesson.”
b) “I want to attend ballet lessons.”
c) “I used to attend ballet lessons.”
d) “I will attend a ballet lesson.”
4. Which of the following sentences uses the continuous aspect?
a) “I used to watch a lot of TV.”
b) “I watched a lot of TV yesterday.”
c) “I will watch TV later.”
d) “I’ve been watching a lot of TV.”
5. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “I used to like sweets when I was little, but now I don’t.”
b) “I liked sweets when I was little, but now I don’t.”
c) “I would like sweets when I was little, but now I don’t.”
d) A & C
Aspects of the Present Tense
741

Definition
The present tense is combined with four traditional aspects to form the
structures that are known as the present simple, the present continuous
(or present progressive), the present perfect, and the present perfect
continuous. Although these structures are generally taught as individual
“tenses” of verbs, they are actually a combination of the present tense and
aspect. While the tense tells us when the action takes place in relation to
time (in this case, the present), the added aspect gives us information about
how the event takes place in time.
Present Simple
The present simple structure is used to express facts and habits that are
true in the present time. It is formed using the bare infinitive (the base
form of the verb), or, in the case of the third person singular, the bare
infinitive + “-s”. For example:
• “We love Thai food.”
• “James swims on Sundays.”
• “We study at the library every day.”
Present Continuous
The present continuous is the combination of the present tense with the
continuous aspect. It is used for actions that are either in progress at the
moment of speaking, or will be in progress in the near future. It is formed
using the present form of the verb be (are, am, or is) + the present participle.
For example:
• “They’re playing outside.” (in progress now)
• “Can I call you back? I’m driving.” (in progress now)
• “We’re eating dinner with my in-laws tonight.” (in progress in the future)
The continuous aspect is not usually used with stative verbs. For example,
we cannot say “I am knowing John many years” or “She is seeming sad.”
Present Perfect
The present perfect is the combination of the present tense and the perfect
742

aspect. It is used for actions or states that began in the past but have an
effect on or relevance to the present, stressing the completion of the action.
It is formed using have/has + the past participle. For example:
• “She’s already eaten.”
• "We’ve seen this movie.”
• “I’ve had a bad cold this week.”
Present Perfect Continuous
The present perfect continuous is the combination of the continuous and
perfect aspects with the present tense. It is used for actions that began in the
past and continue to have relevance in the present. The main difference
between it and the present perfect aspect is that the present perfect
continuous aspect emphasizes the progress of the action instead of its
completion. Like the present continuous, it is typically only used with
action verbs, not with stative verbs. The present perfect continuous is
formed using have/has + been + the present participle. For example:
• “We have been waiting for a long time.”
• “My little sister has been sitting very quietly.”
• “I’ve been cleaning all day.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is in the present simple form?
a) went
b) have been
c) goes
d) going
 
2. Which of the following is in the present perfect form?
a) saw
b) have seen
c) sees
d) seeing
 
3. Which of the following is in the present perfect continuous form?
743

a) has been going
b) had been going
c) had gone
d) goes
 
4. Which of the following is in the present continuous form?
a) sang
b) have sung
c) singing
d) been singing
 
5. Which of the following structures is used for facts that are true at the
moment of speaking:
a) present simple
b) present continuous
c) present perfect
d) present perfect continuous
 
5. Which of the following sentences stresses the completion of an action
that occurred in the past but has relevance to the present?
a) “She buys everything we need.”
b) “She’s been buying everything we need.”
c) “She bought everything we need.”
d) “She has bought everything we need.”
Aspects of the Past Tense
Definition
The past tense is combined with four traditional aspects to form the
structures that are known as the past simple, the past continuous (or
past progressive), the past perfect, and the past perfect continuous.
Although these structures are generally taught as individual “tenses” of
verbs, they are actually a combination of the past tense and aspect. While the
tense tells us when the action takes place in relation to the time (in this
case, the past), the added aspect tells us how the event takes place in time.
744

Past Simple
The past simple structure is used to express actions and events that were
completed at a given moment in the past. Whether the occurrence is of short
or long duration, the simple aspect emphasizes its completion. The past
simple is formed by adding “-d” or “-ed” to the end of regular verbs, but the
past form of irregular verbs must be memorized. For example:
• “They lived next door to us for years.” (regular)
• “I locked myself out of the house this morning.” (regular)
• “We went to a private school when we were young.” (irregular)
Past Continuous
The past continuous is the combination of the past tense with the
continuous aspect. It emphasizes the progress of an action that occurred in
the past, rather than its completion. It is often used for actions that are
interrupted by other actions, and it is formed using the past form of the verb
be (was/were) + the present participle. For example:
• “They were playing outside when their father arrived.”
• “I’m sorry I didn’t answer the phone; I was driving when you called.”
• “We were eating dinner when my in-laws told us the good news.”
The past continuous usually occurs only with action verbs, not with
stative verbs. For instance, we cannot say “I was knowing John many
years” or “She was seeming sad.”
Past Perfect
The past perfect is the combination of the past tense with the perfect
aspect. It is used for actions or states that began and were completed before
another action in the past took place. It is formed using had + the past
participle. For example:
• “She had already eaten when she arrived.”
• “We had seen the movie, but we watched it again.”
• “I’d had a bad cold that week, but I went on my vacation anyway.”
745

Past Perfect Continuous
The past perfect continuous is the combination of the continuous and
perfect aspects with the past tense. It is used for actions that took place
before another past action. The main difference between it and the past
perfect structure is that the past perfect continuous emphasizes the progress
of the action instead of its completion. It is also used to emphasize the
action’s strong effect on another moment in the past. Like the past
continuous, the past perfect continuous is generally only used with action
verbs, not stative verbs. It is formed using had + been + the present
participle. For example:
• “We had been waiting for a long time when the bus finally came.”
• “My little sister had been sitting very quietly, but then she started to cry.”
• “I’d been cleaning all day, so I was too tired to go out last night.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is in the past simple form?
a) sang
b) have sung
c) sing
d) singing
2. Which of the following is in the past perfect form?
a) was
b) had been
c) is
d) being
3. Which of the following is in the past perfect continuous form?
a) had been doing
b) has been doing
c) had done
d) does
746

4. Which of the following structures is used to emphasize general
completion in the past?
a) past continuous
b) past simple
c) past perfect
d) past perfect continuous
5. Which of the following sentences emphasizes the progress of a past
action that occurred before another action in the past?
a) “She sang in a band.”
b) “She had been singing in a band at that point.”
c) “She sings in a band.”
d) “She has sung in a band.”
Aspects of the Future Tense
Definition
Although English has no future tense in the strict sense (i.e., it has no verb
form specific to future meaning), we commonly refer to several structures
that are used for future meaning as belonging to the “ future tense.” The
most common of these structures begin with will or a form of the verb be +
going to. For example:
• “I will go with you.”
• “I am going to send you an email.”
While these verb markers tell us that the action takes place in the future, it is
the aspect of the verb that tells us how the event will be temporally
structured. The combination of the future marker and the aspect results in
the verb structures that we usually call the future simple, the future
continuous (or future progressive), the future perfect, and the future
perfect continuous.
For the purpose of clarity, our example sentences will all use will, but it
should be remembered that, in each of the examples, we can replace will
with another modal verb of future meaning (shall, might, would, could,
etc.) or with a form of be + going to.
747

Future Simple
The future simple structure is the combination of the future tense and the
simple aspect. The future simple is used to express actions and events that
will occur at a given moment in the future. The simple aspect emphasizes the
action or state as a whole. The structure is formed using will + the base form
of the verb (the infinitive without to). For example:
• “We will go to a private school when we are older.”
• “They will move next door to us soon.”
• “I will be famous in the future.”
Future Continuous
The future continuous structure is the combination of the future tense
with the continuous aspect. It is used to express actions and events that will
be in progress at a given moment in the future. The future continuous is
formed using will + be + the present participle. For example:
• “They will be playing outside when their father arrives.”
• “I won’t answer my phone later because I’ll be driving.”
• “We will be eating dinner at 7 o’clock.”
Like other structures that reflect the continuous aspect, it is usually only
used with action verbs, not with stative verbs. For example, we couldn’t
say “I will be knowing John later” or “She will be seeming sad this evening.”
Future Perfect
The future perfect is the combination of the future tense and the perfect
simple aspect. It is used to express actions and events that will be completed
at a given moment in the future. It is formed using will + have + the past
participle. For example:
• “She will have eaten before she arrives.”
• “We will have seen that movie already.”
• “I will have spent a lot of money after this weekend’s festivities.”
Future Perfect Continuous
748

Finally, the future perfect continuous is the combination of the perfect
and continuous aspects with the future tense. It is used to emphasize that an
action will be in progress until a given moment in the future, at which time
the action will stop. Like the future continuous, it is typically not used with
stative verbs, but only with action verbs. It is formed using will + have +
been + the present participle. For example:
• “We will have been waiting for a long time when the bus finally comes.”
• “My little sister will have been sitting quietly for an hour when the
movie finishes.”
• “I will have been cleaning all day when you arrive, so I’ll be too tired to
go out.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is in the future simple form?
a) sing
b) will have sung
c) will sing
d) will be singing
 
2. Which of the following is in the future perfect form?
a) will watch
b) will have watched
c) will be watching
d) will have been watching
 
3. Which of the following is in the future perfect continuous form?
a) will have been doing
b) will have done
c) will be doing
d) will do
 
4. Which of the following structures is used to emphasize an action that will
be in progress at a particular moment in the future?
a) future simple
b) future continuous
749

c) future perfect simple
d) future perfect continuous
 
5. Which of the following sentences emphasizes the completion of a future
action before another action in the future?
a) “She’ll have been doing all her work.”
b) “She’ll be doing all her work then.”
c) “She’ll do all her work.”
d) “She’ll have done all her work by then.”
Mood
Definition
Grammatical mood refers to the way in which a verb is used to express
certain meaning by the speaker or writer. In linguistics, moods are broken
down into two main categories: realis moods (expressing what is real or
true) and irrealis moods (expressing what is unreal, hypothetical, or
untrue).
Realis 
moods 
(the 
indicative
mood)
The indicative mood is a type of grammatical mood used to express facts,
statements, opinions, or questions. It is the only realis mood used in
English.
This mood is used in all verb tenses to form declarative sentences (i.e.,
statements or declarations) or interrogative sentences (i.e., questions).
For example:
• “She graduated last year with a doctorate in neuroscience.” (declarative
sentence in the past simple tense)
• “He is taking his exam at the new testing center.” (declarative sentence in
the present continuous tense)
• “Are you going to give your speech tomorrow?” (interrogative sentence in
the future simple tense)
The indicative mood is the most commonly used grammatical mood in
750

English.
Irrealis Moods
The term irrealis means “unreal,” and it refers to grammatical moods that
reflect what is not actually the case.
There are two irrealis moods in English: the subjunctive mood and the
imperative mood.
Subjunctive Mood
The subjunctive mood refers to verbs that are conjugated a certain way to
describe hypothetical or non-real actions, events, or situations. This is in
comparison to the indicative mood, which is used to express factual, non-
hypothetical information.
We most commonly use the subjunctive mood to express wishes; to express
commands, suggestions, requests, or statements of necessity; or to describe
hypothetical outcomes that depend on certain conditions.
For example:
• “I wish I didn’t have to go to work.” (wish)
• “He demanded that they leave the room at once.” (command)
• “I recommend that she study harder next time.” (suggestion)
• “I ask that the audience be completely silent during the demonstration.”
(request)
• “It’s necessary that we be vigilant to avoid another disaster.” (statement of
necessity)
• “If I had been more prepared, I would have passed that test.”
(hypothetical condition)
There are very specific ways we conjugate verbs to create the subjunctive
mood; continue on to that section to learn more.
Imperative Mood
Although we can use the subjunctive mood to express commands or
requests, it is becoming less common in modern English. Instead, we usually
use the imperative mood to form imperative sentences when we want
751

to issue direct orders, commands, or general instructions. It is considered an
irrealis mood because the action being demanded has not actually happened
(and might not happen).
When we make an imperative sentence, we use the infinitive form of the verb
(without to), and we omit the subject of the verb.
For example:
• “Turn off the light before you leave.”
• “Go to bed!”
As you can see, there are no subjects in the sentences above.
However, we do often use a noun of address (also called a vocative)
instead, which is a noun or noun phrase used to address the person to whom
the command is directed. For example:
• “John, please turn out that light.”
• “Stand up, Janet.”
• “Be quiet, sir!”
• “You there, pay attention!”
To learn more about how we form and use sentences in the imperative mood,
see the section Imperative Sentences in the chapter on Sentences.
Other moods
The three true moods in English are the indicative, the subjunctive, and the
imperative.
However, there are two sub-categories that are sometimes described as
moods in different grammar guides: the “emphatic mood” and “infinitive
mood.” While we do not consider them to be discrete grammatical moods in
this guide, they are worth mentioning for general reference.
Emphatic mood
The “emphatic mood” refers to the use of the auxiliary verb do to add
emphasis to a verb that would otherwise not require an auxiliary.
We usually use emphatic do to stress the fact that something is the case.
For example:
• “Yes, I do know that we are meeting your parents tonight.”
752

• “Well, she does have a Ph.D., after all.”
We can also use do to add emphasis to demands or requests, as in:
• “Do be careful, John.”
• “Oh, do be quiet!”
However, the use of do in such imperative sentences is now rather formal
and old fashioned.
Infinitive mood
The “infinitive mood” merely refers to a verb being put into its infinitive
form—that is, the base form with the particle to. For example:
• “To be loved is a wonderful thing.”
In this case, the infinitive to be forms the infinitive phrase to be loved, which
is used as a noun and the subject of the sentence.
Infinitives have a variety of functions in a sentence, but none of them is as a
true verb, which is why we do not consider the so-called “infinitive mood” as
belonging to any of the true grammatical moods in English.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following moods is used to describe what is true or real?
a) Indicative mood
b) Subjunctive mood
c) Imperative mood
d) A & C
e) B & C
 
2. Which of the following moods is used to describe what is unreal,
hypothetical, or desired?
a) Indicative mood
b) Subjunctive mood
c) Imperative mood
d) A & C
e) B & C
 
753

3. Which of the following kinds of sentences can be made using the
indicative mood?
a) Declarative sentences
b) Conditional sentences
c) Interrogative sentences
d) Imperative sentences
e) A & C
f) B & D
 
4. Identify the grammatical mood used in the following sentence:
“I wish I were in Spain right now, instead of at home.”
a) Indicative mood
b) Subjunctive mood
c) Imperative mood
d) Emphatic mood
 
5. Which of the following is not one of the true grammatical moods?
a) Indicative mood
b) Subjunctive mood
c) Imperative mood
d) Emphatic mood
e) Infinitive mood
f) A & B
g) C & E
h) D & E
Indicative Mood
Definition
The indicative mood is a type of grammatical mood used to express facts,
statements, opinions, or questions. It is the sole realis mood in English (as
opposed to the irrealis moods).
This mood can be used in the past, present, or future tense and in a
declarative sentence (i.e., a statement) or an interrogative sentence
(i.e., a question). For example:
• “She graduated last year with a doctorate in neuroscience.” (declarative
754

sentence in the past indicative)
• “He is taking his exam at the new testing center.” (declarative sentence in
the present indicative)
• “Are you going to give your speech tomorrow?” (interrogative sentence in
the future indicative)
The indicative mood covers a wide breadth of sentence structures and verb
tenses, and it is more commonly used than the imperative and
subjunctive moods (the two irrealis moods in English).
Function
Indicative-mood verbs function in many tenses and forms. The following
sections contain explanations for and various examples of declarative and
interrogative sentences in the past indicative, present indicative, and
future indicative.
Past indicative
Verbs in the past indicative describe things that have happened or are
believed to have happened at some point in the past.
Declarative sentences in the past
indicative
In declarative sentences in the past indicative, the past simple tense and
past perfect tense describe something that finished in the past, whereas
the past continuous tense and past perfect continuous tense describe
a continuous action originating in the past. For example:
• “Verne left his house and headed to the airport.” (past simple tense)
• “We had lived in Singapore for three years before returning to America.”
(past perfect tense)
• “She was looking online for a solution to her homework problem.” (past
continuous tense)
• “I had been studying philosophy at the time, but my real interest was in
Japanese literature.” (past perfect continuous tense)
755

Interrogative sentences in the
past indicative
Interrogative sentences in the past indicative may use the past tense to
inquire about a past action or event. For example:
• “Did you finish the movie without me?” (past simple tense)
• “Had the candidate successfully completed the internship at the time?”
(past perfect tense)
• “Where were they training for their race?” (past continuous tense)
• “Who had she been spending her time with when all this happened?”
(past perfect continuous tense)
Present indicative
The present indicative describes things that are happening, are about to
happen, or are believed to be happening.
Declarative 
sentences 
in 
the
present indicative
In declarative sentences in the present indicative, the present simple
tense and present continuous tense describe habits or things occurring
in the present or near future, whereas the present perfect tense and
present perfect continuous tense describe experiences or things
originating in the past and continuing into the present. For example:
• “She brings her own lunch to work every day.” (present simple tense)
• “The cashier is counting the customer’s change.” (present continuous
tense)
• “I have visited every major theme park in the world.” (present perfect
tense)
• “They have been staying with my parents while the repairs are finished.”
(present perfect continuous tense)
Interrogative sentences in the
756

present indicative
Interrogative sentences in the present indicative may use the present tense
to inquire about a current or closely occurring action or event. For example:
• “What kinds of books do you normally read?” (present simple tense)
• “What is Mae doing right now?” (present continuous tense)
• “Have you heard that new song on the radio yet?” (present perfect tense)
• “Where have you been working these days?” (present perfect continuous
tense)
Future indicative
The future indicative describes things that will happen or things that it is
believed will happen. The future tense in English is not a unique verb
inflection (in comparison to the present and past tenses), but is
approximated using the form will or be going to + the main verb.
Declarative 
sentences 
in 
the
future indicative
Declarative sentences in the future indicative use the future tense to describe
things that will or are likely to occur at a future time. For example:
• “I will try to be more patient with children.” (will)
• “Eugene is going to compete in a skiing competition next week.” (be
going to)
Interrogative sentences in the
future indicative
Interrogative sentences in the future indicative use the future tense to
inquire about a future action or event. For example:
• “Will they arrive on time?” (will)
• “What are you going to write about for your thesis?” (be going to)
757

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. The indicative mood can be used to express which of the following?
a) statements
b) opinions
c) questions
d) facts
e) All of the above
2. Which of the following sentences uses the past indicative?
a) “Jude is preparing breakfast for the guests.”
b) “Have you ever been to Egypt?”
c) “The child was complaining about her missing toy.”
d) “I won’t be able to take time off from work.”
3. Which of the following sentences uses the present indicative?
a) “She’ll be busy at summer camp from June to August.”
b) “He usually goes for a jog in the afternoon.”
c) “Were you at the movie theater last night?”
d) “The two best friends hadn’t seen each other in years.”
4. Which of the following sentences uses the future indicative?
a) “Casey suffers from terrible migraines.”
b) “They spent all day yesterday exploring the museum.”
c) “Is he going to attend college or take a year off?”
d) “What country are you moving to with your family?”
Subjunctive Mood
Definition
The subjunctive mood refers to verbs that are used to describe
hypothetical or non-real actions, events, or situations. This is in comparison
to the indicative mood, which is used to express factual, non-hypothetical
information.
We most commonly use the subjunctive mood to express desires or wishes;
758

to express commands, suggestions, requests, or statements of necessity; or to
describe hypothetical outcomes that depend on certain conditions.
Using the Subjunctive Mood
Verbs do not have different forms to express the subjunctive mood in
English. Instead, they are conjugated a certain way depending on the
meaning we wish to achieve.
Expressing Wishes
When we a wish for something to be true, we conjugate the verb one degree
into the past to create the subjunctive mood. For example:
• Indicative mood: “It’s Monday. I have to go to work.”
• Subjunctive mood: “I wish it weren’t Monday. I wish I didn’t have to go
to work.”
(Notice that the verb be always conjugates to were in the subjunctive mood,
regardless of whether it refers to a singular or plural noun.)
See the full section on Expressing Wishes to learn more about conjugating
wishes in different tenses.
Expressing 
Commands,
Suggestions, 
Requests, 
and
Statements of Necessity
When we express actions that we demand, suggest, or request that someone
else take, or describe something that must be the case, we use the base form
of the verb—that is, the infinitive form without the word to.
For example:
• “He demanded that they leave the room at once.” (command)
• “I recommend that she study harder next time.” (suggestion)
• “I ask that the audience be completely silent during the demonstration.”
(request)
• “It’s necessary that we be vigilant to avoid another disaster.” (statement of
necessity)
759

The biggest difference between the subjunctive and indicative mood in this
case is that the verb does not change according to who is taking the action.
For instance, it is she study, the audience be, and we be in the subjunctive,
while it would be she studies, the audience is, and we are in the indicative
mood.
Note that when we issue direct demands using imperative sentences (as
in, “Do your homework!” or “Please close the window.”), we are no longer
using the subjunctive mood—instead, we are using what’s known as the
imperative mood.
Conditional Sentences
Conditional sentences are used to describe hypothetical scenarios that
require a certain condition or conditions to be met. They use what’s known
as the conditional mood and are generally constructed using if to identify
the conditions that must be met.
There are four “degrees” of conditionals, all of which vary in structure and
meaning. We’ll give a brief synopsis of the different conditionals below; see
the section on Conditional Sentences to learn more about how they are
formed and used.
Zero Conditional
The zero conditional is used to talk about something that is generally true.
For instance:
• “If you throw a ball in the air, it comes back down.” (Always true: A ball will
come back down every time you throw it in the air.)
First Conditional
The first conditional is very similar in structure to the zero conditional,
except that we now use the future simple tense (will + bare infinitive) to
describe a probable or intended result of the condition. For example:
• “If I see him, I will tell him.”
• “If I win the lottery, I will buy a new house.”
Second Conditional
760

We use the second conditional to speak about a hypothetical situation or
outcome resulting from the condition. Unlike the first conditional, we
generally use the second conditional to talk about things that cannot or are
less likely to happen.
To create the second conditional, we use the past simple tense after the if
clause, followed by would, could or might + the bare infinitive for the result
of the condition. For example:
• “If you had a phone, you could call me every day.”
• “If I were older, I might stay up all night long.”
Third Conditional
Third conditionals are used to establish a hypothetical situation in the past,
followed by a hypothetical outcome that did not really happen—typically, the
outcome is the opposite of what actually happened.
To form the third conditional, we use the past perfect tense for the if
conditional clause, and would/could/should/might have + the past
participle of the verb for the hypothetical outcome.
• “If I had been more prepared, I would have passed that test.”
• “If I hadn’t overslept, I wouldn’t have been late for work.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not something we use the subjunctive mood to
express?
a) A wish
b) Commands, suggestions, requests, and statements of necessity
c) Conditionals
d) Factual, non-hypothetical information
2. How are verbs conjugated to express wishes in the subjunctive mood?
a) Shifted one tense into the future
b) Shifted one tense into the past
c) Into the base form of the verb
d) Into the infinitive form of the verb
 
761

3. How are verbs conjugated to express commands in the subjunctive
mood?
a) Shifted one tense into the future
b) Shifted one tense into the past
c) Into the base form of the verb
d) Into the infinitive form of the verb
4. Which of the following words is used to indicate a conditional sentence?
a) if
b) were
c) will
d) wish
5. Which of the following sentences is in the subjunctive mood?
a) “I’m going out for a walk later.”
b) “It’s really important that you be still during the procedure.”
c) “Please don’t be so noisy!”
d) “She will be studying tonight, so she can’t come to baseball practice.”
Subjunctive Mood - Expressing
Wishes
Definition
One of the most straightforward ways of using the subjunctive mood is
when we want to describe a wish for something to be different than it is or
was. We generally construct these sentences using the word wish, followed
by the verb of the desired action.
Creating the subjunctive mood
When we express wishes, we create the subjunctive mood by moving the
main verb of the sentence one tense back in the past. We’ll look at some
examples of these tense shifts below, but here is a quick reference to
remember how each tense moves back in the past:
present simple tense —> past simple tense
762

present continuous tense —> past continuous tense
present perfect tense —>past perfect tense
present perfect continuous tense —>past perfect continuous tense
 
past simple tense —> past perfect tense
past continuous tense —> past perfect continuous tense
past perfect tense —>past perfect tense (no further shift possible)
past perfect continuous tense —>past perfect continuous tense (no
further shift possible)
Present tense wishes
As we can see above, for a wish about a situation in the present, we use the
past tense equivalent of the verb:
• Situation: “It’s Monday. I have to go to work.” (present simple tense)
• “I wish it weren’t Monday. I wish I didn’t have to go to work.” (past
simple tense)
Conjugating be in the subjunctive
mood
You might be more inclined to say “I wish it wasn’t Monday,” because this
sounds like the natural subject-verb agreement resulting from “It is
Monday.” However, the verb be always conjugates to were in the
subjunctive mood, regardless of whether it refers to a singular or plural
noun.
Although it is becoming increasingly common to use was in everyday writing
and speech, you should always use were when talking about wishes or
desires, especially in formal, professional, or academic contexts.
Be is the only verb that conjugates irregularly to reflect the subjunctive mood
for wishes and desires. For all other verbs, we simply move them back one
tense in the past as normal.
For example:
• Situation: “I can’t speak French, but would like to.”
• Desire: “I wish I spoke French.”
763

When we use auxiliary verbs, we move these back a tense instead of the
main verbs:
• “I wish I could speak French.”
We can also use the subjunctive mood within the same sentence as verbs in
the indicative mood:
• “I can’t speak French, but I wish I could.”
Examples of other present tense
wishes
• Situation: “It is raining outside.” (present continuous tense)
• Desire: “I wish it weren’t raining.” (past continuous tense)
• Situation: “He has lived in New York City his whole life.” (present perfect
tense)
• Desire: “He wishes he had lived somewhere else at some point.” (past
perfect tense)
• Situation: “My assistant has been organizing the filing cabinet.” (present
perfect continuous tense)
• Desire: “I wish he had been working on something more important.”
(past perfect continuous tense)
Past tense wishes
For past wishes, we go back in the past one tense further. For instance:
• Situation: “I’ll miss my appointment because I left the house late.” (past
simple tense)
• “I wish I had left the house earlier.” (past perfect tense)
As with the present tense, we can also have sentences that use both the
indicative mood and the subjunctive mood. For instance:
• “I forgot to set an alarm; I wish I hadn’t.”
Examples of other past tense
wishes
• Situation: “I was living in Canada when I met you.” (past continuous tense)
764

• Desire: “I wish I had been living in America when I met you.” (past
perfect continuous tense)
• Situation: “He had started smoking again.” (past perfect tense)
• Desire: “They all wished he hadn’t started smoking again.” (past perfect
tense—no further shift possible)
• Situation: I had been working outside when you called. (present perfect
continuous tense)
• Desire: “I wish I hadn’t been working outside when you called.” (past
perfect continuous tense)
Wishes about others’ behavior
When we talk about someone’s continued behavior that we wish were
different, we either use would + the desired verb, or simply the past tense of
the verb.
For example:
Your son is always leaving his clothes lying around the bedroom floor. 
• “I wish he would pick up his clothes off the floor when I asked him to.”
or
• “I wish he picked up his clothes off the floor when I asked him to.”
Your mother always whistles when she is in the house. 
• “I wish she wouldn’t whistle in the house like that.”
or
• “I wish she didn’t whistle in the house like that.”
In the examples above, both constructions of the subjunctive are acceptable,
though the would construction is more conventional. If we want to imply
that we find a certain behavior annoying, we tend to use the would
construction.
If only instead of wish
To express a desire that is more fanciful, unrealistic, or that we consider to be
ideal, we can use if only instead of I wish to add more emphasis to the desire.
(Note that the subjunctive verb still goes back one tense in the past.)
For example:
• “I hate being cold all the time. If only I lived in a hot country.”
• “If only I were rich—I would spend my whole life traveling.”
765

• “We’re spending two weeks in the French alps next month; if only I could
ski!”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which verb conjugates irregularly when describing wishes in the
subjunctive mood?
a) can
b) will
c) be
d) have
 
2. For a situation in the present perfect tense, what verb tense would we use
for a wish in the subjunctive mood?
a) present perfect continuous tense
b) past simple tense
c) past continuous tense
d) past perfect tense
 
3. Which of the following sentences is correctly conjugated for a wish in the
subjunctive mood?
a) “I wish I weren’t short.”
b) “I wish I wasn’t short.”
c) “I wish I won’t be short.”
d) “I wish I’m not short.”
 
4. Which of the following phrases can be used instead of wish to describe an
ideal or fanciful desire?
a) if so
b) if only
c) if possible
d) if hopefully
5. Which auxiliary verb can we use when we express a desire about someone
else’s behavior in the subjunctive mood?
a) will
766

b) would
c) could
d) should
Voice
Definition
Voice, also known as diathesis, is a grammatical feature that describes the
relationship between the verb and the subject (also known as the agent) in a
sentence. More specifically, voice describes how the verb is expressed or
written in relation to the agent.
There are two main types of voice: active voice and passive voice. A third
type of voice called “middle” voice also exists but is less commonly used.
Here are some examples of the three types of voice:
• “She wrote a novel.” (active voice)
• “The house was purchased by an elderly couple.” (passive voice)
• “The cat licked itself.” (“middle” voice)
Active voice
A verb is in the active voice when the agent of the verb (the person or thing
that performs the action specified by the verb) is also the subject of the
sentence. The active voice is the most common type of voice in both spoken
and written English, and is generally considered to be the default voice.
Not all active-voice verbs are required to take an object. Any object present,
however, must come after the verb (which always comes after the agent). For
example:
• “The boy sang a song.” (with an object, a song)
• “I am watching a movie.” (with an object, a movie)
• “Vivian sings well.” (without an object)
Passive voice
A sentence uses the passive voice when the subject is acted upon by the
verb. Passive-voice sentences are structurally opposite to active-voice
sentences, with the object (now the subject* of the sentence) coming before
767

the verb and the verb coming before the agent of the action. A passive-voice
verb is used in the past participle form preceded by the auxiliary verb be, and
the preposition by is inserted before the agent to form a prepositional
phrase. For example:
• “Angie will perform a famous piano piece tomorrow night.” (active voice)
• “A famous piano piece will be performed by Angie tomorrow night.”
(passive voice)
• “Thousands of people have already read his new book.” (active voice)
• “His new book has already been read by thousands of people.” (passive
voice)
(*When converting a sentence from active to passive, the original object
becomes the new subject due to its position at the beginning of the sentence.
At the same time, the agent changes into the object of a prepositional
phrase.)
Unlike active-voice, passive-voice sentences do not require agents. If an
agent is unknown or irrelevant, you may eliminate the prepositional phrase
containing the agent. For example:
• “The light bulb was patented by Thomas Edison in 1880.” (with agent) 
• “The light bulb was patented in 1880.” (without agent)
• “The wedding venue has been decided on by the bride and groom.”
(with agent)
• “The wedding venue has been decided on.” (without agent)
“Middle” voice
The term “middle” voice describes a type of voice that is a combination of
sorts between the active and passive voices. The middle voice is not clearly
defined in the English language; that is, it does not have a verb form specific
to it. It does, however, contain several odd or irregular verb usages that are
said to correspond most closely with the middle voice of other languages.
In most “middle”-voice sentences, the agent performs the verb’s action on
itself. To compensate for the lack of a middle-voice verb form, these verbs are
typically followed by a reflexive pronoun. For example:
• “My girlfriend always checks herself in the mirror before we go out.”
• “The dog bit itself on the tail.”
“Middle” voice can also be used to describe some intransitive verbs. These
768

verbs syntactically appear active (agent + verb) but function more similarly
to verbs in the passive voice. In other words, the agent is being acted upon
(like the passive voice) despite its position in front of the verb (as in the
active voice). For example:
• “The lasagna cooked in the oven for several hours.” (The verb cook is
acting upon the agent lasagna.)
• “The bicycle broke without warning.” (The verb break is acting upon the
agent bicycle.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following voices is typically regarded as the default voice?
a) passive voice
b) active voice
c) “middle” voice
d) none of the above
 
2. Which of the following choices contains the correct word order for an
active-voice sentence?
a) agent – verb – object
b) verb – agent – object
c) agent – verb – reflexive pronoun
d) subject – verb – prepositional phrase
 
3. Which of the following choices contains the correct word order for a
passive-voice sentence?
a) agent – verb – object
b) verb – agent – object
c) agent – verb – reflexive pronoun
d) subject – verb – prepositional phrase
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses the “middle” voice?
a) “Her parents had chosen the school she would attend.”
b) “I was blinded by a bright light.”
c) “He threw a birthday party for himself.”
d) “All of our food burned.”
769

Active Voice
Definition
The active voice is a type of grammatical voice in which the subject of a
sentence is also the agent of the verb—that is, it performs the action
expressed by the verb. In active-voice sentences, the agent always comes
before the verb. For example:
• “My friend bought a new car.” (My friend performed the action bought.)
• “She enjoys watching movies.” (She performs the action enjoys.)
• “Barney is talking to his sister.” (Barney is performing the action talking.)
A direct object is not always required for active-voice verbs. When an object
is included, however, it must come directly after the verb. For example:
• “I am drinking some tea.” (with a direct object, some tea)
• “The boy hid his report card from his parents.” (with a direct object, his
report card)
• “Dr. Johnson will speak at the convention.” (without a direct object)
When to use the active voice
Typically, the active voice is preferable to the passive voice, as it requires
fewer words and expresses a clearer relationship between the verb and its
agent. The active voice is generally thought of as the default voice in
spoken and written English.
The following sections contain circumstances in which you should always try
to use the active voice over the passive voice.
When there is no direct object
Because passive-voice sentences require direct objects (which are turned into
subjects when converted from active to passive voice), sentences without
direct objects must be active. For example:
• “That man has painted for more than 40 years.”
• “We departed immediately after the grand finale.”
• “The kids chatted for several minutes.”
770

We can see how these sentences cannot be put in the passive voice, because
there is no direct object to become the subject. Take, for instance, the first
sentence:
• “For more than 40 years, has been painted by the man.” (What has been
painted?)
It no longer makes any sense when structured in the passive voice, so it must
remain active.
When the agent is important
The active voice is commonly used to emphasize the importance of an agent
in a sentence. By using the active voice, we can highlight an agent’s
responsibility for or involvement with a particular action. The examples
below demonstrate the differences between an important agent (active
voice) and an unimportant agent (passive voice):
• “The employees drink lots of coffee before work every day.” (active voice—
describes the employees in relation to the act of drinking coffee)
• “Lots of coffee is drunk by the employees before work every day.” (passive
voice—describes the act of drinking coffee in relation to the employees)
• “Sir Isaac Newton discovered gravity more than 300 years ago.” (active
voice—emphasizes Newton’s responsibility for the discovery of gravity)
• “Gravity was discovered by Sir Isaac Newton more than 300 years ago.”
(passive voice—emphasizes the discovery of gravity over Newton’s
involvement)
When the agent is known or
relevant
You should always use the active voice if an agent is identifiable or contains
information that is relevant to the rest of the sentence. For example:
• “Shawn stole a menu from the restaurant.” (The speaker knows or is
familiar with Shawn.)
• “A veterinarian found an abandoned puppy by the road.” (The speaker
knows that it was a veterinarian who found the puppy and believes the
information is relevant.)
• “Dr. Li opened the hospital in 1989.” (The speaker knows the name of the
771

person who started the hospital and the information is relevant to the
conversation.)
On the other hand, when an agent is unknown or irrelevant, we usually
switch to the passive voice and eliminate the agent altogether. For example:
• “A menu was stolen from the restaurant.”
• “An abandoned puppy was found by the road.”
• “The hospital was opened in 1989.”
When 
expressing 
an
authoritative tone
The active voice may also be used to stress the authority of an agent. This
authoritative tone is a strategy commonly used in copywriting, advertising,
and marketing in order to convince consumers of the beneficial effects of a
product or service. It may also be used to establish a command or to more
strongly emphasize an agent’s responsibility for an action. For example:
• “Brushing your teeth at least twice a day is recommended by dentists.”
(passive voice)
• “Dentists recommend brushing your teeth at least twice a day.” (active
voice—emphasizes the authority of the dentists)
• “All of your broccoli must be eaten by you before dessert is served.”
(passive voice)
• “You must eat all of your broccoli before dessert is served.” (active voice—
emphasizes your responsibility to eat your broccoli)
When the agent is an ongoing
topic
Agents that can perform multiple actions may be treated as topics. Making
an agent an ongoing topic places emphasis on that agent instead of the
actions it performs. When an agent acts as a topic, it usually remains the
primary subject in most active-voice sentences used to describe or refer to it.
This can be seen most prominently in works of fiction, in which protagonists
typically perform numerous actions throughout a story.
For example, look at how the passage below describes a fictional protagonist
772

named Caroline:
“Caroline jumped back and gasped. She was afraid of spiders and despised
the feeling of their silky webs on her skin. But she knew it was time to face
her fears. Sighing and brushing herself off, Caroline slowly continued down
the path toward the hill.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In the following active-voice sentence, which word is the agent of the
verb?
“Damien built a bookshelf with his own two hands.”
a) built
b) bookshelf
c) Damien
d) hands
 
2. Which of the following active-voice sentences does not contain a direct
object?
a) “She reads a chapter from her book before bed every night.”
b) “Mom already made plans for the weekend.”
c) “The tornado caused severe damage to the neighborhood.”
d) “Tomorrow night I will be dining with my friends.”
 
3. In which of the following cases should you always use the active voice?
a) When the agent is known or relevant
b) When the agent is an ongoing topic
c) When there is no direct object
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
4. Which of the following sentences uses the active voice?
a) “The town was founded over 400 years ago.”
b) “The father surprised his children by bringing home a kitten.”
c) “Her car has been missing since last week.”
d) “I will be visited by my grandfather tomorrow.”
773

Passive Voice
The passive voice is a type of grammatical voice in which the subject is
acted upon by the verb. In passive-voice sentences, the subject is the
receiver of the action (i.e., what would be the direct object in an active-
voice sentence). For example:
• “The concert was attended by many young people.” (The subject the
concert receives the action of attended.)
• “The necklace is being made by a child.” (The subject the necklace
receives the action of being made.)
Passive-voice verbs are always preceded by the auxiliary verb be and are in
their past participle forms. While the receiver of the action comes before
the verb, the person or thing performing the action (known as the agent)
comes after the verb and is preceded by the preposition by to form a
prepositional phrase. For example:
• “The lights were turned off by the janitor.” (The lights is the subject, but
the janitor performs the action turned off.)
• “Final exams will be taken by students on Friday.” (Final exams is the
subject, but students performs the action taken.)
• “Letters to Santa are sent by children every year.” (Letters to Santa is the
subject, but children performs the action sent.)
Converting the active voice into
the passive voice
You may only convert a sentence from the active voice into the passive voice
if there is a direct object. As we’ve seen, this direct object becomes the
subject in the passive voice. For example:
• “A high school track and field star won the race.” (active voice)
• “The race was won by a high school track and field star.” (passive voice)
• “Local businesses are handing out pamphlets near the mall.” (active
voice)
• “Pamphlets are being handed out by local businesses near the mall.”
(passive voice)
774

If an active-voice sentences does not contain a direct object, it cannot be
converted into the passive voice, as the sentence will lack coherency without
a subject. For example:
• “The kids are playing outside.” (active voice)
• “Is being played by the kids outside.” (What is being played by the kids?)
Converting the passive voice into
the active voice
You may only convert a sentence from the passive voice into the active voice
if there is an identifiable agent of the verb. In the active voice, this agent
becomes the subject. For example:
• “This blanket was knitted by my grandmother.” (passive voice)
• “My grandmother knitted this blanket.” (active voice)
• “The deer was being chased by a bear.” (passive voice)
• “A bear was chasing the deer.” (active voice)
If a passive-voice sentences does not contain an agent, it cannot be
converted into the active voice, as the sentence will lack coherency without a
subject. For example:
• “The Great Pyramid of Giza was constructed more than 4,000 years ago.”
(passive voice)
• “Constructed the Great Pyramid of Giza more than 4,000 years ago.”
(Who constructed the Great Pyramid of Giza?)
When to use the passive voice
The passive voice is less commonly used than the active voice because it is
wordy and often lacks clarity; however, there are several cases in which using
the passive voice may be necessary or preferable.
The following sections contain various circumstances in which you might
wish to use the passive voice instead of the active voice.
When the receiver of the action is
important
The passive voice may be used to emphasize the importance of the receiver of
775

the action. (In contrast, the active voice typically emphasizes the importance
of the agent.) The examples below demonstrate the differences between an
important receiver of the action (passive voice) and an important
agent (active voice):
• “The school dance will be organized by the science teachers this year.”
(passive voice—emphasizes the activity in relation to the organizers)
• “The science teachers will organize the school dance this year.” (active
voice—emphasizes the organizers in relation to the activity)
• “She is always being praised by her parents.” (passive voice—
emphasizes she in relation to her parents)
• “Her parents are always praising her*.” (active voice—emphasizes her
parents in relation to her)
(*When the pronoun she is converted into an object, it becomes her.)
When the agent is unknown,
irrelevant, or implied
Occasionally, the agent of an action may be unknown or irrelevant to the rest
of a sentence, or it may already be heavily implied through the action or
receiver of the action. In these cases, the agent may be eliminated altogether
(which can only be done with the passive voice—not the active voice). For
example:
• “My missing wallet was returned to a lost-and-found.” (unknown agent—
we don’t know who returned the missing wallet)
• “A popular play is being performed at the local theater.” (irrelevant
agent—the names of the performers are irrelevant)
• “Bathing suits are usually sold in the summer months.” (implied agent—
we can assume that the agent is clothing stores or something similar)
When softening an authoritative
tone
Because the passive voice places less emphasis on the responsibility of the
agent and more emphasis on the receiver of the action, we can use the
passive voice to express commands in a softer, less authoritative tone than
776

those expressed through the active voice. For example:
• “Inexperienced mountaineers should not attempt Mount Everest.”
(active voice—emphasizes inexperienced mountaineers’ responsibility to
avoid the mountain)
• “Mount Everest should not be attempted by inexperienced
mountaineers.” (passive voice—emphasizes the difficulty or danger of the
mountain)
If the agent is clearly implied, it may be eliminated for the sake of
conciseness:
• “You need to finish this project by tomorrow.” (active voice)
• “This project needs to be finished by you by tomorrow.” (passive voice
with agent)
• “This project needs to be finished by tomorrow.” (passive voice without
agent)
When expressing a professional,
neutral, or objective tone
Various forms of writing, including scientific reports and instruction
manuals, use the passive voice to express a professional, neutral, or objective
tone. Typically, the receiver of the action functions as the primary topic
throughout the text. The agent is usually removed due to irrelevance or to
avoid a sense of subjectivity. For example:
• “The experiment was conducted over the course of two weeks.”
• “Once Part A has been inserted into Part B, tighten the screws with a
screwdriver.”
• “Adverse reactions to the medication should be assessed and treated
by a medical professional.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In the following passive-voice sentence, which group of words is the
receiver of the action?
“The large monument was erected by the construction crew last spring.”
a) the large monument
777

b) was erected
c) by the construction crew
d) last spring
 
2. Which of the following passive-voice sentences does not contain an agent
of the verb?
a) “The homework assignment was completed last Thursday.”
b) “Frank was struck by lightning.”
c) “Her poem will be read aloud by her teacher.”
d) “This desk was assembled by my aunt.”
3. Which choice correctly converts the following active-voice sentence into
the passive voice?
“You should congratulate your sister on her academic achievement.”
a) “Your sister should congratulate on her academic achievement.”
b) “Your sister should be congratulated on her academic achievement.”
c) “Your sister should congratulate on her academic achievement by you.”
d) “Your sister on her academic achievement should be congratulated.”
4. In which of the following cases should you use the passive voice?
a) When softening an authoritative tone
b) When the agent is important
c) When expressing a neutral or professional tone
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) All of the above
5. Which of the following sentences uses the passive voice?
a) “You can get to Vienna from Salzburg by train.”
b) “The elementary school is by the park.”
c) “I learned Korean by watching dramas.”
d) “This scarf was crocheted by my friend.”
Middle Voice
Definition
778

The so-called middle voice is an approximate type of grammatical voice in
which the subject both performs and receives the action expressed by the
verb. In other words, the subject acts as both the agent and the receiver
(i.e., the direct object) of the action. For example:
• “He injured himself playing rugby.” (He is the agent and himself is the
receiver of the action.)
• “The cat is scratching itself.” (The cat is the agent and itself is the receiver
of the action.)
Middle-voice verbs follow the same syntactic structure as in the active
voice (agent + verb), but function semantically as passive-voice verbs. As
a result, the middle voice is described as a combination of the active and
passive voices.
Because there is no verb form exclusive to the middle voice, it is often
categorized as the active voice since it uses the same verb structure in a
sentence. The following examples highlight the similarities between the two:
• “Some snakes have tried to eat inedible things.” (active voice)
• “Some snakes have tried to eat themselves.” (middle voice)
• “The man accidentally hit his face.” (active voice)
• “The man accidentally hit himself in the face.” (middle voice)
How to identify the middle voice
We can distinguish the middle voice from the active voice by determining
whether there is a reflexive pronoun after the verb (in the direct object
position) or an intransitive verb acting upon the agent.
When the direct object is a
reflexive pronoun
Because the agent is also the receiver of the action in the middle voice, we
can clarify this connection by inserting a reflexive pronoun after the verb.
The reflexive pronoun assumes the role of the direct object and indicates
that the agent is acting upon itself. For example:
• “The child warmed herself by blowing into her hands.” (Herself is a
reflexive pronoun that refers to the child.)
• “Small dogs tend to hurt themselves when playing with bigger dogs.”
779

(Themselves is a reflexive pronoun that refers to small dogs.)
Many middle-voice verbs are transitive verbs and therefore require a direct
object in the form of a reflexive pronoun. Without a reflexive pronoun, the
receiver of the action becomes unclear, and the sentence loses coherence.
For example:
• “The child warmed by blowing into her hands.” (What or whom did the
child warm?)
• “Small dogs tend to hurt when playing with bigger dogs.” (What or whom
do small dogs tend to hurt?)
Reusing the agent instead of adding a reflexive pronoun will affect the
coherence of the sentence or even change its meaning altogether:
• “The child warmed the child by blowing into her hands.” (implies the child
warmed a different child)
• “Small dogs tend to hurt small dogs when playing with bigger dogs.”
(implies small dogs tend to hurt other small dogs)
Likewise, using a personal pronoun instead of a reflexive pronoun will
change or confuse the meaning of the verb’s action:
• “The child warmed her by blowing into her hands.” (implies the child
warmed a different child)
• “Small dogs tend to hurt them when playing with bigger dogs.” (indicates
an unspecified object of the verb hurt other than small dogs)
However, there do exist certain verbs for which the reflexive pronouns are
implied and may therefore be eliminated. For example:
• “My father is shaving himself in the bathroom.” (with the reflexive
pronoun himself)
• “My father is shaving in the bathroom.” (without reflexive the pronoun)
• “She always stretches herself before doing yoga.” (with the reflexive
pronoun herself)
• “She always stretches before doing yoga.” (without reflexive the pronoun)
When the verb is intransitive and
acting upon the agent
Certain intransitive verbs can be used to modify an agent (usually an
780

inanimate object) that is also the receiver of the action. In the middle voice,
this type of verb does not take a reflexive pronoun (or any direct object). For
example:
• “My sister’s lunch is cooking on the stove.” (Cook is an intransitive verb
indicating what is being cooked.)
• “This car doesn’t drive smoothly anymore.” (Drive is an intransitive verb
indicating what is being driven.)
• “Her engagement ring broke in half.” (Break is an intransitive verb
indicating what is being broken.)
However, active-voice verbs can also be intransitive and are expressed
identically to middle-voice verbs. For example:
• “The boy laughed when he heard the joke.” (Laugh is an intransitive verb
indicating who is laughing.)
• “Someone is crying in the hallway.” (Cry is an intransitive verb indicating
who is crying.)
You can determine whether an intransitive verb is in the active voice or the
middle voice by changing the verb into the passive voice. Doing so will
convert the intransitive verb into a transitive verb and the agent into the
receiver of the action. If the meaning of the sentence stays roughly the same,
it is in the middle voice. If the meaning changes dramatically or lacks
coherence, it is in the active voice. For example:
• “My sister’s lunch is cooking on the stove.” (original)
✔ “My sister’s lunch is being cooked on the stove.” (passive voice)
Because cook can be converted into a transitive verb in the passive voice
without altering the meaning of the original sentence, the original sentence
must be in the middle voice.
Here is another example:
• “The boy laughed when he heard the joke.” (original)
✖ “The boy was laughed when he heard the joke.” (passive voice)
When converted into the passive voice, the original sentence loses
coherence; therefore, it must be in the active voice.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is the correct word order for a middle-voice
781

sentence?
a) agent – verb – reflexive pronoun
b) subject – verb
c) subject – reflexive pronoun – verb
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) None of the above
 
2. Which of the following sentences is in the middle voice?
a) “Brianna wants to see the world for herself.”
b) “The mountain appeared vaster than the sky itself.”
c) “I can’t contain myself when I’m excited about something.”
d) “Children are encouraged to play by themselves.”
 
3. Which of the following sentences is in the active voice?
a) “He can never control himself when he’s angry.”
b) “Edmund is shaving in the upstairs bathroom.”
c) “What’s cooking for dinner tonight?”
d) “You should always stretch your muscles before exercising.”
 
4. Which of the following sentences is not in the middle voice?
a) “The child exhausted her by playing too many games.”
b) “The man saw himself in the mirror.”
c) “Joanna entertained herself by whistling.”
d) “The employees dedicated themselves to their work.”
Speech
Definition
Grammatical speech refers to how we report something another person said.
Depending on how we do this, we sometimes have to inflect (change the
form of) the verbs that we use.
Speech is usually divided between two types: direct speech and reported
speech (also known as indirect speech). There are also other sub-
categories of speech, which we’ll look at a little later in this section.
782

Reporting verbs
Both direct and indirect speech use what are known as reporting verbs,
the most common of which are say and tell. When we use tell, we need to
use another person’s name or a personal pronoun as an indirect object.
Other reporting verbs include ask, instruct, explain, mention, suggest, claim,
and many more.
Direct Speech
Direct speech refers to the direct quotation of something that someone else
said. It is sometimes known as quoted speech. Because the quotation
happened in the past, we put the reporting verb into the past simple tense,
but we don’t change the verbs used within the quotation. We also punctuate
sentences in a certain way when we use direct speech in writing.
Punctuating direct speech
When used in writing, we indicate the quoted speech with quotation
marks. (Note that American English uses double quotation marks ( “ ”
), while British English typically uses single quotation marks ( ‘ ’ ).)
If we are quoting an entire sentence, we set it apart with one or two commas.
For example:
• John said, “I’ll never live in this city again.”
• Mary told him, “I want to have another baby,” which took him by
surprise.
• The other day, my daughter asked, “Mommy, why do I have to go to
school, but you don’t?”
However, if we are quoting a fragment of speech that is used as an integral
part of the overall sentence, then no commas are used. We still use reporting
verbs in the past tense, though. For instance:
• John said he feels “really bad” about what happened.
Direct speech before a reporting
verb
783

We can also put direct speech before the reporting verb. Again, we usually
use a comma to separate the quoted text from the unquoted text, as in:
• “I can’t wait to see daddy,” my son said.
However, if a question mark or exclamation point is used in the direct
speech, then we do not use a comma:
• “Where are we going?” asked Sally.
• “This is going to be great!” Tom exclaimed.
End punctuation — American vs.
British English
In American English, a period or comma used at the end of direct speech
always appears within the quotation marks.
In British English, however, if the quotation ends in a period or comma, it is
usually placed outside the quotation mark, as in:
• The CEO said, ‘This is a great day for the company’.
• ‘I want to be a doctor when I grow up’, Susy told us yesterday.
Note that if a quoted sentence ends in a question mark or exclamation point
that belongs to the quotation, it will appear within the quotation marks. If
the question mark or exclamation point belongs to the overall sentence
(that is, it isn’t actually part of the quotation), it will appear outside the
quotation marks. This is the same in both American and British English. For
example:
• Samantha asked, “How long will it take to get there?”
• But I don’t want to just ‘see how things go’!
Using multiple sets of quotation
marks
If a sentence already uses quotation marks, then we have to differentiate
between the quoted speech and the rest of the sentence. If we are using
double quotation marks, then we have to put the quoted speech in single
quotation marks; if it is in single quotation marks, then the quoted text is put
into double quotation marks. The rest of the punctuation in the sentence
784

does not change. For example:
• “They told us, ‘We don’t have the budget for more staff.’”
• ‘The prime minister is reported to have said that he is “in disagreement
with the president’s remarks”, which prompted a quick response from
the White House.’
Reported 
Speech 
(Indirect
Speech)
When we tell other people what someone else told us without directly
quoting that person, it is called reported speech. (It is also sometimes
known as indirect speech or indirect quotation.)
We still use reporting verbs in reported speech, but we no longer use
quotation marks because we are reporting a version of what was said. We
also do not use commas to set the reported speech apart, though we often
(but not always) introduce it with the word that. For example:
• Janet said she would go to the station herself.
• He told us that he wanted to be alone.
Shifting verb tense in reported
speech
The conventional grammar rule when using reported speech is to shift the
verb tense one degree into the past. This is because we usually put the
reporting verb in the past tense (I asked, she said, they told us, he
suggested, etc.), so the speech that is being reported must shift back as
well. In the table below, we’ll look at the way sentences in various tenses are
shifted in reported speech according to this convention:
Non-reported
sentence
Verb shift
Reported speech
I 
live 
in
Germany.
present simple tense shifts to
past simple tense
He said he lived
in Germany.
785

I 
was 
a
carpenter
before I moved
here.
past simple tense shifts to past
perfect tense
She said that she
had 
been 
a
carpenter 
before
she moved here.
He is writing a
letter 
to 
our
friend.
present continuous tense shifts
to past continuous tense
She told us he
was 
writing 
a
letter to our friend.
She 
was
sleeping 
when
you called.
past continuous tense shifts to
past perfect continuous tense
He told me you
had 
been
sleeping when I
called.
I have been to
Paris 
four
times.
present perfect tense shifts to
past perfect tense
She said she had
been to Paris four
times.
The film had
ended when I
switched on the
TV.
No shift in the first verb, because
there is no tense further in the past.
The second verb shifts from past
simple tense to past perfect
tense.
He said the film
had ended when
he’d switched on
the TV.
When 
she
finally arrived, I
had 
been
waiting for over
two hours.
No shift, as there is no tense further
in the past.
He said he had
been waiting for
over 
two 
hours
when she finally
arrived.
I will call you
tomorrow.
The modal verb will shifts to its
past-tense version, would.
He told me that
he would call me
tomorrow.
 
It should be noted, though, that it is quite common to keep the verb tense
the same in modern English. This is especially true in cases in which the
reporting verb remains in the present tense, or when the thing being
reported is still currently true. To learn more about such nuances, continue
on to the Reported Speech section.
Other categories of speech
786

While direct and reported speech are the two main forms of grammatical
speech, there are two other sub-categories that we use: free indirect
speech and silent speech.
Free Indirect Speech
Free indirect speech (also known as free indirect discourse) is used to
indicate the thoughts or mental processes of a character; as such, it is most
commonly found in prose writing. It is most often used in the form of a
question, rhetorically asking something about the character’s situation.
We do not use reporting verbs to introduce or indicate free indirect speech,
and, like reported speech, it is used without quotation marks. For
example:
• He had no money, no job, and no friends. How had his life arrived to
such a desperate point?
• Janet had just learned that she needed to give a speech to the entire school
in less than an hour. What was she going to do?
Silent Speech
Silent speech refers to a direct quotation that is said internally (i.e.,
silently) by someone to him- or herself. We still use reporting verbs, and we
often apply the exact same punctuation rules to silent speech that we use in
direct speech. For instance:
• “I’m never coming back to this town again,” he murmured to himself.
• She thought, “What a beautiful country.”
It is equally common, however, to use silent speech without quotation marks
(although we still use commas in the same way). To make the quotation
stand out from the rest of the text, some writers will use italics to indicate
silent speech. Note that, if the reporting verb appears before the silent
speech, we generally do not capitalize the first word if we don’t use quotation
marks. For example:
• It will be quiet around here when the kids go to college, Dan
thought.
• She asked herself, how am I going to get out of this one?
Whether you choose to use quotation marks, italics, or nothing at all is
entirely a matter of personal preference when it comes to silent speech—the
787

important thing is to be consistent.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What type of speech is used to indicate an exact quotation by someone
else?
a) Direct speech
b) Reported speech
c) Free indirect speech
d) Silent speech
2. What type of speech is used to indicate an internal quotation by
someone?
a) Direct speech
b) Reported speech
c) Free indirect speech
d) Silent speech
 
3. What is the conventional rule for conjugating verbs in reported
speech?
a) Shift the verb one tense into the future
b) Shift the verb one tense into the past
c) Always use the past simple tense
d) No verb shift is necessary.
 
4. In American English, when does the end punctuation in quoted speech
appear within the quotation marks?
a) Only if it is a comma or period
b) Only if it is a question mark or exclamation point
c) Never
d) Always
 
5. Identify the type of speech used in the following sentence:
He knew he had to find someone to cover his shift at work, but who would be
free this late on a Saturday?
a) Direct speech
788

b) Reported speech
c) Free indirect speech
d) Silent speech
6. Identify the type of speech used in the following sentence:
She said had seen the movie already, but she would go again if I wanted to
see it with her.
a) Direct speech
b) Reported speech
c) Free indirect speech
d) Silent speech
Reported 
Speech 
(Indirect
Speech)
Definition
When we tell other people what someone else told us, it is called indirect
speech or reported speech. We use reporting verbs to introduce the
information that was spoken previously.
Reporting verbs
The most common so-called “reporting verbs” are say and tell. When we use
tell, we need to use another person’s name, or a personal pronoun
representing him or her, as an indirect object.
For example:
✖ “She said me she was late for the appointment yesterday.” (incorrect)
✔ “She said she was late for the appointment yesterday.” (correct)
✖ “She told she was late for the appointment yesterday.” (incorrect)
✔ “She told me she was late for the appointment yesterday. (correct)
Remember, the personal pronouns are me, you, him, her, it, us, and them.
We can also change the indirect object and use a person’s name, as in “She
told Mark she was late for the appointment yesterday.”
Other reporting verbs include ask, instruct, explain, mention, suggest, claim,
and many more. Although we will focus on say and tell in this article, let’s
789

see some examples that employ other reporting verbs:
• “He asked if I could come in early tomorrow.”
• “She explained that she was only joking.”
• “I merely suggested that we should go home early.”
Shifting grammatical tense in
indirect speech
The conventional grammar rule is to go back a tense when you report to
another person what someone said to you. This is because we usually put the
reporting verb in the past tense (I asked, she said, they told us, he suggested,
etc.), and so the speech that is being reported must shift back as well.
In modern English, though, it is quite common to keep the verb tense the
same. This is especially true in cases where the reporting verb remains in the
present tense and/or that which is being reported is still currently true.
Let’s have a look at each verb tense and examine how the sentence changes
when speech is reported.
Present simple tense
Direct speech: “I live in Germany.”
Reported Speech: “He said I lived in Germany.”
But because the reported speech is still true, it is often left in the present
simple tense:
• “He told them I live in Germany.”
Past simple tense
Direct speech: “She was a carpenter before she moved here.”
Reported speech: “She said she had been a carpenter before she moved
here.”
With the past tense, the general rule is to move it back a tense to the past
perfect tense. However, for action verbs in the past tense, it is much more
common for the reported speech to remain in the past tense:
• “She went to the supermarket this morning.”
790

• “I told him she went to the supermarket this morning.” or:
• “I said she had gone to the supermarket this morning.”
Present continuous tense
Direct speech: “He is writing a letter to their friend.”
Reported speech: If he is writing the letter at the exact moment it is reported
to another person, we generally say either:
• “She says he is writing a letter to their friend.” or:
• “She said he is writing a letter to their friend.”
If the reported action happened some time before it was reported, we shift
the reported speech back one tense to the past continuous, as in:
• “She told us he was writing a letter to their friend.”
Past continuous tense
Direct speech: “You were sleeping when I called.”
Reported speech: “He said you were sleeping when I called.”
In modern English, it is very common to maintain the past continuous tense
in the reported speech. However, the conventional grammar rule is to change
the reported tense to the past perfect continuous tense, as in:
• “He told me you had been sleeping when I called.”
Present perfect tense
Direct speech. “I have been to Paris four times.”
Reported Speech: “She told me she has been / had been to Paris four
times.”
When reporting an action in the present perfect, it is common to either
maintain the tense in reported speech, or to shift it back to the past perfect.
However, if the reported speech is used in contrast to another event or action
in the past, then the past perfect must be used. For example:
• “She said she had been to Paris four times before she met Tom.”
Past perfect tense
791

Direct speech: “The film had ended when I switched on the TV.”
Reported speech: “He said the film had ended when he’d switched on the
TV.”
Reported speech in the past perfect remains the same, as there is no other
tense beyond the past perfect. The other element of the sentence (“when I
switched on the TV”) conventionally goes into the past perfect tense as well.
However, it is also common for this to remain in the past simple in reported
speech, as in:
• “He told me the film had ended when he switched on the TV.”
Past perfect continuous tense
Direct speech: “When she finally arrived, I had been waiting for over two
hours.”
Reported speech remains the same, as there is no tense beyond the past
perfect continuous:
• “He said he had been waiting for over two hours when she finally
arrived.”
Future simple tense
Direct speech: “I will call you tomorrow.”
In reported speech, will goes back a tense and becomes would:
• “He said he would call me tomorrow.”
It is also common for the future simple to remain in the same tense in
reported speech, especially if what was reported happened very recently. For
example:
• Person A: “What did Barry say just now?”
• Person B: “He said/says he will call me tomorrow.”
Special cases
Can
Direct speech: “I can swim.”
792

In reported speech, as with will, can moves back a tense and becomes could:
• “She told me she could swim.”
Must
Direct speech: “I must go.”
In reported speech, must can either remain in the simple present, or else
take the past tense of have to in reported speech, as in:
• "She said she had to go.”
or:
• “She told me she must go.”
Modal auxiliary verbs
If we use the modal auxiliary verbs should, would, could, may, might, or
ought to, then direct speech and reported speech are always the same.
For example:
Direct speech: “You should take an aspirin.”
Reported speech: “She said I should take an aspirin.”
Direct speech: “I would phone him if I had his number.”
Reported speech: “She told me she would phone him if she had his
number.”
Direct speech: “They could stay another day if you want.”
Reported speech: “They said they could stay another day if I wanted.”
Direct speech: “I might/may be late.” 
Reported speech: “I told them I might/may be late.”
Reporting the negative
Where we put the negating not or never depends on what is negative in the
reported speech: the speech being reported or the report itself. Both cases
are simple to structure.
Reporting negative speech
When we report negative speech, we simply use the reporting verbs and
tense shifts that we’ve looked at already. For example:
793

Direct speech: “I did not buy a car.” (negative past tense)
Reported speech: “He said he hadn’t bought a car.” (shifts to the negative
past perfect)
However, as with reporting speech in the positive past simple, it is common
in modern English to leave the reported speech in the negative past simple,
as in:
• “He said he didn’t buy a car.”
Reporting negative commands
There are two general ways to report imperative speech that was in the
negative: we either use not to before the verb of a reported clause without a
subject, or else use was/were not to before the verb of a reported clause with
a subject. (We often contract was/were with not in this construction.) For
example:
Direct speech: “Don’t speak.”
Reported speech:
• “He said not to speak.”
• “He said I wasn’t to speak.”
• “I told you we were not to speak.”
Giving negative reports
When we are giving a negative report of quoted speech, we typically use the
negative past tense of the reporting verb:
Direct speech: “She is studying for a test.”
Reported speech: “She didn’t say she was studying for a test.”
If we want to put the report further in the past, we can also use the negative
past perfect, as in:
• “She hadn’t said she was studying for a test.”
Using 
infinitives 
to 
report
imperatives, requests, and advice
When we report orders, requests, or advice, we can use the infinitive form of
794

the verbs that the other person has said.
Imperatives (orders)
Direct speech: “Stand up straight!”
Reported speech: “The teacher said to stand up straight.”
Requests
Direct speech: “Can you take me to the airport, please?”
Reported speech: “He asked me to take him to the airport.”
Advice
Direct speech: “You should study a bit harder next time.”
Reported speech: “She advised me to study a bit harder.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the conventional rule for the verb tense of speech that we
report?
a) It stays the same as the original tense
b) It shifts back one tense in the past
c) It shifts forward one tense in the future
d) It is always in the past simple tense
2. What does the reporting verb tell require that the verb say does not?
a) a direct object
b) a direct subject
c) an indirect object
d) an indirect subject
3. Which verbs always remain in the same tense when they are reported?
a) reporting verbs (other than suggest and advise)
b) modal auxiliary verbs (other than can and will)
c) linking verbs (other than seem and feel)
d) action verbs (other than say and go)
795

 
4. Which verb form is uniquely used to reporting commands, requests, and
advice?
a) infinitive
b) past perfect
c) future simple
d) present participle
 
5. Which of these is not a reporting verb?
a) advise
b) say
c) suggest
d) speak
6. Complete the following sentence with the appropriate tense according to
conventional grammar rules:
Direct speech: “I have seen that movie already.”
Reported speech: “He said he ________ that movie already.”
a) saw
b) has seen
c) had seen
d) having seen
Grammatical Person
Definition
Grammatical person refers to the degree of involvement of a participant
in an action, event, or circumstance. There are three degrees of grammatical
person: first person (the speaker), second person (someone being
spoken to), and third person (anyone/anything not being directly
addressed). The grammatical person of a clause’s subject (a noun or
pronoun) will affect how we conjugate the verb of that clause.
The vast majority of verbs only conjugate for third-person singular
subjects (e.g., he, she, and it) by taking the suffix “-s” or “-es.”
However, the verb be is unique in that it has five conjugations according to
the grammatical person of its subject and the tense of the verb.
796

Non-be Verbs
When to conjugate for person
Every verb in English (except modal auxiliary verbs) conjugates for
grammatical person. However, this conjugation only occurs in one specific
instance: if the subject is singular and in the third person, and if the verb
is in the present simple tense. If this is the case, we most often conjugate
the verb by adding “-s” or “-es” to the end. In the first or second person in the
present simple tense, we simply use the base form (bare infinitive) of the
verb. For example:
• “I want a soda.” (first-person singular, present simple tense)
• “You want a soda.” (second-person singular, present simple tense)
• “She wants a soda.) (third-person singular, present simple tense)
• “They want a soda.) (third-person plural, present simple tense)
Note that this conjugation does not occur with the past or future simple
tenses:
• “I wanted a soda.” (first-person singular, past simple tense)
• “You wanted a soda.” (second-person singular/plural, past simple tense)
• “She wanted a soda.) (third-person singular, past simple tense)
• “I will want a soda.” (first-person singular, future simple tense)
• “You will want a soda.” (second-person singular/plural, future simple
tense)
• “She will want a soda.” (third-person singular, future simple tense)
Auxiliary verbs
Auxiliary verbs combine with the main verb of a clause to create a unique,
specific meaning. There are three primary auxiliary verbs that can all
conjugate to reflect tense and person: do, have, and be.
We use the verb do as an auxiliary when we want to ask questions or to make
verbs negative. In the present tense in the third-person singular, we
conjugate do into does. For example:
• “Do you want any ice cream?” (second-person singular/plural)
• “Does he want any ice cream?” (third-person singular)
• “They don’t want any ice cream.” (third-person plural)
797

• “She doesn’t want any ice cream.” (third-person singular)
The auxiliary verbs have and be are used to create the perfect, continuous,
and perfect continuous forms of the past and present tenses. The main
verb in these tenses will not conjugate for person, but, in certain cases, the
auxiliary verbs can.
The present perfect and present perfect continuous tense both use
the present-simple tense form of the auxiliary verb have, which conjugates as
has in the third-person singular. For example:
Present Perfect Continuous Tense
• “I have been working a lot lately.” (first-person singular)
• “You have been working a lot lately.” (second-person singular/plural)
• “He has been working a lot lately.” (third-person singular)
• “They have been working a lot lately.” (third-person plural)
Present Perfect Tense
• “I have eaten too much food.” (first-person singular)
• “You have eaten too much food!” (second-person singular/plural)
• “The dog has eaten too much food!” (third-person singular)
• “The dogs have eaten too much food!” (third-person plural)
The present continuous and past continuous tenses, on the other
hand, use the verb be as an auxiliary verb, and it conjugates in several ways
according to person and tense:
Present Continuous Tense
• “I am running out of time.” (first-person singular)
• “We are running out of time.” (first-person plural)
• “You are running out of time.” (second-person singular/plural)
• “He is running out of time.” (third-person singular)
• “They are running out of time.” (third-person plural)
Past Continuous Tense
• “I was running out of time.” (first-person singular)
• “We were running out of time.” (first-person plural)
• “You were running out of time.” (second-person singular/plural)
• “He was running out of time.” (third-person singular)
• “They were running out of time.” (third-person plural)
We’ll examine all the ways be can conjugate a little bit later in this section.
798

Spelling conjugated verbs
As we’ve seen already, some verbs take “-s” or “-es” to conjugate for third-
person singular subjects, depending on how they are spelled. Let’s look at the
rules that guide which kinds of verbs take which endings.
Add “-s”
The vast majority of verbs simply take the suffix “-s” onto the end of their
base form, as in:
Base form Third-person singular
I play
she plays
they break
it breaks
we buy
he buys
you write
the author writes
I bake
my father bakes
they lie
he lies
Add “-es”
There are some verbs that already end in a sibilant sound (a sound like a
hiss or buzz) created by the endings “-ss,” “-z,” “-x,” “-sh,” “-ch,” or “-tch.”
Adding “-s” to the end would just elongate that sound in an odd way, so we
add the suffix “-es” instead so that the sound is distinguished. For example:
Base form Third-person singular
they catch
she catches
we mix
it mixes
I hush
he hushes
we pass
he passes
they quiz
the teacher quizzes
799

I approach
she approaches
We also usually add the “-es” suffix to verbs ending in a consonant + “-o,”
as in:
Base form Third Person Singular Present Tense
I go
he goes
we do
she does
they forgo
he forgoes
they veto
the committee vetoes
I lasso
the rancher lassoes
you undo
he undoes
However, verbs ending in a vowel + “-o” (such as moo, boo, woo, or radio)
simply take the “-s” ending (moos, boos, woos, radios). Solo is unique in
that it ends in a consonant + “o,” yet it also only takes “-s” for the third-
person singular (solos).
Change “y” to “i” and add “-es”
If a verb ends in a consonant followed by “-y,” we conjugate by changing “y”
to “i” and then adding “-es.” (Note that if “y” is preceded by a vowel, as in
play, buy, stay, etc., then we simply add “-s” as usual.)
Base form
Third-person singular
they cry
he cries
we try
she tries
they scurry
it scurries
the dogs bury he buries
I fly
the pilot flies
I spy
she spies
800

Conjugating be
The verb be is known as a highly irregular verb due to the huge variation
in how it conjugates for tense and person. Below are all the possible
conjugations of the verb—eight forms in total!
Grammatical
person
Base
form
Past
Tense
Singular
Past
Tense
Plural
Past
Participle
Present
Tense
Singular
Present
Tense
Plural
n/a
be
 
 
been
 
 
first person
 
I was
we
were
 
I am
we are
second person
 
you were you
were
 
you are
you are
third person
 
he/she/it
was
they
were
 
he/she/it
is
they are
 
Be, like the verbs have and do, can be both an auxiliary verb or the main
verb of a clause. As we saw above, when be functions as an auxiliary, it is
used to create the past continuous and present continuous tenses;
when it functions as a main verb, it is called a linking verb, meaning it
connects a subject to a description rather than expressing a dynamic action.
We’ve already seen examples of be functioning to create the continuous
tenses; now let’s look at some examples of how it functions as a linking
verb.
• “I am 32 years old.”
• “Were you cold last night?”
• “It was very rainy in Ireland.”
• “John is in the other room.”
• “She is a bully.”
• “They are a lost cause.”
Note that we don’t conjugate be into its past and present participles to
reflect grammatical person; instead, they are used when be is functioning as
the main verb in the perfect or continuous tenses. For example:
801

• “I have been unwell lately.” (present perfect tense)
• “You are being silly.” (present continuous tense)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is the only type of verb that does not conjugate for
grammatical person?
a) Auxiliary verbs
b) Modal auxiliary verbs
c) Linking verbs
d) Stative verbs
 
2. Which of the following is not a suffix used to conjugate non-be verbs for
grammatical person?
a) -re
b) -s
c) -es
d) -ed
e) A & D
f) B & C
 
3. Which of the following does the verb be conjugate for?
a) First-person singular present tense
b) Second-person singular past tense
c) Third-person singular present tense
d) Third-person plural past tense
e) A & C
f) B & D
g) All of the above
 
4. Which of the following do all verbs (except modal verbs) conjugate for?
a) First-person singular present tense
b) First-person singular past tense
c) Third-person singular present tense
d) Third-person singular past tense
 
802

5. Which of the following is not a conjugation of be?
a) has
b) was
c) is
d) am
Declension
Definition
Declension collectively refers to the inflection (change in form) of nouns,
pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs to reflect certain aspects of how they are
used in a sentence. Declension stands in contrast to conjugation, which
refers specifically to the inflection of verbs.
Nouns
The declension of nouns reflects two things: plurality and gender.
Plurals
Nouns are declined primarily to reflect number. A noun in its basic form is
inherently singular, so we must inflect it when there is more than one.
The most common way to do this is to add the suffix “-s” to the end of the
noun, as in books, dogs, tables, etc.
However, certain nouns take “-es” at the end instead, and many irregular
plurals defy any sort of spelling guidelines at all. Continue on to the section
on plurals to learn more about the various spelling rules and irregularities
when writing about multiple nouns.
Gender
In English, nouns are generally gender neutral. While it is very common to
inflect nouns for gender in the romance languages (such as French, Italian,
and Spanish), inflection for gender has all but disappeared in modern
English (except for personal pronouns, as we’ll see).
However, there are still a few English nouns that still do inflect for gender.
The most common of these take an “-ess” ending to reflect feminine (female)
803

gender. For example, count (male) vs. countess (female), or prince (male)
vs. princess (female).
Continue to the section describing the inflection of nouns for gender to
learn more about when and how we spell the few remaining gender-specific
noun forms.
Personal Pronouns
Pronouns are used for a wide range of purposes, but we only inflect a
relatively small portion of them—personal pronouns. However, other than
the conjugation of verbs, personal pronouns are the most heavily
inflected part of speech in English, changing form to reflect case, gender,
number, and person. Reflexive pronouns, though not technically an
example of declension, are so similar to personal pronouns that we will also
consider them within this group.
Case
Personal pronouns change form to reflect the subjective case, the objective
case, and the possessive case.
Subjective Case
When a personal pronoun is acting as the subject of a verb (that is, it is the
person or thing doing the action), it is said to be in the subjective case. For
instance:
• “I know that she said that.” (Both pronouns are subjective, as both are
agents of their respective actions.)
• “He told her to be quiet.” (Here, only he is in the subjective case; her, the
recipient or “object” of his action, is in the objective case.)
Objective Case
A personal pronoun is in the objective case when it is a direct or indirect
object of a verb, or else if it is the object of a preposition. For example:
• “I can’t believe he fired you.” (You is the direct object of the verb fire.)
• “Please send them a thank you card.” (Them is the indirect object of the
verb send.)
804

• “You can’t say that to me!” (Me is the object of the preposition to; together
they form the prepositional phrase to me.)
Possessive (Genitive) Case
As the name implies, the possessive case changes the inflection of a personal
pronoun 
to 
mark 
possession. 
Possessive 
determiners 
function
grammatically like adjectives, modifying a noun or nouns. For example:
• “My dad’s glasses went missing.” (My is a possessive determiner that shows
the relation of dad to the speaker.)
• “He said it was his computer.” (His is a possessive determiner that modifies
computer.)
Possessive pronouns are personal pronouns in the possessive case that
have the grammatical function of nouns. For example:
• “I can see mine through the window!”
• “Jenny seems pretty sure that the book is hers.”
Gender
Personal pronouns are only inflected for gender when they are in the third
person and singular—first-person and second-person pronouns (singular or
plural) and third-person plural pronouns remain gender neutral. Here are
the gendered pronouns in English:
Third-person feminine singular: she, her, hers, herself
Third-person masculine singular: he, him, his, himself
The third-person singular can also be neuter. This is used when a personal
pronoun represents a thing or an animal. Animals can sometimes take
gendered personal pronouns if they are pets or domesticated animals;
otherwise, they take the third-person neuter form:
Third-person neuter singular: it, its, its own, itself
Remember, when there are multiple people or things, we use the
ungendered forms of they:
Third person plural: they, them, their, theirs, themselves
Person
805

Grammatical person refers to the perspectives of the personal pronouns used
to identify a person in speech and text—that is, it distinguishes between a
speaker (first person), an addressee (second person), and others beyond that
(third person).
First person
First-person pronouns tell what is directly happening to the speaker or
narrator:
Singular: I, me, my, mine, myself
Plural: we, us, our, ours, ourselves
Second person
We use the second-person pronouns to indicate those who are being
addressed directly by the speaker:
Singular/Plural: you, you, your, yours, yourself (singular), yourselves
(plural)
Third person
Third person is used to talk about someone or something that is not the
speaker and is not being directly addressed:
Feminine singular: she, her, hers, herself
Masculine singular: he, him, his, himself
Neuter singular: it, its, its own, itself
However, when there are multiple people or things, we use the un-gendered
forms of they:
Third person plural: they, them, their, theirs, themselves
Number
Personal pronouns, unlike nouns, have various specific inflections depending
on whether they are singular or plural. For the most part, only the first-
person and third-person personal pronouns have plural forms; the only
plural second-person pronoun is the reflexive pronoun yourselves.
There are no rules or guidelines for how we change the personal pronouns
806

for number because doing so affects all the other forms; we simply have to
memorize their various forms.
Person Number
Gender
Subjective
Case
Objective
Case
Po
De
First
Person
Singular
Masculine/feminine I
me
my
First
Person
Plural
Masculine/feminine we
us
our
Second
Person
Singular/Plural Masculine/feminine you
you
you
Third
Person
Singular
Feminine
she
her
her
Third
Person
Singular
Masculine
he
him
his
Third
person
Singular
Neuter
it
it
its
Third
person
Plural
Neuter 
/ 
gender
neutral)
they
them
the
Reflexive 
Pronouns 
and
intensive pronouns
Reflexive and intensive pronouns are identical in appearance, formed by
adding “-self” or “-selves” to the pronouns my, our, your, her, him, it, them,
or one (an indefinite pronoun).
Reflexive pronouns are used when someone or something is both the subject
and the object of the same verb. When this happens, the reflexive verb is
used as the object of the verb to represent the person or thing; a reflexive
pronoun can never be used as the subject of a verb.
For example:
• “I wish you could hear yourselves right now!”
807

• “She admitted to herself that she was wrong.”
• “The vole hides itself beneath the ground for safety.”
• “The players have really outdone themselves today!”
• “One should strive to better oneself every day.”
Intensive pronouns look identical to reflexive pronouns, but they are used to
add emphasis to a person’s (or thing’s) role in an action. For example:
• “I told them myself that the report would be finished on time.”
• “You need to do the work yourselves, or you will never learn the
material.”
• “The president herself will be speaking at the ceremony.”
Reflexive and intensive pronouns are not typically considered inflections of
personal pronouns. However, because they are formed from other pronouns,
we have grouped them together here with the other types of personal
pronoun declension.
Adjectives
Adjectives are inflected when we want to form comparisons between two
people or things (comparative adjectives), or to identify the person or
thing with the highest degree of a characteristic among a group
(superlative adjectives).
For instance:
• “Mike is strong.” (adjective)
• “I am stronger than him.” (comparative adjective)
• “Jeff is the strongest of all of us.” (superlative adjective)
The progression of inflection for adjectives is known as the degrees of
comparison. The spelling rules that dictate how each degree is formed
depend on how the base form (known as the positive degree) of the adjective
is spelled.
Adjective
spelling
How to modify
Positive
degree
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
808

One syllable,
ending in a
consonant
preceded 
by
one vowel.
Add 
“-er” 
for
comparative
degree or “-est” for
superlative
degree. 
Double
final consonant.
big
bigger
biggest
One syllable,
ending in a
consonant
preceded 
by
two vowels or
another
consonant.
Add 
“-er” 
for
comparative
degree or “-est” for
superlative
degree. 
Do 
not
double 
final
consonant 
if
preceded by one
vowel.
strong
stronger
strongest
One syllable,
ending in an
“e”
Add 
“-r” 
for
comparative
degree or “-st” for
superlative
degree.
large
larger
largest
Two syllables,
ending in a
“y”
Replace “y” with
“i” and add “-er”
for 
comparative
degree or “-est” for
superlative
degree.
happy
happier
happiest
Three 
or
more
syllables, 
or
two syllables
not ending in
"y"
Add 
the 
words
more 
or 
less
before 
the
adjective to make
them comparative,
or most/least to
make 
them
superlative.
clever
more/less
careful
most/least
careful
There are several exceptions to these rules, however, especially when using
809

irregular adjectives. Go to the section on Degrees of Comparison in
the Adjectives chapter to learn more.
Adverbs
We can also inflect adverbs when we want to compare the degree to which
two actions are performed (comparative adverbs), or to identify the
highest degree of how an action is performed. (superlative adverbs).
For example:
• “Susan runs fast.” (adverb)
• “Janet runs faster than Susan.” (comparative adverb)
• “Betty runs the fastest.” (superlative adverb)
The progression of inflection for adverbs is known (like adjectives) as the
degrees of comparison. Again, the spelling rules that dictate how each
degree is formed depend on how the base form (known as the positive
degree) of the adverb is spelled.
Adverb
spelling
How to modify
Positive
degree
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
One
syllable,
ending in
a
consonant
Add 
“-er” 
for
comparative 
degree
or 
“-est” 
for
superlative degree.
fast
faster
fastest
One
syllable,
ending in
an “e”
Add 
“-r” 
for
comparative 
degree
or “-st” for superlative
degree.
late
later
latest
Adverbs
ending in
a “y”
Add the words more
or less before the
adverb to make it
comparative, 
or
most/least to make it
superlative.
carefully
more/less
carefully
most/least
carefully
There are many irregular adverbs that go against the rules we just looked
810

at. Go to the section on degrees of comparison in the Adverbs chapter to
learn more how their comparative and superlative degrees are formed.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following do not undergo grammatical declension?
a) nouns
b) pronouns
c) adjectives
d) verbs
e) adverbs
2. What is the most common reason nouns are inflected?
a) To establish the gender of the noun
b) To establish the plurality of the noun
c) To establish the grammatical person of the noun
d) To establish the grammatical case of the noun
e) All of the above
f) None of the above
 
3. What is the most common reason personal pronouns are inflected?
a) To establish the gender of the pronoun
b) To establish the plurality of the pronoun
c) To establish the grammatical person of the pronoun
d) To establish the grammatical case of the pronoun
e) All of the above
f) None of the above
 
4. How are adjectives most commonly inflected to create the comparative
degree?
a) By adding the suffix “-er”
b) By adding the suffix “-est”
c) By adding the suffix “-es”
d) By adding the suffix “-s”
 
5. Which adverbs do not adhere to the spelling rules when inflecting for the
811

comparative and superlative degree?
a) One-syllable adverbs ending in an “e”
b) Adverbs formed from adjectives
c) Irregular adverbs
d) Adverbs of manner
Plurals
Definition
Plurals of nouns are used to indicate when there is more than one person,
place, animal, or thing.
The normal method for making nouns plural is to add an “-s” at the end of
the noun.
For example:
one boy – two boys
one girl – two girls
one pen – two pens
one pencil – two pencils
one prize – two prizes
one price – two prices
If a noun ends in “-s,” “-x,” “-z,” or with a cluster of consonants, such as “-sh,”
“-ch,” or “-tch” (as in “watch”), we add “-es” to render it plural.
For example:
one coach – two coaches
one witch – two witches
one dish – two dishes
one box – two boxes
one bus – two buses
one kiss – two kisses
one waltz – two waltzes
Words ending in “-y”
When the noun ends in a “-y” and it is preceded by a consonant, we change
812

“y” to “i” and add “-es.”
For example:
one country – two countries
one city – two cities
one gallery – two galleries
one baby – two babies
one lady – two ladies
one reality – two realities
one fly – two flies
one butterfly – two butterflies
However, when a word ends in a “-y” preceded by a vowel, then we simply
add an “-s” as usual:
one toy – two toys
one play – two plays
one key – two keys
one guy – two guys
Irregular plurals
There are some nouns that are irregular. They do not adhere to spelling
rules, and so these need to be memorized.
Here are the most common ones:
one man – two men
one woman – two women
one person – two people*
one mouse – two mice
one goose – two geese
one child – two children
one tooth – two teeth
one foot – two feet
(*Persons is also a plural form of person, but in modern English it is usually
reserved for more formal, bureaucratic, or legal language, as in, “Any such
persons found to guilty of shoplifting will be prosecuted.”)
813

Be aware that irregular plural nouns cannot be made plural again; that is,
you cannot have childrens, or feets. However, people is an exception—it can
be pluralized as peoples in some cases.
Adding “-ves” vs. “-s”
With some nouns that end in “-f,” “-fe,” or “-lf,” we replace the endings with
“-ves” to make them plural. Below is a list of some common examples:
one life – two lives
one wife – two wives
one loaf – two loaves
one leaf – two leaves
one knife – two knives
one thief – two thieves
one calf – two calves
one half – two halves
one wolf – one wolves
However, many other words that end in “-f,” “-fe,” or “-lf” are simply made
plural with an “-s” on the end. Here are some common examples:
one chief – two chiefs
one brief – two briefs
one safe – two safes
one gulf – two gulfs
one belief – two beliefs
one roof – two roofs
And yet some other words can receive either “-ves” or “-s,” such as:
one handkerchief – two handkerchiefs – two handkerchieves
one hoof – two hoofs – two hooves
one scarf – two scarfs – two scarves
Unfortunately, there is no steadfast rule for which words will receive a “-ves”
ending, an “-s” ending, or both—they are irregular and have to be
memorized.
Words ending in “-ff” or “-ffe”
814

Words ending in “-ff” or “-ffe,” on the other hand, have straightforward plural
forms: we simply add “-s” to the end, as in:
one cliff – two cliffs
one bailiff – two bailiffs
one giraffe – two giraffes
one gaffe – two gaffes
Words with the same plural and
singular forms
We also have some nouns that remain the same in singular and plural.
For example:
one fish – two fish*
one sheep – two sheep
one bison – two bison
one aircraft – two aircraft
*Note that fish can also be pluralized as fishes. However, it is more common
for this “-es” form to be used in reference to more than one kind of fish, as
opposed to multiple fish in general.
Uncountable nouns
Although similar in nature to the above nouns, uncountable nouns refer
to things that cannot be divided into individual units, and that therefore
cannot be made plural at all.
For example:
rice
butter
milk
advice
news
To quantify them, we need to use a unit of measure, such as one pound of
rice, a bottle of milk, a piece of advice, etc.
The rules surrounding these can be quite complex, so see the section on
815

Uncountable Nouns to learn more.
Words from Latin or Greek
There are also nouns taken from Latin or Greek that maintain their original
forms in the plural. However, as we’ll see, some of these words have begun
shifting towards more conventional plural forms, in addition to their original
spellings.
For example:
index – indices (indexes is now also acceptable)
appendix – appendices (appendixes is now also acceptable)
fungus – fungi
criterion – criteria
nucleus – nuclei
syllabus – syllabi
focus – foci
cactus – cacti (cactuses is now also acceptable)
thesis – theses
crisis – crises
phenomenon – phenomena
Non-Existent Plural Adjectives
In many languages, especially languages deriving from Latin, adjectives
become plural when they are used to describe plural nouns. However, in
English, adjectives are never made plural.
For example:
✖ “Two blues pens.” (incorrect)
✔ “Two blue pens.” (correct)
✖ “Roses are reds.” (incorrect)
✔ “Roses are red.” (correct)
✖ “Several 10-years-old boys.” (incorrect) 
✖ “Several 10-year-olds boys.” (incorrect) 
✔ “Several 10-year-old boys.” (correct)
As you can see, it is always the noun that is pluralized, and never the
816

adjective.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the correct plural form of the noun batch?
a) batchs
b) batches
c) batchies
d) batch
 
2. For words ending in “-f,” “-fe,” or “-lf,” in what instances do we replace the
endings with “-ves” to make them plural?
a) always
b) never
c) Only if the endings are preceded by a vowel
d) We have to memorize when to do so
 
3. When a word ends in a consonant + “y,” how is the word made plural?
a) By replacing the “y” with “-ies”
b) By replacing the “y” with “-es”
c) By adding “-s” to the end of the word
d) No change necessary
 
4. How can an uncountable noun be made plural?
a) Its singular form is the same as its plural form
b) It cannot be made plural
c) By using its original Latin or Greek ending
d) We have to memorize how to do so
 
5. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “There are a number of missing persons following the disaster.”
b) “Many men and women sacrificed their lives in the line of duty.”
c) “There are many different childrens trying to find their parents.”
d) “The roofs of several houses have collapsed in the last half hour.”
Gender in Nouns
817

Definition
In modern English, nouns are generally only declined (inflected) to create
plurals. There are, however, still some instances in which nouns are
declined to show masculine or feminine gender.
Conveying 
gender 
in 
English
nouns
In many other languages, especially the Romance languages (such as French,
Spanish, and Italian), a large number of nouns are coded as being either
feminine or masculine.
This used to be the case in Old English as well, but in modern English only
certain nouns that describe a person who performs an action are inflected for
gender. This is usually achieved by changing the end of the word to a
feminine suffix, such as “-ess,” “-ine,” and “-trix.” Words are less commonly
changed to specifically reflect masculine gender, but the few that do use the
suffixes “-er” or “-or.”
Making a noun feminine
Of the nouns that decline to mark gender, most do so to indicate the noun as
being feminine. However, even this practice is becoming less common in
modern English.
“-ess”
The most common suffix used to mark feminine nouns is “-ess.” It is used
primarily to identify a professional, noble, royal, or religious title of a woman.
For example:
stewardess
waitress
actress
abbess
countess
duchess
818

princess
The use of “-ess” to distinguish females working in a certain profession is
beginning to wane, giving way to the basic masculine form (actor is
becoming more common to refer to both males and females) or a non-
gendered alternative (flight attendant is now preferred to either steward (m)
or stewardess (f)).
However, gendered titles of royalty, nobility, and religiosity are still common
in modern English.
“-ette”
The other suffix most commonly recognized as being a feminine marker is “-
ette,” due largely to its use in the term suffragette, the name given to
supporters and advocates of women’s suffrage in the early 20th century
(especially in Britain).
Two other words commonly distinguished as feminine using this suffix are
bachelorette (a young unmarried woman, used especially in the context of
“bachelorette parties”) and brunette (a girl or woman with brown hair), both
of which terms are still widely used in modern English today.
Other than the above examples, though, “-ette” is more commonly used to
refer to non-gendered items that are small or diminutive, such as cigarette,
kitchenette, novelette, launderette, cassette, and so on.
Other feminine suffixes
Other than “-ess” and “-ette,” the only extant suffixes that exist to signify
femininity are “-ine,” used to form heroine (from hero), and “-trix,” which
almost only appears in old-fashioned or legalistic terms, such as aviatrix
(from aviator), executrix (from executor), or mediatrix (from mediator).
Making a noun masculine
Nouns that are, were, or can be distinguished between feminine and
masculine genders are often masculine in their basic form. These tend to end
in “-er” or “-or” to denote someone who performs the action of a verb. For
example:
actor
cleaner
819

lawyer
executioner
executor
aviator
bachelor
Increasingly in modern English, the distinction of the above terms as being
solely or inherently masculine is fading away, and the terms refer to anyone
—regardless of gender identity—who performs such an action or role.
Uniquely, there is one word that is inherently feminine that can take the
suffix “-er” to become masculine: we make the inherently feminine word
widow (meaning a woman whose spouse had died) masculine by adding “-
er”—widower (a man whose spouse has died).
Nouns 
with 
inherent 
gender
identity
There is a relatively small amount of nouns in English that are inherently
gendered because they describe members of the male or female sex; they do
not use suffixes to alter the meaning of an existing word. Most commonly,
they are terms describing familial, social, or sometimes royal titles.
Below is a list of common (but by no means exhaustive) examples:
Feminine
Masculine
queen
king
girl
boy
bride
groom (less commonly, bridegroom)
mother
father
wife
husband
madam
sir
lady
gentleman
witch
wizard
 
820

Animal names
We also have specific gendered words to identify male and female members
of animal types. Although some are dependent on the use of suffixes (for
instance, a female lion is a lioness), many are totally unique words specific to
that gender. Here are a few common examples:
Animal type Feminine Masculine
horses
mare
stallion
deer
doe
buck
pigs
sow
boar
chickens
hen
rooster
sheep
ewe
ram
 
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is used to change a noun to reflect gender in English?
a) a prefix
b) a suffix
c) pronunciation
d) syllable stress
e) A & C
f) B & D
 
2. Which of the following is most commonly used to indicate a feminine
noun?
a) -ette
b) -ine
c) -trix
d) -ess
e) A & B
f) C & D
 
3. Which of the following is most commonly used to indicate a masculine
821

noun?
a) -er
b) -or
c) -ed
d) -ing
e) A & B
f) C & D
 
4. Which of the following nouns identifies for gender without using a
gendered suffix?
a) madame
b) actress
c) widower
d) brunette
Regular and Irregular Inflection
Definition
Inflection, the way we change a word’s form to reflect things like tense,
plurality, gender, etc., is usually governed by consistent, predictable rules.
This is known as regular inflection.
For example, we usually create the past simple tense of verbs by adding “-
d” or “-ed” (as in heard or walked, which also function as the verbs’ past
participles), and we normally create plurals by adding “-s” or “-es” to the
ends of nouns (as in dogs, cats, watches, etc.).
However, there are many instances in which the way a word is inflected
doesn’t seem to follow any rules or conventions at all—this is known as
irregular inflection. For example, the past simple tense of the verb go is
went (rather than goed, as regular inflection would suggest), and its past
participle is gone.
Irregular inflection affects nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and (most commonly)
verbs.
Plurals of Nouns
Although nouns are largely uninflected in English (remaining the same
822

regardless of case, gender, or person), we do still inflect them to indicate
plurals—that is, when there is more than one of something.
Regular plurals
As we noted above, the standard way to inflect a noun for plurality is to add
“-s” or “-es.” Occasionally we have to make a slight alteration to the spelling
of the word to accommodate this inflection (for example, when the noun
ends in a “-y” and it is preceded by a consonant, we change “y” to “i” and add
“-es”), but these are still considered regular because there is a standard rule
that they follow. Here are some examples of regular nouns and their plural
counterparts:
Regular noun Plural form
boy
boys
book
books
box
boxes
beach
beaches
lady
ladies
city
cities
Irregular plurals
However, there are a large number of nouns that have irregular plural
forms that defy this convention. These are completely unique words that do
not follow any rules or conventions for how they are spelled. Here are some
of the most common irregular nouns:
Irregular noun
Plural form
person
people/persons*
mouse
mice
goose
geese
child
children
823

foot
feet
man
men
woman
women
(*Persons is also a plural form of person, but in modern English it is usually
reserved for more formal, bureaucratic, or legal language, as in, “Any such
persons found to be guilty of shoplifting will be prosecuted.”)
There are many other unique, irregular ways that nouns are pluralized. To
learn more, go to the section on Plurals in the chapter dealing with
Declension.
Adjectives
Adjectives inflect when we change them into their comparative and
superlative forms. Comparative adjectives are used to compare a
quality between two nouns, while superlative adjectives identify a noun
with the highest (or lowest) degree of an attribute among a group.
Regular adjectives
We generally form the comparative degree by adding the suffix “-er” to the
end of the adjective, or by adding the words more or less before it.
To form the superlative degree, we either add “-est” to the end of the
adjective or add the word most or least before it.
We sometimes have to change the spelling of the adjective slightly to
accommodate the addition of the suffix, but the rules for when this is
necessary are straightforward and consistent.
The shift from a basic adjective to its comparative or superlative forms is
known as the degrees of comparison. Let’s look at how this is
accomplished with regular adjectives:
Adjective Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
Spelling rule
824

big
bigger
biggest
With one-syllable adjectives, add
“-er” or “-est” and double the
final consonant if preceded by
one vowel.
strong
stronger
strongest
The final consonant is not
doubled if it is preceded by two
vowels or another consonant.
large
larger
largest
If the adjective ends in an “e,”
then you only need to add “-r” or
“-st.”
happy
happier
happiest
If an adjective has one or two
syllables and ends in “-y,” we
replace “y” with “i” and add “-er”
or “-est.”
beautiful
more/less
beautiful
most/least
beautiful
For adjectives that have three or
more syllables, or adjectives that
have two syllables and do not
end in “-y,” use the words
more/less or most/least.
 
Irregular adjectives
The vast majority of adjectives follow the above conventions when forming
the comparative or superlative degrees. However, there are a few adjectives
that are irregular and have unique forms that do not conform to any spelling
conventions. Because of this, they must all be memorized.
Irregular adjective Comparative degree Superlative degree
fun
more/less fun
most/least fun
bad
worse
worst
well (healthy)
better
best
good
better
best
far
farther/further
farthest/furthest
825

little (amount)
less
least
many/much
more
most
To learn more about how comparative and superlative adjectives are formed,
go to the Degrees of Comparison section of the Adjectives chapter.
Adverbs
Regular adverbs
A large number of adverbs are formed from adjectives. The standard way of
doing this is by adding “-ly” to the end of the adjective. Sometimes the
adjective’s spelling needs to be altered slightly to accommodate this, but the
rules of doing so are fairly straightforward. Here are some common
examples:
Adjective
Regular adverb
Spelling rule
beautiful
beautifully
Adjective + “-ly”
enthusiastic enthusiastically If the adjective ends in “-ic,” it will change
to “-ically.”
happy
happily
If the adjective ends in a “-y,” it will
change to “-ily.”
terrible
terribly
If the adjective ends in “-le,” the ending is
dropped and is replaced with “-ly.”
due
duly
If the adjective ends in “-ue,” the “e” on
the end is dropped and is replaced with “-
ly.”
Irregular adverbs
Although the majority of adverbs follow the above rules when they are
formed from adjectives, there are a number of irregular adverbs that go
against the conventions. Much of the time, irregular adverbs have the same
spelling as their adjectival counterparts, but there are no clues in the
826

adjectives’ spelling as to when this is the case; like all irregular inflections,
they just have to be memorized. Below are some of the most common
irregular adverbs.
Adjective Irregular
adverb
Sources of confusion
fast
fast
Last becomes lastly, but fast becomes fast.
hard
hard
Hardly (ever) is an adverb of frequency, meaning
“almost never.”
straight
straight
 
lively
lively
Lively still exists as an adverb in phrases like step
lively; however, it is more often used in the
adverbial prepositional phrase in a lively manner.
late
(tardy)
late
Lately is a different adverb that means “recently.”
daily
daily
Adverbs of frequency that relate to units of time
have the same form as both adjectives and adverbs.
early
early
 
friendly
no adverb
Can only be used in the adverbial prepositional
phrase in a friendly manner.
timely
no adverb
Can only be used in the adverbial prepositional
phrase in a timely manner.
good
well
Well is the adverbial form of good; it can also
function as a predicative adjective meaning
“healthy.”
Go to the section on Regular and Irregular Adverbs in the Adverbs
chapter to learn more about how adverbs are formed from adjectives.
Irregular Degrees of Comparison
Just like adjectives, adverbs also have comparative and superlative
degrees, which are used to compare actions among people or things. They
are formed in the same way, by adding “-er” or more/less for comparative
827

adverbs or “-est” or most/least for superlative adverbs.
However, there are some adverbs that have irregular comparative and
superlative forms. We can’t rely on the irregular adverbs we looked at above,
either, because many of those adverbs are regular in how they inflect to
become comparative or superlative. As always, we just have to commit them
to memory:
Irregular adverb (positive
degree)
Comparative
degree
Superlative
degree
badly
worse
worst
early
earlier
earliest
far
farther/further
farthest/furthest
little
less
least
well
better
best
 
Verbs
Verbs present the greatest challenge when it comes to learning about regular
and irregular inflection. A huge variety of verbs are irregular, which means
they have past simple tense and past participle forms that defy the
normal conventions. That means that every irregular verb has three unique
conjugations that must be memorized. In addition, the verb be is known as
being highly irregular, because it has six irregular conjugations in
addition to its base and present participle form—eight in all!
We’ll briefly look at the rules for conjugating regular verbs and then look at
some common irregular verbs below. You can learn more by going to the
section Regular and Irregular Verbs in the chapter on Verbs in Parts
of Speech.
(Note that all verbs, whether regular or irregular, conjugate the same way to
form present participles, taking “-ing” at the end of the base form.
Because of this, we won’t include the present participle form in the
breakdowns below.)
Conjugating regular verbs
828

The majority of verbs take the ending “-d” or “-ed” to their base form (the
infinitive of the verb without to) to create both the past simple tense and
past participle. There are some instances in which the verb’s spelling must
change slightly to accommodate this, but these rules are straightforward and
consistent. Here are some common regular verb inflections:
Base Form Past Simple Tense Past Participle
play
bake
listen
approach
gather
climb
chop
copy
panic
played
baked
listened
approached
gathered
climbed
chopped
copied
panicked
played
baked
listened
approached
gathered
climbed
chopped
copied
panicked
 
Conjugating irregular verbs
Irregular verbs do not have spelling rules that we can follow to create the
past simple tense and past participles. This means that the only way of
knowing how to spell these forms is to memorize them for each irregular verb
individually. Here are a few common examples:
Base Form Past Simple Tense Past Participle
see
grow
give
think
throw
drive
ride
run
swim
sit
saw
grew
gave
thought
threw
drove
rode
ran
swam
sat
seen
grown
given
thought
thrown
driven
ridden
run
swum
sat
 
829

Conjugating be
As we mentioned above, the verb be is unique among verbs for having a huge
variety of conjugations. Not only does it have irregular inflections for the past
simple tense and past participle, but it also has specific forms depending on
plurality and grammatical person (first person, second person, and third
person). The table below shows a breakdown of all the different ways we
conjugate be.
Grammatical
person
Base
form
Present
Tense
Singular
Present
Tense
Plural
Present
Participle
Past
Tense
Singular
Past
Tense
Plural
n/a
be
 
 
being
 
 
first person
 
I am
we are
 
I was
we
were
second person
 
you are
you are
 
you were you
were
third person
 
he/she/it
is
they are  
he/she/it
was
they
were
Learning irregular inflection
As we’ve seen, words that inflect in irregular ways are, unfortunately,
unpredictable by nature. Because there are no patterns for how they are
formed, it can be very difficult to learn them.
The best way to learn irregular words is to pay close attention when you are
reading—if a word looks like it has an unusual spelling compared to other
words that are used in the same way, then it is probably an irregular
inflection. In these cases, look up the word in a good dictionary and make a
note of how it is used, then try to remember it for next time.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. In which of the following does irregular inflection not occur?
a) Adjectives
830

b) Adverbs
c) Pronouns
d) Verbs
 
2. What is the most common way of forming regular adverbs from
adjectives?
a) Adding “-ly” to the end of the word
b) Adding “-er” to the end of the word
c) Adding “-est” to the end of the word
d) Adding “-s” to the end of the word
 
3. What is the most common way of forming regular superlative
adjectives?
a) Adding “-ly” to the end of the word
b) Adding “-er” to the end of the word
c) Adding “-est” to the end of the word
d) Adding “-s” to the end of the word
 
4. When do regular and irregular verbs conjugate differently?
a) When forming the past simple tense
b) When forming the past participle
c) When forming the present participle
d) A & B
e) B & C
d) None of the above
 
5. Which of the following sentences is incorrect?
a) “There are a number of missing persons following the disaster.”
b) “Many men and women sacrificed their lives in the line of duty.”
c) “There are many different childrens trying to find their parents.”
d) “The roofs of several houses have collapsed in the last half hour.”
 
6. Which of the following is a correct conjugation of the verb be?
a) is
b) was
c) been
831

d) are
e) A & B
f) C & D
g) All of the above
h) None of the above
832

Syntax
Definition
Syntax refers to the ways in which we order specific words to create logical,
meaningful sentences. While the parts of speech are all the different types
of words that we can use, syntax is the set of rules, patterns, or processes by
which we can put them together.
Because English is such a flexible language, it can be difficult to understand
all the specific nuances that govern these rules and patterns. However, we
have some basic building blocks that help us identify the hierarchy of how
the language is structured.
We’ll briefly look at the parts that make up this hierarchy of structure. Go to
the individual sections to learn more about each.
The Hierarchy of Grammatical
Structure
Subjects and Predicates
The basis of all syntax really begins with the subject and the predicate,
both of which are required to form a complete and logical statement. The
subject is the person or thing that performs or controls an action in a
sentence, while the predicate describes that action.
Put in the simplest terms, the subject is at least a noun (or a pronoun
representing a noun), while the predicate is at least a verb. However, the
subject can also include any words that add meaning to the noun or
pronoun, such as determiners or other modifiers (adjectives, adverbs, or
phrases acting like them).
Take, for example, the following sentence:
• “My father drives a car to work each day.”
The subject here is not just father (the noun), but also the determiner my.
This specifies which father is controlling the action of the verb drives.
Likewise, the predicate includes any words that add meaning to the verb,
such as modifiers, objects, or complements. Let’s look at that sentence
833

again:
• “My father drives a car to work each day.”
Here, the predicate is the entire phrase drives a car to work each day. In
addition to the verb drives, it also contains the phrases a car (the direct
object of the verb), to work (a prepositional phrase that modifies the verb),
and each day (an adverbial phrase that also modifies the verb).
Modifiers
Modifiers are words, phrases, or even clauses that add descriptive meaning
to another word; they are categorized as being either adjectives or
adverbs.
Modifiers can appear anywhere in a sentence, and they can be a part of either
the subject or the predicate. For example:
• “The red car went too fast.”
In this sentence, we have three modifiers. The adjective red is modifying the
noun car and is part of the subject. The adverb too is an intensifier
modifying the adverb fast; together, they modify the verb went as an
adverbial phrase.
The modifier red in this sentence is known as an adjunct, because it does
not provide essential information to the sentence; if we were to remove it,
the meaning would not change in any significant way.
The adverbial phrase too fast, on the other hand, is essential to the meaning
of the sentence. Without the phrase, it would read “The red car went.” This is
still a complete sentence, but the intended meaning is completely changed.
Modifiers that are necessary to the meaning of the sentence are known as
complements, and they are always part of the predicate.
Phrases
Phrases are groups of two or more words that do not contain both a subject
and a predicate. They are formed when a determiner, modifier, or
complement is used to describe or complete the meaning of another word. It
is also common for a phrase to be made up of smaller phrases. For example:
• “The bright red car is mine.”
The subject the bright red car is all a single phrase. It is considered a noun
phrase with the noun car at its root (sometimes referred to as the “head”
834

noun). The phrase is also made up of the determiner the and the adjective
phrase bright red (the adjective red plus its own modifier, the adverb
bright).
Likewise, the predicate of the sentence, is mine, is a verb phrase made up
of the verb is and the possessive pronoun mine.
Because phrases can be part of both the subject and the predicate, they are
often a constituent part of clauses.
Clauses
All of the information contained in the subject and the predicate function
together to form a clause. As such, all clauses are, by definition, a group of
two or more words containing both a subject and a predicate. Depending on
its structure, a clause can be either dependent or independent.
A dependent clause (also called a subordinate clause) is unable to stand
on its own. It is marked by certain kinds words (commonly called
dependent words) that connect it to an independent clause, which it relies
on to have a complete, logical meaning.
Independent clauses, on the other hand, are able to function as sentences
on their own. They do not depend on the information from other clauses to
be considered complete.
Take these two examples:
• “when they were younger”
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together”
Both examples have a subject—they in the first example and Mark and Betty
(a compound subject) in the second—and a predicate—were younger and
often traveled together.
However, the first example is a dependent clause because of the word when.
This subordinating conjunction tells the reader that more information is
required for a complete thought.
The second example, on the other hand, is an independent clause—it has
everything in it that the reader needs to know. We must always have at least
one independent clause when we are forming a sentence.
Sentences
835

A sentence is considered the most complete unit of syntax in English. It is
always made up of at least one independent clause, and, because of this, it
always contains a subject and a predicate.
A sentence that only contains a single independent clause is known as a
simple sentence, such as our example from earlier:
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together.”
We can also attach a dependent clause to the beginning or end of an
independent clause to add more information or elaborate upon the meaning
of the sentence. This forms what’s known as a complex sentence, as in:
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together when they were younger.”
or:
• “When they were younger, Mark and Betty often traveled together.”
It’s also common to join two or more independent clauses together, either by
using a coordinating conjunction and a comma; a conjunctive
adverb, a comma (usually), and a semicolon; or just a semicolon. These
are known as compound sentences. For example:
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together, and they have been to
many different countries.”
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together; as a result, they have been
to many different countries.”
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together; they have been to many
different countries.”
If we link a complex sentence to a simple sentence or another complex
sentence, we form what’s called a compound-complex sentence:
• “Mark and Betty often traveled together when they were
younger, and they have been to many different countries.”
In addition to the four categories of structure (simple, compound, complex,
and compound-complex), there are several categories of sentences based on
their purpose. We’ll look at those more closely in the chapter on Sentences.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What is the function of the subject of a sentence?
a) To identify the person or thing performing an action
836

b) To describe an action that a person or thing performs
c) To identify the person or thing receiving the action of a verb
d) To describe another word in a sentence
 
2. Which of the following must a clause always contain?
a) A modifier
b) A subject
c) A predicate
d) A & C
e) B & C
 
3. True or false: Modifiers can only appear as part of the predicate.
a) True
b) False
 
4. Which of the following types of clauses can function alone as sentences?
a) Dependent clauses
b) Noun clauses
c) Independent clauses
d) Adverbial clauses
 
5. Which of the following types of sentences can be made of one independent
clause and one dependent clause?
a) Simple sentences
b) Compound sentences
c) Complex sentences
d) Compound-complex sentences
Subjects and Predicates
Sentences must always include both a subject and a predicate.
The subject of a clause or sentence is the noun (a person, place, or thing)
that performs, controls, or is responsible for the action of a verb.
The predicate is made up of at least one finite verb, the action of which is
performed or controlled by the subject.
837

The Subject
The subject usually appears before its verb and is made up of at least one
noun, any grammatical element functioning as a noun, or a pronoun
standing in place of a noun.
For example:
Example sentence
Type of subject
“Computers can process numbers very quickly.” Noun
“A boy I know owns a motorcycle.”
Noun phrase
“Someone ate my cake!”
Pronoun
“Swimming is great exercise.”
Gerund
 
There are several other types of grammatical constructions that can be used
as the subject of a sentence or clause, as well as instances in which the
subject’s position in relation to the verb changes. To learn more, continue on
to the next section in this chapter, The Subject.
The Predicate
In addition to a finite verb, the predicate can also (but does not always)
include participles, objects, complements, and modifiers. In most
cases, the predicate comes after the subject in a sentence or clause, although
some parts of the predicate (especially adverbial modifiers) can sometimes
appear before the subject.
Here are some examples, with the predicate in bold:
Example sentence
Parts of the predicate
“I refuse.”
• refuse — intransitive finite verb in the present
simple tense
 
 
838

“My 
family 
loves
going to the beach
each summer.”
• loves — transitive finite verb in the present
simple tense
• going to the beach — gerund phrase acting as
the direct object of the verb loves
• each summer — adverbial phrase modifying
the verb phrase loves going to the beach
“In school we are
learning about the
American
Revolution.”
• in school — adverbial prepositional phrase acting
as a modifier of the present participle learning
• are — finite auxiliary verb used with the
present participle learning to create the
present continuous tense
• learning — present participle (a type of non-
finite verb) used with the auxiliary finite verb are
to form the present continuous tense
• 
about 
the 
American 
Revolution 
—
prepositional phrase functioning as the direct
object of the present participle learning
 
To learn more about forming and identifying the predicate, as well as the
various grammatical elements that can be included in it, go to the section in
this chapter called The Predicate.
The Subject
Definition
The subject in a sentence or clause is the person or thing doing, performing,
or controlling the action of the verb.
Every sentence requires a subject and a verb to be complete. Without a
subject, we would have an action being done by no one or nothing—simply
happening on its own, which cannot happen. (The only exception to this is in
imperative sentences, in which the subject is implied, as in: “Do your
homework!”)
Subject Forms
Only that which has the grammatical function of a noun can be the subject
of a clause. This is because it is someone or something that is capable of
839

performing or “controlling” the action of the verb. This function can be
performed by each of the following:
nouns – “Computers can process numbers very quickly.”
noun phrases – “A boy I know owns a motorcycle.”
pronouns – “Someone ate this cake!”
gerunds – “Swimming is great exercise.”
gerund phrases – “Traveling the world has been my lifelong
dream.”
infinitives – “To err is human; to forgive is divine.”
infinitive phrases – “To fall in love can be both wonderful and
tragic.”
noun clauses – “Whoever knows the truth should come
forward.”
dummy pronouns – “There is nothing we can do for him now.”
Subject Positions
As we can see in the above examples, the subject most typically occurs at or
near the beginning of a clause, preceding the main verb that describes the
action of the clause (known as the finite verb).
Auxiliary questions
When auxiliary verbs are used to make questions (interrogative
sentences) without question words, then the subject comes between the
auxiliary verb and the main verb. For example:
• “Is hiking your favorite activity?”
• “Did Mary come by yesterday?”
• “Have you heard this song before?”
Passive voice
The examples we’ve seen so far have been of sentences in the active voice,
meaning the subject of a clause or sentence is also the agent of the verb’s
action.
Sentences in the passive voice, however, create a bit of confusion.
840

Structurally, the object of the verb’s action becomes the grammatical subject
of the clause, while the “proper” subject (the agent of the action) becomes
modifying information. For example:
• “Jack is reading the book.” (active voice)
• “The book is being read by Jack.” (passive voice)
In the first sentence, Jack is both the subject of the sentence and the agent
of the verb is reading.
In the second sentence, though, the book is now the subject of the sentence.
The agent of the verb’s action, Jack, becomes the object of the prepositional
phrase by Jack, which modifies the verb is being read.
Subject-Verb Agreement
Subject-verb agreement refers to using certain conjugations of verbs with
singular subjects and different conjugations with plural subjects. This
happens most noticeably with the verb to be, which becomes is or was with
singular subject nouns and are or were with plural subjects.
For example:
• “My brother is back from college.” (singular present simple tense)
• “The company was in financial trouble.” (singular past simple tense)
• “Many people are frustrated with the government.” (plural present simple
tense)
• “The computers were rather old.” (plural past simple tense)
For any other verb, we only need to make a change if it is in the present
simple tense. For most verbs, this is accomplished by adding an “-s” to the
end if it is singular and leaving it in its base form if it is plural. For example:
• “My father runs his own business.” (singular)
• “But his sons run it when he’s away.” (plural)
• “The dog wags his tail when he is happy.” (singular)
• “Dogs sometimes wag their tails when they’re angry or scared.” (plural)
The verbs have and do also only conjugate for singular subjects in the
present simple tense, but they have irregular forms for this: has and does.
For example:
• “The apple has a mark on it.” (singular)
• “All the apples have marks on them.” (plural)
841

• “My teacher does not think it’s a good idea.” (singular)
• “The other teachers do not mind, though.” (plural)
Finally, the modal auxiliary verbs (will, would, shall, should, can, could,
might, must, and ought to) do not conjugate for singular or plural subjects—
they always remain the same. For instance:
• “This phone can also surf the Internet!” (singular)
• “Most phones can do that now.” (plural)
• “The president will arrive in Malta next week.” (singular)
• “The other diplomats will arrive shortly after that.” (plural)
Subject Pronouns
Pronouns stand in for a person or thing we are speaking about or referring to;
they are used to avoid repetition in speech or writing. The personal
pronouns in the subjective case—I, you, he, she, it, we, and they—can act
as substitutes for the subject of the clause or sentence. In this instance, they
are known as subject pronouns. For example:
• “John is running late, but he is almost ready.” (The pronoun he, replaces
the noun John in the clause he is almost ready.)
• “The book is on the table. It is just over there.” (The book is a non-person
noun, so it can be substituted with the pronoun it in subsequent clauses or
sentences.)
The question words who and what can also act as subject pronouns of the
sentence or clause. For example:
• “Who is going to the party later?”
• “What just happened?”
(These form what are known as subject questions; we’ll look at these a
little more in depth later on.)
Other pronouns
There are other pronouns in English that can act as the subjects of clauses or
sentences. Indefinite pronouns, for example, are used in place of nouns
without specifying a particular person or thing that is being represented, as
in:
• “Everyone is waiting for the party to begin.” (The action of waiting is
842

being done by everyone.”
• “I have five teachers, but only one is writing me a recommendation.” (The
action of writing is being done by one.)
• “Nobody told me about this.” (The action of told was done by nobody.)
Common Subject Errors
Because the subject can be so widely varied in English, a number of errors
can arise about how to correctly use (or not use) a subject in a sentence. Let’s
look at some common errors that occur.
Subject-Verb Agreement Errors
Unfortunately, there are many opportunities for confusion as to when to
omit the “-s” when conjugating a verb for subject-verb agreement.
Remember: we only need the “-s” when using the present simple tense in
affirmative (non-negative) sentences, and when using subjects that are in the
third person.
For example:
First person:
✖ “I lives in Paris.” (incorrect)
✔ “I live in Paris.” (correct)
Second person:
✖ “You lives in Paris.” (incorrect)
✔ “You live in Paris.” (correct)
Third person:
✖ “He live in Paris.” (incorrect) 
✔ “He lives in Paris.” (correct)
Irregular plurals
Here are some other examples of subject-verb errors with third-person
singular and third-person plural:
✖ “People lives here.” (incorrect) 
✔ “People live here.” (correct)
✖ “The children is playing outside.” (incorrect)
843

✔ “The children are playing outside.” (correct)
A person (singular) lives, while people (plural) live; a child (singular) is
playing, while children (plural) are playing. We can have “one person” or
“one child,” but we have “two/three/10/many people or children.”
These are known as irregular plurals because they do not follow the
normal rule of making a noun plural by adding an “-s” or “-es” to the end.
Nevertheless, they still require the correct third-person verb conjugations, as
with any other noun.
(See the chapter on Plurals to learn more about the spelling rules for
regular and irregular plurals.)
Indefinite pronouns
Indefinite pronouns can sometimes cause confusion because many seem to
be referring to a group of people or things, and so should take third-person
plural verbs, when in fact they require third-person singular verbs. For
example:
✖ “Everyone have a television.” (incorrect) 
✔ “Everyone has a television.” (correct)
The indefinite pronoun everyone refers to “each single person.” It does not
refer to a group, but instead to separate individuals, so it therefore requires a
third-person singular verb. Other examples that take third-person singular
verbs include no one/nobody, someone/somebody, and anyone/anybody.
Other indefinite pronouns use qualifying information that can make subject-
verb agreement confusing. For example:
✖ “One of my students have gone to England.” (incorrect)
✔ “One of my students has gone to England.” (correct)
In instances like this, the auxiliary verb have should be conjugated with the
indefinite pronoun one (singular) instead of students (plural)—one is
functioning as the subject of the sentence, while of my students is an
adjectival prepositional phrase that describes it. Here’s a similar example:
✖ “Each person study individually.” (incorrect)
✔ “Each person studies individually.” (correct)
Because each is paired with the word person, which it modifies, it implies a
group of people. However, like one, this subject has to take a third-person
singular verb.
844

Double Subject Error
We must be careful to avoid using a pronoun as a “double” subject in the
same clause—we only use a pronoun as a subject when it refers to the subject
in a different clause.
For example:
✖ “My brother he speaks English.” (incorrect)
✔ “My brother speaks English.” (correct) 
✔ “He speaks English.” (correct)
✖ “My country it is very beautiful.” (incorrect)
✔ “My country is very beautiful.” (correct)
✔ “It is very beautiful.” (correct)
✖ “This my car cost me a lot of money.” (incorrect)
✔ “My car cost me a lot of money.” (correct)
✔ “This cost me a lot of money.” (correct)
Omission of the subject
We occasionally use what’s known as a “ dummy pronoun” to function as a
subject in a clause. The two dummy pronouns in English are there and it,
and they do not have antecedents the way proper pronouns do. Because they
don’t refer to a concrete element semantically, it can seem like they should
be omitted in certain circumstances, but we must be careful to always
include them where necessary. For example:
✖ “I think is going to rain.” (incorrect)
✔ “I think it is going to rain.” (correct)
In the first example, there is no subject before is. We always need a subject
before the verb. When we talk about the weather, time, speed, distance, or
things, we use the dummy pronoun it as the subject of the clause.
Here is another example of this kind of error:
✖ “Is anything I can help you with?” (incorrect)
✔ “Is there anything I can help you with?” (correct)
In the first example, we do not know what the speaker wants to help with,
because there is no subject. In this case, we use there as the subject to make
the sentence complete.
845

Subject before auxiliary verbs in
questions
When we form questions, the subject of the sentence still comes before the
main verb. However, if an auxiliary verb is being used to create the question,
it’s also important to remember that the subject comes after the auxiliary
verb. For instance:
✖ “Where does work Mary?” (incorrect)
✖ “Where Mary does work?” (incorrect)
✔ “Where does Mary work?” (correct)
✖ “You do speak English?” (incorrect)
✔ “Do you speak English?” (correct)
Subject Question Error
In a “subject question,” in which the subject is implied by the question, we
do not usually add the auxiliary verb do in the same way as in normal
questions. For instance:
• “What did happen last night?” (less common; only used for emphasis
when trying to determine what did happen vs. what did not happen)
• “What happened last night?” (much more common)
Since the subject is already in the question, we do not have to use an
auxiliary verb.
When we use a subject question in the past simple tense, the verb needs to
be used in the past tense too. This is because the auxiliary verb did, the past
tense of do, is absent.
Normal Questions vs. Subject
Questions
To better understand this, let’s look at a comparison between a normal
question and a subject question.
First, let’s look at two statements:
A) I saw Mary.
846

B) Anne saw me.
If we were asking a question to which sentence A was the answer, it would be
a normal question:
• “Who did you see?” 
• “I saw Mary.”
The subject in the normal question, you, corresponds to the subject in the
answer, I. Since this is a normal question, we use the auxiliary verb, did, to
form the past tense of the main verb, see.
If we were asking a question to which sentence B was the answer, it would be
a subject question:
• “Who saw you?” 
• “Anne saw me.”
Here, who, the question word, is what corresponds to the subject in the
response, Anne. You is the direct object of the verb saw, which is put in the
past tense because we do not use the auxiliary verb did; it corresponds to me
in the response, which is also the direct object of saw.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Where is the subject usually placed in a clause?
a) Before an adjective
b) After an adjective
c) Before the main verb
d) After the main verb
2. When does a third-person verb conjugate differently to accommodate the
subject?
a) When the subject is singular, in the present simple tense
b) When the subject is plural, in the present simple tense
c) When the subject is singular, in the past simple tense
d) When the subject is plural, in the past simple tense
3. What role does the subject have in a clause or sentence that’s in the active
voice?
a) It is the person or thing that receives the action of the verb
847

b) It is the person or thing that does or performs the action of the verb
c) It modifies or describes the action of the verb
d) It modifies or describes the person or thing performs the action of the verb
4. What role does the subject have in a clause or sentence that’s in the
passive voice?
a) It is the person or thing that receives the action of the verb
b) It is the person or thing that does or performs the action of the verb
c) It modifies or describes the action of the verb
d) It modifies or describes the person or thing performs the action of the verb
5. Which of the following has a clause with a subject that is a gerund
phrase?
a) “John is swimming on Saturday, which I’m excited to see.”
b) “A lot of people I know are coming to the party.”
c) “Reading by candlelight is thought to be bad for your eyes.”
d) “Seeing eye dogs provide an invaluable service.”
6. Which of the following has a clause with a subject that is a pronoun?
a) “Cell phones are way too advanced these days.”
b) “Wherever she lives is where I’m destined to be.”
c) “Several eyewitnesses have placed the suspect at the scene of the crime.”
d) “Everyone is being caught off guard by this new law.”
The Predicate
Definition
Sentences must always include both a subject and a predicate.
The subject is the noun (a person, place, or thing) that performs, controls,
or is responsible for the action of the verb.
The predicate is, essentially, everything in the sentences that follows the
subject. It is made up of at least one finite verb, the action of which is
performed by the subject. In addition, the predicate may (but does not
always) include:
• Participles, which are used to form the perfect and continuous tenses;
848

• Direct and indirect objects (if the verb is transitive);
• Other complements (which include object complements, adjective
complements, and subject complements); and
• Modifiers (if they are not a part of the subject).
First, let’s look at how we can identify the predicate in a clause or sentence.
Later on, we will look more closely at the various parts of the predicate.
Identifying the predicate
In most cases, the predicate comes after the subject in a sentence or clause.
It’s possible in simple sentences to have only a subject followed by a finite
verb (a verb that has a relationship with subject and can inflect for
grammatical tense). For example:
• “I refuse.”
• “Dogs bark.”
• “Bees sting.”
• “Cats meow.”
In the above examples, the subject (in italics) begins the sentences and the
predicate (in bold) ends them. The predicate, made up of just an
intransitive verb in the present simple tense, contains all the necessary
information about the subject to be logical; therefore, each example is
considered an independent clause and is a complete sentence.
However, it is much more common for the predicate to contain much more
information than just a verb. Let’s look at an example of a sentence with a
more complex predicate:
Example sentence
Parts of the predicate
“My family loves going to
the beach each summer.”
• loves — transitive finite verb in the present
simple tense
• going to the beach — gerund phrase acting
as the direct object of the verb loves
• each summer — adverbial phrase
modifying the verb phrase loves going to the
beach
 
Because every element after the subject my family is related to the verb
849

loves, the entire phrase loves going to the beach each summer is considered
the predicate.
Note that adverbs (which can be single words, adverbial phrases, or even
adverbial clauses) that modify elements of the predicate do not always
appear after the subject. It’s quite common for certain adverbs to appear at
the beginning of a sentence to add emphasis to the information. For
example:
Example sentence
Parts of the predicate
“In school we are
learning about the
American
Revolution.”
• in school — adverbial prepositional phrase acting
as a modifier of the present participle learning
• are — finite auxiliary verb used with the
present participle learning to create the
present continuous tense
• learning — present participle (a type of non-
finite verb) used with the auxiliary finite verb are
to form the present continuous tense
• 
about 
the 
American 
Revolution 
—
prepositional phrase functioning as the direct
object of the present participle learning
 
Notice that the adverbial prepositional phrase in school is still part of the
predicate, even though it appears at the beginning of the sentence before the
subject. This is because it modifies the participle learning, which is part of
the predicate.
Compound predicates
The subject of a clause or sentence must always be performing at least one
action, but there are many instances in which it performs more than one
action. In such a case, in which the subject is related to two or more finite
verbs, the sentence is said to have a compound predicate; a predicate
composed of one verb is sometimes known as a simple predicate.
We usually use coordinating conjunctions to link the verbs in a
compound predicate. If there are more than two predicate elements, we
separate them with commas and use a conjunction before the final one.
For example:
850

Example sentence
Parts of the
compound predicate
“I live in New Jersey but work in New York
City.”
1. live in New Jersey 
2. work in New York
City
Connected 
by 
the
coordinating conjunction
but. 
They both have the same
subject—I.
“My friend Daniel teaches in the morning,
volunteers in the afternoon, and plays
volleyball in the evening."
1. 
teaches 
in 
the
morning 
2. 
volunteers 
in 
the
afternoon
3. plays volleyball in the
evening
Connected by commas
and 
the 
coordinating
conjunction and. 
They all have the same
subject—my 
friend
Daniel.
Compound subjects
Just as the same subject may have multiple compound predicates, the same
predicate may have multiple compound subjects. In the same way, we join
multiple subjects with coordinating conjunctions and (if there are more than
two subjects) commas. For example:
• “My brother and I go fishing on the weekends.”
• “John, Mary, and Joe went to school together.”
851

Compound 
predicates 
vs.
compound sentences
It’s important to distinguish a compound predicate from a compound
sentence. A compound sentences is made up of two independent clauses
connected by a coordinating conjunction; each clause has its own subject.
Even if the subjects relate to the same person or thing, there is a different
predicate for each subject.
For example:
• “John studies at Harvard, but he also works as a mechanic on the
weekend.”
This is a compound sentence, which has two independent clauses with
two subjects: John and he. Even though they talk about the same person,
each subject has its own unique predicate—it is not a compound predicate or
a compound subject.
Complex sentences
Complex sentences are composed of an independent clause and one or
more dependent clauses. Each clause in a complex sentence has a subject,
and, again, each subject has its own predicate. For instance:
• “When my father is home on the weekends, the whole family always
goes to a movie together.”
The dependent clause has the subject my father, and the predicate is is
home on the weekends. The dependent clause is linked to the independent
clause by the subordinating conjunction when, which can also be considered
part of the dependent clause’s predicate. The subject of the independent
clause is the whole family, and the predicate is always goes to a movie
together.
Sentences can become increasingly complex, with multiple independent
clauses and multiple dependent clauses. Just remember that for every clause
with its own subject, there must be at least one corresponding predicate as
well.
Parts of the predicate
852

We’ve seen where to look to identify the predicate in a sentence. Now let’s
look more closely at the different elements that can be a part of the
predicate.
Finite vs. Non-finite Verbs
When we are identifying the predicate in a sentence, we usually look for the
finite verb that acts as the root of the sentence. The only verbs that can be
considered finite are verbs in their base form (the infinitive form without the
particle to), verbs in their past-tense form, or verbs inflected for the third-
person singular. (The verb be, unique among verbs, also has unique forms
to reflect plurality (multiple subjects), as well as first-person vs. second
and third person.)
Let’s look at the last example from above:
• “In school we are learning about the American Revolution.”
The sentence uses the present continuous verb are learning. This largely
functions as a single unit, with learning carrying the most meaning in the
sentence. However, learning is a present participle, which is considered a
non-finite verb; the finite verb of the sentence is actually just the
auxiliary verb are. It is an inflection of the verb be that denotes a first
person plural subject (we).
Verb forms that are never considered to be finite verbs in a sentence are
gerunds, infinitives, and participles (both past and present). Here are a
few example sentences to illustrate the difference, with finite verbs in bold
and non-finite verbs in italics:
Example sentence
Finite vs. non-finite verbs
“We hate working on the
farm.”
Finite verb: hate (present simple tense, first-
person plural)
Non-finite verb: working (gerund)
“John ran quickly to catch
his bus.”
Finite verb: ran (past simple tense, third-
person singular)
Non-finite verb: to catch (infinitive)
853

“Susy lives in New York
City.”
Finite verb: lives (present simple tense, third-
person singular)
Non-finite verb: none
“They were being very
difficult.”
Finite verb: were (past simple tense, third-
person plural)
Non-finite verb: being (present participle)
“We have seen that movie
already.”
Finite verb: have (present simple tense, first-
person plural)
Non-finite verb: seen (past participle)
Note that gerunds and infinitives are able to function as nouns, so it is
possible for them to be the subject of a clause rather than part of the
predicate. If they appear before the finite verb in a sentence, they are usually
acting as the subject. For example:
• “Working all week makes me so tired.”
• “To err is human.”
To learn more about the differences between these two classes of verbs, go to
the section Finite and Non-finite Verbs in the chapter dealing with
Verbs.
Objects of verbs
Grammatical objects are nouns or pronouns that complete the meaning of
verbs or prepositions. The objects of verbs tell us who or what is receiving the
action of the verb. They are technically a kind of complement (sometimes
known as a verb complement); however, because they are often so
important to the structure of the predicate, they are usually described as a
unique, separate part of it.
The object of a verb can either be a direct object, meaning it directly
receives the action of the verb, or it can be an indirect object, meaning it
receives the direct object of the verb.
Note that only transitive verbs take objects.
854

Direct objects
Direct objects are directly affected by the verbs they complete—that is, the
verb’s action is happening directly to them. For example:
• “The dog chased its tail.” (The object its tail is receiving the action of the
verb chase.)
• “Mary reads a new book every week.” (The object a new book is receiving
the action of the verb read.)
• “I asked Jonathan on a date.” (The object Jonathan is receiving the action
of the verb asked.)
Indirect objects
An indirect object, on the other hand, is the person or thing who receives
the direct object of the verb. Indirect objects appear directly between the
verb and its direct object.
For example:
• “Please pass me the salt.” (The pronoun me is receiving the direct object
the salt, which receives the action of the verb pass.)
• “I sent the company an application for the job.” (The noun phrase the
company is receiving the direct object an application, which receives the
action of the verb sent.)
Complements
Complements are words or groups of words that are necessary to complete
the meaning of another part of the sentence. Unlike modifiers, they do not
add supplemental information—they provide information that is necessary to
achieve the intended meaning in the sentence.
In addition to objects, there are four other types of complements: object
complements, adjective complements, adverbial complements, and
subject complements. We’ll look at some examples of each below, but to
learn more about them, continue on to the section covering Complements.
Object Complements
An object complement is a word or group of words that describes,
855

renames, or completes the direct object of the verb. It can be a noun,
adjective, relative clause, infinitive, or gerund.
For example:
• “The committee elected him treasurer.” (The noun treasurer renames the
object him.)
• “All he wanted was to make his husband happy.” (The adjective happy
describes the object his husband.)
• “Do you know someone who can work the printer?” (The relative clause
who can work the printer describes the object someone.)
• “I didn’t expect you to approve.” (The infinitive to approve describes a
potential action of the object you.)
• “We came across him lying in the yard.” (The gerund phrase lying in the
yard describes the action of the object him.)
Adjective Complements
An adjective complement is a phrase or clause that provides information
necessary to complete an adjective’s meaning. Adjective complements almost
always appear with predicative adjectives (adjectives that appear after
linking verbs) and can be prepositional phrases, infinitives and
infinitive phrases, or noun clauses.
For example:
• “I am perfectly content on my own.” (The prepositional phrase on my own
completes the meaning of the adjective content.)
• “We’re just glad to be of service.” (The infinitive phrase to be of service
completes the meaning of the adjective glad.)
• “We were a little curious why they decided to leave.” (The noun clause
why they decided to leave completes the meaning of the adjective curious.)
Adverbial Complements
Adverbial complements are adverbs or adverbial elements that are
required to complete the meaning of the verb. They always appear after the
verb they complement.
For example:
• “The teacher sent Tim home.” (The adverbial noun home completes the
856

meaning of the verb sent.)
• “Please put the book on the shelf.” (The adverbial prepositional phrase on
the shelf completes the meaning of the verb put.)
Subject Complements
A subject complement is the information that follows a linking verb to
describe, identify, or rename the subject of the clause. Subject complements
can be nouns, pronouns, or adjectives.
Even though they modify the subject, they are dependent on the verb of the
clause and thus are part of the predicate.
For example:
• “Love is a virtue.” (The noun phrase a virtue renames the subject love.)
• “Her husband took all the credit, but it was she who did all the work.” (The
pronoun she re-identifies the subject it.)
• “You look nice.” (The adjective nice describes the subject you.)
Modifiers
Modifiers are adjectives and adverbs that describe (modify) another part of
the sentence. They can appear as part of either the subject or the predicate,
depending on what they are modifying.
Both adjectives and adverbs can be made into phrases and clauses, which
function as a whole unit to modify a word (or group of words).
Below, we’ll look at some examples of modifiers functioning as part of the
predicate (the predicate will be in italics, while the modifier will be in bold).
Go to the section Modifiers to learn more about them.
Example sentence
Modifiers
What
they
modify
“Jonathan always brings his
favorite toy to school.”
1. always — adverb
2. favorite — adjective
3. to school — adverbial
prepositional phrase
1. The verb
brings
2. 
The
noun toy
3. The verb
brings
857

“I work in a restaurant that
is often busy.”
1. 
in 
a 
restaurant 
—
adverbial 
prepositional
phrase 
2. often — adverb
3. often busy — predicative
adjective phrase 
4. that is often busy —
relative clause (also called an
adjective clause)
1. The verb
work
2. 
The
adjective
busy
3. 
The
subject
pronoun
that
4. 
The
noun
restaurant
“We took the bright orange
painting in the living room
off the wall.”
1. bright — adverb
2. bright orange — adjective
phrase
3. in the living room —
adjectival 
prepositional
phrase
4. off the wall — adverbial
prepositional phrase
1. 
The
adjective
orange
2. 
The
noun
painting
3. 
The
noun
painting
4. The verb
took
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Where does the predicate usually appear in a sentence?
a) Before the subject
b) After the subject
c) After the subject complement
d) A & C
e) B & C
2. What must the predicate always contain?
a) A finite verb
b) A non-finite verb
858

c) A direct object
d) A subject complement
3. Which of the following is used to create a compound predicate?
a) A coordinating conjunction
b) A subordinating conjunction
c) Commas
d) A & C
e) B & C
4. Identify the predicate in the following sentence:
“My sister and my brother both like to read.”
a) My sister and my brother
b) both like to read
c) like to read
d) to read
5. Identify the finite verb in the following sentence:
“I have been working a lot lately.”
a) have
b) been
c) working
d) have been working
6. Which part of the predicate tells us who or what is receiving the action of
the verb?
a) Verbs
b) Object complements
c) Objects
d) Modifiers
7. Which part of the predicate completes the meaning of another part of
the sentence?
a) Verbs
b) Complements
c) Objects
859

d) Modifiers
Complements
Definition
Complements are words or groups of words that are necessary to complete
the meaning of another part of the sentence. Complements act like
modifiers to add additional meaning to the word or words they are attached
to. However, unlike adjunct modifiers, they do not add supplemental
information—they provide information that is necessary to achieve the
intended meaning in the sentence.
Complements, even those that complete the meaning of the subject, are
always part of the predicate.
Types of Complements
There are five main categories of complements: objects, object
complements, adjective complements, adverbial complements, and
subject complements. We’ll briefly look at each below. To learn more
about them, continue on to their individual sections.
Objects
Grammatical objects are nouns or pronouns that complete the meaning of
verbs and prepositions. Depending on what they complete, objects are
also sometimes known as either verb complements or prepositional
complements.
There are three types of objects: direct objects, indirect objects, and
objects of prepositions.
Direct objects
Direct objects are directly affected by verbs they complete—that is, the
verb’s action is happening directly to them. For example:
• “The dog chased its tail.”
• “Mary reads a new book every week.”
860

Indirect objects
An indirect object is the person or thing who receives the direct object of
the verb.
For example:
• “Please pass me the salt.”
• “I sent the company an application for the job.”
Objects of prepositions
Prepositions also take objects, connecting them back to another element of
the sentence to elaborate on its meaning. Together, the preposition and its
object form a prepositional phrase. For example:
• “Your backpack is under the table.”
• “I got a ticket for speeding.”
Object Complements
An object complement is a word or group of words that describes,
renames, or completes the meaning of the direct object of a verb. It can be a
noun, adjective, relative clause, infinitive, gerund, or a phrase made from any
one of them.
Nouns and noun phrases
When we use nouns as object complements, they serve to rename or re-
identify the object of factitive verbs. For example:
• “The committee elected him treasurer.”
• “Mrs. Fields named her late husband the executor of her estate.”
Adjectives and adjective phrases
Adjectives that function as object complements serve to describe or modify
the direct object. Like all object complements, adjectives must follow the
direct object they are describing. If they come before it, they are simply
acting as attributive adjectives, which are not necessary to complete the
meaning of the sentence.
861

• “All he wanted was to make his husband happy.”
• “The excitement of the day got the kids way too hyper.”
Relative clauses
Relative clauses are dependent clauses that are introduced by relative
pronouns. Like adjectives, relative clauses serve to describe the object that
they follow; for this reason, they are often called adjective clauses.
For example:
• “Do you know someone who can work the printer?”
• “I hate the color that they painted this room.”
Infinitives and infinitive phrases
An infinitive or infinitive phrase acts as an object complement by describing
the intended or desired action of the direct object. For example:
• “I didn’t expect you to approve.”
• “She’s forcing me to work this the weekend.”
Gerunds and gerund phrases
Gerunds generally function as object complements by describing what the
direct object is or was doing (as opposed to infinitives, which describe an act
that has not yet been done).
For example:
• “We came across him lying in the yard.”
• “My mother noticed the baby walking by himself.”
Adjective Complements
An 
adjective 
complement 
(also 
called 
an 
adjective 
phrase
complement) is a phrase or clause that provides information necessary to
complete 
an 
adjective’s 
meaning. 
Adjective 
complements 
can 
be
prepositional phrases, infinitives and infinitive phrases, or noun
clauses.
862

Prepositional Phrases
Prepositional phrases describe the relationship between the adjectives they
complement and the objects of their prepositions.
• “I am perfectly content on my own.”
• “He felt alone in the world.”
Infinitives and infinitive phrases
Infinitives and infinitive phrases describe actions that result from or lead to
the adjective they complement.
For example:
• “I’m very happy to know you!”
• “We’re just glad to be of service.”
Noun Clauses
A noun clause is a dependent clause that is able to function grammatically
like a noun. It connects the adjective’s meaning to an action by a secondary
subject.
• “We were a little curious why they decided to leave.”
• “I’m thrilled that you are coming to visit!”
Adverbial Complements
Adverbial complements are adverbs or adverbial elements in a clause
that are required to complete the meaning of the verb.
Adverbial complements usually describe location or direction, and most
frequently occur with verbs that indicate motion. They always appear after
the verb they complement.
If the verb is intransitive, the complement will appear directly after the
verb; if the verb is transitive, the complement will appear after the verb’s
direct object.
For example:
• “The teacher sent Tim home.”
863

• “Please put the book on the shelf.”
Subject Complements
A subject complement is the information that follows a linking verb to
describe, identify, or rename the subject of the clause. A subject complement
can either be a predicate noun, a predicate pronoun, or a predicative
adjective.
Predicate nouns
Predicate nouns serve to rename or re-identify the subject after a linking
verb. If the noun is accompanied by any direct modifiers (such as
determiners, adjectives, or prepositional phrases), the entire noun
phrase acts predicatively.
For example:
• “Love is a virtue.”
• “Tommy seems like a real bully.”
Predicate pronouns
We can also use a predicate pronoun after a linking verb to re-identify the
subject. This is most common in questions and responses in which the
identity of the subject is not known or is being explained. For example:
• Question: “Who is it?” 
• Answer: “It’s me!”
We can also use predicate pronouns in declarative statements, but this is less
common in everyday speech and writing. For instance:
• “It was I who did this.”
• “Her husband took all the credit, but it was she who did all the work.”
Predicative Adjectives
A predicative adjective is an adjective used after a linking verb to describe
or modify the subject of the clause. For example:
• “You look nice.”
• “He is very handsome.”
864

When a prepositional phrase follows a linking verb (especially the verb be), it
functions in the same way as a predicative adjective to describe the
subject. For example:
• “The cat is in the shed.” (The prepositional phrase in the shed is
describing the subject the cat.)
• “I am across the street.” (The prepositional phrase across the street is
describing the subject I.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What kind of complement is used to create a prepositional phrase?
a) Object
b) Object complement
c) Adjective complement
d) Adverbial complement
e) Subject complement
2. What kind of complement is used to complete an adjective’s meaning?
a) Object
b) Object complement
c) Adjective complement
d) Adverbial complement
e) Subject complement
3. Which of the following sentences uses a subject complement?
a) “We left school early.”
b) “Your future is what you make it.”
c) “I’m a bit anxious about the test tomorrow.”
d) “I want you to work a little harder.”
4. Which of the following sentences uses an object complement?
a) “We left school early.”
b) “Your future is what you make it.”
c) “I’m a bit anxious about the test tomorrow.”
d) “I want you to work a little harder.”
865

5. Identify the adverbial complement in the following sentence:
“I have been living in Ireland for six years.”
a) I have
b) been living
c) in Ireland
d) for six years
Objects
Definition
Grammatical objects are nouns or pronouns that complete the meaning of
verbs and prepositions. Additionally, almost any group of words that
functions as a noun can be an object, such as noun phrases, noun
clauses, gerunds, and infinitives.
Objects of verbs
The objects of verbs relay information about who or what is receiving the
action of the verb. The object of a verb can either be a direct object,
meaning it directly receives the action of the verb, or it can be an indirect
object, meaning it receives the direct object of the verb.
Note that only transitive verbs take objects.
Direct objects
Direct objects are directly affected by the verbs they complete—that is, the
verb’s action is happening directly to them. For example:
• “The dog chased its tail.” (The object its tail is receiving the action of the
verb chase.)
• “Mary reads a new book every week.” (The object a new book is receiving
the action of the verb read.)
• “I asked Jonathan on a date.” (The object Jonathan is receiving the action
of the verb asked.)
We can identify the direct object by asking the question Whom? or What?
about the verb. The part of the sentence that answers that question is the
direct object.
866

“The dog chased
its tail.”
“Mary reads a new book
every week.”
“I asked Jonathan
on a date.”
Question: The dog
chased what?
Question: Mary reads what? Question: 
I 
asked
whom?
Answer: its tail
Answer: a new book
Answer: Jonathan
 
Indirect objects
An indirect object is the person or thing who receives the direct object of
the verb. He, she, or it is still affected by the action of the verb, but now this
happens indirectly. Indirect objects appear directly between the verb and its
direct object.
For example:
• “Please pass me the salt.” (The pronoun me is receiving the direct object
the salt, which receives the action of the verb pass.)
• “I sent the company an application for the job.” (The noun phrase the
company is receiving the direct object an application, which receives the
action of the verb sent.)
Only verbs that express an action being relayed to or done for another
person or thing can take indirect objects. These are called ditransitive
verbs. (Those that can only take direct objects are called monotransitive
verbs.)
Indirect objects as prepositional
phrases
The indirect object comes immediately before the direct object in a sentence,
as we saw above. However, we can also communicate the same information
by placing the indirect object after the direct object in a prepositional phrase
using to or for. We can do this with any indirect object, but it is often
preferable when the indirect object is particularly long. For instance:
Indirect Object
Prepositional Phrase
“I sent my brother a letter.”
“I sent a letter to my brother.”
867

“My father baked our class a batch
of cupcakes.”
“My father baked a batch of cupcakes
for our class.”
“She 
teaches 
many 
different
students mathematics.”
She teaches mathematics to many
different students.”
 
Objects of prepositions
Prepositions 
also 
take 
objects, 
which 
work 
together 
to 
create
prepositional phrases. Generally, a preposition is directly followed by its
object. For example:
• “I am looking for work.” (The noun work is the object of the preposition
for, which creates the prepositional phrase for work.)
• “Your backpack is under the table.” (The noun phrase the table is the
object of the preposition under, which creates the prepositional phrase under
the table.)
• “I got a ticket for speeding.” (The gerund speeding is the object of the
preposition for, which creates the prepositional phrase for speeding.)
• “She can study with whomever she likes.” (The noun clause whomever
she likes is the object of the preposition with, which creates the prepositional
phrase with whomever she likes.)
The Objective Case
We largely do not inflect (change the form of) words to reflect whether they
are acting as subjects or objects in a sentence. Personal pronouns,
however, still have a unique form in the objective case when they act as
objects of verbs or prepositions.
In addition, the pronouns who and whoever change in the objective case,
becoming whom and whomever; however, this distinction is becoming less
common, with who and whoever being used in most instances in modern
English.
The table below gives a quick breakdown of these different cases and how
they are used in a sentence. Notice that the pronouns you and it are the
same for both cases.
868

Subjective
Case
Example sentence
Objective
Case
Example Sentence
I
“I read a great book
recently.”
Me
“Jeff told me about a
great book.”
We
“We went out for ice
cream.”
Us
“Mom took us out for
ice cream.”
You
“You said the project
was finished!”
You
“I told you it would be
finished next week!”
He
“He 
left 
for 
practice
already.”
Him
“I'm waiting for him to
return from practice.”
She
“She is writing a play.”
Her
“The play was written
by her.”
It
“It might rain today.”
It
“I want it to stop
snowing.”
They
“They won't like this.”
Them
“I asked them a week
ago.”
Who
“Who told you about our
plan?”
Whom
“Whom have you told
about our plan?”
Whoever
“Whoever 
broke 
this
vase is in deep trouble!”
Whom
“Study 
with
whomever you like.”
(To learn more about grammatical case, go to the section on Personal
Pronouns - Case.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following cannot function as objects in a sentence?
a) Noun phrases
b) Noun clauses
c) Gerunds
d) Adjective phrases
2. Identify the type of object (in bold) in the following sentence:
869

“I’m going to a football game with my dad later.”
a) Direct object
b) Indirect object
c) Object of a preposition
 
3. Where does an indirect object usually appear in a sentence?
a) Directly before its verb
b) Between its verb and the direct object
c) Directly after the direct object
d) Anywhere
 
4. Which of the following pronouns is in the objective case?
a) we
b) they
c) I
d) me
Subject Complements
Definition
A subject complement is the information that follows a linking verb to
describe, identify, or rename the subject of the clause. Whereas most verbs
describe the action a subject performs, linking verbs describe something
about the subject, which is completed by the subject complement.
A subject complement can either be a predicate noun, a predicate pronoun,
or a predicative adjective.
Predicate nouns
Nouns that follow linking verbs are known as predicate nouns (or
sometimes predicative nouns or predicate nominatives). These serve
to rename or re-identify the subject. If the noun is accompanied by any
direct modifiers (such as determiners, adjectives, or prepositional
phrases), the entire noun phrase acts predicatively.
For example:
• “Love is a virtue.” (The noun phrase a virtue follows the linking verb is to
870

rename the subject love.)
• “Tommy seems like a real bully.” (The noun phrase a real bully follows
the linking verb seems to rename the subject Tommy.)
• “Maybe this is a blessing in disguise.” (The noun phrase a blessing in
disguise follows the linking verb is to rename the subject this.)
Predicative noun clauses
Noun clauses are dependent clauses that are able to function
grammatically like nouns in a sentence. They most commonly begin with the
words that, how, if, and the “wh-” words—what, whatever, where,
wherever, when, whenever, why, which, whichever, who, whom, whoever,
whomever, whether, and whatever.
Because they behave like nouns, they can perform all the roles that a normal
noun would fill in a sentence, including as a subject complement. For
example:
• “Japan is where I want to go most.” (Where I want to go most is the
predicate noun of the linking verb is, renaming the subject Japan.)
• “The thing I wish for most is that people would all just get along.”
(That people would all just get along is the predicate noun of the linking
verb is, renaming the subject the thing I wish for most.)
• “Politicians are who create the laws.” (Who create the laws is the
predicate noun of the linking verb are, renaming the subject politicians.)
Predicate pronouns
We can also use a predicate pronoun after a linking verb to re-identify the
subject. This is most common in questions and responses in which the
identity of the subject is not known or is being explained. For example:
• Question: “Who is it?” (The pronoun it follows the linking verb is to rename
the subject who.)
• Answer: “It’s me!” (The pronoun me* follows the linking verb is to rename
the subject It.)
We also commonly use personal pronouns in the possessive case
predicatively, as in:
• “That’s mine.”
871

• “The computer was his.”
• “Victory is ours!”
We can also use subjective* personal pronouns in declarative statements, but
this is less common in everyday speech and writing, as it tends to make the
sentence sound more formal than is usually necessary. For instance:
• “It was I who did this.”
• “Her husband took all the credit, but it was she who did all the work.”
• “It was they who assured us that there would be no problems.”
*The subjective case
When pronouns that are not possessive are used predicatively, the
conventional rule is to put them in the subjective case rather than the
objective case. Pronouns in the objective case (me, us, him, her, them,
whom, and whomever) should only be used as direct objects of verbs or
prepositions, not as subject complements.
For example, “it was I who did this” is more correct than “it was me who did
this.”
In conversational English, however, this distinction is much less frequently
observed, and you will often hear people using phrases such as “it’s me” or
“that was her” in response to questions.
But in writing (especially formal or professional writing), always use the
subjective case for a personal pronoun if it is functioning as a subject
complement after a linking verb.
To learn more about using the subjective and objective cases of pronouns,
see the section dealing with Case in the chapter on Personal Pronouns.
Predicative Adjectives
A predicative adjective is an adjective used after a linking verb to describe
or modify the subject of the clause. For example:
• “You look nice.”
• “He is very handsome.”
Here, nice describes the subject you, while the adjective phrase very
handsome describes the subject he.
872

Note that adjectives appearing immediately before the noun they are
describing are known as attributive adjectives. For example:
• “The old man seems nice.”
Old is an attributive adjective that describes the subject, man. Nice also
describes man, but it is a predicative adjective because it follows the linking
verb seems.
Prepositional Phrases
Prepositional phrases can either functions as adjectives (modifying nouns or
pronouns) or adverbs (modifying verbs, adjectives, and adverbs). When a
prepositional phrase follows a linking verb (especially the verb be), it is
functioning in the same way as a predicative adjective, describing the
subject (which must be a noun or pronoun). For example:
• “The cat is in the shed.” (The prepositional phrase in the shed is
describing the subject the cat.)
• “I am across the street.” (The prepositional phrase across the street is
describing the subject I.)
To learn more about how Predicative Adjectives work, go to their section
in the chapter on Adjectives.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is used to describe the subject of a clause?
a) Predicate nouns
b) Predicate pronouns
c) Predicative adjectives
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
2. Which of the following is used to rename the subject of a clause?
a) Predicate nouns
b) Predicate pronouns
c) Predicative adjectives
d) A & B
873

e) B & C
f) All of the above
3. Which of the following sentences uses a predicative adjective?
a) “This soup tastes delicious!”
b) “The project was a disaster.”
c) “They are going to sell our beautiful old house tomorrow.”
d) “It was he who sold the company to overseas investors.”
4. What kind of verbs must be used with a subject complement?
a) Action verbs
b) Linking verbs
c) Stative verbs
d) Non-finite verbs
Object Complements
Definition
Sometimes a verb is not complete with only a direct object, especially when
that direct object is a person. More information about the object’s
relationship with the verb is required to form a complete thought. This
additional information is known as the object complement.
An object complement is a word or group of words that describes,
renames, or completes the direct object of the verb; without one, we are left
asking what about the state or condition of the direct object as a result of the
verb.
An object complement can be a noun or noun phrase; an adjective or
adjective phrase; a relative clause (also known as an adjective clause); an
infinitive or infinitive phrase; or a gerund or gerund phrase.
(In the examples used in this section, the object complements are in bold
while the objects they modify or rename are underlined.)
Nouns and noun phrases
When we use nouns as object complements, they serve to rename or re-
identify the object of factitive verbs. For example:
874

• “The committee elected him treasurer.”
• “Mrs. Fields named her late husband the executor of her estate.”
• “The coach made Timothy team captain.”
• “The school board appointed her superintendent.”
Adjectives and adjective phrases
Factitive verbs also take adjectives and adjective phrases as their object
complements. But whereas a noun that functions as an object complement
will rename a direct object, an adjective serves to describe or modify the
direct object.
Like all object complements, adjectives must follow the direct object they are
describing. If they come before it, they are simply acting as attributive
adjectives, which are not necessary to complete the meaning of the
sentence.
• “All he wanted was to make his husband happy.”
• “The excitement of the day got the kids way too hyper.”
• “We decided to paint my room bright pink.”
• “The jury judged the defendant not guilty.”
• “She deemed him worthy of her love.”
Relative clauses
Relative clauses are dependent clauses that are introduced by relative
pronouns. Like adjectives, relative clauses serve to describe the noun that
they follow; for this reason, they are often called adjective clauses.
For example:
• “Do you know someone who can work the photocopier?”
• “I hate the color that they painted this room.”
• “I found an apartment that is big enough for both of us.”
• “He is a friend whose generosity knows no bounds.”
Infinitives and infinitive phrases
An infinitive or infinitive phrase acts as an object complement by describing
875

the intended or desired action of the direct object. For example:
• “I don’t expect you to approve of my decision.”
• “She’s forcing me to work through the weekend.”
• “We need you to make a few more copies.”
• “Janet’s father wants her to go to Harvard.”
• “I would like the boss to see these reports.”
• “He persuaded me to marry him.”
• “They taught me to work the photocopier.”
We often also use infinitives as object complements in reported speech to
express what someone said to or asked of someone else. For example:
• “He asked me to help him.”
• “She told me not to answer the phone.”
Gerunds and gerund phrases
Gerunds generally function as object complements by describing what the
direct object is or was doing (as opposed to infinitives, which describe an act
that has not yet been done).
For example:
• “We came across him lying in the yard.”
• “My mother noticed the baby walking by himself.”
• “I can’t believe the bosses caught you napping.”
• “We heard their dogs barking at the wind.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following do not function as object complements?
a) Noun phrases
b) Adjective phrases
c) Adverbial phrases
d) Infinitive phrases
 
2. Which of the following kinds of verbs requires an object complement?
876

a) Action verb
b) Factitive verb
c) Stative verb
d) Linking verb
 
3. Identify the type of object complement (in bold) in the following
sentence:
“They found him unfit to lead the company.”
a) Noun phrase
b) Adjective phrase
c) Relative clause
d) Infinitive phrase
 
4. Which of the following sentences uses a gerund phrase as an object
complement?
a) “They saw me walking on my own.”
b) “He wanted me to take him to the airport.”
c) “I need an office that has a telephone line.”
d) “They appointed me secretary of the meeting.”
877

Adjective Complements
Definition
An 
adjective 
complement 
(also 
called 
an 
adjective 
phrase
complement) is a phrase or clause that provides information necessary to
complete an adjective phrase’s meaning. They are most often used with
predicative adjectives* (adjectives that follow linking verbs to describe
the subject of the clause).
(*Note: Some grammar guides refer to predicative adjectives as being
synonymous with adjective complements. In this guide, however, an
adjective complement refers to that which completes the meaning of an
adjective, while a predicative adjective (a kind of subject complement)
completes the meaning of a subject.)
Types of Adjective Complements
Adjective complements can be prepositional phrases, infinitive
phrases, or noun clauses.
Prepositional Phrases
A prepositional phrase is comprised of a preposition immediately followed by
a noun, pronoun, noun phrase, pronoun phrase, or noun clause. Here are
some examples of prepositional phrases acting as adjective complements:
• “I am perfectly content on my own.” (On my own is the complement of
the adjective content.)
• “He felt alone in the world.” (In the world is the complement of the
adjective alone.)
• “They seem a little concerned about the direction we’re taking.”
(About the direction we’re taking is the complement of the adjective
concerned.)
• “She is skilled at archery.” (At archery is the complement of the adjective
skilled.)
• “The bosses are pleased with your progress.” (With your progress is the
complement of the adjective pleased.)
878

Infinitive Phrases
Infinitive phrases are formed from full infinitive verbs (to + the base form of
the verb) plus any additional objects or modifiers of the verb. (Be careful not
to confuse infinitive phrases with prepositional phrases beginning with to.)
For example:
• “I’m very happy to know you!” (To know you is the complement of the
adjective happy.)
• “We’re just glad to be of service.” (To be of service is the complement of
the adjective glad.)
• “They felt relieved to return home.” (To return home is the complement
of the adjective relieved.)
• “The crowd seemed impatient to begin.” (To begin is the complement of
the adjective impatient.)
Noun Clauses
A noun clause is a dependent clause that is able to function grammatically
like a noun. Noun clauses begin with the words that, how, if, and the “wh-“
words—what, whatever, where, wherever, when, whenever, why, which,
whichever, who, whom, whoever, whomever, whether, and whatever.
• “We were a little curious why they decided to leave.” (Why they decided
to leave is the complement of the adjective curious.)
• “I’m thrilled that you are coming to visit!” (That you are coming to visit
is the complement of the adjective thrilled.)
• “It’s so wonderful what he did for those orphans.” (What he did for
those orphans is the complement of the adjective wonderful.)
• “They’re somewhat unsure whether this is the right decision.”
(Whether this is the right decision is the complement of the adjective
unsure.)
Modifiers vs. Complements
Adjective complements are similar to but distinct from modifiers of
adjectives. Both function adverbially, but while adjective modifiers describe
or elaborate upon an adjective’s meaning, adjective complements work with
879

adjectives to complete their meaning. The meaning of the sentence will not
change if the modifier is taken out, whereas some information will be lost or
altered if the complement is removed.
• “I am perfectly content on my own.” (Perfectly is an adverb that modifies
the adjective content, while on my own is a prepositional phrase that
complements it.)
• “They seem a little concerned about the direction we’re taking.” (A
little is an adverbial phrase that modifies the adjective concerned, while
about the direction we’re taking is a prepositional phrase that complements
it.)
• “I’m very happy to know you!” (Very is an adverb that modifies the
adjective happy, while about the direction we’re taking is an infinitive
phrase that complements it.)
• “We’re just glad to be of service.” (Just is an adverb that modifies the
adjective glad, while to be of service is an infinitive phrase that complements
it.)
• “We were a little curious why they decided to leave.” (A little is an
adverbial phrase that modifies the adjective curious, while why they decided
to leave is a noun clause that complements it.)
• “They’re somewhat unsure whether this is the right decision.”
(Somewhat is an adverbial phrase that modifies the adjective unsure, while
whether this is the right decision is a noun clause that complements it.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following cannot be used to form an adjective complement?
a) prepositional phrases
b) infinitive phrases
c) gerund phrases
d) noun clauses
 
2. Adjective complements usually occur with:
a) attributive adjectives
b) predicative adjectives
c) demonstrative adjectives
d) interrogative adjectives
880

 
3. Identify the adjective complement in the following sentence:
“Their huge cabin by the lake is sure to bring in lots of visitors.”
a) huge cabin
b) by the lake
c) in lots of visitors
d) to bring in lots of visitors
Adverbial Complements
Definition
Adverbial complements are adverbs or other adverbial elements in a
clause that are required to complete the meaning of the verb.
Like adverbial adjuncts, adverbial complements modify the meaning of
the verb by providing additional information. However, unlike adjuncts,
which can be removed without losing meaning, adverbial complements must
be included because removing them would cause the sentence to be
incomplete or fundamentally altered in its meaning.
For example:
• “Please keep still.”
• “I love living in New York.”
If the adverb still in the first sentence were removed, it would read “Please
keep” and no longer make any sense. If the adverbial prepositional phrase in
New York were removed from the second sentence, it would read “I love
living”—this would still make logical sense, but the original meaning would
be completely lost.
Identifying 
adverbial
complements
Adverbial complements always appear after the verb they complement. If the
verb is intransitive, the complement will appear directly after the verb; if
the verb is transitive, the complement will appear after the verb’s direct
object.
881

The best way to identify whether an adverbial element is a complement or
not is to remove it from the sentence. If the sentence no longer makes sense
or has a very different meaning, then the adverbial element is a complement.
Example (with
adverbial)
Example (without
adverbial)
Does the meaning
change?
“The teacher sent Tim
home.”
“The 
teacher 
sent
Tim.”
Yes—the adverbial is a
complement.
“She told me the story
quickly.”
“She 
told 
me 
the
story.”
No—the adverbial is an
adjunct.
“Please put the book on
the shelf.”
“Please put the book.” Yes—the adverbial is a
complement.
“He wrote a book in his
spare time.”
“He wrote a book.”
No—the adverbial is an
adjunct.
 
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Where does an adverbial complement of an intransitive verb appear in a
sentence?
a) Before the verb it completes
b) Directly after the verb it completes
c) After an adverbial adjunct
d) After the direct object
 
2. Where does an adverbial complement of an transitive verb appear in a
sentence?
a) Before the verb it completes
b) Directly after the verb it completes
c) After an adverbial adjunct
d) After the direct object
 
3. When can an adverbial complement be removed from the sentence?
a) When it completes a transitive verb
a) When it completes an intransitive verb
882

c) When the verb also has an adverbial adjunct
d) Always
e) Never
Modifiers
Definition
Modifiers are, quite simply, any word or group of words that modifies
(describes or elaborates upon) another element in a sentence. Modifiers can
either be adjectives, which modify nouns (or sometimes pronouns), or
adverbs, which modify pretty much everything else (usually verbs,
adjectives, and other adverbs). Whether a modifier is an adjective or adverb
depends on what it modifies and how it functions in a sentence.
Adjectives
Adjectives have two basic syntactic categories: attributive and predicative.
Adjectives that appear directly before (or sometimes directly after) the noun
or pronoun they modify are known as attributive adjectives. These can
appear anywhere in a sentence.
Predicative adjectives, on the other hand, always appear after the noun
they modify, connected to it by a linking verb. They are one of the three
types of subject complements, and they are always part of the predicate
—hence their name.
Let’s compare two examples to highlight this difference:
• “The black dog is barking.”
In this sentence, black is an attributive adjective. It is part of the noun
phrase and is not connected to the noun dog by a linking verb. Now let’s look
at a predicative adjective:
• “The dog was black.”
In this sentence, black is a predicative adjective. It follows dog, the noun
that it modifies, and is connected to it by the linking verb was.
Other categories of adjectives
There is a huge variety of adjectives in English. While many words are
883

adjectival in nature, such as colors (red, black, yellow, etc.), there are also
several categories of adjectives that are formed from other sources. The table
below will give a brief breakdown of these categories of adjectives, along with
some examples. Go to each individual section to learn more.
Category of
Adjective
Definition
Example
adjectives
Example
sentence
Proper
Adjectives
Formed 
from
proper nouns to
create 
descriptive
words.
Italian,
Shakespearean,
Alaskan,
Middle Eastern,
Nordic
"He writes in an
almost
Shakespearean
style."
Compound
Adjectives
Created from two or
more 
words 
that
work 
jointly 
to
modify 
the 
same
noun; they always
appear before the
noun they modify
and 
are 
usually
joined 
with 
a
hyphen(s).
top-right, last-
minute, sugar-
free, 
record-
breaking,
expensive-
looking
“I know this is a
last-minute
suggestion, 
but
hear me out.”
Demonstrative
Adjectives (or
Demonstrative
Determiners)
Used to specify what
we are referring to,
whether 
it 
is
singular or plural,
and to give more
information 
about
its proximity to the
speaker.
this, 
that,
these, those
“These cups are
very pretty.”
Interrogative
Adjectives
Usually used to ask
questions 
about
something.
what, 
which,
whose
“Whose
computer 
is
this?”
884

Nominal
Adjectives
Adjectives 
that
perform 
the
function of a noun
in a sentence. They
are preceded by the
word the and can be
found 
as 
the
subject 
or 
the
object of a sentence
or clause.
the 
best, 
the
strongest, 
the
blue
“He wants the
red car, but I
want the blue.”
Collective
Adjectives
A 
subgroup 
of
nominal
adjectives, used to
refer to a group of
people based on a
shared
characteristic.
the 
rich, 
the
poor, 
the
innocent, 
the
French, 
the
Dutch
“The 
rich
should help the
poor.”
Adjective Phrases and Clauses
In addition to the single-word adjectives we looked at above, we can also use
adjective phrases and relative clauses (also called adjective clauses)
to modify nouns. We’ll look at both briefly below, but to learn more about
how they are formed and used, go to their sections in the chapter on
Adjectives.
Adjective Phrases
An adjective phrase is an adjective and any additional information linked
to it that work together to describe a noun or pronoun in a sentence. The
adjective around which an adjective phrase is formed is known as the head
word of the phrase. When the head word is a participle, the phrase is
known as a participle phrase.
For example:
• “You have a beautiful voice.”
• “He is a very good swimmer.”
885

• “The helicopters are controlled remotely.”
• “I am perfectly content on my own.”
• “People wearied by travel often stop here to rest.”
• “They felt relieved to return home.”
Relative 
Clauses 
(Adjective
Clauses)
Relative clauses (also known as adjective or adjectival clauses) are
dependent clauses that provide descriptive information about a noun or
noun phrase. Relative clauses are introduced by either a relative pronoun
or a relative adverb, and the information they provide can either be
essential or nonessential to the completeness of the sentence.
• “There’s the woman who always sits next to me on the bus.”
• “The book that I wrote is being published in January.”
• “The escaped giraffe, which had been on the loose for weeks, was
finally captured.”
• “The house where I was born is a very special place.”
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.”
Adverbs
As we learned above, an adverb is a word that modifies or describes a verb,
adjective, other adverb, or an entire clause. For example:
• “You write beautifully.” (The adverb beautifully modifies the verb write.)
• “He owns the bright red car.” (The adverb bright modifies the adjective
red.)
• “She ran very quickly to the bus.” (The adverb very modifies the adverb
quickly.)
• “She looked excited, as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment.” (The adverbial clause as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment modifies the independent clause She looked excited.)
There are many different categories of adverbs, which provide specific kinds
of descriptions and which behave slightly differently in a sentence.
886

The table below provides a quick breakdown of the different categories and
how they are used to describe something in a sentence. Go to the section for
each individual category to see more examples and learn more about how
each one is used.
(Note that most of the examples below are single-word adverbs. However,
adverbial phrases—and sometimes adverbial clauses—can also belong to each
category.)
Category of
Adverb
Definition
Example
adverbs
Example
sentence
Adverbs of
Time
Describe when or for how
long something happens or
is the case.
now,
tomorrow,
yesterday,
still, yet, later
“We 
are
eating now.”
Adverbs of
Frequency
Describe 
how 
frequently
something happens or is the
case. A subset of Adverbs of
Time.
always,
usually,
sometimes,
often, 
rarely,
daily, weekly,
monthly
“I rarely eat
breakfast 
in
bed.”
Adverbs of
Place
Describe 
the 
direction,
distance, 
movement, 
or
position involved in the
action of a verb.
north,
everywhere,
here, 
there,
forward,
downward,
up, 
uphill,
behind
“I absolutely
hate running
uphill.”
Adverbs of
Manner
Describe 
how 
something
happens or how someone
does 
something. 
Usually
formed from adjectives.
beautifully,
wonderfully,
slowly,
deliberately,
happily
“He 
walked
slowly
towards 
the
bar.”
Adverbs of
Degree
Describe 
the 
intensity,
degree, or extent of the
verb, adjective, or adverb
they are modifying.
undoubtedly,
truly, 
very,
quite, 
pretty,
somewhat,
fairly
“I'm 
fairly
certain this is
correct.”
887

Adverbs of
Purpose
Describe 
why 
something
happens or is the case.
Single-word 
adverbs 
are
usually 
conjunctive
adverbs.
therefore,
thus,
consequently,
hence
“We’ve never
seen 
such
high
numbers. We
must
therefore
conclude that
the 
results
are 
not
normal.”
Focusing
Adverbs
Used to draw attention to a
particular part of a clause.
also,
exclusively,
just, 
mostly,
notably,
primarily
“They played
mostly
techno music
at the party.”
Negative
Adverbs
Used to modify the meaning
of a verb, adjective, other
adverb, or entire clause in a
negative way. Used in many
of 
the 
other 
categories
above.
no, 
not,
hardly, barely,
never, seldom
“He does not
work 
on
Mondays.”
Conjunctive
Adverbs
Used 
to 
connect
independent 
clauses 
and
describe 
the 
relationship
between them.
comparatively,
therefore, also,
however,
moreover,
similarly
“Jen 
is
terrible 
at
math;
however,
she still likes
it.”
Evaluative
Adverbs
Used by the speaker to
comment or give an opinion
on something. Evaluative
adverbs modify the entire
clause.
apparently,
astonishingly,
clearly,
frankly,
obviously,
presumably
“Clearly,
we're going to
have to work
harder.”
888

Viewpoint
Adverbs
Used 
to 
indicate 
whose
point 
of 
view 
we 
are
expressing, or to specify
what aspect of something
we are talking about. (Many
viewpoint 
adverbs 
are
adverbial phrases.)
personally, in
my 
point 
of
view,
according 
to
you,
scientifically,
biologically
“Personally,
I 
don’t
believe 
it’s
true.”
Relative
Adverbs
Used to introduce relative
clauses, 
when 
the
information relates to a
place, time, or the reason an
action took place.
where, when,
why
“I don’t know
why he got
angry.”
Adverbial
Nouns
Nouns or noun phrases that
function grammatically as
adverbs to modify verbs and
certain adjectives, usually
specifying time, distance,
weight, age, or monetary
value.
tomorrow, an
hour, 
an
ounce, 
five
dollars, 
25
years
“I can barely
see a foot in
front of me in
this fog.”
 
Adverbial Phrases
An adverbial phrase (also known as an adverb phrase) is group of words
that functions as an adverb in a sentence. These can be adverbs modified by
other adverbs, adverbial prepositional phrases, or adverbial infinitive
phrases.
For example:
• “The kicker is running somewhat slowly back to the bench. He might be
injured.”
• “He performed very well on his exam.”
• “We were playing Frisbee at the park.”
• “After they woke up, they packed up their things and went on a hike.”
• “Patricia went to the mountains to go for a hike.”
• “I’m so happy to be your friend.”
889

Adverbial Clauses
An adverbial clause, or adverb clause, is a group of words that contains
a subject and a predicate and is used, like a regular adverb, to modify
adjectives, verbs, and adverbs.
Adverbial clauses use subordinating conjunctions to connect them to
independent clauses; the way an adverbial clause modifies an element in
a sentence depends on the kind of subordinating conjunction used. For
example:
• “I will arrive when dinner is ready.” (adverbial clause of time)
• “Peter brings his sunglasses everywhere he goes.” (adverbial clause of
place)
• “I admire you because you are an inspiration to many people.”
(adverbial clause of time or purpose)
• “They’ll approve your request provided you pay the appropriate
amount of money.” (adverbial clause of condition)
• “She looked excited, as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment.” (adverbial clause of comparison or manner)
• “Although she doesn’t have much money, Wendy often goes
traveling.” (adverbial clause of contrast)
Common modifier mistakes
In simple sentences, it is usually easy to understand what a modifier is
modifying. However, when we begin adding more information into longer
sentences, we must be careful that we make it clear which elements are
modifying which parts of the sentence.
If we place a modifier too far away from the thing it describes, it can become
a misplaced modifier. In some cases, a modifier may be in the correct
position for its intended recipient, but too close to another element, making
it look like it is describing the wrong thing; this is known as a squinting
modifier.
We must also make sure that the thing being modified is explicitly stated in
the text, otherwise we might be left with a dangling modifier.
890

Misplaced modifiers
A misplaced modifier can occur when we don’t place the modifier close
enough to the word that it modifies, making its meaning unclear or incorrect.
For example:
• “Burton was driving around the countryside while his friend sang songs
slowly.”
Because of its placement in the above sentence, we would presume that the
adverb slowly is modifying sang. If it is meant to modify driving, the adverb
should be placed directly before or after the verb it’s modifying to eliminate
this confusion, as in:
• “Burton was slowly driving around the countryside while his friend sang
songs.”
or
• “Burton was driving slowly around the countryside while his friend sang
songs.”
Here’s another example:
• “The rusted woman’s bicycle made a horrible screeching noise.”
Now the sentence is completely incorrect, because, due to its position, rusted
is modifying woman instead of bicycle. The sentence should read:
• “The woman’s rusted bicycle made a horrible screeching noise.”
With participle phrases
These types of errors often occur with participle phrases. Because they
can appear in the beginning, middle, or end of a sentence, it is can be easy to
misplace the noun or noun phrase they are modifying. For instance:
• “Terrified after watching a scary movie, my father had to comfort my
little sister.”
In the above sentence, the participle phrase terrified after watching a scary
movie is supposed to modify my little sister. However, since my father
appears closer to the participle phrase, it seems it is the father who is
terrified.
The sentence should be rewritten to correct the misplaced modifier. For
example:
891

• “My father had to comfort my sister, terrified after watching a scary
movie.”
or
• “Terrified after watching a scary movie, my sister had to be
comforted by my father.”
or
• “My sister, terrified after watching a scary movie, had to be
comforted by my father.”
Squinting modifiers
Occasionally we use a modifier in the correct technical position, but its
meaning can be misconstrued because of another word that is too close to it.
This usually happens with adverbials, as they can appear before or after the
words they modify. For example:
• “The way he sings so often annoys me.”
So often seems like it could be modifying either sings or annoys, because it’s
technically in the correct position for both. We should rewrite the sentence
to make it more clear what is meant:
• “The way he sings so often is annoying to me.” (modifies sings)
or
• “The way he sings annoys me so often.” (modifies annoys)
Dangling modifiers
A dangling modifier occurs when we don’t clearly state the noun that is
supposed to be modified by the modifying phrase. These are especially
common with participle phrases. For example:
• “Walking down the road, the birds were singing.”
Because the sentence does not state who was walking down the road, is
seems that it was the birds, which is probably not the intended meaning. The
sentence needs to include another noun or pronoun being described by the
phrase to correct the dangling modifier. For example:
• “Walking down the road, I (or she, he, Mary, the couple, etc.) heard the
birds singing.”
892

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following are not classified as modifiers?
a) Particles
b) Adjectives
c) Prepositions
d) Adverbs
e) A & C
f) B & D
2. What are the two main syntactic categories of adjectives?
a) Attributive and predicative
b) Compound and Comparative
c) Demonstrative and Interrogative
d) Nominal and Collective
3. A participle phrase is what kind of modifier?
a) Adverbial phrase
b) Adjective phrase
c) Adverbial clause
d) Adjective clause
4. What introduces a relative clause?
a) A relative pronoun
b) A relative adverb
c) A subordinating conjunction
d) A & B
e) B & C
5. What kind of error results from a modifier that is placed too far away
from the word(s) it modifies?
a) Misplaced modifier
b) Squinting modifier
c) Dangling modifier
893

6. What kind of error results from a modifier that is placed between two
words that it might modify?
a) Misplaced modifier
b) Squinting modifier
c) Dangling modifier
Adjuncts
Definition
Adjuncts are parts of a sentence that are used to elaborate on or modify
other words or phrases in a sentence. Along with subjects, verbs, objects, and
complements, adjuncts are one of the five main components of the structure
of clauses.
A distinguishing feature of adjuncts is that their removal from sentences
does not alter the grammatical integrity and meaning of the sentence. In
other words, adjuncts expand on the word or phrase that they are modifying,
but their presence is not needed for a sentence to function.
Nouns, adjectives, and adverbs can all be adjuncts. However, adverbial
adjuncts are the most complex, so we will examine those in greater detail.
Adverbial adjuncts
Adjuncts are usually adverbs or adverbial phrases that help modify and
enrich the context of verbs in the sentence. For example, consider the
following sentence:
• “She walked to the park slowly.”
In this sentence, the adjunct is the adverb slowly, which modifies the verb
walked. Without this adjunct, the sentence could function on its own and
still be grammatically correct. In this case, the sentence would read:
• “She walked to the park.”
There is nothing wrong with this sentence. The reader just doesn’t know at
what speed she walked to the park. Here are some other examples of
sentences with adverbial adjuncts in them:
• “The soccer team played the game in the rain.”
• “The bowling ball rolled quickly toward the pins.”
894

• “The man walks by the river often.”
In all of these sentences, the adjunct can also be removed without the
sentence losing meaning or grammatical correctness.
Types of modification
Adjuncts can be used to modify words in the sentence in a variety of different
ways. Typically, when adjuncts are used in a sentence, they expand on the
frequency, place, time, degree, reason, or manner of the word or phrase they
are modifying. Here are examples of adjuncts being used to modify all of
these things:
Frequency
• “Every day, the boy played basketball with his friend.”
• “The farmer plowed his field once a week.”
Place
• “The tourists went to see the sights around the city.”
• “The lakes are beautiful in North Carolina.”
Time
• “At 5:00 PM, the dog went to see if there was food in his bowl.”
• “The game began right after school.”
Degree
• “He jumped as high as he could.”
• “As tall as he was, he still could not reach the top cabinet.”
Reason
• “The plants grew tall because they received a lot of sunshine.”
• “She was good at math because she practiced a lot.”
Manner
895

• “The gazelle ran gracefully over the field.”
• “The river flowed swiftly.”
Types of adjunct phrases
As we can see in the examples above, both words and phrases can function as
adjuncts, and there are several different types of phrases that can be used.
Prepositional phrases, noun phrases, and adverb phrases can all be used as
adverbial adjuncts.
Here are examples of each type of phrase being used as an adverbial adjunct:
Prepositional phrase
• “The group went swimming at the beach.”
Adverb phrase
• “The surfer looked calm, although the wave looked huge.”
Noun phrase
• “The grandfather will give his grandson his birthday present next month.”
Position of adjuncts
Adjuncts can occur in different sections of the clause; where they are
positioned depends on the structure of the sentence. Sometimes it works
better to put them into the initial position, sometimes the middle, and
sometimes the final. For example, here are some sentences with adjuncts in
different positions:
• “We arrived at noon.” (final position)
• “The salmon quickly swam.” (middle position)
• “In the middle of the meadow, there was a patch of daisies.” (initial
position)
Sentences can also have more than one adjunct appearing in different parts
of a clause. For example:
• “At the playground, the children ran quickly.”
896

In this sentence, both at the playground, and quickly are adjuncts. Both of
these adjuncts modify the clause the children ran.
Misplaced modifiers
Another important note about adjuncts is that if they are placed too far away
from the word or phrase they are modifying, or too near to another word or
phrase, there can sometimes be confusion about what they are modifying.
These are known as misplaced modifiers. For example, consider this
sentence:
• “Reading books frequently improves intelligence.”
In this sentence, it is difficult to tell if frequently is modifying reading books
or improving intelligence. Placing the adjunct in a better position will
improve the clarity of the sentence. For example:
• “Frequently reading books improves intelligence.”
Noun Adjuncts and Adjectival
Adjuncts
Adjuncts can also be nouns or adjectives. These occur so commonly, though,
that they rarely need to be identified. Nevertheless, let’s look at what
constitutes noun adjuncts and adjectival adjuncts.
Noun Adjuncts
Noun adjuncts are nouns that are used to modify other nouns. The
resulting phrase is called a compound noun. For example:
• “The boy played with his toy soldier.”
In this sentence, toy is the noun adjunct, and it modifies the word soldier,
creating the compound noun toy soldier. The meaning of the sentence would
change if we left out toy, but the sentence would remain grammatically
correct.
Noun adjuncts can also create single-word compound nouns, as in
policeman, where the word police modifies the word man.
Adjectival Adjuncts
897

Adjectival adjuncts are just adjectives that come immediately before the
noun they describe. They are more commonly referred to as attributive
adjectives. They too can be removed without compromising grammatical
correctness. Here is an example of an adjectival adjunct:
• “The white cat climbed onto the table.”
In this sentence, white is the adjectival adjunct, and it modifies the word cat.
Again, leaving it out does not affect the grammar of the sentence. However, if
we said, “The cat that is white climbed onto the table,” the adjective is no
longer an adjunct because it is integral to the grammar of the sentence.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following words is the adverbial adjunct in this sentence?
“The tall man smiled enthusiastically.”
a) tall
b) the
b) enthusiastically
d) smiled
 
2. Which of the following words is the adverbial adjunct in this sentence?
“The two people agreed to meet at the end of the day.”
a) agreed
b) two people
c) to meet
d) at the end of the day
 
3. Which of the following adjuncts correlates to place?
a) in the meadow
b) before noon
c) beautifully
d) often
 
4. Which of the following adjuncts correlates to manner?
a) at the mall
b) steadily
c) in three days
898

d) once a week
5. Which of the following adjuncts is a prepositional phrase?
a) slowly
b) quickly
c) at the beach
d) beautifully
6. Where do noun and adjectival adjuncts appear in a sentence?
a) Immediately before the noun they describe
b) Immediately after the noun they describe
c) Before a preposition
d) At the end of a clause
Phrases
Definition
Grammatical phrases are groups of two or more words that work together to
perform a single grammatical function in a sentence. Unlike clauses,
phrases do not contain both a subject and a predicate (although they
sometimes function as one or the other).
Phrases from the parts of speech
Most of the parts of speech can be made into phrases by adding
information that is directly associated with them.
Below, we’ll look at a breakdown of each type of phrase that is formed from a
part of speech, including some examples of the various types of phrases and
how each functions in a sentence. To learn more, go to the sections that
discuss each type of phrase.
Noun Phrases
A noun phrase consists of a noun plus any determiners or modifiers
directly related to it. Noun phrases always have the grammatical function of
nouns in a sentence.
899

Noun phrase examples
How they appear in
a sentence
• a book — determiner a + noun book
• “I found a book I'd
like to read.”
• her sweetly smiling child — determiner her +
adverb sweetly + adjective (present participle)
smiling + noun child
• “She gazed lovingly
at 
her 
sweetly
smiling child.”
• the red car — determiner the + adjective red +
noun car
• 
“The 
red 
car
belongs to me.”
Verb Phrases
A verb phrase can either be made up of an auxiliary verb and its main verb,
or a verb plus any modifiers, objects, or complements.* Verb phrases are
used to form perfect or continuous verb tenses, to express modality, or as
part (or all) of the predicate.
Verb phrase examples
How they appear in a sentence
• am running — auxiliary verb am +
present participle running
• “I am running late.” (forms the
present continuous tense)
• have completed — auxiliary verb
have + past participle completed
• “They have completed work on
the building.” (forms the present
perfect tense)
• quickly ran to the bus — adverb
quickly + verb ran + prepositional
phrase to the bus
• “She quickly ran to the bus.”
(forms the predicate)
• plays the trombone — verb plays
+ object the trombone
• 
“My 
brother 
plays 
the
trombone.” (forms the predicate)
*Notes on verb phrases
There are two different definitions of what constitutes a verb phrase.
In traditional grammar, a verb phrase is made up of an auxiliary verb plus
900

the main verb(s) that follow it. For example:
• “We were running late.”
• “I have been learning Arabic.”
• “They will call you tomorrow.”
More modern theories of grammar, however, define verb phrases as being
any main verb (or combination of main and auxiliary verbs) in a clause plus
its constituent parts—that is, any modifiers or objects that complete its
meaning. These verb phrases are, according to this definition, what forms (or
adds to) the predicate of a sentence. For example:
• “My brother is running late for school again.”
• “Our teacher looks tired; she must have been up late last night.”
This guide takes a more all-inclusive approach for the term verb phrase. In
a situation in which we are analyzing everything that belongs to a certain
verb, it will be referred to as a verb phrase. Likewise, when we’re describing
the use of auxiliary verbs to create different verb tenses or modal
constructions, the overall verb that is constructed may also be called a verb
phrase.
Adjective Phrases
An adjective phrase is made up of an adjective along with any
determiners, modifiers, or adjective complements that modify or
complete the adjective’s meaning. The entire phrase functions as an adjective
in a sentence, modifying a noun.
Adjective phrase examples
How they appear in a
sentence
• my favorite — determiner my + adjective
favorite
• “I brought my favorite
jacket to school.”
• 
wonderfully 
talented 
— 
adverb
wonderfully + adjective talented
• 
“The 
singer 
was
wonderfully talented.”
• alone in the world — adjective alone +
adjective complement in the world
• “She felt alone in the
world.”
901

Adverbial Phrases
An adverbial phrase may consist of an adverb plus any determiners and
supplemental information, or an adverb plus an adverb of degree, or an
adverbial prepositional phrase. (Prepositional phrases are so often adverbial
that they are commonly included in definitions of adverbial phrases.)
Adverbial phrase examples
How they appear in a
sentence
• once a week — adverb once + noun
phrase a week
• “My dad swims once a
week.”
• too quickly — intensifier too + adverb
quickly
• “Don't run too quickly!”
• 
down 
the 
street 
— 
adverbial
prepositional phrase
• “We walked down the
street.”
 
 
 
Prepositional Phrases
Prepositional phrases consist of a preposition and its object. They most
commonly function as adverbs, but they can also be adjectival.
Prepositional phrase
examples
How they appear in a sentence
• on the wall — preposition on
+ object the wall
• “We hung the painting on the wall.”
(adverbial prepositional phrase)
• 
in 
the 
driveway 
—
preposition in + object the
driveway
• “The car in the driveway is my dad’s.”
(adjectival prepositional phrase)
 
Gerund Phrases
A gerund phrase is formed when a gerund (the “-ing” form of a verb used
as a noun) is accompanied by any modifiers and/or objects. The entire
902

phrase functions as a noun, meaning it can be the subject of a clause or an
object of a verb or preposition.
Gerund phrase examples
How they appear in a
sentence
• swimming every day — gerund swimming +
adverbial phrase every day
• 
“Swimming 
every
day is good for your
health.”
• reading books in the dark — gerund
reading + object books + adverbial prepositional
phrase in the dark
• “I wouldn't recommend
reading books in the
dark.”
Infinitive Phrases
Infinitive phrases are composed of the infinitive of a verb (the base form +
the particle to) along with any objects or modifiers associated with it.
Infinitives and infinitive phrases can function as nouns, adjectives, or
adverbs in a sentence.
Infinitive phrase examples
How they appear in a sentence
• 
to 
help 
one 
another 
—
infinitive to help + object one
another
• “We must all try to help one
another.” (functions as a noun, the
direct object of try)
• to stop for today — infinitive to
stop 
+ 
adverbial 
prepositional
phrase for today
• “This is a good place to stop for
today.” (functions as an adjective,
modifying the noun place)
• to send my brother a letter —
infinitive to send + indirect object
my brother + direct object a letter
• “I'm going to the post office to send
my brother a letter.” (functions as
an adverb, modifying the verb going)
 
Participle Phrases
Like gerunds and infinitives, participles are formed from verbs, so
participle phrases are created when participles are accompanied by any
modifiers or objects. Past and present participles (without modifiers or
903

objects) can be used to create different verb tenses, but they can also
function as adjectives. Participle phrases, however, can only function as
adjectives in a sentence.
Participle phrase examples
How they appear in a
sentence
• destroyed in the accident — past
participle 
destroyed 
+ 
adverbial
prepositional phrase in the accident
• “My car, destroyed in the
accident, was taken away by
the tow truck.”
• breaking the rules — present participle
breaking + object the rules
• “Participants breaking the
rules will be removed from
the competition.”
 
Phrases within phrases
As you might have noticed in the examples above, there are many instances
in which one type of phrase has one or more other phrases within it. Take the
following sentence, for example:
• “The bright orange cat lives in the shed in the garden.”
There are actually seven phrases in this sentence. The two primary phrases
are the noun phrase the bright orange cat (the subject) and the verb phrase
lives in the shed in the garden (the predicate), and each of these phrases
contains one or more smaller phrases. Let’s look at a breakdown below:
 
The Subject
 
 
The Predicate
Contains
the 
noun
phrase:
The 
bright
orange cat
 Contains 
the
verb phrase:
lives in the shed in
the garden
Contains
the
adjective
phrase:
The 
bright
orange (modifies
the noun cat)
 
Contains 
the
adverbial
prepositional
phrase:
in the shed in the
garden 
(modifies
the verb lives)
 
 
 Contains 
the
noun phrase:
the shed in the
garden 
(object 
of
the preposition in)
904

 
 
 
Contains 
the
adjectival
prepositional
phrase:
in 
the 
garden
(modifies the noun
shed)
 
 
 Contains 
the
noun phrase:
the garden (object
of 
the 
second
preposition in)
When we are trying to examine all the parts of an individual sentence, it’s
important to be able to recognize when one part is (or might be) made up of
several other smaller elements.
Absolute Phrases and Appositive
Phrases
There are two other types of phrases that we have not looked at yet
—absolute phrases and appositive phrases. These are created from
specific parts of speech and have specific functions in a sentence. We’ll
briefly look at both below. You can continue on to their individual sections to
learn more.
Absolute phrases
An absolute phrase or absolute construction is a grammatically
independent group of words that modify or add information to the entire
sentence. It is usually made up of a noun or pronoun and a participle, along
with any modifiers or objects of the participle.
Absolute phrases usually appear at the beginning or end of a sentence to add
descriptive information or provide a final comment on the sentence as a
whole. They can also appear in the middle of the sentence to emphasize the
additional information. They are always set apart from the rest of the
sentence by commas or dashes.
For example:
• “The students having left early, I decided to catch up on some grading.”
• “I hope to get into Harvard next year—God willing.”
• “The teacher, her students having left early, decided to catch up on
905

some grading.”
Appositive Phrases
An appositive phrase is a noun phrase that serves to describe or rename
another noun that appears directly before it in a sentence. Appositive
phrases are usually (but not always) non-restrictive, meaning they provide
information that is not essential to the meaning of the sentence, and are
separated from the rest of the sentence by one or two commas.
For example:
• “The office, an old Georgian building, badly needed repairs.”
• “Janet Smith, a former student of mine, is joining the faculty next
spring.”
• “Just meet me at my car, the old station wagon parked across the
street.”
Other appositives
Note that an appositive can also be a proper noun that names or identifies
a common noun. An appositive made up of a proper noun that contains
more than one word is not considered an appositive phrase, but rather a
single noun construction. For example:
• “My brother Michael lives in New York.”
• “America’s first president, George Washington, was born in the colony of
Virginia.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following types of phrases can function as a noun in a
sentence?
a) Noun phrases
b) Infinitive phrases
c) Gerund phrases
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
 
906

2. Which of the following can be added to an adjective to create an adjective
phrase?
a) A noun
b) An adverb
c) A determiner
d) A & B
e) B & C
 
3. Identify the type of phrase (in bold) in the following sentence:
“The bird flying above us landed on the tree.”
a) Participle phrase
b) Infinitive phrase
c) Gerund phrase
d) Verb phrase
 
4. What does an absolute phrase modify?
a) A noun
b) A clause
c) A sentence
d) A phrase
 
5. What does an appositive phrase modify?
a) A noun
b) A clause
c) A sentence
d) A phrase
Noun Phrases
Definition
Noun phrases are groups of two or more words within a sentence that
function grammatically as nouns. They consist of a noun and other words
that modify the noun. Some grammarians also consider a single-word noun
to be a noun phrase, while more traditional grammars hold that a phrase
must be made up of two or more words. In this guide, we define a phrase as
being made up of more than one word.
907

Noun phrases can also have pronouns as their structural base, which we will
examine later in this section.
Identifying noun phrases
Noun phrases allow groups of words to function as a noun in the sentence. In
this way, nouns can be elaborated upon or modified to add further depth to
the sentence without losing their structural role.
The following sentence contains a basic, single-word noun, without any
modifiers:
• “Whales swim.”
In this sentence, the word “whales” functions alone as the noun. Because
there are no modifiers to create a noun phrase, the reader receives no
additional information about “whales.”
The following sentence contains a noun phrase with modifiers:
• “He brought the shovel with the blue handle.”
In this sentence, “the shovel with the blue handle” is a noun phrase. It
collectively acts as a noun while providing modifying words for the head
noun, “shovel.” The modifiers are “the” and “with the blue handle.”
Here are some other examples of sentences with noun phrases marked in
italics (the primary nouns being modified are underlined):
• “The tall mountain was very large.”
• “The highway at rush hour can be frantic.”
• “The oranges that fell from the orange tree are delicious.”
A good way to test whether or not a phrase is a noun phrase is to replace the
phrase with a pronoun and see if the sentence is still grammatically correct.
For example, in all three examples provided above, the noun phrase can be
successfully replaced with a pronoun:
• “It was very large.”
• “It can be frantic.”
• “They are delicious.”
Noun phrases of varying length
Noun phrases can be as short as two words, or they can be longer and have
908

many words; the number of words in a phrase does not affect its status as a
noun phrase, so long as it functions as a noun in the sentence. For example,
the following sentences contain one very short noun phrase, and one very
long noun phrase:
• “The man sat down.”
• “The forty-five year old man with brown hair and a black shirt sat down.”
Despite their difference in length, both phrases in italics function as nouns.
Noun 
phrases 
within 
noun
phrases
You may have noticed that many of the sentences above contain multiple
noun phrases. It is very common for a smaller noun phrase to occur within a
larger one, acting as part of the modifying information. For instance, the
second sentence above actually has three noun phrases, two of which are
contained within the longer one. Let’s look at the sentence again, this time
underlining each noun being modified and putting the smaller phrases in
bold.
• “The forty-five year old man with brown hair and a black shirt sat
down.”
Here are some more examples of sentences with noun phrases inside of other
noun phrases:
• “They passed an orange bus driven by a jolly old man wearing a lady’s
wig on the highway.”
• “Please hand me the book with the torn cover.”
Modifiers
Position of modifiers
Sometimes the words that modify the noun come before the noun in the
phrase, and sometimes they come after. For example, in the following
sentence, the modifiers come before the noun:
• “Dogs often like to chase high-flying Frisbees.”
In this next sentence, the modifiers come after the noun:
909

• “Trucks with red stripes and large wheels came riding into town.”
The position of modifiers in a noun phrase depends on what type of modifier
is being used to describe the noun.
Types of modifiers
There are many different types of modifiers that can be used in noun phrases
to modify the noun in the phrase. Among these modifiers are adjectives,
articles, participles, possessive nouns, possessive pronouns, determiners,
relative clauses, infinitives, participle phrases, prepositional phrases, and
compound nouns*.
Adjectives, articles, participles, possessive nouns, determiners, possessive
pronouns, and compound nouns tend to appear before the noun in a noun
phrase. Relative clauses, infinitives, participle phrases, prepositional phrases,
and compound phrases tend to appear after the noun in noun phrases.
(*Modifiers are usually considered to be adjectives, adverbs, or other
grammatical elements that function as one or the other. For the sake of
conciseness in this section, however, we’ll be including items that are not
usually classed as modifiers—such as articles and determiners—but still serve
to give more meaning to the noun in a noun phrase.)
Here are examples of each type of modifier in a sentence with a noun phrase:
Adjectives
Adjectives modify the noun by expressing a certain quality of the noun:
• “Bright stars shine in the sky.”
• “Big cities are loud.”
Articles
Articles modify the noun by revealing if the noun is definite or indefinite:
• “The dog went to the park.”
• “A boy ate an apple.”
Determiners
Determiners are words that reveal the amount of a noun in a sentence:
910

• “There are five bananas.”
• “Several iguanas were on the tree.”
Participles
Participles can be used to directly modify the noun by showing a past or
present action that the noun is or was involved in doing:
• “The galloping gazelle jumped high.
• “Boiled water is very hot.”
Possessive Nouns
Possessive nouns modify the noun by explaining that the noun belongs to
someone, something, or some group:
• “The mail man's truck was parked.”
• “The woman's purse was blue.”
Possessive Determiners
Possessive determiners also indicate possession. However, they indicate
possession by using a pronoun instead of a noun:
• “His wife brought him his forgotten briefcase.”
• “Her shoe was untied.”
Compound Nouns
Compound nouns are created by modifying the head noun with a noun
adjunct (a word that works together with the noun to give it a different
meaning). (There are different kinds of adjuncts, which are covered in
another section).
Compound nouns can either be one word, two words, or two words joined by
a hyphen. In every case, the noun adjunct adds to or changes the meaning of
the head noun. The following sentences show an example of each type of
compound noun:
• “He ran to the doghouse.”
• “The bus station was busy.”
911

• “His ex-wife called him yesterday.”
Relative Clauses
Relative clauses (also known as adjective clauses express a quality of the
noun just like adjectives do. However, adjective clauses contain a subject and
a verb:
• “The car that drove up the street turned left.”
• “The light that was left on was very bright.”
Infinitives
Infinitives modify the noun by providing a verb phrase that helps elaborate
on and provide clarification of the noun:
• “He was the person to contact if you wanted pastries.”
• “She was the one to ask.”
Participle Phrases
Participle phrases modify the noun by providing a group of words with a
present or past participle that works like an adjective to modify the noun:
• “The man waving his hand for a taxi was being ignored.”
• “The geese flying overhead formed a V shape.”
Prepositional Phrases
Prepositional phrases are used in noun phrases to provide unique,
distinguishing, or specifying information about the noun being modified:
• “The train at the station had twenty-seven cars.”
• “The snow on the field was white.”
• “A cat with white whiskers just walked by.”
Noun 
Phrases 
with 
Pronoun
Bases
Although noun phrases primarily have nouns as the base word that is being
912

modified, sometimes these base words can also be pronouns. For example,
the following sentences have pronoun base words as opposed to noun base
words:
• “He who walks by the bay at night may see the moon.”
• “Someone new slowly approached the group.”
Nouns 
phrases 
as 
subjects,
objects, and complements
Noun phrases can be used in sentences as a subject, object, or complement.
The individual sentence will determine how the noun phrase is used. Here
are some examples of noun phrases being used as subjects, objects, and
complements.
Subject
The subject of a sentence is the noun or noun phrase that is doing the action
of the verb:
• “The green bowling ball rolled down the lane.”
Object
Objects are the noun or noun phrase that receives the action of the verb.
They are the things that something happens to, as opposed to the things
causing the action:
• “He rolled the green bowling ball down the lane.”
Complement
Complements are words or phrases that are necessary to make the sentence’s
subject or predicate complete. Subject complements are words that follow a
linking verb and describe the subject of the sentence. Object complements
are words that modify the direct or indirect object of the verb. Here are
examples of both:
Subject Complement
• “He was a man who owned green bowling balls.” (The noun phrase
913

follows the linking verb was and modifies the subject he.)
Object Complement
• “He painted the bowling ball a greenish color.” (The noun phrase follows
and modifies the direct object bowling ball.)
• “The club elected the man their president.” (The noun phrase follows
and modifies the direct object the man.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following word or words is the noun phrase in this sentence?
“The new shoe laces would be delivered soon.”
a) delivered soon
b) would
c) The new shoe laces
d) be
 
2. The following sentence contains which type of noun phrase?
“Full moons shine brightly.”
a) article
b) infinitive
c) participle
d) adjective
 
3. How many noun phrases are there in the following sentence?
“The old man rode his bicycle.”
a) 2
b) 1
c) 3
d) 0
 
4. Which of the following is not a noun phrase?
a) The rock
b) slowly
c) his house
d) the man who saw the sign
914

 
5. Which of the following is a noun phrase with an article modifier?
a) blue hat
b) dog that chased cats
c) the car
d) tall building
Adjective Phrases
Definition
An adjective phrase is an adjective and any additional information linked
to it that work together to describe a noun or pronoun in a sentence. The
adjective around which an adjective phrase is formed is known as the head
word of the phrase.
Some grammar guides consider an adjective functioning by itself to be an
adjective phrase, but, in this guide, when we refer to a phrase, we always
mean a group of two or more words.
There is also a tendency to combine the terms adjective phrase and
adjectival phrase into a single category, but they are not quite the same.
We’ll look at this distinction more closely later on in this section.
Attributive vs. Predicative
Adjective phrases can either be attributive or predicative.
Attributive adjectives occur immediately before or after the noun they
modify, as in:
• “You have a very beautiful voice.”
Predicative adjectives, on the other hand, appear after a linking verb to
describe the subject of the clause. For example:
• “Your voice is very beautiful.”
Forming adjective phrases
Any word or words that work in conjunction with an adjective constitute part
of an adjective phrase. These are usually made up of determiners or
adverbs. Prepositional phrases, infinitives, and noun clauses can
915

also be used as adjective complements to create adjective phrases.
As you will notice in some of examples below, we can also use a combination
of different elements together to create more complex adjective phrases.
Determiners
Determiners are used to introduce a noun or noun phrase. There are
several classes of determiners: articles, demonstrative determiners,
possessive determiners, interrogative determiners, distributive
determiners, pre-determiners, quantifiers, and numbers.
Determiners are able to stand alone to introduce a noun, but when they
function with an adjective, they create an adjective phrase. For example:
• “I would like a large soda, please.” (The article a forms an adjective phrase
with the head word large to describe the noun soda.)
• “This green pen belongs to me.” (The demonstrative determiner this
forms an adjective phrase with the head word green to describe the noun
pen.)
• “I’ve lost my favorite backpack.” (The possessive determiner my forms an
adjective phrase with the head word favorite to describe the noun
backpack.)
• “Whose black laptop is this?” (The interrogative determiner whose forms
an adjective phrase with the head word black to describe the noun laptop.)
• “The camp gives out welcome packs to each new arrival.” (The
distributive determiner each forms an adjective phrase with the head word
new to describe the noun arrival.)
• “She’s such a sweet girl.” (The pre-determiner such forms an adjective
phrase with the article a and the head word sweet to describe the noun girl.)
• “Many vintage cars were parked outside the diner.” (The quantifier many
forms an adjective phrase with the head word vintage to describe the noun
cars.)
• “They own three gigantic yachts.” (The number three forms an adjective
phrase with the head word gigantic to describe the noun yachts.)
Adverbs
Adverbs modify adjectives, verbs, and other adverbs. When an adverb is used
916

to modify an adjective, the two work together as an adjective phrase to
modify a noun or pronoun. If a determiner appears before the adverb, it is
also considered part of the adjective phrase.
Adverbs often appear directly before the adjective they modify. For example:
• “He is a very good swimmer.” 
Very modifies the adjective good; together they modify swimmer.
• “The brightly lit room hurt my eyes.” 
Brightly modifies the past participle lit (which functions as an adjective);
together they modify the noun room.
• “She is wonderfully talented.”
Wonderfully modifies the adjective talented; together they modify the
pronoun she.
However, we can sometimes use adverbs directly after an adjective. This can
serve to place emphasis on the relationship between the adjective and the
adverb. For example:
• “The helicopters are controlled remotely.”
In this sentence, remotely modifies the past participle controlled (which
functions as an adjective); together they modify the noun helicopters.
Because remotely appears after controlled, it puts extra emphasis on the way
in which the helicopters are controlled.
We can see how this emphasis works if we reword the sentence:
• “The helicopters are remotely controlled.”
The sentence doesn’t lose any literal meaning, but there is now slightly less
emphasis on the relationship between remotely and controlled.
Adjective Complements
An 
adjective 
complement 
(also 
called 
an 
adjective 
phrase
complement) is a phrase or clause that provides information necessary to
complete an adjective phrase’s meaning.
They are most often used with predicative adjectives (adjectives that
follow linking verbs to describe the subject of the clause) and can be
prepositional phrases, infinitive phrases, and noun clauses.
Sometimes these adjectives are modified by adverbs, which also form part of
the full adjective phrase.
917

Prepositional Phrases
• “I am perfectly content on my own.” (On my own is the complement of
the adjective content, which is modified by the adverb perfectly.)
• “He felt alone in the world.” (In the world is the complement of the
adjective alone.)
• “They seem a little concerned about the direction we’re taking.”
(About the direction we’re taking is the complement of the adjective
concerned, which is modified by adverbial phrase a little.)
Prepositional phrases can also be used with adjectives (often past participles)
that are attributive but appear after the noun, as in:
• “People wearied by travel often stop here to rest.”
• “I will not allow a dog covered in mud into my clean house.”
Infinitives
• “I’m very happy to know you!” (To know you is the complement of the
adjective happy, which is modified by adverb very.)
• “We’re glad to be of service.” (To be of service is the complement of the
adjective glad.)
• “They felt relieved to return home.” (To return home is the
complement of the adjective relieved.)
Noun Clauses
• “We were a little curious why they decided to leave.” (Why they
decided to leave is the complement of the adjective curious, which is
modified by adverbial phrase a little.)
• “I’m thrilled that you are coming to visit!” (That you are coming to
visit is the complement of the adjective thrilled.)
• “It’s so wonderful what he does for charity.” (What he does for
charity is the complement of the adjective wonderful, which is modified by
the adverb so.)
• “They’re somewhat unsure whether this is the right decision.”
(Whether this is the right decision is the complement of the adjective
unsure, which is modified by the adverb somewhat.)
918

Adjective Phrases vs. Adjectival
Phrases
The terms adjective phrase and adjectival phrase are often treated as
synonymous terms; however, while they are very similar, they are in fact two
different things.
A true adjective phrase contains an adjective as a head word, while an
adjectival phrase does not have to—it is any phrase that is functioning as an
adjective in a sentence, whether or not it contains an adjective as a head
word. Therefore, an adjective phrase can be considered a specific kind of
adjectival phrase.
Prepositional phrases, for instance, often function independently as
adjectives in a sentence, in which case they follow the noun they are
describing. For example:
• “The car on the lawn belongs to my brother.”
• “Pass me the cup with the handle.”
• “He wrote a book about modern economics.”
All three of these examples are adjectival phrases—they do not have
adjectives as head words. The prepositional phrase in the third example does
contain the adjective modern, but it is modifying the noun economics (the
object of the preposition about), not the noun book.
Relative clauses (also known as adjective clauses) are also kinds of
adjectival phrases. They are introduced by relative pronouns and modify a
noun in a sentence. For example:
• “The man whom I met in the bank was on the same bus as me tonight.”
• “It’s the nicest thing that I own.”
• “The song, which he wrote for his wife, is beautiful.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following can be used to form an adjective phrase?
a) Determiners
b) Adverbs
919

c) Infinitives
d) Noun clauses
e) A & B
f) C & D
g) All of the above
2. True or False: An adjective phrase can only be attributive.
a) True
b) False
3. Identify what is used to create the adjective phrase (in bold) in the
following sentence:
“A man dressed in fine silk walked through the doors.”
a) Adverb
b) Prepositional phrase
c) Infinitive phrase
d) Noun clause
4. Which of the following does an adjective phrase require that an
adjectival phrase does not?
a) A noun as a head word
b) An adjective as a head word
c) A noun to modify
d) An adjective complement
Adverbial Phrases
Definition
An adverbial phrase (also known as an adverb phrase) is group of words
that functions as an adverb in a sentence. That is, it modifies a verb,
adjective, adverb, clause, or the sentence as a whole. Adverbial phrases often
feature an adverb (known as the head word) being modified by other
elements, but not always.
Here are some examples of adverbial phrases:
very quickly
920

in a while
just a bit
surprisingly well
at the fairground
slightly close
as soon as possible
Here are some examples of adverb phrases being used in sentences:
• “Shelia rode her bike very hastily so she could get home sooner.”
• “The farmers worked like a single unit.”
• “The surf at the beach was coming in extremely quickly.”
• “After they woke up, they packed up their things and then went on a
hike.”
• “He read the restaurant's menu rather slowly.”
As you can see, different types of word groups can be used as adverbial
phrases.
Types of Adverbial Phrases
Adverbs 
with 
mitigators 
and
intensifiers
Adverbial phrases are commonly formed when an adverb’s intensity is being
modified by another adverb. These modifying adverbs are known as
mitigators, which decrease the intensity of the main adverb, and
intensifiers, which increase its intensity. For example:
• “The kicker is running somewhat slowly back to the bench. He might be
injured.” (mitigator)
• “She performed very well on her exam.” (intensifier)
Prepositional phrases
Prepositional phrases are often used adverbially, though they can also
function as adjectives. If the phrase is modifying an adjective, verb, or
adverb, it is an adverbial phrase. If it is modifying a noun or a pronoun, it is
921

an adjectival phrase.
We’ll look briefly at both uses so the difference is clear.
Adverbial prepositional phrases
• “We were playing Frisbee at the park.”
In this sentence, the prepositional phrase at the park is an adverbial phrase,
because it is modifying the verb playing.
• “All of the employees were filled with excitement because they learned
that they might get a raise.”
The prepositional phrase with excitement modifies the adjective filled in this
sentence. Therefore it is an adverbial phrase.
Adjectival prepositional phrase
• “The cat on the window sill was orange and had some white spots.”
• “All the people on the boardwalk were wearing sunglasses.”
In these examples, the prepositional phrases modify the nouns cat and
people—they are functioning as adjectives and not adverbs.
Infinitive phrases
We can also use infinitives or infinitive phrases as adverbs in a sentence.
Infinitive phrases are groups of words that begin with a verb in the infinitive
form (the base form of the verb preceded by the particle to) and typically
include an object and/or modifiers.
Similar to prepositional phrases, infinitive phrases can act as adverbial
phrases if they modify a verb, adverb, or adjective. However, infinitives can
also act as noun phrases and adjectival phrases.
Adverbial infinitive phrases
• “The man brought his fishing gear to catch fish in the river.”
In this sentence, the infinitive phrase to catch fish in the river modifies the
verb brought, so it is functioning adverbially.
• “Patricia went to the mountains to go for a hike.”
922

Here, the infinitive phrase to go for a hike modifies the verb went, so it is
also an adverbial phrase.
Adjectival infinitive phrases
• “One of the best things to do if you get lost is to call for help.”
In this sentence, the infinitive phrase to do if you get lost modifies the noun
things. Since it is modifying a noun, it is an adjectival phrase.
Infinitive noun phrases
• “I like to go on a walk a couple times a week.”
Here, the infinitive phrase to go on a walk a couple times a week is the
object of the verb like, so it is acting as a noun.
Purpose of use
Adverbial phrases typically give descriptions of time, location, manner, or
reason. They serve to broaden the meaning of the sentence and enhance the
context of the verb, adjective, or adverb that they describe.
Time
• “The player made the shot just before the buzzer.”
The adverbial phrase just before the buzzer is a description of a time that
modifies the verb made. It lets you know exactly when the player made the
shot.
• “The sun set at around 7:30 PM.”
Here, the adverbial phrase at around 7:30 PM describes the time that the
sun set. Because the phrase uses the compound preposition at around,
rather than simply at, it implies a level of ambiguity about the exact time
that the sun set. Subtleties like this help to create descriptions that are more
nuanced and rich with meaning.
Location or direction
• “Stuart ran five miles around the track.”
Around the track is an adverbial phrase that establishes a location and
923

direction for the verb ran.
• “The large wind turbines stood on top of the hill.”
In this sentence, the adverbial phrase on top of the hill tells where the wind
turbines stood.
Manner
• “The leopard climbed the tree quite gracefully.”
Here, quite gracefully describes the manner in which the leopard climbed
the tree.
• “The figure skater leapt in a beautiful arc.”
The adverbial phrase in a beautiful arc describes how the figure skater leapt.
Reason or purpose
• “The woman went to the store to get some lettuce.”
In this sentence, the infinitive adverbial phrase to get some lettuce explains
the reason why the woman went to the store.
• “The hockey team prepared for the championship match.”
The adverbial prepositional phrase for the championship match lets you
know the purpose for the team’s preparation.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is an adverbial phrase?
a) quite lazy
b) the great big house
b) quite enthusiastically
d) meander slowly
 
2. Identify the adverbial phrase in the following sentence.
“Sally threw the football to her friend.”
a) threw the football
b) Sally threw
c) to her friend
d) none of the above
924

 
3. Which of the following parts of speech do adverbial phrases never
modify?
a) Nouns
b) Verbs
c) Adjectives
d) Adverbs
 
4. Identify the type of adverbial phrase used in the following sentence.
“The group worked late to get the job done early.”
a) Intensifier
b) Infinitive phrase
c) Prepositional phrase
d) Mitigator
e) None of the above
 
5. Which of the following do adverbial phrases typically not describe?
a) Reason or purpose
b) Time
c) Location or direction
d) Possession
Participle Phrases
Definition
Participles are words formed from verbs that can function as adjectives, as
gerunds, or to form the continuous and perfect tenses of verbs. Past
participles are often (but not always) formed by adding “-d” or “-ed” to the
end of the verb, while present participles are always formed by adding “-
ing” to the end.
When they function as adjectives, participles can form participle phrases
(sometimes known as participle clauses) with any information that
modifies or complements them. Because they function as adjectives,
participle phrases modify nouns, noun phrases, or pronouns in a sentence.
925

Using participle phrases
We can form phrases using present, past, perfect, and passive perfect
participles—each one changes the way the noun is modified. Where they
appear in a sentence also impacts the sentence’s meaning, as well as the way
in which they’re punctuated.
Present participle phrases
If we use the present participle in a phrase, we give the phrase an active
meaning. In other words, the noun being modified is the agent of the action
expressed by the present participle. For example:
• “Singing in the shower, I was oblivious to the doorbell ringing.” (I was
singing.)
• “James, hiding under the bed, was completely silent.” (James was
hiding.)
Past participle phrases
If we use the past participle to form an adjectival phrase, the noun being
modified is either given a passive role in the action, or else is being described.
For example:
• “My car, destroyed in the accident, was taken away by the mechanics.”
• “My sister, exhausted after a long day’s work, fell asleep on the sofa.”
In the first example, the noun phrase my car is not the agent of the action,
but is being acted upon; it has been destroyed by another driver, and so it
has a passive role. In the second example, my sister is also not the agent of
the verb exhaust. Instead, exhausted is used to describe how she feels.
Perfect participle phrases
When we want to emphasize that one event happened before another, we
can use the structure having + past participle—this is sometimes known as
the perfect participle. Perfect participle phrases, like the present
participle, designate that the noun being modified is the agent of the
participle’s action. For example:
• “Having seen the movie before, I wouldn’t want to see it again.”
926

• “Having done so much exercise this morning, we should eat a big
lunch.”
• “She was exhausted, having stayed up all night.”
Passive 
perfect 
participle
phrases
If we want to describe a noun that was passively acted upon in an event that
happened before another one, we can use what is known as the passive
perfect participle (sometimes called the perfect passive participle),
which is structured as having + been + past participle. For example:
• “Having been dismissed from class early, Thomas decided to explore
the river by his house.”
• “The turkey, having been burnt to a crisp, was thrown in the garbage.”
• “The book is ancient, having been written nearly 3,000 years ago.”
This is similar to how past participle phrases are used, but the emphasis is
placed on the first action happening further in the past. And whereas past
participle phrases can be used to describe a noun or pronoun, passive perfect
participle phrases stress the action being done to the noun—they cannot be
used to create simple descriptions. For instance:
✔ “My sister, exhausted after a long day’s work, fell asleep on the sofa.”
(correct)
✖ “My sister, having been exhausted after a long day’s work, fell
asleep on the sofa.” (incorrect)
Sentence Placement
Where a participle phrase appears in a sentence changes the way we
punctuate it, as does its importance to the meaning of the sentence as a
whole.
Initial position
When a participle phrase occurs in the initial position, it is usually separated
from the rest of the sentence by a comma. For example:
• “Running to the car, the boy welcomed his father home after three
927

months away.”
• “Singing in the shower, I was oblivious to the doorbell ringing.”
• “Scared, my sister slept with the light on.”
Middle position
When the phrase occurs in the middle position, and is not essential to the
meaning of the sentence, it should be set apart from the rest of the sentence
by two commas. For example:
• “My sister, exhausted, has fallen asleep on the sofa.”
• “James, hiding under the bed, was completely silent.”
• “The turkey, having been burnt to a crisp, was thrown in the garbage.”
If we took the participle phrases out, each of the examples above would still
mean the same thing, just with less descriptive detail.
However, if a participle phrase occurs in the middle position and is essential
to the meaning of the sentence, it should not be set apart by commas. For
example:
• “The students finished with their work may have a break.”
• “Jackets left behind will be donated.”
• “Participants breaking the rules will be removed from the competition.”
If we took the participle phrases out of these examples, we would be left with
completely different meanings, as each phrase describes an essential aspect
about the noun to set it apart from others. To make it clear that this
description is integral to the sentence’s meaning, we do not use commas to
set it apart.
Final position
If the participle phrase occurs in the final position immediately after the
noun that it modifies, it doesn’t need a comma. For example:
• “We looked for hours and finally found James hiding under the bed.”
• “The cat had no interest in the poor dog wagging its tail.”
• “I was in such a hurry I didn’t notice my jacket left on the table.”
However, when it occurs in final position but not immediately after the
noun that it modifies, it does need a comma. For example:
928

• “It was obvious he really enjoyed the meal, having helped himself to
more dessert.”
• “My sister cried as she packed up her belongings, saddened at the idea
of moving out of her childhood home.”
• “Most of the puzzle pieces have disappeared, misplaced after so many
years.”
Common mistakes
When we use participle phrases as adjectives, it’s important that the noun
modified is clearly stated and that the phrase appears as close to it as
possible. Otherwise, we run the risk of errors known as misplaced
modifiers and dangling modifiers.
Misplaced modifiers
A misplaced modifier can occur when there is more than one noun in the
sentence. If we don’t place the participle phrase close enough to the noun
that it modifies, it may seem that it modifies another noun. For example:
• “Terrified after watching a scary movie, my father had to comfort my
little sister.”
In the above sentence, the participle phrase terrified after watching a scary
movie is supposed to modify my little sister. However, since my father
appears closer to the participial phrase, it seems it is the father who is
terrified. The sentence should be rewritten to correct the misplaced modifier.
For example:
• “My father had to comfort my sister, terrified after watching a scary
movie.”
or;
• “Terrified after watching a scary movie, my sister had to be
comforted by my father.”
or;
• “My sister, terrified after watching a scary movie, had to be comforted
by my father.”
Dangling modifiers
929

A dangling modifier occurs when we don’t clearly state the noun that is
supposed to be modified by the participle. For example:
• “Walking down the road, the birds were singing.”
Because the sentence does not state who was walking down the road, is
seems that it was the birds, which is probably not the intended meaning. The
sentence needs to include another noun or pronoun being described by the
phrase to correct the dangling modifier. For example:
• “Walking down the road, I (or she, he, Mary, the couple, etc.) heard the
birds singing.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Participle phrases have the function of __________ in a sentence.
a) verbs
b) adjectives
c) adverbs
d) nouns
2. Where can a participle phrase appear in a sentence?
a) At the beginning
b) In the middle
c) At the end
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
3. Which of the following sentences is punctuated correctly?
a) “Anthony, tired of failing his exams, started studying every night after
school.”
b) “Anthony tired of failing his exams started studying every night after
school.”
c) “Anthony, tired of failing his exams started studying every night after
school.”
d) “Anthony tired of failing his exams, started studying every night after
school.”
 
930

4. Identify what kind of participle phrase is used in the following sentence:
“Having worked all her life, Susanne was ready to enjoy her retirement.”
a) Present participle phrase
b) Past participle phrase
c) Perfect participle phrase
d) Passive perfect participle phrase
5. When should a participle phrase appearing in the middle of a sentence be
set apart by commas?
a) When it identifies a noun as an active agent
b) When it is essential to the meaning of the sentence
c) When it is not essential to the meaning of the sentence
d) Always
e) Never
6. What kind of participle phrase indicates a noun that is acted upon (not
the agent of the participle’s action)?
a) Present participle phrase
b) Past participle phrase
c) Perfect participle phrase
d) Passive perfect participle phrase
e) A & C
f) B & D
931

Absolute Phrases
Definition
An absolute phrase (sometimes known as an absolute construction) is
a grammatically independent group of words that serves to modify or add
information to an entire sentence.
An absolute phrase is usually made up of a noun or pronoun and a
participle, along with any modifying information. Because of their unique
construction, absolute phrases are more commonly found in descriptive
writing, such as prose, than in speech or even in everyday writing.
Using absolute phrases
We generally use absolute phrases at the beginning of a sentence to
introduce additional information, or at the end of a sentence to provide a
final comment on the sentence as a whole.
Because absolute phrases are considered parenthetical (meaning they are
not an integral part of the sentence), we always set them apart by commas
or dashes.
For example:
• “The students having left early, I decided to catch up on some grading.”
• “The test finished, Jason heaved a sigh of relief.”
• “I hope to get into Harvard next year—God willing.”
• “She walked out the door, her head turning for a last look at home.”
It is also possible to use an absolute phrase in the middle of a sentence to
highlight or put extra emphasis on the extra information. For instance:
• “The teacher, her students having left early, decided to catch up on
some grading.”
• “I hope—God willing—to get into Harvard next year.”
Omitting the participle
When a participle of the verb be (being or having been) is part of an
absolute phrase, it is very common to omit it altogether. For instance:
932

• “All things being equal, I’d rather finish this next week.”
• “All things equal, I’d rather finish this next week.”
• “I started getting nervous, having been alone for so long.”
• “I started getting nervous, alone for so long.”
However, the participle of be should not be omitted when doing so might
lead to a confusing construction. For instance:
✔ “That being the case, we should resolve the issue quickly.” (correct)
✖ “That the case, we should resolve the issue quickly.” (incorrect)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is usually found in an absolute phrase?
a) A gerund
b) An infinitive
c) A participle
d) A finite verb
2. Where is an absolute phrase usually located in a sentence?
a) At the beginning
b) In the middle
c) At the end
d) A & B
e) A & C
f) All of the above
3. Which of the following is not used to separate an absolute phrase from the
rest of the sentence?
a) A semicolon
b) A comma
c) A dash
d) Parentheses
4. When can a participle be omitted?
a) When the participle is of an auxiliary verb
933

b) When the participle is of the verb be
c) When the participle does not have a subject
d) Always
e) Never
Appositives
Definition
An appositive is a noun that serves to describe or rename another noun (or
pronoun) that appears directly before it in a sentence.
When an appositive is made up of a noun phrase, it is known as an
appositive phrase.
Proper nouns as appositives
Appositives that are made up of one noun or more without any determiners
or modifiers are almost always proper nouns, which serve to name
common nouns that appears before them. For example:
• “Our cat, Scruffles, hates being left home alone.” (The proper noun
Scruffles provides a name for the common noun cat.)
• “Your friend Jack is here to see you.” (The proper noun Jack provides a
name for the common noun friend.)
• “America’s first president, George Washington, was born in the colony of
Virginia.”
Appellations
Appellations are additional words added to a person’s name, which
generally become capitalized as part of the proper noun. Appellations are not
considered appositives in their own right, but they can be used as
appositives in conjunction with the proper noun. For example:
• “The heir, Prince William, is adored by many.” (The proper noun William
with the appellation Prince provides a name for the common noun heir.)
• “Italy was invaded by the conqueror Attila the Hun in 452.” (The proper
noun Attila with the appellation the Hun provides a name for the common
noun conqueror.)
934

Appositive phrases
It is also very common to use noun phrases (which consist of a noun
accompanied by any determiners and modifiers) as appositives to provide
more descriptive identifying information about a noun; these appositive
phrases can modify both common and proper nouns. They usually begin with
the articles the, a, and an. For example:
• “The office, an old Georgian building, badly needed repairs.” (In the
appositive phrase, the head noun building is modified by the article an and
the adjectives old and Georgian.)
• “Janet Smith, a former student of mine, is joining the faculty next
spring.” (In the appositive phrase, the head noun student is modified by the
article a, the adjective former, and the prepositional phrase of mine.)
• “Just meet me at my car, the old station wagon parked across the
street.” (In the appositive phrase, the head compound noun station
wagon is modified by the article the, the adjective old, and the participle
phrase parked across the street.)
While it is most common to use the articles the, a, and an, we can also use
indefinite pronouns (such as one or some) to begin an appositive phrase, as
in:
• “My father, one of the toughest lawyers in the state, always wanted
me to follow in his footsteps.”
• “The scientists, some of the most respected in their fields,
collaborated on a paper on the dangers of climate change.”
Introductory appositive phrases
Appositives most commonly appear directly after the noun they identify, as
we have seen in all of the examples so far.
However, we can also place an appositive before a noun when it serves to
introduce a sentence. In this case, it does not need to be immediately
adjacent to the noun. This adds emphasis to the information the appositive
provides. Note that we can only use appositive phrases (as opposed to proper
nouns functioning as appositives) at the beginning of sentences. For
example:
• “The only one from her class to graduate with honors, Ms.
935

Thomson now runs one of the largest businesses in the world.”
• “A true classic, this book inspired a generation of young readers.”
• “A staunch conservative, the New York senator has promised to
reinvigorate industry in her state.”
Restrictive 
vs. 
non-restrictive
appositives
Restrictive appositives
Appositives that are necessary for the sentence’s meaning are known as
restrictive appositives. These are often proper nouns, and they are
integrated into the sentence without commas. For example:
• “The popular restaurant Joe’s Place gets thousands of diners a day.”
Without the information the appositive provides, the sentence would be
confusing and the reader would not know which restaurant the sentence is
referring to. Other times, the sentence would still make logical sense, but the
implied meaning changes slightly. Consider, for example, these two
sentences:
• “My brother lives in New York.”
• “My brother Michael lives in New York.”
Both sentences make sense. However, in the first example, it is implied that
the speaker only has one brother, and he lives in New York. In the second
example, it sounds like the speaker has specified his brother’s name because
he has more than one brother.
We can also use appositive phrases restrictively when we are making a
comparison between two descriptions of the same person. For example:
• “Jeremy Jones the professor has gained much more praise than Jeremy
Jones the novelist ever did.”
Non-restrictive appositives
Appositives that are not essential to the meaning of the sentence are known
as non-restrictive appositives. We set non-restrictive appositives apart
from the rest of the sentence with commas. For example:
936

• “Neil Armstrong, the first person to walk on the moon, was a pilot in
the Korean War.”
• “My hometown, Denver, has a fantastic zoo.”
• “A brilliant and eager student, he graduated from college at the age of
19.”
In 
each 
of 
the 
above 
sentences, 
there 
would 
be 
no 
potential
misunderstanding or loss in meaning if the appositives were left out.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What types of nouns are used as appositives without any modifiers?
a) Common nouns
b) Proper nouns
c) Compound nouns
d) Abstract nouns
2. Which of the following are used to make appositive phrases?
a) Noun phrases
b) Noun clauses
c) Adjective phrases
d) Relative clauses
3. Identify the appositive in the following sentence:
“Because of the recession, my son, a software engineer, had to move home
when he lost his job.”
a) Because of the recession
b) my son
c) a software engineer
d) had to move home
4. Identify the appositive in the following sentence:
“Ask your sister Mary if she’d like to come to a movie on Saturday.”
a) sister
b) Mary
c) she
d) a movie
937

 
5. Appositive phrases are most commonly ________________.
a) Restrictive
b) Non-restrictive
Clauses
Definition
Clauses are groups of words that contain both a subject and a predicate.
There are two main types of clauses: independent clauses, which can
function independently as sentences, and dependent clauses, which
depend on an independent clause to form a sentence.
We’ll briefly cover the various types of clauses below. To learn more about
how clauses are formed and used, continue on to each individual section.
Independent Clauses
An independent clause (also known as a main clause) is a clause that
forms a complete, independent thought. It does not require anything else to
be considered complete, and so it can stand alone as a sentence.
A single independent clause is known as a simple sentence. It contains a
subject and a predicate, each of which can have modifiers.
For example:
• “I refuse.”
• “They like to stay in fancy hotels.”
• “The girl in the red jacket ran quickly towards the bus.”
• “The Beatles were a great band.”
• “I wish it weren’t Monday.”
In each of the above cases, the independent clause remains able to stand
alone as a simple sentence.
Sometimes we form a sentence with two (and occasionally more)
independent clauses, which is known as a compound sentence. We join
the independent clauses together with a comma and a conjunction or a
semicolon without a conjunction. For example:
938

• “She wanted to play tennis, but he wanted to play basketball.”
• “My brother lives in Detroit; I wish I lived there.”
Dependent Clauses
A dependent clause (also called a subordinate clause) is a clause that
relies on the information from an independent clause to form a complete,
logical thought. As such, it cannot stand on its own to form a sentence.
Dependent clauses are usually marked by dependent words, such as
subordinating conjunctions, relative pronouns, or relative adverbs,
which link them to independent clauses in a sentence.
For example:
• “Whenever I travel, I like to stay in fancy hotels.”
• “We struck up a great conversation with a person whom we met on the
plane.”
• “She found it strange that they like to eat sushi.”
In each of the examples above, the groups of words in bold are clauses,
because they each have a subject (I, we, and they) and a predicate (travel,
met on the plane, and like to eat sushi). However, we can also see that they
are dependent clauses because of their dependent words—whenever,
whom and that. Because of this, they cannot stand alone as a sentence; they
depend on the information from the independent clauses (in italics) to be
logically complete.
Categories of Dependent Clauses
Because dependent clauses must be a part of or attached to an independent
clause, they serve a variety of grammatical functions depending on what type
of dependent clause we are using. There are three primary categories of
dependent clauses: noun clauses, relative clauses, and adverbial
clauses. We’ll look at a few examples of each. To learn more about them,
continue on to the section Dependent Clauses, or to the individual
sections for each type of clause.
Noun Clauses
Noun clauses are dependent clauses that function as nouns. Because of this,
939

noun clauses can perform all the roles that a normal noun could play in a
sentence, such as the subject or the object of a verb. For example:
• “Wherever we decide to go is fine with me.” (subject of the sentence)
• “I want to see what is available before I make a purchase.” (direct object
of the verb see)
Relative Clauses
Relative clauses, also called adjective clauses, provide descriptive
information about a noun. These clauses can either be essential to the
sentence (restrictive clauses) or non-essential (non-restrictive clauses). They
are introduced by either a relative pronoun or a relative adverb.
Here are some examples:
• “The man, whom I’d heard so much about, gave an electrifying speech
to the crowd.” (non-restrictive clause)
• “The book that I wrote is being published in January.” (restrictive clause)
• “Any student whose desk is not clean will have detention after class.”
(restrictive clause)
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.” (non-
restrictive clause)
Adverbial Clauses
An adverbial or adverb clause is used, like a regular adverb, to modify
adjectives, verbs, adverbs, and sometimes entire clauses. Adverbial clauses
use subordinating conjunctions to connect to an independent clause.
For example:
• “I went to the park before my parents woke up.” (modifies the verb
went)
• “Animals are cute while they’re young.” (modifies the adjective cute)
• “I work better when I have total privacy.” (modifies the adverb better)
• “I have loved you since the day I met you.” (modifies the entire clause I
have loved you)
Omitted subjects in imperative
940

sentences
Every clause in English must have both a subject and a predicate. However,
when we form imperative sentences to issue commands or requests, the
subject is always implied because the sentence is directed at someone
specific (either the reader or the person being spoken to). In this case, we
never include the subject. For example:
• “Do your homework!”
• “Please open the window.”
• “Let me know when the documents arrive.”
We sometimes include a person’s name to specify who is being addressed,
but this is not the same as the subject of the sentence. It is known as a noun
of address (also known as a vocative), which is considered parenthetical
and set apart by commas. For instance:
• “John, do your homework!”
• “Please open the window, Mary.”
• “Let me know when the documents arrive, sir.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What kinds of clauses can function as sentences on their own?
a) Independent clauses
b) Dependent clauses
2. Which of the following cannot be used to link a dependent clause to an
independent clause?
a) Relative pronouns
b) Relative adverbs
c) Subordinating conjunctions
d) Coordinating conjunctions
3. How can two independent clauses be joined to form a compound
sentence?
a) A comma followed by a subordinating conjunction
941

b) A semicolon followed by a coordinating conjunction
c) A comma followed by a coordinating conjunction
d) A semicolon
e) A & B
f) C & D
4. In which of the following ways can a dependent clause function
grammatically in a sentence?
a) As a noun
b) As an adjective
c) As an adverb
d) All of the above
e) B & C
f) None of the above
5. In what types of sentences is the subject not included?
a) Interrogative sentences (questions)
b) Imperative sentences (commands or requests)
c) Declarative sentences (statements)
d) None of the above
Independent Clauses
Definition
An independent clause (also known as a main clause) is a clause that
forms a complete, independent thought. Like all clauses, an independent
clause contains a subject and a predicate (which consists of a verb and any
related information).
Forming sentences
An independent clause does not require anything else to be considered
complete, and so it can stand alone as a sentence. This is known as a simple
sentence.
For example:
• “I refuse.”
942

• “The wind blows.”
• “Dogs bark.”
• “Bees sting.”
• “Cats meow.”
In the above examples, the subject begins the sentences and the predicate
ends them. The predicate (in each of these cases made up of just a verb)
contains all the necessary information about the subject to be considered
logical, so each is considered an independent clause.
The predicate of an independent clause can also contain additional
information that modifies the verb. For example:
• “I like to stay in fancy hotels.” ( prepositional phrase used as an adverb)
• “She wanted to play basketball.” (infinitive phrase used as the direct object
of the verb)
In each of the above cases, the independent clause remains able to stand
alone as a simple sentence, despite the addition of qualifying information.
Forming 
sentences 
with
dependent clauses
A dependent clause, on the other hand, relies on the information from an
independent clause to form a complete, logical thought. Dependent clauses
(also known as subordinate clauses) are usually marked by dependent
words, such as a subordinating conjunctions or relative pronouns.
Here are some examples of dependent clauses:
• “whenever I travel” (subordinating conjunction)
• “whom we met on the plane” (relative pronoun)
We can see that the clauses above do not express a complete idea—they
require independent clauses to be logically complete:
• “Whenever I travel, I like to stay in fancy hotels.”
• “We struck up a great conversation with a person whom we met on the
plane.”
An independent clause that contains or is connected to at least one
dependent clause, as we see in the above two examples, forms what is known
as a complex sentence.
943

Forming sentences with multiple
independent clauses
A sentence formed by two independent clauses is known as a compound
sentence. For example:
• “She wanted to play tennis, but he wanted to play basketball.”
If at least one of those independent clauses contains a dependent clause,
then the sentence is considered a compound-complex sentence, as in:
• “Because I love to read, I like to visit the library, and I enjoy going to book
stores, too.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is true of both independent and dependent
clauses?
a) Able to stand alone as a simple sentence
b) Contains a subject
c) Contains a predicate
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
 
2. Which of the following is true only of an independent clause?
a) Able to stand alone as a simple sentence
b) Contains a subject
c) Contains a predicate
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
 
3. What is a sentence called that is formed from an independent clause and
at least one dependent clause?
a) compound sentence
b) dependent sentence
c) complex sentence
944

d) compound-complex sentence
 
4. Is the following an independent or a dependent clause? (Capitalization and
punctuation have been intentionally left out.)
“he was walking home”
a) independent clause
b) dependent clause
5. Is the following an independent or a dependent clause? (Capitalization and
punctuation have been intentionally left out.)
“while I waited for the bus”
a) independent clause
b) dependent clause
Dependent Clauses
Definition
A dependent clause (also called a subordinate clause) is a clause that
relies on the information from an independent clause to form a complete,
logical thought. As such, it cannot stand on its own to form a sentence.
There are three types of dependent clause: noun clauses, relative clauses
(also called adjective clauses), and adverbial clauses.
Forming Dependent Clauses
A clause, whether it is dependent or independent, always consists of two
parts—a subject and a predicate (though the subject can be implied in
certain situations). The predicate consists of a verb or verb phrase (a verb
and any objects or modifiers relating to it), while the subject consists of a
noun, a pronoun, or a phrase containing either.
Dependent clauses are usually marked by dependent words, such as
subordinating conjunctions or relative pronouns.
Here are some examples of dependent clauses:
• “whenever I travel”
• “whom we met on the plane”
945

• “that they like to eat sushi”
We can see that each of the examples above is a clause, because they each
have a subject (I, we, and they) and a predicate (travel, met on the plane,
and like to eat sushi). However, we can also see that they are dependent, as
they do not express a complete idea—they require independent clauses to be
logically complete:
• “Whenever I travel, I like to stay in fancy hotels.”
• “We struck up a great conversation with a person whom we met on the
plane.”
• “She found it strange that they like to eat sushi.”
Functions of Dependent Clauses
Because dependent clauses must be a part of or attached to an independent
clause, they serve a variety of grammatical functions. These vary depending
on what type of dependent clause we are using.
Noun Clauses
Noun clauses are dependent clauses that function as nouns. Because of this,
noun clauses can perform all the roles that a normal noun would play in a
sentence: they can act as the subject, a direct or indirect object, a
predicate noun, the object of a preposition, or an adjective
complement. Let’s look at an example of each.
The Subject
• “Wherever we decide to go is fine with me.” (Wherever we decide to go
is the subject of the linking verb is.)
Direct Object
• “I want to see what is available before I make a purchase.” (what is
available is the direct object of the verb see.)
Indirect Object
• “I’ll send whoever is responsible a strongly worded letter.” (Whoever is
responsible is the indirect object of the verb send, and a strongly worded
946

letter is the direct object.)
Predicate Noun
• “The thing I wish for most is that people would all just get along.”
(That people would all just get along is the predicate noun of the linking
verb is, renaming the subject the thing I wish for most.)
Object of a preposition
• “The is the man to whom I owe my life.” (Whom I owe my life is the
object of the preposition to, acting as an adjective to describe the noun man.)
Adjective complement
• “I’m thrilled that you are coming to visit!” (That you are coming to visit
is the complement of the adjective thrilled.)
Relative Clauses
Relative clauses are also called adjective clauses because they provide
descriptive information about a noun or noun phrase. These clauses can
either be essential to the sentence (restrictive clauses) or non-essential (non-
restrictive clauses).
Relative clauses are introduced by either a relative pronoun or a relative
adverb.
Here are some examples:
• “The man, whom I’d heard so much about, gave an electrifying speech
to the crowd.” (Whom I’d heard so much about is a non-restrictive clause
modifying the word man.)
• “The escaped giraffe, which had been on the loose for weeks, was
finally captured.” (Which had been on the loose for weeks is a non-restrictive
clause modifying the word giraffe.)
• “The book that I wrote is being published in January.” (That I wrote is a
restrictive clause modifying the word book.)
• “Any student whose desk is not clean will have detention after class.”
(Whose desk is not clean is a restrictive clause modifying the word student.)
• “The house where I was born is a very special place.” (Where I was born
947

is a restrictive clause modifying the word house.)
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.” (When we
get to wear jeans to work is a non-restrictive clause modifying the word
Fridays.)
Adverbial Clauses
An adverbial or adverb clause is used, like a regular adverb, to modify
adjectives, verbs, and adverbs. Adverbial clauses use subordinating
conjunctions to connect to an independent clause. For example:
• “I went to the park before my parents woke up.” (Before my parents
woke up is an adverbial clause that modifies the verb went.)
• “She waited on the shore until the ship departed.” (Until the ship
departed is an adverbial clause that modifies the verb waited.)
• “Animals are cute while they’re young.” (While they’re young is an
adverbial clause that modifies the adjective cute.)
• “I work better when I have total privacy.” (When I have total privacy is
an adverbial clause that modifies the adverb better.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is true of both independent and dependent
clauses?
a) Unable to stand alone as simple sentences
b) Contain a subject
c) Contain a predicate
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
 
2. Which of the following is true only of dependent clauses?
a) Unable to stand alone as simple sentences
b) Contain a subject
c) Contain a predicate
d) A & B
e) B & C
948

f) All of the above
 
3. Which type of dependent clause is able to function as the subject of a
sentence?
a) relative clause
b) noun clause
c) adverbial clause
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
 
4. Which type of dependent clause is able to function as a verb in a
sentence?
a) relative clause
b) noun clause
c) adverbial clause
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
5. Identify the type of dependent clause (in bold) in the following sentence:
“I like to wake up before the sun rises.”
a) relative clause
b) noun clause
c) adverbial clause
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
Noun Clauses
Definition
A noun clause is a type of dependent clause that is able to function
grammatically like a noun in a sentence. As such, it serves to name a person,
place, or thing.
Because of this, noun clauses can perform all the roles that a normal noun
would fill in a sentence: they can act as the subject, a direct or indirect
object, a predicate noun, an adjective complement, or the object of a
preposition.
949

Forming Noun Clauses
Noun clauses most commonly begin with the words that, how, if, and the
“wh-” words—what, whatever, where, wherever, when, whenever, why,
which, whichever, who, whom, whoever, whomever, whether, and
whatever.
Like all clauses, a noun clause contains a subject (sometimes represented by
one of the words above) and a predicate (a verb and any additional
information attached to it).
Below we’ll look at some examples of various noun clauses performing the
different functions of a noun:
Subjects
The subject performs, occupies, or controls the action of the verb.
• “Wherever we decide to go is fine with me.” (Wherever we decide to go
is the subject of the linking verb is.)
• “Which option is best remains to be seen.” (Which option is best is the
subject of the verb remains.)
• “Whoever wants to go should sign up with their supervisor.” (Whoever
wants to go is the subject of the phrasal verb sign up.)
• “That you act so frivolously with money shows you aren’t ready to
lead this company.” (That you act so frivolously with money is the subject of
the verb shows.)
Objects
Remember that intransitive verbs do not take direct and indirect objects,
so you will only find noun clauses used as the objects of transitive verbs.
Direct objects
A direct object is a person or thing that directly receives the action of the
verb
• “I will enjoy whatever we decide to do.” (Whatever we decide to do is
the direct object of the verb enjoy.)
• “We’ve decided to go wherever the wind takes us.” (Wherever the wind
950

takes us is the direct object of the verb go.)
• “I want to see what is available before I make a purchase.” (what is
available is the direct object of the verb see.)
• “At this point, we’ll take whatever we can get.” (Whatever we can get is
the direct object of the verb take.)
Indirect objects
An indirect object is a person (or sometimes thing) that receives the
direct object via the action of the verb. For example:
• “I’ll send whoever is responsible a strongly worded letter.” (Whoever is
responsible is the indirect object of the verb send, and a strongly worded
letter is the direct object.)
• “Just pay whomever you hire $100, as we agreed.” (Whomever you hire
is the indirect object of the verb pay, and $100 is the direct object.)
• “I will give whatever you propose my full support.” (Whatever you
propose is the indirect object of the verb give, and my full support is the
direct object.)
Predicate nouns
Predicate nouns are a subset of a larger category known as subject
complements 
(including 
predicate 
pronouns 
and 
predicative
adjectives), which rename or re-identify the subject after a linking verb
(usually a form of the verb be). For example:
• “Japan is where I want to go most.” (Where I want to go most is the
predicate noun of the linking verb is, renaming the subject Japan.)
• “The thing I wish for most is that people would all just get along.”
(That people would all just get along is the predicate noun of the linking
verb is, renaming the subject the thing I wish for most.)
• “Politicians are who create the laws.” (Who create the laws is the
predicate noun of the linking verb are, renaming the subject politicians.)
Objects of prepositions
A preposition is followed by its object to create a prepositional phrase,
which can function as an adverb or an adjective in a sentence. For example:
951

• “The is the man to whom I owe my life.” (Whom I owe my life is the
object of the preposition to, acting as an adjective to describe the noun man.)
• “I ran into a few people from where I used to live.” (Where I used to live
is the object of the preposition from, acting as an adjective to describe the
noun people.)
• “They were angry because of what they found out.” (What they found
out is the object of the compound preposition because of, acting as an adverb
to describe the adjective angry.)
• “She can study with whomever she likes.” (Whomever she likes is the
object of the preposition with, acting as an adverb to modify the verb study.)
Adjective complements
An adjective complement is a clause or phrase that completes the meaning of
a predicative adjective. For example:
• “We were curious why they decided to leave.” (Why they decided to
leave is the complement of the adjective curious.)
• “I’m thrilled that you are coming to visit!” (That you are coming to visit
is the complement of the adjective thrilled.)
• “It’s so wonderful what he did for those orphans.” (What he did for
those orphans is the complement of the adjective wonderful.)
• “They’re unsure whether this is the right decision.” (Whether this is
the right decision is the complement of the adjective unsure.)
Multiple noun clauses
Because of their various roles, a sentence can have multiple noun clauses
functioning in different ways. Take the following sentence, for example:
• “What I decide will determine who gets the promotion.”
Here, the noun clause what I decide is acting as the subject of the sentence,
while the clause who gets the promotion is acting as the direct object of the
verb determine.
Here’s another example:
• “What they want to know is why you think this is acceptable.”
What they want to know is a noun clause acting as the subject, and why you
think this is acceptable is a predicate noun that renames the subject.
952

Replacing a noun clause with a
pronoun
A noun clause can always be replaced by a single pronoun (such as you, he,
she, it, they, there, etc.), the same way a normal noun would. If you are
uncertain whether a part of a sentence is functioning as a noun clause, try
replacing it with a pronoun; if the sentence is still grammatically complete,
then the part you replaced is a noun clause. (The only exception to this rule
is when a noun clause is used as an adjective complement, since a
pronoun cannot function this way.)
Let’s try replacing some of the examples we used above with pronouns:
• “Whoever wants to go should sign up with their supervisor.”
• “They should sign up with their supervisor.”
• “I want to see what is available before I make a purchase.”
• “I want to see it before I make a purchase.”
• “Just pay whomever you hire $100, as we agreed.”
• “Just pay her $100, as we agreed.”
• “The thing I wish for most is that people would all just get along.”
• “The thing I wish for most is this.”
• “She can study with whomever she likes.”
• “She can study with you.”
• “What they want to know is why you think this is acceptable.”
• “That is it.”
In each of these examples, the new sentence is still grammatically complete
(even if it seems to be lacking information), proving that a noun clause was
used in each case.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a function of a noun clause?
a) Acting as the subject of a sentence
b) Acting as the object of a verb
c) Modifying an adjective, adverb, or verb
d) Following a linking verb to rename the subject
953

e) Acting as the object of a preposition
 
2. Which of the following can be used to begin a noun clause?
a) you
b) there
c) it
d) that
 
3. Identify the function of the noun phrase in the following sentence:
“I wish that I were taller.”
a) The subject
b) Direct object of the verb
c) Indirect object of the verb
d) Predicate noun
 
4. Identify the noun clause in the following sentence:
“The boss, who is away on vacation, should know what was discussed.”
a) The boss
b) who is away on vacation
c) should know what
d) what was discussed
Relative Clauses
Definition
Relative clauses (also known as adjective clauses or adjectival
clauses) are dependent clauses that provide descriptive information
about a noun or noun phrase. Relative clauses are introduced by either a
relative pronoun or a relative adverb, and the information they provide
can either be essential or nonessential to the completeness of the sentence.
Relative Pronouns and Relative
Adverbs
Relative pronouns are used to help clarify who or what a sentence is
954

talking about, or else give extra information about the person or thing. Like
other pronouns, they have the grammatical function of nouns, and can be
either the subject or object of the relative clause. There are five common
relative pronouns: who, whom, which, whose, and that.
Here are some examples of relative clauses introduced by relative pronouns:
• “There’s the woman who sits next to me on the bus.”
• “The man, whom I’d heard so much about, gave an electrifying speech
to the crowd.”*
• “The escaped giraffe, which had been on the loose for weeks, was
finally captured.”
• “The book that I wrote is being published in January.”
• “Any student whose desk is not clean will have detention after class.”
Relative adverbs, on the other hand, are used when the information
relates to a place, time, or the reason an action took place; like many other
adverbs, they modify a verb in the sentence. The relative adverbs are where,
when, and why.
For example:
• “The house where I was born is a very special place.” (Where modifies
the verb born.)
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.” (When
modifies the verb wear.)
• “I don’t know why he got so angry.” (Why modifies the verb get.)
(*Usage Note: Whom is becoming increasingly rare in modern English
outside of formal writing or speech. Although it is technically correct to use
whom when it functions as the object of a clause and who when it functions
as the subject, it is much more common to use who in both cases.)
Restrictive and Non-restrictive
Clauses
Clauses that provide essential information are known as restrictive clauses
(sometimes also called defining clauses), while those that provide
nonessential 
information 
are 
known 
as 
non-restrictive 
clauses
(sometimes called non-defining clauses). Because non-restrictive clauses
955

are not integral, they are separated from the rest of the sentence by commas.
Restrictive relative clauses
Restrictive relative clauses identify a particular noun, giving us information
about it that we need to know in order to understand the speaker’s meaning.
Because this type of clause is integral to the sentence, it is not separated by
any punctuation. For example:
• “I saw the guy who delivers my mail in town yesterday.”
• “I’ll always remember the river where we learned to swim.”
• “Yesterday was the day when I met my husband.”
• “I sat on the chair that has a wobbly leg.”
• “Do you know the reason why the sky is blue?”
• “She’s the person whose daughter goes to Harvard.”
The restrictive relative clause in each of the sentences above is in bold. If we
remove the relative clause, we are left with questions about who or what the
speaker is referring to:
• “I saw the guy in town yesterday.” (What guy?)
• “I’ll always remember the river.” (What river?)
• “Yesterday was the day.” (What day?)
• “I sat on the chair.” (What chair?)
• “Do you know the reason?” (The reason for what?)
• “She’s the person.” (What person?)
When you remove a restrictive relative clause, the nouns are no longer
identifiable and the sentences become logically incomplete.
It is worth noting that the relative pronoun which is not used to introduce
restrictive relative clauses. However, the authenticity of this rule is often
contested, 
and 
modern 
writers 
very 
often 
use 
which 
and 
that
interchangeably with restrictive clauses. If you have any doubts, though,
especially in formal or professional writing, then it is better to reserve which
for non-restrictive clauses.
Non-restrictive relative clauses
Non-restrictive relative clauses give us additional information about a noun
956

that has already been identified, but this information is not essential for the
sentence to make sense. Because of this, non-restrictive relative clauses are
set apart from the rest of the sentence by commas.
For example:
• “Paris, where I spent six months studying, is the most beautiful city in
the world.”
• “The woman down the street, whose children are the same age as
ours, invited us over for dinner next week.”
• “I love casual Fridays, when we get to wear jeans to work.”
• “Samantha, whom I’ve asked to be my bridesmaid, is getting married
next year.”
• “The senator, who is up for re-election next month, has made a lot of
promises to his constituency.”
• “The movie, which is my favorite comedy of all time, is being shown
on TV tomorrow night.”
In the examples above, the relative clauses merely give extra information
about the nouns; they do not define them. The sentences would still make
sense even if the relative clauses were removed, which is how we know that
we are dealing with non-restrictive relative clauses. For example:
• “Paris is the most beautiful city in the world.”
• “The woman down the street invited us over for dinner.”
• “I love casual Fridays.”
• “Samantha is getting married next year.”
• “The senator has made a lot of promises to his constituency.”
• “The movie is being shown on TV tomorrow night.”
Note that non-restrictive clauses cannot be introduced by the relative
pronoun that or the relative adverb why—these can only introduce
restrictive clauses.
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following do relative clauses describe?
a) verbs
957

b) nouns
c) adjectives
d) adverbs
2. Which of the following is used to introduce a relative clause that is
clarifying who or what the sentence is talking about?
a) relative pronoun
b) relative adverb
c) relative adjective
d) relative determiner
 
3. What punctuation marks are used to separate non-restrictive clauses
from the rest of the sentence?
a) semicolons
b) periods
c) parentheses
d) commas
 
4. Choose the most correct relative pronoun or relative adverb to complete
the following sentence:
“The company, _____ was acknowledged for its outstanding environmental
efforts, more than doubled its profits over the past year.”
a) who
b) whom
c) which
d) that
Adverbial Clauses
Definition
An adverbial clause, or adverb clause, is a group of words behaving as
an adverb. Like all clauses, it always contains a subject and a predicate,
and it is used, like a regular adverb, to modify adjectives, verbs, and adverbs.
For example:
• “I went to the park today.” (Today is an adverb that modifies the verb
went.)
958

• “I went to the park before my parents woke up.” (Before my parents
woke up is an adverbial clause that also modifies the verb went.)
An adverbial clause is a type of dependent clause, or subordinate
clause, that uses a subordinating conjunction to connect to the main
clause. In the previous example, before acts as a subordinating conjunction,
connecting the adverbial clause before my parents woke up to the main
clause I went to the park.
Function
Subordinating conjunctions have different functions depending on the ideas
being modified. We can therefore identify the function of an adverbial clause
by looking at the type of subordinating conjunction connecting it to the main
clause.
The table below highlights the various functions of some of the most
common subordinating conjunctions:
Idea Being
Modified
Subordinating Conjunction
Time
when, whenever, while, before, after, since, until,
once
Place
where, wherever, everywhere, anywhere
Reason or purpose
because, as, since, so
Condition
if, unless, whether or not, in the event, provided
Comparison 
or
manner
like, as, as… as, as if, the way, than
Contrast
though, although, even though, whereas, even if
 
Adverbial clauses of time
An adverbial clause of time describes when or for how long something has
occurred or will occur. Possible subordinating conjunctions include when,
whenever, while, before, after, since, until, and once. For example:
• “I will arrive when dinner is ready.” 
959

• “He said he’ll go whenever you decide it’s time to leave.” 
• “Animals are cute while they’re young.” 
• “Before you leave, let me give you a kiss.” 
• “Teachers grade papers after the students go home for the day.” 
• “I have loved you since the day I met you.” 
• “She waited on the shore until the ship departed.” 
• “The bully stopped picking fights once he realized it was wrong.”
(*Be careful with the subordinating conjunction since, because it is also used
with adverbial clauses of reason or purpose, as we will see below.)
Adverbial clauses of place
An adverbial clause of place describes where something has occurred or will
occur. The most common subordinating conjunctions are where, wherever,
everywhere, and anywhere. For example:
• “Grandma and Grandpa want to go where their children live.” 
• “I can go wherever I want to go.” 
• “Peter brings his sunglasses everywhere he goes.” 
• “Birds create nests anywhere they deem suitable.”
Adverbial clauses of reason or
purpose
An adverbial clause of reason or purpose describes why something has
occurred or will occur. Common subordinating conjunctions are because, as,
since, and so. For example:
• “I admire you because you are an inspiration to many people.” 
• “As it is raining, we probably shouldn’t go to the park today.” 
• “I’m going outside to play since my homework is finished.”* 
• “He went to his room so he could be alone.”
(*Be careful with the subordinating conjunction since, because it is also used
with adverbial clauses of time, as we saw above.)
Adverbial clauses of condition
Adverbial clauses of condition describe the conditions necessary for specific
actions or events to happen. This type of clause usually employs the
960

subordinating conjunctions if, unless, whether or not, in the event, and
provided. For example:
• “If it snows tonight, I’m not going to work tomorrow.” 
• “Kate can’t attend the school dance unless her parents allow it.” 
• “He’s always doing crazy stunts whether or not they’re considered
safe.” 
• “In the event of a hurricane, you must stay inside.” 
• “They’ll approve your request provided you pay the appropriate
amount of money.”
Adverbial clauses of comparison
or manner
An adverbial clause of comparison or manner describes how or in what
manner something occurred or will occur, to what degree something
occurred or will occur, or how something compares to something else. Some
of the most often used subordinating conjunctions are like, as, as … as, as if,
the way, and than. For example:
• “He sings like he wants to be a rock star.” 
• “The teary-eyed friends embraced as long-lost siblings would.” 
• “The freshly picked flower is as beautiful as it is soft.” 
• “She looked excited, as if she could jump up and dance at any
moment.” 
• “Lauren walks confidently, the way a model struts on a runway.” 
• “Tim is more nervous than Rhonda (is).”*
(*In colloquial English, the final verb in an adverbial clause of comparison
may be omitted. In this case, the sentence would become Tim is more
nervous than Rhonda, in which the predicate verb is is implied. We also see
verb omission in adverbial clauses containing the subordinating conjunctions
before, after, and as … as.)
Adverbial clauses of contrast
An adverbial clause of contrast describes something that differs from or
contrasts with an idea expressed in the main clause. Commonly used
subordinating conjunctions include though, although, even though,
whereas, and even if. For example:
961

• “Though the sun is out, the wind is very chilly.” 
• “Although she doesn’t have much money, Wendy often goes
traveling.” 
• “I do this job even though I hate it.” 
• “Babies look at the world with innocence, whereas adults look at it
with experience.” 
• “Matt will go to college, even if it means taking out student loans.”
Adverbial clauses vs. adverbial
phrases
An adverbial phrase is composed of two or more words functioning
adverbially. Unlike an adverbial clause, it does not have a subject and a
predicate. For example:
• “Try to finish your summer reading list before school starts on
Monday.” (adverbial clause)
• “Try to finish your summer reading list before Monday.” (adverbial
phrase)
Additionally, 
adverbial 
phrases 
often 
use 
prepositions 
instead 
of
subordinating conjunctions:
• “I’ll send the letters in a minute.”
• “Heather can play tennis with such ease.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following is not a subordinating conjunction?
a) wherever
b) after
c) until
d) with
 
2. Which sentence contains an adverbial clause of place?
a) “My goal is to travel everywhere my sister has visited.”
b) “When I am alone, I write in my diary.”
c) “George promised he’d come, even if he had to walk the entire distance.”
962

d) “This soup is as healthy as it is delicious.”
3. Which sentence contains an adverbial clause of condition?
a) “Whenever an expensive bill comes in the mail, I complain to my
roommate.”
b) “Alex will probably become famous, provided she builds up her portfolio.”
c) “The man smiled and said he’d go wherever the wind took him.”
d) “Although they’re just toddlers, the twins seem very intelligent.”
4. Which sentence contains an adverbial phrase, as opposed to an
adverbial clause?
a) “Don’t believe him if he says he’s telling the truth.”
b) “Sarah will start her presentation in an hour.”
c) “She’s much taller than he is.”
d) “My uncle tells jokes like he’s a comedian.”
Sentences
Definition
In this chapter, we will look at what comprises a sentence. We will explore
the elements used to construct sentences, and what parts of speech are
used to expand and elaborate on them.
We will focus for now on forming simple sentences (sentences that contain
only a single independent clause). In the subsections of this chapter, we will
explore the different kinds of sentences according to structure, purpose,
and length.
The Construction of a Sentence
Clauses
In English, a clause almost always consists of two parts—a subject and a
predicate. (This rule is only broken when making imperative sentences
and non-finite clauses.) In traditional English grammar, a predicate is
made up of a verb or verb phrase (a verb and any objects or modifiers
relating to it), while the subject consists of a noun, pronoun, or a phrase
963

containing either.
A sentence, whether short or long, must express a complete idea; and a
complete sentence must consist of at least one independent clause—that
is, a subject and predicate that make a complete thought. Independent
clauses are so called because they make sense when they stand on their own.
They are also sometimes referred to as “main clauses.”
For example:
• “I refuse.”
• “The wind blows.”
• “Dogs bark.”
• “Bees sting.”
• “Cats meow.”
In the above examples, the subject begins the sentences and the predicate
ends them. The predicate (in each these cases made up of just a verb)
contains all the necessary information about the subject to be considered
logical, so each is considered an independent clause.
A dependent clause, on the other hand, relies on the information from an
independent clause to form a complete, logical thought. Dependent clauses
(also known as subordinate clauses) are usually marked by dependent
words, such as a subordinating conjunctions or relative pronouns.
Here are some examples of dependent clauses:
• “whenever (subordinating conjunction) I travel”
• “whom (relative pronoun) we met on the plane”
We can see that the clauses above do not express a complete idea—they
require independent clauses to be logically complete:
• “Whenever I travel, I like to stay in fancy hotels.”
• “We struck up a great conversation with a person whom we met on the
plane.”
For more information on independent and dependent clauses, see the
chapter on Clauses.
Additional Information
Verb phrases add additional information to a sentence. Because verb phrases
964

can be made up of more than one verb, as well as the information relating to
those verbs, we can add quite a bit of information into a single sentence. This
additional information is used to answer the questions Why?, What?, What
kind?, When?, Where?, How?, How much?, and Who/Whom?
For instance, let’s look again at the very first example from above:
• “I refuse.”
Now let’s add more information to create a verb phrase:
• “I refuse to eat.”
Adding the infinitive phrase (“to” + the simple form of a verb) explains
What? about the action of the main verb, “refuse.” It is considered the
object of the verb; together they form a verb phrase, which constitutes the
predicate.
We can continue to expand the predicate to include more information:
• “I refuse to eat that awful food.”
The modifiers “that” and “awful,” together with the noun “food,” are the
direct object of the verb “eat,” again answering the question What? All
together, they form the object of “refuse,” providing us with more detailed
information about exactly what “I” is refusing.
Let’s look at some examples where additional information answers various
questions about otherwise basic sentences:
• “The wind blows in the north.” (Identifying where the wind blows.)
• “The train leaves at night.” (Identifying when the train leaves.)
• “Electricity costs a lot.” (Here we state how much it costs.)
• “Bees sting people.” (Here we state “who” they sting.)
• “Dogs bark when they are hungry, happy, or angry.” (Here we state why or
when they bark.)
• “Cats meow because they want attention.” (Here we state why they meow.)
We can make sentences even longer by adding more information:
• “Electricity costs a lot during the day in most countries.”
Here we have added the answer to three questions:
• How much? – “a lot”
• When? – “during the day”
965

• Where? – “in most countries”
Further elaboration
Just like the predicate, the subject can be modified and expanded to provide
more information in a sentence. Adjectives are the most straightforward
means of doing so. For example:
• “Good friends are loyal people.”
Here, the adjective “good” describes the subject “friends” (a noun); the
adjective “loyal” describes “people,” which together form the object of the
verb “are.”
In the above sentence we have used adjectives to describe the nouns. They
answer the questions:
• What kind of friends? “Good friends.”
• What kind of people? “Loyal people.”
These are called noun phrases. A subject can be comprised of a noun
phrase (or phrases). A verb phrase can also include noun phrases, as in “are
loyal people” in the example above.
We can give even more details by adding adjectives, adverbs, and
prepositional phrases. Remember, an adjective describes a noun whereas
adverbs describe verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs. Prepositional
phrases, on the other hand, can act as either adjectives or adverbs.
Let’s look at an example:
• “Solar-powered electricity rarely costs much during the day.”
Here we use the adjective “solar-powered” to describe the subject noun
“electricity.” It answers the question, “What kind of electricity?”
We used “rarely,” which is an adverb of frequency, to describe the verb
“cost;” likewise, the prepositional phrase “during the day” is used
adverbially to describe the verb “costs” and answer the question When?
Although “much” can be used as an adverb, it is here used as an indefinite
pronoun to be the direct object of the verb “cost.” Be careful with “much,”
because it can function as a determiner (adjective before a noun), adverb, or
pronoun, depending on the sentence.
Let’s look at another example:
• “Cold wind from the Atlantic Ocean blows in at night.”
966

The adjective “cold” and the prepositional phrase “from the Atlantic Ocean”
both modify the subject “wind.”
Compound subjects
A sentence can also have multiple subjects that relate to the same verb; these
are known as compound subjects. For example:
• “James and Daniel collaborated on the project together.”
“James” and “Daniel,” joined by the conjunction “and,” are both related to
the verb “collaborate.” Each subject in a compound subject can be
modified and expanded in the same ways that we’ve seen already:
• “My brother James and his colleagues from India collaborated on the
project together.”
“James” is now modified by “my brother,” while the second subject
“colleagues” is modified by “his” and “from India.”
Compound predicates
Likewise, a single subject can take multiple predicates that are joined by a
conjunction, such as “and” or “or.” These are called compound predicates.
For example:
• “Janet runs, swims, and cycles.”
As with compound subjects, we can expand each of the compound predicate
verbs individually:
• “Janet runs in the morning, swims in the evening, and cycles to and from
work.”
Restructuring the sentence
When forming simple sentences in English, the additional information
included with the subject and the predicate can often be reordered.
Information modifying the predicate can even appear before the subject, and
vice versa.
It helps if we break down each element in the sentence into what question it
is answering. Take a look at the sentences below for an illustration of how
such reconstructions might work:
Who?
How?
Where?
When?
967

Who?
How?
Where?
When?
He goes by bus to the movies every Saturday at 8 o'clock.
Now let’s reorder the information in the predicate (everything after the verb
“goes”):
Who?
Where?
When (at what time)? How?
When?
He goes to the movies at 8 o'clock
by bus every Saturday.
As you can see, the sentence still makes logical sense, sounds fine, and
retains all of the information it had before.
Now let’s restructure it to have part of the predicate come at the beginning of
the sentence:
When (at what time)?
When?
Who?
Where?
How?
At 8 o'clock
every Saturday he goes to the movies by bus.
It is also possible to have the subject come at the end of the sentence,
especially when we begin a sentence with “there is/are,” as in the popular
English proverb:
• “There is more than one way to skin a cat.”
Types of sentences
So far what we have been discussing are known as simple sentences, which
are made up of a single independent clause and no dependent clauses. Even
as we have added a lot of information into the sentences above, each one has
remained an independent clause because each one has a subject (or
compound subject) and a predicate.
However, there are many different types of sentences, depending on how we
order the text, if we use multiple clauses, if we’re asking a question, etc. In
the chapter sections below, we’ll begin looking at the various kinds of
sentences we can make and how they are formed.
Classifications of Sentences
968

By Structure
In addition to simple sentences, which we learned about above, sentences
classified by structure include:
• Compound sentences
• Complex sentences
• Compound-complex sentences
By Purpose
The purpose of a sentence also determines its classification. The sentences
classified by purpose are:
• Declarative sentences
• Interrogative sentences
• Exclamatory sentences
• Imperative sentences
• Negative sentences
• Negative interrogative sentences
By Length
Similar to sentences classified by structure, sentences can also be classified
by length:
• Major/regular sentences
• Minor sentences
• Word sentences (also called sentence words)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What must a sentence contain in order to be complete? (Choose the
answer that is most correct.)
a) A subject
b) A noun
c) A verb
d) A predicate
e) A & C
f) A & D
969

g) B & D
2. Which of the following is not an independent clause?
a) They will discuss it.
b) Every time my cousin from Cairo visits.
c) I can imagine.
d) He sees her walking.
3. What can a prepositional phrase modify in a sentence?
a) The subject.
b) The predicate.
c) Either a subject or a predicate.
d) Neither a subject nor a predicate.
4. Where can a predicate appear in a sentence? (Choose the answer that is
most correct.)
a) Before the subject
b) After the subject
c) Before and after the subject
e) All of the above
970

Compound Sentences
Definition
Compound sentences are one of the four main sentence structures. They
are made up of at least two independent clauses expressing closely related
ideas of equal or similar importance that are joined using a comma and a
conjunction or just a semicolon. By using compound sentences, we can add
variety to our writing and speech and avoid the repetitive sound of multiple
simple sentences.
Determining when to form a
compound sentence
As 
mentioned, 
compound 
sentences 
are 
formed 
by 
joining 
two
independent clauses that are closely related and of equal or similar value.
To determine if two clauses can be joined in a compound sentence, we can
ask ourselves three simple questions:
Q1. Does each clause contain a subject and a verb? 
Q2. Can each clause stand alone to express a complete thought? 
Q3. Are the two clauses closely related and of equal or similar importance?
If the answer to each of the three questions above is “yes,” then we can form
a compound sentence. Let’s apply the three questions to an example:
• “I like running. My sister is going to study in Sweden.”
Q1. Does each clause contain a subject and a verb? Yes, marked in bold. 
Q2. Can each clause stand alone to express a complete thought? Yes.
Q3. Are the two clauses closely related and of equal or similar importance?
No, they have nothing to do with one another.
Because the answer to question three is “no,” the two clauses above cannot
be joined as a compound sentence. Let’s try another example:
• “She wanted to play tennis. He wanted to play basketball.”
Q1. Does each clause contain a subject and a verb? Yes, marked in bold. 
Q2. Can each clause stand alone to express a complete thought? Yes. 
Q3. Are the two clauses closely related and of equal or similar importance?
Yes.
971

Since the answer to each of the three questions is “yes,” we can form a
compound sentence. This can be done in several ways. For example:
• “She wanted to play tennis, but he wanted to play basketball.”
OR
• “She wanted to play tennis; he wanted to play basketball.”
OR
• “She wanted to play tennis; however, he wanted to play basketball.”
How 
to 
form 
a 
compound
sentence
Once we’ve determined that two ideas can be joined to form a compound
sentence, we have to decide how to join them. We have several options—we
can use a coordinating conjunction, a correlative conjunction, a
conjunctive adverb, or a semicolon.
Forming a compound sentence
using a coordinating conjunction
There are seven coordinating conjunctions in English, which can be
remembered using the acronym FANBOYS:
For
And
Nor 
But
Or
Yet
So
When we join two clauses in a compound sentence with a coordinating
conjunction, we must choose the one that best fits the relationship that
exists between the two clauses. For example:
• “The family moved into the new house, and the neighbors welcomed them
warmly.” (additional information)
• “She wanted to play tennis, but he wanted to play basketball.” (contrasting
972

information)
• “We can go to the movies tonight, or we can just hang out at home.”
(alternative choice or option)
Punctuation note: When we use a coordinating conjunction to form a
compound sentence, it is preceded by a comma, as in the examples above.
Forming a compound sentence
using a correlative conjunction
Correlative conjunctions, or paired conjunctions, are sets of
conjunctions that are always used together. Since they come in pairs, with
each conjunction preceding an independent clause, they can join a
maximum of two independent clauses together. Some of the most common
correlative conjunctions are:
• either … or
• just as … so
• neither … nor
• not … but 
• not only … but also 
• whether … or
Again, the conjunction that we choose has to do with the relationship
between the two clauses. For example:
• “Neither does he need to go, nor does he want to go.” (negates both
clauses)
• “Just as baseball is loved in America, so cricket is loved in England.”
(indicates that the clauses are similar)
• “Either I will pick you up, or you’ll get a ride home with your father.”
(indicates two possible choices or outcomes)
Punctuation note: When we use correlative conjunctions, a comma
precedes the conjunction that introduces the second independent clause, as
in the examples.
Forming a compound sentence
with a conjunctive adverb
973

Another common way to form a compound sentence is to use a conjunctive
adverb. Some common conjunctive adverbs are:
• accordingly
• as a result
• comparatively 
• in fact
• moreover
• nevertheless
• nonetheless
• on the other hand
• otherwise
While coordinating conjunctions can be used to join words, phrases, or
independent clauses, conjunctive adverbs can only be used to join
independent clauses. Conjunctive adverbs are used to indicate a specific
relationship between the two independent clauses. For example:
• “Jen hadn’t enjoyed the play; as a result, she didn’t recommend it.”
(consequence)
• “I absolutely love singing; on the other hand, my sister hates it.”
(contrast)
• “Being a doctor is an exhausting job; moreover, you don’t earn good
money until you’ve been practicing for many years.” (adding stronger
information)
(Punctuation note: When we use a conjunctive adverb to form a
compound sentence, it is preceded by a semicolon and followed by a comma,
as in the examples above.)
Forming a compound sentence
with a semicolon
If the two independent clauses are very closely related and the reader has
enough information to understand the relationship between them from the
context alone, we can join the clauses using a semicolon without a
conjunction. For example:
• “She wanted to play tennis; he wanted to play basketball.”
• “I made the cake; my sister decorated it.”
974

• “We don’t eat meat; we’re vegetarians.”
Common Errors
The most common errors that occur with compound sentences are comma
splices and run-on sentences.
Comma splices
A comma splice occurs when we join two independent clauses with a comma.
(A comma is not strong enough to separate two independent clauses on its
own.) For example:
✖ “She wanted to play tennis, he wanted to play basketball.” (incorrect)
Luckily, the mistake is easy to correct using any of the methods for forming
compound sentences that we described above. For example:
✔ “She wanted to play tennis; he wanted to play basketball.”
✔ “She wanted to play tennis, but he wanted to play basketball.”
✔ “She wanted to play tennis; however, he wanted to play basketball.”
Run-on sentences
Run-on sentences can occur when we join two independent clauses without
the correct punctuation or conjunction. For example:
✖ “I made the cake however my sister decorated it.” (incorrect—missing the
proper punctuation)
Again, we can correct the mistake by using any of the methods described in
this article:
✔ “I made the cake; however, my sister decorated it.”
✔ “I made the cake; my sister decorated it.”
✔ “I made the cake, and my sister decorated it.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Compound sentences are made up of two (or more) ________.
a) words
b) phrases
975

c) dependent clauses
d) independent clauses
 
2. The two clauses in a compound sentence can be joined using ________.
a) a coordinating conjunction
b) a correlative conjunction
c) a conjunctive adverb
d) a semicolon
e) A, B & C
f) all of the above
 
3. Which of the following sentences is punctuated incorrectly?
a) “I love swimming my brother enjoys hockey.”
b) “I love swimming, but my brother enjoys hockey.”
c) “I love swimming; however, my brother enjoys hockey.”
d) “I love swimming; my brother enjoys hockey.”
 
4. Complete the following compound sentence with the correct
conjunction:
“He’s a great rock climber; ________ , he’s a terrible skier.”
a) and
b) but
c) however
d) as a result
 
5. Complete the following compound sentence with the correct
conjunction:
“I don’t mind what we do tonight. We can go bowling, ________ we can see
a movie.”
a) and
b) or
c) on the other hand
d) likewise
Complex Sentences
976

Definition
Complex sentences are one of the four main sentence structures. They are
made up of one independent clause (or main clause) and one or more
dependent clauses (or subordinate clauses). The dependent clause is
introduced and linked to the independent clause by a subordinating
conjunction.
We use complex sentences to indicate a specific relationship between two
ideas, and to clarify which of the two is more important. Consider the
following example:
• “I went to the supermarket. We were out of milk.”
Although the reader can probably guess that the relationship between the
two ideas above is one of cause and effect, that relationship could be
specified by combining the two ideas into a complex sentence instead, as in:
• “I went to the supermarket because we were out of milk.”
By adding the subordinating conjunction “because,” we have transformed the
previously independent clause “we were out of milk” into a dependent
clause. It can no longer stand alone, but is dependent on the clause that it is
now linked to. The relationship between the two ideas is now perfectly clear,
and the importance of the independent clause “I went to the supermarket” is
highlighted.
Using complex sentences
Subordinating Conjunctions
As mentioned, complex sentences are useful because they can indicate a very
specific relationship between two ideas. Depending on what relationship we
would like to indicate, we choose a specific subordinating conjunction. For
example:
• “He’s going to pass his test even if he doesn’t study.” (a specific outcome
despite a hypothetical action)
• “I watched a movie while my friend was shopping.” (concurrent events)
• “I will go as long as you go with me.” (an outcome will occur under a
certain condition)
977

In the examples above, the subordinating conjunctions even if, while, and as
long as introduce the dependent clauses and specify their relationship to the
independent clauses.
Some of the most common subordinating conjunctions are:
after
although
as
as soon as
because
even if
in case
in order that
providing
since
though
when
where
Go to the chapter on Conjunctions to learn more about how subordinating
conjunctions are used in complex sentences.
Structure and punctuation
The order of the independent and dependent clause in a complex sentence is
flexible. We can structure complex sentences with the independent clause
first, as in:
• “He’s going to pass his test even if he doesn’t study.”
• “I watched a movie while my friend was shopping.”
• “I will go as long as you go with me.”
The same sentences can be structured with the dependent clause first as
well. This results in no change of meaning. For example:
• “Even if he doesn’t study, he’s going to pass his test.”
• “While my friend was shopping, I watched a movie.”
• “As long as you go with me, I will go.”
978

Although there are exceptions, note that when the dependent clause is
placed first, we generally follow it with a comma, as in the examples above.
However, if the independent clause introduces the sentence, we usually do
not need a comma.
Usage Note
While it’s a commonly quoted belief that a sentence should not begin with
the word because, this is not an actual grammatical rule. Sentences can
begin with because (and any other subordinating conjunction) as long as the
sentence is not a fragment. For example
✖ “Because we were early.” (incorrect)
✔ “Because we were early, we decided to have a coffee.” (correct)
As the first sentence is a dependent clause without an independent clause to
complete it, it is considered a fragment and must be corrected. However,
the second sentence is a complete sentence because the dependent clause is
followed by the independent clause “we decided to have a coffee.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Complex sentences are usually made up of ________.
a) two independent clauses
b) two dependent clauses
c) an independent clause and a dependent clause
 
2. The two clauses in a complex sentence are joined using a ________.
a) coordinating conjunction
b) subordinating conjunction
c) conjunctive adverb
d) correlative conjunction
 
3. Which of the following statements about complex sentences is correct?
a) We never separate the two clauses with a comma.
b) We always separate the two clauses with a comma.
c) We separate the two clauses with a comma if the sentence begins with the
independent clause.
979

d) We separate the two clauses with a comma if the sentence begins with the
dependent clause.
 
4. Which of the following sentences is punctuated correctly?
a) “Even though I recognized her, I didn’t say hello.”
b) “Even though, I recognized her, I didn’t say hello.”
c) “I didn’t say hello even though, I recognized her.”
d) “I didn’t say, hello even though I recognized her.”
 
5. Which of the following sentences is punctuated correctly?
a) “I didn’t stop at the store because I didn’t think there was anything we
needed.”
b) “I didn’t stop at the store, because I didn’t think there was anything we
needed.”
c) “I didn’t stop at the store because, I didn’t think there was anything we
needed.”
d) “I didn’t stop, at the store because I didn’t think there was anything we
needed.”
Compound-Complex Sentences
Definition
Compound-complex sentences are one of the four main sentence
structures. They are made up of two independent clauses (also known as
main clauses) and one or more dependent clauses (or subordinate
clauses).
Complex 
vs. 
Compound
Sentences
A compound-complex sentence has to satisfy the conditions we established
for both complex sentences and compound sentences. First, let’s recap
both briefly so we understand both sets of conditions that must be met.
(More detailed explanations are included in their individual chapter
sections.)
After we understand the basics of how these two are formed, we will look at
980

how they fit together to form compound-complex sentences.
Complex Sentences
For a sentence to be considered compound-complex, at least one of the
independent clauses must be a complex sentence (if it were to stand on its
own). That is, it is made up of a dependent clause that is introduced and
linked to the independent clause by a subordinating conjunction.
We use complex sentences to indicate a specific relationship between two
ideas, and to clarify which of the two is more important. Consider the
following example:
• “I went to the party next door. I had school the next morning.”
There is an inherent contrast of information between these two clauses. Left
separated, the clauses’ relationship is implied, it but comes across rather
awkwardly. However, by combining the two ideas into a complex sentence
with a subordinating conjunction, this contrast is made more explicit and the
sentence as a whole reads much more fluidly:
• “I went to the party next door even though I had school the next
morning.”
By adding the subordinating conjunction even though, the previously
independent clause “I had school the next morning” is transformed into a
dependent clause. It can no longer stand alone, but is dependent on the
clause that it is now linked to. The relationship between the two ideas is now
perfectly clear, and the importance of the independent clause “I went to the
party next door” is highlighted.
Compound Sentences
Compound sentences are formed by joining two independent clauses that
are closely related and of equal or similar importance. To determine if two
clauses can be joined in a compound sentence, we can ask ourselves three
simple questions:
Q1. Does each clause contain a subject and a verb? 
Q2. Can each clause stand alone to express a complete thought? 
Q3. Are the two clauses closely related and of equal or similar importance?
If the answer to each of the three questions above is “yes,” then we can form
a compound sentence. Let’s apply the three questions to an example:
981

• “They wanted to go to Venice. I wanted to see Madrid.”
Q1. Does each clause contain a subject and a verb? Yes, marked in bold. 
Q2. Can each clause stand alone to express a complete thought? Yes.
Q3. Are the two clauses closely related and of equal or similar importance?
Yes.
Since the answer to all three questions is “yes,” we can form a compound
sentence. This can be done in several ways. For example:
• “They wanted to go to Venice, but I wanted to see Madrid.” (coordinating
conjunction)
OR
• “Just as they wanted to go to Venice, so I wanted to see Madrid.”
(correlative conjunction)
OR
• “They wanted to go to Venice; however, I wanted to see Madrid.”
(conjunctive adverb)
OR
• “They wanted to go to Venice; I wanted to see Madrid.” (semicolon)
Forming a compound-complex
sentence
In a compound-complex sentence, we join the complex independent clause
to the other independent clause in the same way as for normal compound
sentences: with coordinating conjunctions, correlative conjunctions,
conjunctive adverbs, or semicolons. Take, for example, these two
separate sentences:
• “Because I love to read, I like to visit the library. I enjoy going to book
stores, too.”
The first sentence is a complex sentence (the dependent clause is italicized);
the second one is a standard independent clause. Now let’s make them into a
complex-compound sentence:
• “Because I love to read, I like to visit the library, and I enjoy going to book
stores, too.” (coordinating conjunction)
• “Because I love to read, not only do I like to visit the library, but I also
enjoy going to book stores, too.” (correlative conjunction)
• “Because I love to read, I like to visit the library; additionally, I enjoy
982

going to book stores.” (conjunctive adverb)
• “Because I love to read, I like to visit the library; I enjoy going to book
stores, too.” (semicolon)
In each of the examples above, the dependent clause is italicized, the
independent clauses are underlined, and the means used to join the two
independent clauses are in bold.
Multiple dependent clauses
Complex-compound sentences can also have more than one dependent
clause. For example:
• “Although I promised I’d study with Ethan, I’d rather go to the movies with
Jim; nevertheless, I made a promise, even if it isn’t as much fun.”
• “I got into gymnastics because of my brother, but I got into archery
because of my sister.”
More examples
Let’s look at a few more examples of complex-compound sentences.
• “I wanted to go to a baseball game, but my father, who is a huge ballet fan,
wanted to see The Nutcracker instead.”
• “We went to get some dinner after class was over; however, the food
court was already closed.”
• “I will go to the party as long as Terry is there; I won’t stay long, though.”
• “Even though he never studied, he always passed his tests in high school,
but I don’t think he’ll be able to pull that off in college when he has a much
harder workload.”
• “The bank will lend us the money providing we have something for
collateral, so I asked my parents to help, although I’m not sure they will
agree to.”
• “I never graduated from college; nevertheless, I found a great job because
my uncle has a connection in the auto industry.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. A complex-compound sentence requires at least one of which of the
983

following?
a) independent clause
b) dependent clause
c) coordinating conjunction
d) semicolon
 
2. Which of the following can be used to join the two independent clauses in
a complex-compound sentence?
a) coordinating conjunction
b) correlative conjunction
c) conjunctive adverb
d) semicolon
e) All of the above
f) None of the above
3. Which of the following can be used to join a dependent clause to an
independent clause in a complex-compound sentence?
a) coordinating conjunction
b) subordinating conjunction
c) conjunctive adverb
d) semicolon
e) All of the above
f) None of the above
4. Identify the dependent clause or clauses in the following sentence:
“I’m going to see Shawna at the mall later; you can come with me, though I
know you two don’t get along.”
a) I’m going to see Shawna at the mall later
b) you can come with me
c) though I know you two don’t get along
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) A & C
 
5. Identify the dependent clause or clauses in the following sentence:
“Although I’ve saved up for a few years, I’ve never been able to afford buying
a house, but we should be able to get a mortgage soon, providing my job
984

remains secure.”
a) Although I’ve saved up for a few years
b) I’ve never been able to afford buying a house
c) we should be able to get a mortgage soon
d) providing my job remains secure
d) A & C
e) B & C
f) A & D
g) B & D
Declarative Sentences
Definition
A declarative sentence makes a statement or argument about what is,
was, or will be the case. That is, it talks about that which is asserted to be
true.
Declarative sentences usually end in a period (also known as a full stop)
and are the most ubiquitous type of sentence in English. (If they are
expressing a strong emotion or are forceful in nature, they can also end in an
exclamation point (“!”), in which case they are sometimes referred to as
exclamatory sentences.)
They stand in contrast to interrogative sentences, which ask a question
and end with a question mark (“?”), and imperative sentences, which are
used to give orders, commands, and general instructions.
Different sentence structures
All four of types of sentence structures—simple, compound, complex, and
compound-complex sentences—can be made into declarative sentences.
For example:
Simple Sentences
“I’m walking to the library.”
“She went to the park yesterday.”
“I hope to see you soon.”
985

Compound Sentences
“She wanted to play basketball, but he wanted to play tennis.”
“Either I will pick you up tonight, or you can get a ride home with
your father.”
“I’ve always wanted to try riding a jet-ski; however, I’m too worried
about my safety.”
“I’m going to the party later; my friend is the DJ for it.”
Complex Sentences
“Even though I’m not a fan of Hitchcock, I’ll go with you to see The
Birds.”
“I’d be willing to lend you the money providing you can offer
collateral.”
“I waited in line for three hours because I’m such a big fan of his.”
Compound-Complex Sentences
“We went to Venice, even though they knew I wanted to go to
Madrid; nevertheless, we had a great time.”
“I’ve been saving up for a few years, so we should be able to get a
mortgage soon, providing my job remains secure.”
“I’m going to see Shawna at the mall later; you can come with me,
though I know you two don’t get along.”
Different Verb Tenses
Declarative sentences can be formed in any tense, so long as the sentence is
a statement of what is the case. For example:
Present Tense
“I always run on Fridays.” (present simple tense)
“I am driving to work now.” ( present continuous tense)
“She has worked in this firm for 10 years.” (present perfect tense)
“He has been living in New York all his life.” (present perfect
continuous tense)
986

Past Tense
“I enjoyed that soup.” (past simple tense)
“He was walking the dog at the time.” (past continuous tense)
“They had been in the olive oil business for generations.” (past
perfect tense)
“We had been looking for a new style for our music.” (past perfect
continuous tense)
Future Tense
“I will work from home tomorrow.” (future simple tense)
“He will be working late tonight, for sure.” (future continuous
tense)
“Her flight will have arrived by then.” (future perfect tense)
“We will have been living together for five years this Tuesday.”
(future perfect continuous tense)
Variations
Not all declarative sentences are straightforward statements of positive fact—
there are a few variations that express slightly different information, while
still remaining declarative in nature.
Negative declarative sentences
Negative declarative sentences (or simply negative sentences) are
declarative sentences whose information is made negative by the word not or
never. All of the different sentence structures and verb tenses that we looked
at above can be made negative. For example:
• “I won’t be going to the party because I have an exam tomorrow.”
(complex sentence – future continuous tense – made negative by not
(contracted with will))
• “I did not eat your sandwich.” (simple sentence ¬– past tense – made
negative by not)
• “Jim is a good guy, but you can never rely on him.” (compound sentence
¬– present simple tense – second independent clause made negative by
987

never)
Declarative 
commands 
and
requests
We generally use imperative sentences to issue commands or
instructions, and interrogative sentences to ask questions or make
requests. For example:
• “Clean your room.” (imperative sentence)
• “Would you buy me a video game while you’re at the mall?” (interrogative
sentence)
However, we can sometimes use declarative sentences to make statements
that have the sound of a command or request, and yet are not exactly either
one. For instance:
• “You should clean your room.”
• “You could buy me a video game while you’re at the mall.”
Both of these sentences are now in the declarative form, yet both function in
a middle ground between a command and a request. Note that the
forcefulness of the imperative sentence is lost when it is made declarative,
just as the tact and politeness is lost from the interrogative sentence.
Statements of uncertainty
We often use declarative sentences as an indirect way of asking a question
about something that we’re not certain about, expressing what we wish to
know as a declarative, factual statement. For example:
• “I was thinking we could see the movie together, if you’re free.”
• "They want to know why you did this.”
Because these kinds of statements are so close in nature and meaning to
interrogative sentences, many people end up erroneously putting a question
mark at the end of them. However, we must take care not to make this
mistake and only use a period with such sentences.
Indirect questions
Indirect questions are very similar to statements of uncertainty, except that
988

they use what is known as reported speech (sometimes called indirect
speech) to relay an interrogative sentence from another person to the
listener as a declarative sentence. For example:
• “Dan asked if you are coming to the study session this evening.”
• “She was wondering if you want to get some coffee later.”
• “They told me to ask where you’re going later.”
Declarative questions
Declarative questions are a bit of a unique bridge between declarative
sentences and interrogative sentences. They are declarative, yet they end
with a question mark; they are used primarily in spoken, informal English
and generally have “yes” or “no” as possible responses. For example:
• “You’re firing me?”
• “He wants to drive to the city at this hour?
• “She’s moving to Russia?”
These could technically be considered interrogative sentences because they
ask a question and end with a question mark, but, because the actual form of
the sentence does not change, they are still very like a declarative sentence.
In spoken English, the only way they are marked as questions is by the
speaker’s intonation.
1. Which of the following marks of punctuation is used with declarative
sentences?
a) question mark
b) exclamation point
c) period
d) interrobang
2. Declarative sentences are used to express which of the following?
a) That which is, was, or will be the case
b) An inquiry or request
c) Excitement or intense emotion
d) Orders, commands, and general instructions
989

3. In which of the following verb tenses can declarative sentences be used?
a) Present tense
b) Past tense
c) Future tense
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
4. Which of the following sentence structures can be declarative?
a) Simple sentences
b) Compound sentences
c) Complex sentences
d) Complex-compound sentences
e) A & B
f) A, B, & C
g) All of the above
5. Which of the following is a declarative sentence?
a) “Would you like to see a movie with me later?”
b) “Please go wash your hands.”
c) “I was wondering if you’re free after class.”
d) “I’m so excited to see this play!”
Interrogative Sentences
Definition
An interrogative sentence is simply a sentence that asks a question—that
is, we use it when we interrogate someone for information. Interrogative
sentences always end with question marks.
Forming interrogative sentences
When we make sentences into questions, we almost always use auxiliary
verbs that are inverted with the subject. This is known as subject-verb
inversion. For example:
• “Are you sleepy?”
• “Will she be coming to the party later?”
990

• “Have they finished their project yet?”
• “Do you like country or classical music better?”
We can also use question words (who, what, where, when, why, and
how) to ask more nuanced questions, but we still use auxiliary verbs and
subject-verb inversion. For instance:
• “What does the boss think about the proposal?”
• “When will we arrive?”
• “Who is coming to the play?”
In this last question, the subject is unknown, so it is represented by the word
who (which does not invert with an auxiliary verb).
Using these constructions, we can create several different kinds of
interrogative sentences.
There are four main types of interrogative sentences: yes/no questions,
alternative questions, “Wh-” questions, and tag questions.
Yes/No questions
Yes/No questions are simply questions that can be answered with either
"yes" or "no." These are exclusively formed with auxiliary verbs that are
inverted with the subject—that is, they do not use question words. For
example:
• “Are you registered to vote?”
• “May I borrow your pen?”
• “Do you speak French?”
• “If you miss the deadline for entry, will you still be able to compete?”
• “Is there enough food for everyone?”
Alternative questions
Alternative questions, also known as choice questions, are questions
that provide a choice among two or more answers. These choices might be
explicitly stated in the question (identified by the coordinating
conjunction or), or they might be implied by the context. We usually use
inverted auxiliary verbs on their own for these questions, but they can also
be formed using certain question words. For example:
991

• “Do you prefer apple juice or orange juice?”
• “Who won—New York or Boston?”
• “Do you live in the city, or the suburbs?”
• “Do you want cake, pie, or ice cream?”
• “How would you like your steak cooked?” (The implied choices would be
rare, medium, or well done.)
“Wh-” questions
“Wh-” questions (or question word questions) are questions that seek
information by posing a question with a "wh-" question word ( who, what,
where, when, why, and how). These questions seek an open-ended answer
that can be short or long, simple or complex—there is no expectation about
how the person might respond.
Here are some examples:
• “Who is your favorite author?”
• “What is the capital of England?”
• “When will you be finished with this project?”
• “Where are you going for your summer vacation?”
• “Why haven’t you responded to Karen’s invitation yet?”
• “How did you get here?”
Tag questions
Tag questions are formed by adding a question as a “tag” onto the end of a
declarative sentence. This “tag” is usually made of at least an auxiliary
verb inverted with a subject, though it is sometimes just a single word. It is
considered parenthetical, so we set it apart from the rest of the sentence with
a comma.
Tag questions are often rhetorical, used to confirm an answer that the
speaker already knows or believes to be the case. For example:
• “You’re not going to the party, are you?”
• “This isn't your hat, is it?”
• “That was the most delicious meal, wasn’t it?”
992

• “You can’t talk during the movie, OK?”
• “We’re going to the game, right?”
Other interrogative sentences
Some interrogative sentences consist of a declarative statement posed to
someone as a question, such as:
• “You won?”
• “It ended just like that?”
Some questions can even be a single word. These are often “question words,”
(e.g. What?, Why?, When?, etc.), but they can consist of other words as well.
For example:
• Speaker A: “Sir, you need to move your car.”
• Speaker B: “Me?”
• Speaker A: “You didn’t eat all of your vegetables.”
• Speaker B: “So?”
• Speaker A: “Well?”
• Speaker B: “Hold on, I’m thinking!”
Indirect questions
Some declarative sentences express uncertainty, but are not truly
interrogative. These are known as indirect questions. For example:
• "I was wondering if you would like to go to the party with me."
This does not pose an actual question, so it is not an interrogative sentence.
In informal writing, it is very common to see these types of sentences end
with a question mark. However, this shouldn’t be done, especially in formal
or professional writing—the question mark should either be left out, or the
sentence should be rewritten. For example, to change the sentence above
from declarative to interrogative, we could say, “Would you like to go to the
party with me?”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Choose the sentence that is interrogative. (All ending punctuation has
been removed.)
993

a) “I can't remember when dinner will be served”
b) “When will dinner be served”
c) “I wonder when dinner will be served”
d) “When dinner is served, please let me know”
 
2. Choose the sentence that is not interrogative. (All ending punctuation has
been removed.)
a) “Can you tell me where the bathroom is”
b) “Where is the bathroom in this place”
c) “Where the bathroom is I’ll never know”
d) “This isn’t the way to the bathroom, is it”
3. Choose the sentence that is not interrogative. (Question marks have been
added to every sentence.)
a) “I don't need surgery, do I?”
b) “How I managed to win is a mystery to you, isn’t it?”
c) “Where were you, Mr. Smith, on the night in question?”
d) “I wonder how you play so well?”
4. Choose the question that is not a Yes/No question.
a) “Did you know that my dog was missing?”
b) “Have you seen him lately?”
c) “Where do you think he went?”
d) “Will you help me look for him?”
Negative Interrogative Sentences
Definition
As their name implies, negative interrogative sentences (sometimes
called interro-negative sentences) are interrogative sentences that
are made negative. In addition to asking literal questions, negative
interrogative sentences are often used to imply that the speaker is expecting
a certain answer or for emphatic effect.
Constructing 
negative
994

interrogative sentences
As with all negative sentences, we generally form the negative
interrogative by adding the word not. Where it appears in the sentence
depends on the type of interrogative sentence we’re using.
Yes/No questions
Questions that have either “yes” or “no” for an answer are formed using
auxiliary verbs at the beginning of the sentence, as in:
• “Do you have a dollar?”
• “Are you aware of the consequences of your actions?”
• “Have you seen my wallet?”
To make them negative, we add the word not after the subject of the
sentence. If not is contracted with the auxiliary verb, however, then the
contraction comes before the subject.
Negative interrogative “yes/no” questions usually imply that the speaker
expects the answer to be (or believes the answer should be) “yes.”
For example:
• “Don’t you have a dollar?”
• “Are you not aware of the consequences of your actions?”
• “Haven’t you seen my wallet?”
With question words
We can also use the negative with interrogative sentences that are formed
with certain question words (who, what, where, and why). These kinds of
questions are sometimes called “Wh-” questions, because of the common
beginning of each of the question words.
To make these sentences negative, we add not either immediately after the
subject of the sentence, or contract it with the linking or auxiliary verb.
Unlike the negative form of “yes/no” questions, the negative form of question
word sentences can either be literal or be used for emphasis.
Literal questions
995

The negative interrogative is often used literally for sentences with question
words.
For example:
• “It seems like just about everyone is signed up for the trip. Who isn’t
coming?”
• “Why haven’t we left yet?”
• “Your keys must be somewhere. Where have we not looked?”
In each of these sentences, the speaker is asking a question that requires a
literal response.
Emphatic responses
We can also use the negative interrogative with these question words for
emphasis, usually in response to another question. In this case, not is almost
exclusively contracted with the auxiliary verb, as in:
• Person A: “Who’s coming to the party tomorrow night?”
• Person B: “Who isn’t coming?” (It seems like everyone will be coming.)
• Person A: “Where did you travel while you were in Europe this summer?”
• Person B: “Oh man, where didn’t I go?” (The speaker went to a lot of
places in Europe.)
This type of question is not only used in response to other questions though
—it can stand on its own as a rhetorical question. For example:
• Person A: “My uncle also said we could use his cabin for the week if we
wanted. He’ll also pay for our food while we’re up there.”
• Person B: “Wow, why wouldn’t we go there for spring break?” (There
doesn’t appear to be any reason not to go there.)
• Person A: “They just outlawed skateboarding in public in this town.”
• Person B: “Sheesh, what isn’t illegal here anymore?” (It seems like
everything is against the law now.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What can negative interrogative sentences be used for?
a) To ask literal questions
b) To imply that the speakers expects a certain answer
996

c) For emphatic effect
d) A & B
e) B & C
f) All of the above
2. Negative interrogative sentences imply that the speaker expects a certain
answer with what type of question?
a) Tag questions
b) Alternative questions
c) Yes/No questions
d) “Wh-” questions
3. What is the most likely purpose of the following negative interrogative
sentence?
“Why wasn’t I informed of this meeting earlier?”
a) As a literal question
b) As an emphatic response
c) As a rhetorical question where the speaker expects a certain answer
d) All of the above
e) None of the above
4. Which of the following is contracted with the word not in negative
interrogative sentences?
a) Main verb
b) Auxiliary verb
c) Subject
d) Direct object
Imperative Sentences
Definition
We use imperative sentences to give orders, commands, and general
instructions. Such sentences are said to be in the Imperative Mood, one of
the Irrealis Moods in English.
Verbs without subjects
997

When we make an imperative sentence, we use the infinitive form of the verb
(without “to”), and we omit the subject of the verb. We can also intensify the
sentence by adding an exclamation mark at the end.
For example:
• “Stand up.”
• “Sit down!”
• “Turn off the light before you leave.”
• “Go to bed!”
As you can see, there are no subjects in the sentences above. For example, it
would be incorrect to say, “Open you the window”—it should simply be,
“Open the window.” It would also generally be incorrect to say “You open the
window,” unless it is done for emphasis (as in a retort). For example:
• A: “Daniel, could you please open the window?”
• B: “You open the window!”
Subjects vs. Nouns of Address
Note that this is not the same as using a noun of address (also known as a
vocative), which is a noun or noun phrase used to address someone directly
in a sentence. Nouns of address act as parenthetical elements within a
sentence, grammatically unrelated to the rest of the content. They are set
apart with one or two commas, depending on their position in a sentence.
For example:
• “John, please turn out that light.”
• “Stand up, Janet.”
• “Be quiet, sir!”
• “You there, pay attention!”
John, Janet, sir, and you there are not the subjects of their sentences’ verbs;
they are nouns of address.
Negative Imperatives
We can also make imperative statements negative by putting “do not” or
“don’t” before the infinitive verb:
• “Don’t run in the hallways!”
998

• “Do not leave your dirty dishes in the sink.”
The imperative form is also used for general instructions, as might be seen on
product instructions, formal announcements, notices, or in prohibitions. If
these are in the negative, “do not” is usually not contracted. For example:
• “Wash all woolen garments in lukewarm water.”
• “Do not smoke in the airport.”
• “Do not leave your luggage unattended.”
Usage Note: Imperatives vs. “No”
+ Gerund
There is another form of prohibition that can be found in public notices,
which is “no” plus a gerund (a verb put into the “-ing” form and used as a
noun). This is used for general prohibitions, as in “no running,” “no
smoking,” “no parking,” etc. While similar to the negative imperatives above,
and even having the exact same meaning sometimes (“do not smoke in the
airport” means the same as “no smoking in the airport”), this formation is not
truly imperative from a grammatical point of view; it is considered a noun
phrase made up of a determiner (“no”) and a gerund.
Using “Do”
We can also use the auxiliary verb “do” before the main verb of an imperative
sentence. This adds an emphasis to the tone of the command, instruction, or
request. For instance:
• “Oh, do shut up!”
• “Do take care of yourself, Mary!”
• “Please do enjoy your stay.”
This “emphatic do” can also be made negative, which changes the way a
negative imperative sentence is constructed. Take for instance this negative
imperative:
• “Don’t talk to me like that.”
If we want to add emphasis to “don’t,” we simply add the subject back into
the sentence before the verb:
• “Don’t you talk to me like that!”
999

Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. When can a verb subject be included in an imperative sentence?
a) Always
b) When it comes before the verb.
c) When it comes after the verb.
d) When it is used for emphasis.
e) Never.
 
2. What verb tense do we use to form imperative sentences?
a) Present participle
b) Infinitive
c) Gerund
d) Past participle
3. Which of the following is not in the imperative mood?
a) No talking during class, Jeff.
b) Don’t run with scissors.
c) Jane, please sit down.
d) Talking is not allowed.
e) A & B
f) C & D
g) A & D
h) B & C
4. Which auxiliary verb can be used to construct an imperative sentence?
a) Do
b) Be
c) Can
d) Must
Conditional Sentences
Definition
Conditional sentences are in the conditional mood (a sub-category of
1000

the subjunctive mood), which is used for hypothetical scenarios that are
dependent on a certain condition or conditions. They are usually constructed
using if to identify the conditions that must be met.
There are four “degrees” of conditionals, all of which vary in structure and
meaning.
Zero Conditional
A zero conditional sentence uses the present simple tense to talk about
what is always or generally true. It is classified as a conditional because it
creates a hypothetical situation to describe what would be true each time
something happens.
The general structure for the zero conditional is: “If + subject + present tense
of predicate verb, subject + present tense of main verb.”
For example:
• “If you throw a ball in the air, it comes back down.” (Always true: A ball
comes back down every time you throw it in the air.)
• “If we get up early, we always go jogging.” (Generally true: We jog every
time we get up early.)
First Conditional
The first conditional is very similar in structure to the zero conditional.
We still use if plus the present simple to create the condition, except that we
now use the future simple tense (will + bare infinitive) to describe a
probable result of the condition.
Thus, the structure is: “If + present simple tense, will + infinitive.”
For example:
• “If I see him, I will tell him.”
• “If I win the lottery, I will buy a new house.”
We can also create negative first conditionals by using the negative of the
present simple in the if clause, and the negative of will in the future simple
clause.
For example:
• “If I do not go, I will not see him.”
1001

• “If I don’t see him, I won’t have to say goodbye.”
• “If he doesn’t arrive soon, we won’t have time to catch the 9:30 train.”
We can also reorder the sentence to have the future tense clause at the
beginning of the sentence, and the if conditional clause at the end.
Additionally, we can use modal auxiliary verbs other than will (such as
must, can, could, may, might, or should) to create different shades of
certainty in the future simple tense.
Let’s take a look at some examples:
• “I will go if he calls me.” (Will expresses a certainty.)
• “I must go if he calls me.” (Must expresses a personal obligation for the
speaker.)
• “I can go if he calls me.” (Can expresses either permission from a third
party or the fact that speaker is free from other commitments.)
• “I might go if he calls me.” (Might expresses a 50% possibility.)
• “I may go if he calls me.” (May is similar to might, but it is more formal
and the possibility is slightly less.)
• “I should go if he calls me.” (The speaker feels a mild obligation.)
• “You should go if he calls you.” (The speaker is recommending that you go
or is giving you a personal opinion.)
• “I can’t go if he calls me.” (The speaker is not able or does not have
permission.)
• “I shouldn’t go if he calls me.” (The speaker feels a mild obligation not to.)
• “I might/may not go if he calls me.” (We very rarely contract might not in
modern English, and we almost never contract may not.)
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
To form a question in the first conditional, we invert the subject with the
modal auxiliary verb.
• “If I he calls me, should I go?”
• “Could I leave early if Jake covers my shift?”
• “If I finish my homework on time, may I go to the party?”
1002

• “If I come with you, will you buy me lunch?”
Second Conditional
We use the second conditional to speak about a hypothetical situation or
outcome resulting from the condition. Unlike the first conditional, we use
the second conditional to talk about things that cannot or are unlikely to
happen.
To create the second conditional, we use the past simple tense after the if
clause, followed by would + the bare infinitive for the result of the condition.
In addition to would (which we use to describe something we would
definitely do), we can also use could for what we would be able to do, as well
as might for what it is possible (but unlikely) we would do.
For example:
• “If I went to London, I would visit Trafalgar Square.”
• “If I won the lottery, I could buy a new house.”
• “If you had a phone, you could call me every day.”
• “If I was/were* older, I might stay up all night long.”
(*Note that in more formal English, it is standard to use were in conditional
sentences using the past tense of be, irrespective of it having a singular or
plural subject. However, in everyday writing and speech, it is common to use
was for singular subjects.)
We can also put the second conditional in the negative to describe something
that would not be the case if something else were also not the case. To form
the negative, we use the negative of the past simple in the if clause, and
make would negative in the clause describing the result of the condition.
For example:
• “If our father didn’t work so hard, we wouldn’t be able to afford this
house.”
• “If I didn’t live in London, I could never speak English so well.”
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
1003

To form questions in the second conditional, we invert would/could/might
with the subject. For example:
• “If you had a million dollars, would you buy an expensive boat?”
• “Would you travel to South America if you spoke Spanish?”
We can also put a question word before would in this form:
• “What would you do if your family wasn’t so wealthy?”
• “Where might you go if you won the lottery?”
• “If you could have dinner with a famous person, who would you
choose?”
Third Conditional
Third conditionals are used to establish a hypothetical situation in the
past, followed by a hypothetical outcome that did not really happen—
typically, the outcome is the opposite of what actually happened.
To form the third conditional, we use the past perfect tense for the if
conditional clause, and would have + the past participle of the verb for the
hypothetical outcome.
(As with the second conditional, we can also use could or might instead of
would. Additionally, we can use should have + the past participle to describe
an outcome that ought to have happened.)
For example:
• “If I had been more prepared, I would have passed that test.”
In reality, the speaker was not prepared, and so they did not pass the test. By
creating a condition in the past using the past perfect tense, they can
articulate how they might have achieved a different outcome if they were
more prepared.
Here are some other examples:
• Truth: “She was not there and couldn’t help you.”
• Conditional: “If she had been there, she could have helped you.”
• Truth: “I was late for work yesterday because I overslept.”
• Conditional: “If I hadn’t overslept, I wouldn’t have been late for
work.”
• Truth: “You knew you had a test today.”
1004

• Conditional: “If you knew you had a test today, you should have studied
harder.”
Interrogative 
sentences
(questions)
To 
form 
a 
question 
in 
the 
third 
conditional, 
we 
invert
would/could/might/should with the subject and add a question word before
it (if necessary).
For example:
• “Would you have come to the party if you had known about it?”
• “What might you have done if you had known the truth?”
• “Where could you have gone if you hadn’t come here?”
The Mixed Conditional
A very commonly used “fifth” conditional is what’s known as the mixed
conditional, which is a cross between the third conditional and the second.
There are two ways to form a mixed conditional, depending on the meaning
we wish to achieve.
If it is being used to describe how an unreal situation in the past might have
affected an unreal outcome in the present, we use the past perfect tense in
the if conditional clause and would / could + the bare infinitive of the verb
for the result of the condition.
For example:
• “If I had studied more (the condition is in the past), I would be a doctor
(the result of the condition is in the present).”
• “If I had been born in Italy, I would be Italian.”
• “If he hadn’t lost his job, he wouldn’t be unemployed.”
If the mixed conditional is being used to describe how an unreal condition in
the present might have affected an unreal outcome in the past, we use the
past simple tense in the if conditional clause and would have / could have
+ the past participle of the verb for the result of the condition.
For example:
1005

• “If I wasn’t/weren’t so shy (condition in the present), I would have
asked her on a date (unreal outcome in the past).”
• “If she was/were a better driver, she’d have gotten her license by
now.”
• “If we worked a little harder, we could have finished this project
already.”
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. What verb tense is used in the if clause for the second conditional?
a) Past simple tense
b) Past perfect tense
c) Future simple tense
d) Future perfect tense
 
2. Which of the following correctly completes this sentence using the third
conditional?
“If I had been earlier, ___________________”
a) I would miss the train.
b) I missed the train.
c) I would not have missed the train.
d) I would not be missing the train.
 
3. Which two conditionals can form a mixed conditional?
a) Zero and first conditional
b) First and second conditional
c) Second and third conditional
d) First and third conditional
 
4. Which of the following modal verbs is most commonly used to create
conditional sentences?
a) can
b) will
c) do
d) be
 
1006

5. Which of the conditionals does not describe an unreal situation?
a) Third conditional
b) Second conditional
c) First conditional
d) Zero conditional
6. What kind of conditional is the following sentence an example of?
“I would have studied marine biology if I weren’t afraid of water.”
a) Mixed conditional
b) Third conditional
c) Second conditional
d) First conditional
Major 
and 
Minor 
Sentences
(Regular 
and 
Irregular
Sentences)
Definition
A major sentence (also called a regular sentence) is any complete
sentence that is made up of or contains an independent clause—that is, it
has both a subject and a predicate (a verb and any of its constituent parts).
A minor sentence (also called an irregular sentence), on the other
hand, is any sentence that does not have at least one independent clause—
that is, it does not have both a subject and a complete predicate—and yet is
used in writing or speech as a complete sentence that stands on its own.
All of the other sections in the chapter on Sentences deal with major
sentences, so we will focus on minor sentences in this section.
Minor Sentences
Minor sentences can be made up of single words, sentence fragments,
interjections, or set expressions (such as idioms and proverbs. We’ll
examine several examples of each below to see how they are used in everyday
English.
1007

Single-word sentences
In conversational English, we very often use single words to get across
required information in response to another person. These are known as
sentence words, one-word sentences, or just word sentences. For
example:
• Person A: “Where is your meeting again?”
• Person B: “Denver.”
• Person A: “I think it’s best that we don’t get involved.”
• Person B: “Agreed.”
• Person A: “When do you need these reports finished?”
• Person B: “Tomorrow.”
Even though the second speaker’s response is only made up of a single word
in each of these examples, it contains all the relevant information that is
necessary in the context of the conversation.
Sentence fragments
We also commonly use sentence fragments (phrases, incomplete clauses, or
dependent clauses) as standalone sentences. Again, these are typically used
in conversational English when we are responding to someone else. For
example:
• Person A: “Are you going to have lunch soon?”
• Person B: “In about an hour.” (prepositional phrase)
• Person A: “Do you want to come to a movie with me later?”
• Person B: “Sounds good!” (incomplete clause)
• Person A: “When did you realize that you wanted to pursue politics?”
• Person B: “When I was in college.” (dependent clause)
Interjections
Single words and short phrases are also commonly used as interjections
(also known as exclamations) to convey a strong emotion, such as surprise,
alarm, excitement, dismay, etc. These are divided into primary and
secondary interjections.
1008

Primary interjections
Primary interjections are single words derived from sounds, rather than
from existing word classes. They still have widely recognized meaning,
however. Some common primary interjections are:
argh (an expression of frustration)
brr (an expression of being cold)
eww (an expression of disgust)
grr (an expression of anger)
ooh (an expression of amazement)
phew (an expression of relief)
Primary interjections are often linked to a major sentence with a comma, but
they can also stand on their own as minor sentences, in which case they are
generally punctuated with an exclamation point. For example:
• “Ooh! That’s a beautiful dress.”
• “Brr! It’s freezing in here!”
• “Eww! I hate coconuts!”
Secondary Interjections
Secondary interjections are single words or short phrases that do belong
to other existing word classes. Some common secondary interjections are:
• bless you
• congratulations
• good grief
• hell
• hey
• hi
• oh my
• oh my God
• oh well 
• shoot 
• well
• what
• wow
Secondary interjections are also often punctuated with exclamation points.
1009

For example:
• “Oh my God! We won the lottery!”
• “Wow! What a great achievement!”
• “Congratulations! That was an impressive victory.”
However, we can also have weaker secondary interjections that are
punctuated with periods, or interrogative ones that use question marks. For
example:
• “Well shoot. I really thought we were going to win.”
• “Good grief. I didn’t see that coming.”
• “Well? Are we going to watch a movie?”
• “What? You don’t like coconuts?”
Idioms, 
Proverbs, 
and 
Set
Expressions
English has a large number of expressions that have a set, established
understanding, even if they technically are not grammatically complete or do
not make literal sense. Many of these are idioms (expressions that have a
non-literal meaning) or proverbs (short sayings that carry a basic truth or
precept), though there are other expressions with set meanings that are in
frequent and widespread use, as well.
There are thousands of such phrases, so we will only cover a few here that
are considered minor sentences. To learn more, check out The Free
Dictionary’s Complete Guide to Idioms, Proverbs, and Phrasal
Verbs.
Idioms
Idioms are phrases whose meaning cannot be gleaned from the literal words
they’re composed of, often having a unique grammatical structure. Because
of this, they are frequently used in ways that go against traditional grammar
rules, and they are often used as sentences unto themselves in conversation.
For example:
• “Hi, Bill, how are you?”
• “Hey, Jeff! Long time no see!”
1010

• “Be more careful next time, or there might not be a ‘next time.’ Catch my
drift?”
• “How can you evict us from our house like this?” 
• “Orders are orders.”
• “When will you have that report ready for me?”
• “Any minute now!”
Idioms are so frequently used and understood in everyday speech and
writing that they are often truncated or abbreviated, with the full phrase left
to be implicitly understood by the listener or reader. For instance:
• “I went through all the trouble of getting her this job, and she still managed
to screw it up.”
• “Well, you can lead a horse to water.” (Short for “You can lead a
horse to water, but you can’t make it drink.”)
• “I took them to the best restaurant in town, but they said they would rather
have had cheeseburgers.”
• “What do you expect? Pearls before swine.” (Short for “cast (one’s)
pearls before swine.”)
Proverbs
Proverbs are similar to idioms in that their codified meaning is widely
understood due to frequent and widespread use. Proverbs are self-contained
sentences that express a truth based on common sense or shared experience.
Many of them have become pared down into minor sentences over time. For
example:
• “You should try and form better habits in your day-to-day routine. Early to
bed, early to rise!)” (Short for “Early to bed and early to rise, makes
a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.”)
• “I’m not sure why people are shocked that he’s suspected of stealing. If the
shoe fits.” (Short for “If the shoe fits, wear it.”)
• “Sure, bring your friends. The more the merrier!”
Other set expressions
There are other common expressions that stand on their own as minor
sentences that are not necessarily idiomatic or proverbial but nevertheless
have a particular meaning that is inherently understood. (Many of these are
1011

forms of (or similar to) the interjections that we looked at above.)
Expressions of greeting and farewell are a prime example of set expressions
that function as or form minor sentences. For example:
• “Hello! How are you?”
• “Good afternoon! It’s a pleasure to see you.”
• “I’m afraid I must depart. Good day, gentlemen.”
• “Goodbye. I hope we meet again.”
Expressions of well wishes operate the same way:
• “I hear you have a big exam coming up. Good luck!”
• “This is a big trip you’re undertaking. Godspeed!”
Some set expressions have been adapted from other languages, as in:
• “Bon voyage! Enjoy your trip abroad!” (From French, expressing good
wishes to a departing traveler.)
• “I hope you enjoy the meal. Bon appétit, everyone!” (From French, a
salutation to someone about to eat.)
• “Gesundheit!” (From German, meaning “health,” used in English as a
verbal response to someone who has sneezed.)
Quiz
(answers start on page 610)
1. Which of the following would not comprise a minor sentence?
a) A word
b) A phrase
c) A dependent clause
d) An independent clause
2. Which of the following can be used to punctuate a secondary
interjection?
a) A period
b) An exclamation point
c) A question mark
d) A & C
e) B & C
f) All of the above
1012

3. Identify the minor sentence in the following example:
“I’ll give Samantha a lift back to the office. Sound good?”
a) I’ll give Samantha a lift back to the office.
b) Sound good?
c) Neither A nor B
d) Both A & B
4. When are single-word sentences most commonly used in English?
a) Conversations
b) Formal writing
c) Informal writing
d) Professional writing
5. Identify what kind of minor sentence is highlighted in the following
example:
Speaker A: “I really need that loan you promised me.”
Speaker B: “All in good time.”
a) One-word sentence
b) Interjection
c) Idiom
d) Proverb
1013

Quiz answers
 
Page. Article: Question-Answer
14. Nouns: 1-f, 2-b, 3-d, 4-c, 5-b
16. Common and Proper Nouns: 1-b, 2-b, 3-b
18. Nouns of Address: 1-e, 2-b, 3-d, 4-a, 5-b
21. Concrete and Abstract Nouns: 1-b, 2-a, 3-b, 4-a, 5-a, 6-b
24. Countable Nouns: 1-f, 2-b, 3-b, 4-d, 5-c
28. Uncountable Nouns: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-b, 5-d
31. Collective Nouns: 1-d, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b, 5-c
35. Compound Nouns: 1-a, 2-b, 3-c, 4-c, 5-d
39. Nominalization (Creating Nouns): 1-b, 2-c, 3-a, 4-c
42. Pronouns: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-a, 5-c
44. Personal Pronouns - Number: 1-e, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c
46. Personal Pronouns - Person (First person, Second person, Third person):
1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-d
47. Personal Pronouns - Gender: 1-c, 2-d, 3-b, 4-e, 5-c
50. Personal Pronouns - Case: 1-a, 2-b, 3-e, 4-c, 5-a
51. Personal Pronouns - Reflexive Pronouns: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-b
52. Intensive Pronouns: 1-c, 2-a, 3-f, 4-d
56. Indefinite Pronouns: 1-c, 2-c, 3-a, 4-d
59. Demonstrative Pronouns: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c
62. Interrogative Pronouns: 1-b, 2-d, 3-f, 4-a
68. Relative Pronouns: 1-b, 2-a, 3-d, 4-a, 5-a, 6-d
69. Reciprocal Pronouns: 1-d, 2-b, 3-a, 4-d
72. Dummy Pronouns: 1-b, 2-b, 3-d, 4-a, 5-c
78. Verbs: 1-b, 2-c, 3-a, 4-f, 5-b, 6-c
82. Finite and Non-finite Verbs: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-e, 5-b
85. Transitive and Intransitive Verbs: 1-c, 2-d, 3-c, 4-a, 5-b
88. Regular and Irregular Verbs: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-d, 6-c
93. Auxiliary Verbs: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c, 5-c
100. Primary Auxiliary Verbs: 1-b, 2-c, 3-c, 4-d, 5-a
104. Modal Auxiliary Verbs: 1-a, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c, 5-b, 6-b
107. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Will: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a
110. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Would: 1-b, 2-d, 3-c, 4-a
112. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Shall: 1-a, 2-d, 3-c
115. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Should: 1-a, 2-d, 3-b, 4-a
1014

118. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Can: 1-d, 2-c, 3-a
121. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Could: 1-b, 2-c, 3-b
123. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - May: 1-c, 2-c, 3-b, 4-d
125. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Might: 1-c, 2-c, 3-a, 4-d
127. Modal Auxiliary Verbs - Must: 1-a, 2-c, 3-c, 4-d
130. Substituting Modal Verbs: 1-f, 2-d, 3-c, 4-d
134. Semi-Modal Auxiliary Verbs: 1-b, 2-f, 3-a, 4-c, 5-b
138. Infinitives: 1-f, 2-b, 3-b, 4-a, 5-c
145. Participles: 1-e, 2-b, 3-c, 4-d, 5-a
147. Action Verbs: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c
152. Stative Verbs: 1-c, 2-b, 3-c, 4-d, 5-b
157. Linking Verbs: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-d, 5-b, 6-a
162. Light Verbs: 1-b, 2-e, 3-b, 4-a, 5-a
165. Phrasal Verbs: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-c, 5-b
177. Conditional Verbs: 1-g, 2-c, 2-e, 3-a, 4-b, 5-d
179. Causative Verbs: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-a
181. Factitive Verbs: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-c
183. Reflexive Verbs: 1-b, 2-d, 3-d, 4-a
187. Adjectives: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-d, 5-c
191. Attributive Adjectives: 1-a, 2-a, 3-c, 4-a, 5-b
194. Predicative Adjectives: 1-b, 2-c, 3-e, 4-a
197. Proper Adjectives: 1-b, 2-c, 3-a, 4-d, 5-a
199. Collective Adjectives: 1-a, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b, 5-a
202. Demonstrative Adjectives: 1-b, 2-c, 3-d, 4-a, 5-b
204. Interrogative Adjectives: 1-b, 2-c, 3-e, 4-b, 5-a
207. Nominal Adjectives: 1-d, 2-c, 3-a, 4-c, 5-d
210. Compound Adjectives: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-b
214. Order of Adjectives: 1-b, 2-a, 3-c, 4-d, 5-a
217. Degrees of Comparison: 1-c, 2-a, 3-b, 4-f
222. Comparative Adjectives: 1-a, 2-d, 3-b, 4-c, 5-d
225. Superlative Adjectives: 1-c, 2-b, 3-d, 4-a
229. Adverbs: 1-c, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b, 5-d
233. Adverbs of Time: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-a
237. Adverbs of Place: 1-d, 2-b, 3-c, 4-d, 5-a, 6-c
239. Adverbs of Manner: 1-b, 2-d, 3-d, 4-a, 5-c
242. Adverbs of Degree: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-b, 5-b
244. Mitigators: 1-a, 2-d, 3-b, 4-b, 5-c
247. Intensifiers: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c, 5-f
250. Adverbs of Frequency: 1-f, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c, 5-d, 6-c
1015

253. Adverbs of Purpose: 1-b, 2-c, 3-d, 4-e
257. Focusing Adverbs: 1-a, 2-c, 3-b, 4-d, 5-a
262. Negative Adverbs: 1-d, 2-b, 3-a, 4-a, 5-c
266. Conjunctive Adverbs: 1-d, 2-e, 3-a, 4-b, 5-b
269. Evaluative Adverbs: 1-e, 2-b, 3-d, 4-b, 5-c
272. Viewpoint Adverbs: 1-a, 2-d, 3-c, 4-d, 5-b
274. Relative Adverbs: 1-d, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c, 5-d, 6-a
276. Adverbial Nouns: 1-c, 2-d, 3-b, 4-d
280. Regular and Irregular Adverbs: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-b, 5-c, 6-b
283. Degrees of Comparison: 1-c, 2-a, 3-b, 4-f
287. Comparative Adverbs: 1-c, 2-b, 3-d, 4-b, 5-b
291. Superlative Adverbs: 1-c, 2-c, 3-b, 4-d, 5-b
295. Order of Adverbs: 1-b, 2-a, 3-c, 4-e, 5-a
298. Prepositions: 1-b, 2-e, 3-a, 4-b
301. Prepositional Phrases: 1-d, 2-b, 3-b, 4-a, 5-d
306. Categories of Prepositions: 1-d, 2-b, 3-b, 4-d
316. Prepositions with Nouns: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c
325. Prepositions with Verbs: 1-e, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c
331. Prepositions with Adjectives: 1-d, 2-a, 3-a, 4-d
333. Prepositions in Idioms: 1-d, 2-d, 3-b, 4-b, 5-a
339. Idioms that Start with Prepositions: 1-c, 2-a, 3-a, 4-d
346. Idioms that End with Prepositions: 1-d, 2-d, 3-b, 4-a
348. Conjunctions: 1-d, 2-e, 3-b, 4-c
351. Coordinating Conjunctions: 1-e, 2-c, 3-a, 4-d, 5-a
356. Correlative Conjunctions: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c, 5-d
360. Subordinating Conjunctions: 1-c, 2-a, 3-c, 4-d, 5-e
362. Particles: 1-c, 2-d, 3-b, 4-a
365. Articles: 1-a, 2-b, 3-a, 4-d, 5-f
373. Determiners: 1-b, 2-c, 3-d, 4-a, 5-b
375. Possessive Determiners: 1-a, 2-b, 3-d, 4-d, 5-a, 6-c
378. Gerunds: 1-c, 2-a, 3-b, 4-d, 5-c
381. Gerunds as Objects of Verbs: 1-b, 2-c, 3-d, 4-b
384. Interjections: 1-c, 2-c, 3-a, 4-c, 5-b
389. Inflection (Accidence): 1-b, 2-c, 3-e, 4-a, 5-c
397. Conjugation: 1-c, 2-a, 3-e, 4-d, 5-b, 5-e
404. Tense: 1-b, 2-d, 3-c, 4-a, 5-c
406. Present Tense: 1-g, 2-a, 3-c, 4-f
408. Present Simple Tense: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c
411. Present Continuous Tense (Progressive): 1-c, 2-d, 3-g, 4-a, 5-d, 6-b
1016

415. Present Perfect Tense: 1-c, 2-f, 3-b, 4-a
418. Present Perfect Continuous Tense: 1-b, 2-a, 3-c, 4-d
421. Past Tense: 1-a, 2-d, 3-c, 4-c, 5-d
424. Past Simple Tense: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-c, 5-c
426. Past Continuous Tense: 1-c, 2-a, 3-c, 4-b
429. Past Perfect Tense: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c, 5-d
432. Past Perfect Continuous Tense: 1-c, 2-e, 3-b, 4-c, 5-b
434. Future Tense (Approximation): 1-d, 2-d, 3-c, 4-b
437. Future Simple Tense: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-b, 5-b
440. Future Continuous Tense: 1-d, 2-b, 3-c, 4-a, 5-c
443. Future Perfect Tense: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-c
445. Future Perfect Continuous Tense: 1-c, 2-e, 3-a, 4-b, 5-d
448. Aspect: 1-b, 2-a, 3-d, 4-c, 5-d
451. Perfective and Imperfective Aspect: 1-a, 2-d, 3-c, 4-d, 5-c
452. Aspects of the Present Tense: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-c, 5-a, 6-d
454. Aspects of the Past Tense: 1-a, 2-b, 3-a, 4-b, 5-b
456. Aspects of the Future Tense: 1-c, 2-b, 3-a, 4-b, 5-d
458. Mood: 1-a, 2-e, 3-e, 4-b, 5-h
461. Indicative Mood: 1-e, 2-c, 3-b, 4-c
463. Subjunctive Mood: 1-d, 2-b, 3-c, 4-a, 5-b
465. Subjunctive Mood - Expressing Wishes: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-b
467. Voice: 1-b, 2-a, 3-d, 4-d
469. Active Voice: 1-c, 2-d, 3-f, 4-b
471. Passive Voice: 1-a, 2-a, 3-b, 4-e, 5-d
473. Middle Voice: 1-d, 2-c, 3-d, 4-a
477. Speech: 1-a, 2-d, 3-b, 4-d, 5-c, 6-b
481. Reported Speech (Indirect Speech): 1-b, 2-c, 3-b, 4-a, 5-d, 6-c
486. Grammatical Person: 1-b, 2-e, 3-g, 4-c, 5-a
491. Declension: 1-d, 2-b, 3-e, 4-a, 5-c
495. Plurals: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-c
497. Gender in Nouns: 1-b, 2-d, 3-e, 4-a
503. Regular and Irregular Inflection: 1-c, 2-a, 3-c, 4-d, 5-c, 6-g
507. Syntax: 1-a, 2-e, 3-b, 4-c, 5-c
513. The Subject: 1-c, 2-a, 3-b, 4-a, 5-c, 6-d
519. The Predicate: 1-b, 2-a, 3-d, 4-b, 5-a, 6-c, 7-b
523. Complements: 1-a, 2-c, 3-b, 4-d, 5-c
526. Objects: 1-d, 2-c, 3-b, 4-d
528. Subject Complements: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b
530. Object Complements: 1-c, 2-b, 3-b, 4-a
1017

532. Adjective Complements: 1-c, 2-b, 3-d
533. Adverbial Complements: 1-b, 2-d, 3-e
539. Modifiers: 1-e, 2-a, 3-b, 4-d, 5-a, 6-b
543. Adjuncts: 1-b, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-c, 6-a
548. Phrases: 1-d, 2-e, 3-a, 4-c, 5-a
552. Noun Phrases: 1-c, 2-d, 3-a, 4-b, 5-c
555. Adjective Phrases: 1-g, 2-b, 3-b, 4-b
558. Adverbial Phrases: 1-b, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b, 5-d
561. Participle Phrases: 1-b, 2-f, 3-a, 4-c, 5-c, 6-f
563. Absolute Phrases: 1-c, 2-e, 3-a, 4-b
565. Appositives: 1-b, 2-a, 3-c, 4-b, 5-b
568. Clauses: 1-a, 2-d, 3-f, 4-d, 5-b
569. Independent Clauses: 1-e, 2-a, 3-c, 4-a, 5-b
572. Dependent Clauses: 1-e, 2-a, 3-b, 4-e, 5-c
575. Noun Clauses: 1-c, 2-d, 3-b, 4-d
577. Relative Clauses: 1-b, 2-a, 3-d, 4-c
579. Adverbial Clauses: 1-d, 2-a, 3-b, 4-b
584. Sentences: 1-f, 2-b, 3-c, 4-e
587. Compound Sentences: 1-d, 2-f, 3-a, 4-c, 5-b
589. Complex Sentences: 1-c, 2-b, 3-d, 4-a, 5-a
591. Compound-Complex Sentences: 1-b, 2-e, 3-b, 4-c, 5-f
595. Declarative Sentences: 1-c, 2-a, 3-d, 4-g, 5-c
597. Interrogative Sentences: 1-b, 2-c, 3-d, 4-c
599. Negative Interrogative Sentences: 1-f, 2-c, 3-a, 4-b
601. Imperative Sentences: 1-d, 2-b, 3-g, 4-a
605. Conditional Sentences: 1-a, 2-c, 3-c, 4-b, 5-d, 6-a
608. Major and Minor Sentences (Regular and Irregular Sentences): 1-d, 2-f,
3-b, 4-a, 5-c
 
1018

Index
 
A
absolute construction · 562
absolute phrases · 562
abstract countable nouns · 20
abstract nouns · 19
abstract uncountable nouns · 20
accidence · 385
action verbs · 146
action verbs that take gerunds · 380
active voice · 467
adjectival adjuncts · 542
adjectival clauses · 575
adjectival phrases · 553
adjectival prepositional phrases · 299
adjective clauses · 575
adjective complements · 326, 531
adjective phrase complements · 531
adjective phrases · 553
adjective phrases vs. adjectival phrases · 555
adjective phrases, forming · 553
adjectives · 184
adjectives, attributive · 188
adjectives, collective · 198
adjectives, comparative · 218
adjectives, compound · 207
adjectives, cumulative · 214
adjectives, demonstrative · 200
adjectives, distributive · 367
adjectives, gradable · 221, 241
adjectives, indefinite · 56
adjectives, interrogative · 202
adjectives, irregular · 219, 500
adjectives, long · 219
adjectives, nominal · 205
adjectives, non-gradable · 241
1019

adjectives, non-restrictive · 189
adjectives, order of · 211
adjectives, phrasal · 207
adjectives, possessive · 374
adjectives, postnominal · 189
adjectives, postpositive · 189
adjectives, predicate · 192
adjectives, predicative · 192
adjectives, prenominal · 189
adjectives, prepositive · 189
adjectives, proper · 194
adjectives, regular · 500
adjectives, restrictive · 189
adjectives, short · 218
adjectives, superlative · 223
adjectives, ungradable · 222
adjunct phrases · 541
adjuncts · 540
adverb clauses · 577
adverb phrases · 556
adverbial adjuncts · 540
adverbial clauses · 577
adverbial clauses of comparison or manner · 579
adverbial clauses of condition · 579
adverbial clauses of contrast · 579
adverbial clauses of place · 578
adverbial clauses of purpose · 253
adverbial clauses of reason or purpose · 578
adverbial clauses of time · 578
adverbial complements · 533
adverbial nouns · 275
adverbial objectives · 275
adverbial phrases · 556
adverbial phrases of purpose · 252
adverbial prepositional phrases · 299
adverbials · 226
adverbials, negative · 258
adverbs · 226
adverbs of definite frequency · 248
1020

adverbs of degree · 240
adverbs of direction · 234
adverbs of duration · 231
adverbs of frequency · 247
adverbs of indefinite frequency · 249
adverbs of location · 235
adverbs of manner · 237
adverbs of movement and direction · 235
adverbs of movement and location · 235
adverbs of place · 234
adverbs of purpose · 251
adverbs of purpose, non-conjunctive · 252
adverbs of reason · 251
adverbs of time · 230
adverbs, commenting · 267
adverbs, comparative · 283
adverbs, conjunctive · 263, 586
adverbs, connecting · 263
adverbs, creating · 237
adverbs, evaluative · 267
adverbs, focusing · 254
adverbs, frequency · 247
adverbs, gradable · 287
adverbs, grading · 240
adverbs, irregular · 277, 501
adverbs, linking · 263
adverbs, negative · 258
adverbs, non-grading · 240
adverbs, order of · 292
adverbs, regular · 277, 501
adverbs, relative · 272
adverbs, royal order of · 292
adverbs, superlative · 288
adverbs, ungradable · 287
adverbs, viewpoint · 270
agreement, subject-verb · 24, 354, 509
alternative questions · 596
ambitransitive verbs · 83
American English · 24, 33, 87, 114, 220, 232, 235, 285, 290, 309, 351, 364,
1021

474, 475
animals, collective nouns and · 30
antecedents · 40, 44, 51
anticipatory it · 72
apostrophes, possessive · 375
appellations · 15
appositive phrases · 564
appositives · 564
appositives, non-restrictive · 565
appositives, restrictive · 565
articles · 363
articles, definite · 363
articles, indefinite · 363
as … as · 222
aspect · 446
attributive adjectives · 188
attributive vs. predicative adjectives · 188
auxiliary verbs · 89, 94
auxiliary verbs, semi-modal · 130
B
be · 94, 485
beginning a sentence with a coordinating conjunction · 351
brands · 15
British English · 33, 114, 220, 235, 285, 290, 309, 351, 364, 474, 475
C
can · 116
can / could · 128
can / could / may / might · 128
can / may / shall · 129
case · 48
case, genitive · 49
case, objective · 48, 525, 528
case, possessive · 49
causative verbs · 178, 181
choice questions · 596
clauses · 566
clauses, adjectival · 575
clauses, adjective · 575
1022

clauses, adverb · 577
clauses, adverbial · 577
clauses, dependent · 570
clauses, independent · 568
clauses, main · 568
clauses, non-defining · 576
clauses, non-restrictive · 576
clauses, noun · 572
clauses, participle · 559
clauses, relative · 575
clauses, restrictive · 576
clauses, restrictive relative · 576
clauses, subordinate · 570
closed compound nouns · 33
collective adjectives · 198
collective nouns · 29
collective nouns and animals · 30
collective nouns, plural-only · 30
comma splices · 586
commas · 474, 589
commenting adverbs · 267
common nouns · 15
comparative adjectives · 218
comparative adverbs · 283
comparative adverbs, forming · 284
comparative adverbs, irregular · 285
complements · 520
complements, adjective · 326, 531
complements, adjective phrase · 531
complements, adverbial · 533
complements, object · 180, 190, 529
complements, subject · 49, 527
complete contrast · 265
complex sentences · 588
complex vs. compound sentences · 590
compound adjectives · 207
compound modifiers · 207
compound nouns · 31
compound nouns, hyphenated · 33
1023

compound nouns, open · 33
compound nouns, solid · 33
compound nouns, spaced · 33
compound predicates · 515, 582
compound sentences · 584
compound subjects · 582
compound-complex sentences · 590
concrete countable nouns · 19
concrete nouns · 18
concrete uncountable nouns · 20
conditional sentences · 602
conditional verbs · 175
conjugation · 389, 397
conjunction, beginning a sentence with a coordinating · 351
conjunctions · 347
conjunctions, coordinating · 349, 585
conjunctions, correlative · 585
conjunctions, correlative · 352
conjunctions, paired · 352
conjunctions, subordinating · 356
conjunctive adverbs · 263, 586
conjunctive adverbs of purpose · 251
connecting adverbs · 263
consonant sounds vs. vowel sounds · 363
continuous aspect · 452, 453, 455
conversion · 38
coordinating conjunctions · 349, 585
copular verbs · 153
copulas · 153
correlative conjunctions · 352, 585
could · 119
count nouns · 21
countable nouns · 21
cumulative adjectives · 214
D
dangling modifiers · 143, 539
declarative questions · 594
declarative sentences · 592
1024

declarative sentences, negative · 594
declension · 487
definite articles · 363
degrees of strength · 240
delexical verbs · 158
demonstrative adjectives · 200
demonstrative determiners · 200
demonstrative pronouns · 57
dependent clauses · 570
dependent prepositions · 317
determiners · 366
determiners, demonstrative · 200
determiners, distributive · 367
determiners, interrogative · 202
determiners, possessive · 374
determiners, pre- · 368
diathesis · 466
direct objects · 180, 524
direct questions · 60
direct speech · 474
distributive adjectives · 367
distributive determiners · 367
ditransitive verbs · 84, 524
do · 94
double negatives · 261
dummy pronouns · 70
dynamic verbs · 146
E
each · 368
each other · 68
either · 368
elliptical sentences · 253
emphatic mood · 458
empty subjects · 72
empty verbs · 158
enough · 242
ergative verbs · 83
evaluative adverbs · 267
1025

every · 368
exclamations · 382
exclamatory sentences · 592
existential there · 70
expletive pronouns · 70
F
factitive verbs · 180
familial roles · 16
FANBOYS · 349, 585
farthest · 224
feminine · 495
fewer vs. less · 27
finite verbs · 79, 516
first conditional · 177, 602
first person · 45, 482
flection · 385
focusing adverbs · 254
fragments, sentence · 606
free indirect discourse · 476
free indirect speech · 476
frequency adverbs · 247
furthest · 224
future continuous tense · 438, 455
future indicative · 459
future perfect continuous tense · 443, 456
future perfect progressive tense · 443
future perfect tense · 441, 455
future progressive tense · 438
future simple tense · 435, 455
future tenses · 433
G
gender · 46, 495
gender neutral · 43, 46
generic you · 55
generic you and they · 55
genitive case · 49
gerund phrases · 376, 545
gerunds · 80, 376
1026

gerunds vs. infinitives · 380
good vs. well · 157, 193
gradable adjectives · 221, 241
gradable adverbs · 287
grading adverbs · 240
grammatical number · 44
grammatical person · 45, 482
H
have · 94
helping verbs · 89
here · 236
hierarchy of grammatical structure · 505
hyphenated compound nouns · 33
I
idioms · 166, 607
idioms that end with prepositions · 340
idioms that start with prepositions · 334
idioms, prepositional · 332, 334, 340
imperative mood · 457
imperative sentences · 600
imperfective aspect · 449
impersonal pronouns · 55
impersonal you · 55
implied objects · 182
indefinite adjectives · 56
indefinite articles · 363
indefinite pronouns · 53
indefinite you · 55
independent clauses · 568
indicative mood · 459
indirect objects · 310, 524
indirect questions · 60, 594, 597
indirect speech · 478
infinitive mood · 458
infinitive phrases · 546
infinitives · 79, 134
infinitives of purpose · 252
inflection · 385
1027

inflection, irregular · 498
inflection, regular · 498
intensifiers · 245, 369
intensive pronouns · 51
interjections · 382, 606
interjections, primary · 382
interjections, secondary · 383
interrogative adjectives · 202
interrogative adjectives vs. interrogative pronouns · 204
interrogative determiners · 202
interrogative pronouns · 60
interrogative sentences · 595
interro-negative sentences · 598
intransitive verbs · 82, 309
inversion · 91, 98, 260
inversion, subject-auxiliary · 91
inversion, subject-verb · 595
irrealis moods · 456
irregular adjectives · 219, 500
irregular adverbs · 277, 501
irregular comparative adverbs · 285
irregular inflection · 498
irregular plurals · 492, 499
irregular sentences · 605
irregular superlative adverbs · 290
irregular verbs · 86, 503
it · 70
it, anticipatory · 72
J
job titles · 16
L
less vs. fewer · 27
light verbs · 158
linking adverbs · 263
linking verbs · 153, 181
linking verbs vs. action verbs · 156
long adjectives · 219
M
1028

main clauses · 568
major sentences · 605
marginal modal verbs · 130
masculine · 495
mass nouns · 25
may · 121
may / might · 129
middle voice · 472
might · 123
minor sentences · 605
misplaced modifiers · 143, 538
mitigators · 243
mixed conditional · 604
modal auxiliary verbs · 101
modal verbs · 101
modal verbs, marginal · 130
modifiers · 534
modifiers vs. complements · 532
modifiers, compound · 207
modifiers, dangling · 143, 539
modifiers, misplaced · 143, 538
modifiers, squinting · 539
monotransitive verbs · 84, 524
mood · 456
mood, emphatic · 458
mood, imperative · 457
mood, indicative · 459
mood, infinitive · 458
mood, realis · 456, 459
moods, irrealis · 456
must · 126
must / shall / should / will · 129
N
names · 15
negative adverbials · 258
negative adverbs · 258
negative declarative sentences · 594
negative interrogative sentences · 598
1029

negative phrases · 93
negative sentences · 594
negative sentences, forming · 93
neither · 57, 368
nominal adjectives · 205
nominalization · 35
nominatives of address · 16
non-conjunctive adverbs of purpose · 252
non-continuous verbs · 148
non-count nouns · 25
non-defining clauses · 576
none · 57
non-finite verbs · 79, 516
non-gradable adjectives · 241
non-grading adverbs · 240
non-progressive verbs · 148
non-restrictive adjectives · 189
non-restrictive appositives · 565
non-restrictive clauses · 576
non-restrictive relative clauses · 576
noun adjuncts · 542
noun clauses · 572
noun phrases · 188, 548
nouns · 11
nouns of address · 16
nouns of direct address · 16
nouns, closed compound · 33
nouns, collective · 29
nouns, common · 15
nouns, compound · 31
nouns, concrete · 18
nouns, concrete countable · 19
nouns, concrete uncountable · 20
nouns, count · 21
nouns, countable · 21
nouns, mass · 25
nouns, non-count · 25
nouns, predicate · 527
nouns, predicative · 527
1030

nouns, proper · 15
nouns, synonymous · 311
nouns, uncountable · 25
number · 44
O
object complements · 180, 190, 529
objective case · 48, 525, 528
objects · 524
objects of prepositions · 525
objects of verbs · 524
one another · 68
open compound nouns · 33
order of adjectives · 211
order of adverbs · 292
origin · 306
Oxford comma · 351
P
paired conjunctions · 352
parallel structure · 354
participle clauses · 559
participle phrases · 559
participle phrases, passive perfect · 560
participles · 80, 139
particle phrasal verbs · 163
particle-prepositional phrasal verbs · 163
particles · 361
parts of speech · 10
passive perfect participle phrases · 560
passive voice · 470
past continuous tense · 425, 453
past indicative · 459
past participle phrases · 559
past participles · 80, 140
past perfect continuous tense · 430, 454
past perfect progressive tense · 430
past perfect tense · 427, 454
past progressive tense · 425
past simple tense · 422, 453
1031

past tense · 419
perfect aspect · 452, 454
perfect participle phrases · 559
perfect simple aspect · 455
perfective aspect · 449
person · 45
personal pronouns · 43
phrasal adjectives · 207
phrasal verbs · 162, 166, 361
phrasal verbs, preposition · 163
phrases · 543
phrases, adjectival · 553
phrases, adjectival prepositional · 299
phrases, adjective · 553
phrases, adjunct · 541
phrases, adverb · 556
phrases, adverbial · 556
phrases, adverbial prepositional · 299
phrases, appositive · 564
phrases, infinitive · 546
phrases, negative · 93
phrases, noun · 188, 548
phrases, participle · 559
phrases, prepositional · 298, 525
phrases, verb · 544
plural-only collective nouns · 30
plurals · 44, 492
plurals, irregular · 492, 499
plurals, regular · 499
positive degree · 215, 281
possession · 374
possessive adjectives · 374
possessive apostrophes · 375
possessive case · 49
possessive determiners · 374
postnominal adjectives · 189
postpositive adjectives · 189
pre-determiners · 368
predicate · 514
1032

predicate adjectives · 192
predicate nominatives · 527
predicate nouns · 527
predicate pronouns · 527
predicate, parts of the · 516
predicate, simple · 515
predicates, compound · 515, 582
predicative adjectives · 192
predicative nouns · 527
prenominal adjectives · 189
preposition phrasal verbs · 163
prepositional idioms · 332, 334, 340
prepositional phrases · 298, 525
prepositional verbs · 317
prepositional verbs vs. phrasal verbs · 318
prepositions · 295, 307
prepositions of agency · 306
prepositions of connection · 306
prepositions of direction or movement · 305
prepositions of instrument or device · 306
prepositions of place · 304
prepositions of reason or purpose · 306
prepositions of time · 303
prepositions, dependent · 317
prepositions, objects of · 525
prepositive adjectives · 189
present continuous tense · 409, 452
present indicative · 459
present participle phrases · 559
present participles · 80, 139, 409
present perfect continuous tense · 416, 452
present perfect progressive tense · 416
present perfect tense · 412, 452
present simple tense · 406, 452
present tense · 404
primary interjections · 382
pronouns · 40
pronouns, demonstrative · 57
pronouns, dummy · 70
1033

pronouns, expletive · 70
pronouns, impersonal · 55
pronouns, indefinite · 53
pronouns, intensive · 51
pronouns, interrogative · 60
pronouns, personal · 43
pronouns, predicate · 527
pronouns, reciprocal · 68
pronouns, reflexive · 43, 69, 182
pronouns, relative · 63
proper adjectives · 194
proper nouns · 15
proverbs · 608
Q
quantifiers · 369
question mark · 595
question word questions · 596
question words · 596, 598
questions, reported · 61
quotation marks · 474
quoted speech · 474
R
realis mood · 456, 459
reciprocal pronouns · 68
reflexive pronouns · 43, 69, 182
reflexive verbs · 182
regular adjectives · 500
regular adverbs · 277, 501
regular inflection · 498
regular plurals · 499
regular sentences · 605
regular verbs · 86, 502
relative adverbs · 272
relative clauses · 575
relative clauses, non-restrictive · 576
relative pronouns · 63
reported questions · 61
reported speech · 478
1034

reporting verbs · 474, 478
restrictive adjectives · 189
restrictive appositives · 565
restrictive clauses · 576
restrictive relative clauses · 576
restrictive vs. non-restrictive attributive adjectives · 189
rhetorical · 597
royal order of adverbs · 292
run-on sentences · 586
S
second conditional · 177, 603
second person · 45, 482
secondary interjections · 383
semantically weak verbs · 158
semicolon · 263, 586
semi-modal auxiliary verbs · 130
semi-modal verbs · 130
sense verbs · 149, 155, 192
sentence fragments · 606
sentences · 580
sentences, complex · 588
sentences, compound · 584
sentences, compound-complex · 590
sentences, conditional · 602
sentences, declarative · 592
sentences, elliptical · 253
sentences, exclamatory · 592
sentences, imperative · 600
sentences, interrogative · 595
sentences, interro-negative · 598
sentences, irregular · 605
sentences, major · 605
sentences, minor · 605
sentences, negative · 594
sentences, negative interrogative · 598
sentences, regular · 605
sentences, run-on · 586
sentences, simple · 568
1035

sentences, single-word · 606
serial comma · 351
shall · 110
short adjectives · 218
should · 112
silent speech · 477
simple aspect · 453, 455
simple past tense · 422
simple predicate · 515
simple present tense · 406
simple sentences · 568
single-word sentences · 606
singular · 44
singular they · 47
solid compound nouns · 33
spaced compound nouns · 33
speech · 474
speech, direct · 474
speech, free indirect · 476
speech, indirect · 478
speech, quoted · 474
speech, reported · 478
speech, silent · 477
squinting modifiers · 539
state verbs · 148
stative verbs · 148
stative verbs that take gerunds · 379
subject complements · 49, 527
subject, renaming the · 154
subject-auxiliary inversion · 91
subjective case · 48, 528
subjects · 508
subjects, compound · 582
subjects, empty · 72
subject-verb agreement · 24, 509
subject-verb agreement · 354
subject-verb inversion · 595
subjunctive mood · 461
subordinate clauses · 570
1036

subordinating conjunctions · 356
such · 57
suffixes · 35
superlative adjectives · 223
superlative adverbs · 288
superlative adverbs, irregular · 290
suprafix · 38
synonymous nouns · 311
syntax · 505
T
tag questions · 596
tense · 397
that · 57
there · 70, 236
there, existential · 70
these · 57
these/those · 201
they, generic · 55
they, singular · 47
thin verbs · 158
third conditional · 177, 604
third person · 45, 482
this · 57
this/that · 200
those · 57
to be · 148
toward · 235
towards · 235
transitive verbs · 82, 309
tritransitive verbs · 85
U
uncountable nouns · 25
ungradable adjectives · 222
ungradable adverbs · 287
V
verb phrases · 544
verb tenses · 90
1037

verbs · 73
verbs followed by both gerunds and infinitives · 381
verbs of cognition · 151
verbs of emotion · 150
verbs of possession and attribution · 150
verbs of progression · 156
verbs of states or qualities · 151
verbs of the senses · 155
verbs, action · 146
verbs, ambitransitive · 83
verbs, auxiliary · 89, 94
verbs, causative · 178, 181
verbs, conditional · 175
verbs, copular · 153
verbs, delexical · 158
verbs, ditransitive · 84, 524
verbs, dynamic · 146
verbs, empty · 158
verbs, ergative · 83
verbs, factitive · 180
verbs, finite · 79, 516
verbs, helping · 89
verbs, intransitive · 82, 309
verbs, irregular · 86, 503
verbs, light · 158
verbs, linking · 153, 181
verbs, modal · 101
verbs, modal auxiliary · 101
verbs, monotransitive · 84, 524
verbs, non-continuous · 148
verbs, non-finite · 79, 516
verbs, non-progressive · 148
verbs, phrasal · 162, 166, 361
verbs, prepositional · 317
verbs, reflexive · 182
verbs, regular · 86, 502
verbs, reporting · 474, 478
verbs, semantically weak · 158
verbs, semi-modal · 130
1038

verbs, sense · 149, 155, 192
verbs, state · 148
verbs, stative · 148
verbs, thin · 158
verbs, transitive · 82, 309
verbs, tritransitive · 85
viewpoint adverbs · 270
vocatives · 16
voice · 466
voice, active · 467
voice, middle · 472
voice, passive · 470
vowel sounds vs. consonant sounds · 363
W
weak contrast · 265
wh- questions · 596
what vs. which · 203
whom · 60, 525, 576
whose vs. who’s · 204
will · 105
will / can / could / would · 129
will / shall · 128
would · 107
Y
yes/no questions · 596, 598
yon/yonder · 201
you, generic · 55
you, impersonal · 55
you, indefinite · 55
Z
zero conditional · 176, 602
zero derivation · 38
1039

