Michael Cross (MCSE, MCP+I, CNA, Network+) is an Internet 
Specialist/Computer Forensic Analyst with the Niagara Regional Police Service 
(NAPS). He performs computer forensic examinations on computers involved in 
criminal investigation. He also has consulted and assisted in cases dealing with 
computer-related/Internet crimes. In addition to designing and maintaining the 
NAPS Web site at www.nrps.com and the NAPS intranet, he has provided sup- 
port in tile areas of programming, hardware, and network administration. As part of 
an information technology team that provides support to a user base of more than 
800 civilian and uniform users, he has a theory that when the users carry guns, 
you tend to be more motivated in solving their problems. 
Michael also owns KnightWare (www.knightware.ca), which provides com- 
puter-related services such as Web page design, and Bookworms (www.book- 
worms.ca), where you can purchase collectibles and other interesting items online. 
He has been a freelance writer for several years, and he has been published more 
than three dozen times in numerous books and anthologies. He currently resides 
in St. Catharines, Ontario, Canada, with his lovely wife, Jennifer, his darling 
daughter, Sara, and charming son, Jason. 
Jeremy Faircloth (Security+, CCNA, MCSE, MCP+I,A+, etc.) is an IT 
Manager for EchoStar Satellite L.L.C., where he and his team architect and main- 
tain enterprisewide client/server and Web-based technologies. He also acts as a 
technical resource for other IT professionals, using his expertise to help others 
expand their knowledge. As a systems engineer with over 13 years of real-world IT 
experience, he has become an expert in many areas, including Web development, 
database administration, enterprise security, network design, and project manage- 
ment. Jeremy has contributed to several Syngress books, including Micros@ Log 
Parser Toolkit (Syngress, ISBN: 1932266526), Managing and Securin 2 a Cisco SWAN 
(ISBN: 1932266917), C# forlat, a Programmers (ISBN: 193183654X), Snort 2.0 
Intrusiou Detection (ISBN: 1931836744), and Security+ Study Guide & DVD Training 
System (ISBN: 1931836728). 
Eli Faskha (Security+, Check Point Certified Master Architect, CCSI, CCSE, 
CCSE+, MCP). Based in Panama City, Panama, Eli is Founder and President of 
Soluciones Seguras, a company that specializes in network security and is a Check 
iii 

Point Gold Partner and Nokia Authorized Partner. He was Assistant Technical 
Editor for Syngress' Configuring Check Point NGX VPN- 1/Firewall- 1 (ISBN: 
1597490318) book and Contributing Author for Syngress' Building DMZsfor the 
Enterprise (ISBN: 1597491004). Eli is the most experienced Check Point Certified 
Security Instructor and Nokia Instructor in the region, and has taught participants 
from over twenty different countries, in both English and Spanish. A 1993 grad- 
uate of the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School and Moore School of 
Engineering, he also received an MBA from Georgetown University in 1995. He 
has more than 8 years of Internet development and networking experience, 
starting with web development of the largest Internet portal in Panama in 1999 
and 2000, managing a Verisign affiliate in 2001, and running his own company 
since then. Eli has written several articles for the local media and has been recog- 
nized for his contributions to Internet development in Panama. He can be reached 
at eli@solucionesseguras, com. 
Michael Gregg (CISSR CISA, MCSE, MCT, CTT+,A+, N+, Security+, CNA, 
CCNA, CIW Security Analyst, CCE, CEH, CHFI, DCNR ES Dragon IDS, 
TICSA) is the founder and Chief Operating Officer of Superior Solutions, Inc., a 
Houston-based IT security consulting firm. Superior Solutions performs security 
assessments and penetration testing for Fortune 1000 firms. Michael is responsible 
for working with organizations to develop cost effective and innovative technology 
solutions to security issues and for evaluating emerging technologies. Michael 
supervises client engagements to ensure high quality solutions are developed for 
software design issues, systems administration concerns, policy development, and 
security systems testing. 
Michael has more than 20 years experience in the IT field and holds two asso- 
ciate's degrees, a bachelor's degree, and a master's degree. He has written or co- 
written a number of other books including Que's Certified Ethical Hacker Exam 
Prep 2 and Inside Network Security Assessment by Sam's publishing. He is the author 
of Hack the Stack: Using Snort and Ethereal to Master the 8 Layers of an Insecure 
Network (Syngress, ISBN: 1597491098). He is a member of the American College 
of Forensic Examiners, the Independent Computer Consulting Association, and 
the Texas Association for Educational Technology. 
iv 
Alun Jones (MVR MCP) is the President of Texas Imperial Software. Texas 
Imperial Software develops secure networking software and provides security engi- 
neering consulting services. Texas Imperial Software's flagship product is WFTPD 
Pro, a secure FTP server for Windows, written entirely by Mun. 

Alun entered the security engineering field as more and more of WFTPD's 
support needs indicated that few companies were trying to meet their needs for 
security on the Internet. His current day job is as an Information Systems Security 
Engineer at Premera Blue Cross, a health insurance provider based in the Pacific 
Northwest of the USA. 
Alun has attended, but not completed, University at Corpus Christi College, 
Cambridge, and Bath University, and now lives in Seattle, Washington, with his 
wife, Debbie, and son, Colin. 
Marc Perez (MCSE: Security, Security+) is a senior consultant of Networked 
Information Systems in Boston, MA. Representing Network Information Systems' 
Microsoft practice, he provides strategic and technical consulting services to mid- 
size and enterprise-level clients located throughout the Northeast. Focusing on 
securely integrating directory services with messaging and collaboration solutions, 
he provides the guidance necessary for enterprises to leverage their technology 
investments toward more effective communication with an emphasis on presence. 
Educated at the University of Southern Maine, Marc has consulted privately 
for several organizations in the Boston area and has held roles throughout New 
England, including four years as an Information Security Manager for MBNA 
America Bank. He currently lives on the North Shore with his wife, Sandra, and 
his two sons, Aidan and Lucas. 
ldo Dubrawsky (CISSE CCNA, CCDA) is the Chief Security Advisor for 
Microsoft's Communication Sector North America, a division of the Mobile and 
Embedded Devices Group. Prior to working at Microsoft, Ido was the acting 
Security Consulting Practice Lead at AT&T's Callisma subsidiary and a Senior 
Security Consultant. Before joining AT&T, Ido was a Network Security Architect 
for Cisco Systems, Inc., SAFE Architecture Team. He has worked in the systems 
and network administration field for almost 20 years in a variety of environments 

Alun entered the security engineering field as more and more of WFTPD's 
support needs indicated that few companies were trying to meet their needs for 
security on the Internet. His current day job is as an Information Systems Security 
Engineer at Premera Blue Cross, a health insurance provider based in the Pacific 
Northwest of the USA. 
Alun has attended, but not completed, University at Corpus Christi College, 
Cambridge, and Bath University, and now lives in Seattle, Washington, with his 
wife, Debbie, and son, Colin. 
Marc Perez (MCSE: Security, Security+) is a senior consultant of Networked 
Information Systems in Boston, MA. Representing Network Information Systems' 
Microsoft practice, he provides strategic and technical consulting services to mid- 
size and enterprise-level clients located throughout the Northeast. Focusing on 
securely integrating directory services with messaging and collaboration solutions, 
he provides the guidance necessary for enterprises to leverage their technology 
investments toward more effective communication with an emphasis on presence. 
Educated at the University of Southern Maine, Marc has consulted privately 
for several organizations in the Boston area and has held roles throughout New 
England, including four years as an Information Security Manager for MBNA 
America Bank. He currently lives on the North Shore with his wife, Sandra, and 
his two sons, Aidan and Lucas. 
ldo Dubrawsky (CISSE CCNA, CCDA) is the Chief Security Advisor for 
Microsoft's Communication Sector North America, a division of the Mobile and 
Embedded Devices Group. Prior to working at Microsoft, Ido was the acting 
Security Consulting Practice Lead at AT&T's Callisma subsidiary and a Senior 
Security Consultant. Before joining AT&T, Ido was a Network Security Architect 
for Cisco Systems, Inc., SAFE Architecture Team. He has worked in the systems 
and network administration field for almost 20 years in a variety of environments 

from government to academia to private enterprise. He has a wide range of expe- 
rience in various networks, from small to large and relatively simple to complex. 
Ido is the primary author of three major SAFE white papers and has written, and 
spoken, extensively on security topics. He is a regular contributor to the 
SecurityFocus website on a variety of topics covering security issues. Previously, he 
worked in Cisco Systems, Inc. Secure Consulting Group, providing network secu- 
rity posture assessments and consulting services for a wide range of clients. In addi- 
tion to providing penetration-testing consultation, he also conducted security 
architecture reviews and policy and process reviews. He holds a B.Sc. and a M.Sc. 
in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Texas at Austin. 
Christopher A. Crayton (MCSE, MCP+I,A+, Network+), is a Certified 
A+ /Network+ Instructor, recognized as "Teacher of the Year" by Keiser College in 
2000. He resides in Sarasota, Florida, where he serves as Network Administrator 
for Protocol, an ECRM company. 
vi 

from government to academia to private enterprise. He has a wide range of expe- 
rience in various networks, from small to large and relatively simple to complex. 
Ido is the primary author of three major SAFE white papers and has written, and 
spoken, extensively on security topics. He is a regular contributor to the 
SecurityFocus website on a variety of topics covering security issues. Previously, he 
worked in Cisco Systems, Inc. Secure Consulting Group, providing network secu- 
rity posture assessments and consulting services for a wide range of clients. In addi- 
tion to providing penetration-testing consultation, he also conducted security 
architecture reviews and policy and process reviews. He holds a B.Sc. and a M.Sc. 
in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Texas at Austin. 
Christopher A. Crayton (MCSE, MCP+I,A+, Network+), is a Certified 
A+ /Network+ Instructor, recognized as "Teacher of the Year" by Keiser College in 
2000. He resides in Sarasota, Florida, where he serves as Network Administrator 
for Protocol, an ECRM company. 
vi 

Foreword 
This book's primary goal is to help you prepare to take and pass CompTIA's Security+ exam. Our sec- 
ondary purpose in writing this book is to provide exam candidates like you with knowledge and skills that 
go beyond the minimum requirements for passing the exam, and help to prepare you to work in the real 
world of computer and network security. 
What Is CompTIA Security+? 
Computer and network security is the hottest subspecialty in the IT field today, and a number of product 
vendors and vendor-neutral organizations offer certification exams to allow IT professionals to test their 
knowledge and skills in basic security practices and standards. The Computing Technology Industry 
Association (CompTIA) has positioned itself for the last two decades as a leading trade association devoted 
to promoting standards and providing IT education. One of CompTIA's primary roles has been develop- 
ment of vendor-neutral certification exams to evaluate the skill sets of current and aspiring IT profes- 
sionals. 
CompTIA's certifications are well regarded within the IT community, particularly as validation of 
basic credentials that can be used by employers in screening candidates for entry-level positions. Microsoft, 
Cisco, Novell, and other vendors allow the use of CompTIA certifications in some of their own certifica- 
tion programs as electives or substitution for one of their exams. For example, the CompTIA A+ and 
Network+ certifications can be applied toward Microsoft's MCSA certification. 
One advantage of the CompTIA exams that make them especially popular is the fact that unlike most 
vendor-specific exams, they are considered to be lifetime certifications that do not expire; once you've 
obtained a CompTIA certification, you never have to renew it. 
Path to Security+ 
Only one exam is required to obtain the certification; however, it is a relatively comprehensive exam that 
covers a wide range of security concepts, including: 
9 
General security concepts 
9 
Communications security 
9 
Infrastructure security 
9 
Basics of cryptography 
9 
Operational/organizational security 
XV 

xvi 
Foreword 
Prerequisites and Preparation 
In comparison to other security certifications, such as the CISSP and SANS GIAC, the Security+ is an 
entry-level certification, and there are no prerequisites (prior exams or certifications) required to take the 
exam. However, CompTIA specifies that the target audience for the exam consists of professionals with 
two years of networking experience. We recommend that test-takers have a good grasp of basic computer 
networking concepts, as mastering many of the topics--especially in the domains of communications and 
infrastructure securitymrequires a basic understanding of network topology, protocols, and services. 
Passing the A+ and Network+ exams prior to pursuing the Security+ certification, although not 
required, provides an excellent foundation for a better understanding when studying security topics and is 
recommended by CompTIA. Because this is a vendor-neutral exam, it also helps to have some exposure to 
the computer operating systems most commonly used in a business environment: Windows and 
Linux/UNIX. 
Hands-on experience in working with the security devices and software covered in the exam (for 
example, firewalls, certificate services, virtual private networks [VPNs], wireless access, and so forth) is 
invaluable, although it is possible to pass the exam without direct hands-on experience. The Exercises in 
each chapter are designed to walk readers through the practical steps involved in implementing the secu- 
rity measures discussed in the text. 
Exam Overview 
The structure of this book is designed to closely follow the exam objectives. It is organized to make it easy 
to review exam topics according to the objective domain in which they fall. Under each learning domain, 
we go into detail to provide a good overview of the concepts contained in each subsection of the 
CompTIA objectives. Following is a brief overview of the specific topics covered: 
9 
General Security Concepts: Introduction This section introduces the "AAA" triad of 
security concepts: access control, authentication, and auditing. Readers are also introduced to 
the terminology used in the computer security field, and learn about the primary purposes of 
computer/network security: providing confidentiality of data, preserving integrity of data, and 
ensuring availability of data to authorized users. 
9 
General Security Concepts: Access Control This section focuses on ways that network 
security specialists can control access to network resources, and discusses three important types 
of access control: Mandatory Access Control (MAC), Discretionary Access Control (DAC), and 
Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). 
9 
General Security Concepts: Authentication This section covers the many available 
methods for authenticating users and computers on a network (that is, validating the identity of 
a user or computer before establishing a communication session). Industry standard protocols are 
covered, including Kerberos (used by both UNIX and newer Windows operating systems for 
authenticating users requesting access to resources), and the Challenge Handshake 
Authentication Protocol, or CHAR used for authenticating remote access users. Use of digital 
certificates, tokens, and user/password authentication is discussed. Multifactor authentication 
(use of more than one authentication method for added security), mutual authentication (two- 
way authentication between client and server), and biometric authentication (use of physiolog- 
ical characteristics to validate identity) are all thoroughly covered. 
9 
General Security Concepts: Nonessential services and protocols This section discusses 
those services and protocols that are often installed by default on network computers, which 
can be disabled for added security when not specifically needed. 

Foreword 
xvii 
General Security Concepts: Attacks This section introduces readers to some of the more 
commonly used exploits used by hackers to attack or intrude upon systems, including Denial of 
Service (DOS), backdoor attacks, spoofing, man-in-the-middle attacks, replay, TCP/IP hijacking, 
weak key and mathematical exploits, password-cracking methods, and software exploits. The 
reader will not only learn the technical details of how these attacks work but also become aware 
of how to prevent, detect, and respond to such attacks. 
General Security Concepts: Malicious Code This section deals with computer viruses, 
Trojan horse programs, logic bombs, worms, and other destructive "malware" that can be intro- 
duced-either deliberately or accidentally--into a system, usually via the network. 
General Security Concepts: Social Engineering This section examines the phenomenon 
of using social skills (playacting, charisma, persuasive ability) to obtain information (such as pass- 
words and account names) needed to gain unauthorized access to a system or network. Readers 
will learn how these "human exploits" work and how to guard against them. 
General Security Concepts: Auditing This section covers the ways that security profes- 
sionals can use logs and system scanning tools to gather information that will help detect 
attempted intrusions and attacks, and to detect security holes that can be plugged before out- 
siders have a chance to find and exploit them. 
Communications Security: Remote Access This section deals with securing connections 
that come via phone lines, dedicated leased lines, wireless technology, and the Internet. The reader 
will learn about the 8(i)2.1 x standards that govern implementation of wireless networking and the 
use of VPNs to create a secure "tunnel" from one site to another through the Internet. Popular 
remote authentication methods, such as Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) 
and Terminal Access Controller Access System (TACACS+) will be discussed, and readers will 
learn about tunneling protocols such as Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) and Layer 2 
Tunneling Protocol (L2TP), as well as Secure Shell (SSH). Readers will also learn about Internet 
Protocol Security (IPSec), which can be used either as a tunneling protocol or for encryption of 
data as it moves across the network (IPSec will be a standard part of the next generation of IP, 
IPv6). Vulnerabilities related to all these technologies will be covered, as well. 
Communication Security: E-mail This section will discuss how e-mail can be secured, 
including both client-side and server-side technologies. Use of Secure Multipurpose Internet 
Mail Extensions (MIME) and Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) will be discussed, as will spare 
(unwanted e-mail advertising) and e-mail hoaxes. 
Communications Security: Web This section discusses World Wide Web-based vulnerabili- 
ties and how Web transactions can be secured using Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer 
Security (SSL/TLS) and Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP/S). The reader will get a 
good background in how the Web works, including naming conventions and name resolution. 
Modern Web technologies that present security or privacy vulnerabilities will also be covered, 
including JavaScript, ActiveX, buffer overflows, cookies, signed applets, CGI script, and others. 
Communications Security: Directory This section will introduce the reader to the con- 
cept of directory services and will discuss the X.500 and Lightweight Directory Access Protocol 
(LDAP) standards upon which many vendors' directory services (including Novell's NDS and 
Microsoft's Active Directory) are built. 
Communications Security: File Transfer This section discusses the File Transfer Protocol 
(FTP), how files are shared and the vulnerabilities that are exposed through file sharing, the 
dangers of blind/anonymous FTP, and how protections can be implemented using Secure FTE 
www.syngress.com 

xviii 
Foreword 
This section also addresses packet sniffing, the capture and examination of individual communi- 
cations packets using protocol analyzer tools. 
9 
Communications Security: Wireless This section goes into detail about various protocols 
used in wireless communication and security, including the Wireless Transport Layer Security 
(WTLS) protocol and the Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) protocol. We also discuss the 
Wireless Application Protocol (WAP), which is used for communications by wireless mobile 
devices such as mobile phones, and the 802.1x standards for port-based authentication. 
9 
Infrastructure Security: Devices This section provides an overview of the plethora of hard- 
ware devices that are involved in implementing network security, including firewalls, touters, 
switches, wireless access points, modems, Remote Access Services (RAS) servers, telecom/PBX 
equipment, hardware-based VPNs, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSes), network monitoring 
and diagnostic equipment, workstations, servers, and mobile communications devices. The role 
each plays in network security will be examined. 
9 
Infrastructure Security: Media This section reviews the types of physical media over which 
network communications can take place, including coaxial cable, unshielded and shielded 
twisted pair (UTP/STP), and fiber optic cabling. We also look at removable media on which 
computer data can be stored, including tape, recordable CD/DVD, hard disks, floppy diskettes, 
flash media (Compact Flash, SD cards, MMC, SmartMedia, and memory sticks), and smart cards 
(credit card sized devices that contain a tiny "computer on a chip" and are capable of both 
storing and processing information. 
9 
Infrastructure Security: Security Topologies This section explores the ways in which 
topological structure can impact security issues on a network, and it examines the concept of 
security zones and how the network can be divided into areas (including the DMZ, intranet, 
and extranet) for application of differing security levels. We also take a look at how virtual 
LANs (VLANs) can be used in a security context, and the advantages of Network Address 
Translation (NAT) and tunneling in creating an overall security plan. 
9 
Infrastructure Security: Intrusion Detection This section deals with IDS devices, both 
network-based and host-based. Readers will learn the differences between active and passive 
detection and where each fits into the security plan. We also discuss the role of honeypots and 
honeynets in distracting, detecting, and identifying attackers, and we provide information on 
incident response in relation to network intrusions and attacks. 
9 
Infrastructure Security: Security Baselines This section takes a three-pronged approach to 
overall system hardening. We discuss how to harden (secure) computer/network operating sys- 
tems, including the file system. The importance of applying hot fixes, service packs, patches, and 
other security updates is emphasized. Next, we discuss hardening of the network, with a focus 
on the importance of configuration/settings and use of access control lists (ACLs). Finally, we 
discuss application hardening, with specifics on how to secure Web servers, e-mail servers, FTP 
servers, DNS servers, Network News Transport Protocol (NNTP) servers, file and print servers, 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) servers, and data repositories (including direc- 
tory services and databases). 
9 
Basics of Cryptography This section introduces the concepts upon which encryption tech- 
nologies are based, including symmetric and asymmetric algorithms and hashing algorithms. 
Readers will learn how encryption can provide confidentiality, integrity, authentication, and 
nonrepudiation. The use of digital signatures is discussed. We show readers how cryptographic 
algorithms and digital certificates are used to create a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) for vali- 

Foreword 
xix 
dating identity through a trusted third party (certification server). Key management, certificate 
issuance, expiration and revocation, and other elements of a PKI are discussed. 
Operational/Organizational Security This section deals with the important topic of phys- 
ical security and the environmental factors that affect security. We also cover disaster recovery 
plans, encompassing backup policies, off-site storage, secure recovery, and business continuity. 
Security policies and procedures are covered in detail, with a focus on acceptable use policies, 
due care, privacy issues, separation of duties, need to know, password management, service level 
agreements (SLAs), disposal/destruction policies, human resources policies, and incident 
response policies. Privilege management, computer forensics awareness (including chain of cus- 
tody and collection/preservation of evidence), risk identification, education and training of 
users, executives and HR personnel, and documentation standards and guidelines are also 
important components of this learning domain. 
Test-Ta kin g Ti p s 
Different people work best using different methods. However, there are some common methods of prepa- 
ration and approach to the exam that are helpful to many test-takers. In this section, we provide some tips 
that other exam candidates have found useful in preparing for and actually taking the exam. 
9 
Exam preparation begins before exam day. Ensure that you know the concepts and terms well 
and feel confident about each of the exam objectives. Many test-takers find it helpful to make 
flash cards or review notes to study on the way to the testing center. A sheet listing acronyms 
and abbreviations can be helpful, as the number of acronyms (and the similarity of different 
acronyms) when studying IT topics can be overwhelming. The process of writing the material 
down, rather than just reading it, will help to reinforce your knowledge. 
9 
Many test-takers find it especially helpful to take practice exams that are available on the 
Internet and within books such as this one. Taking the practice exams not only gets you used to 
the computerized exam-taking experience but also can be used as a learning tool. The best 
practice tests include detailed explanations of why the correct answer is correct and why the 
incorrect answers are wrong. 
9 
When preparing and studying, you should try to identify the main points of each objective sec- 
tion. Set aside enough time to focus on the material and lodge it into your memory. On the 
day of the exam, you should be at the point where you don't have to learn any new facts or 
concepts, but need simply to review the information already learned. 
9 
The Exam Vffarnin~ sidebars in this book highlight concepts that are likely to be tested.You may 
find it useful to go through and copy these into a notebook as you read the book (remem- 
bering that writing something down reinforces your ability to remember it) and then review 
them just prior to taking the exam. 
9 
The value of hands-on experience cannot be stressed enough. Although the Security+ exam 
questions tend to be generic (not vendor specific), they are based on test-writers' experiences in 
the field, using various product lines. Thus, there might be questions that deal with the products 
of particular hardware vendors, such as Cisco Systems, or particular operating systems, such as 
Windows or UNIX. Working with these products on a regular basis, whether in your.job envi- 
ronment or in a test network that you've set up at home, will make you much more comfort- 
able with these questions. 
www.syngress.com 

xx 
Foreword 
Know your own learning style and use study methods that take advantage of it. If you're primarily 
a visual learner, reading, making diagrams, or watching video files on CD may be your best study 
methods. If you're primarily auditory, listening to classroom lectures, playing audiotapes in the car 
as you drive, and repeating key concepts to yourself aloud may be more effective. If you're a kines- 
thetic learner, you'll need to actually do the exercises, implement the security measures on your 
own systems, and otherwise perform hands-on tasks to best absorb the information. Most of us 
can learn from all of these methods, but have a primary s@e that works best for us. 
Use as many little mnemonic tricks as possible to help you remember facts and concepts. For 
example, to remember which of the two IPSec protocols (AH and ESP) encrypts data for confi- 
dentiality, you can associate the "E" in encryption with the "E" in ESP. 
Although it may seem obvious, many exam-takers ignore the physical aspects of exam prepara- 
tion.You are likely to score better if you've had sufficient sleep the night before the exam, and if 
you are not hungry, thirsty, hot/cold, or otherwise distracted by physical discomfort. Eat prior to 
going to the testing center (but don't indulge in a huge meal that will leave you uncomfort- 
able), stay away from alcohol for 24 hours prior to the test, and dress appropriately for the tem- 
perature in the testing center (if you don't know how hot or cold the testing environment tends 
to be, you may want to wear light clothes with a sweater or jacket that can be taken off). 
Before you go to the testing center to take the exam, be sure to allow time to arrive on time, take 
care of any physical needs, and step back to take a deep breath and relax. Try to arrive slightly 
early, but not so far in advance that you spend a lot of time worrying and getting nervous about 
the testing process.You may want to do a quick last-minute review of notes, but don't try to 
"cram" everything the morning of the exam. Many test-takers find it helpful to take a short walk 
or do a few calisthenics shortly before the exam, as this gets oxygen flowing to the brain. 
Before beginning to answer questions, use the pencil and paper provided to you to write down 
terms, concepts, and other items that you think you may have difficulty remembering as the 
exam goes on. For example, you might note the differences between MAC, DAC, and P,.BAC. 
Then you can refer back to these notes as you progress through the test.You won't have to 
worry about forgetting the concepts and terms you have trouble with later in the exam. 
Sometimes the information in a question will remind you of another concept or term that you 
might need in a later question. Use your pen and paper to make note of this in case it comes 
up later on the exam. 
9 
It is often easier to discern the answer to scenario questions if you can visualize the situation. 
Use your pen and paper to draw a diagram of the network that is described to help you see the 
relationships between devices, IP addressing schemes, and so forth. This is especially helpful in 
questions dealing with how to set up DMZs and firewalls. 
9 
When appropriate, review the answers you weren't sure of. However, you should only change 
your answer if you're sure that your original answer was incorrect. Experience has shown that 
more often than not, when test-takers start second-guessing their answers, they end up changing 
correct answers to the incorrect. Don't "read into" the question (that is, don't fill in or assume 
information that isn't there); this is a frequent cause of incorrect responses. 

Foreword 
xxi 
About the Security+ 
Study Guide and DVD Training System 
In this book, you'll find many interesting sidebars designed to highlight the most important concepts 
being presented in the main text. These include the following: 
9 
Exam Warnings focus on specific elements on which the reader needs to focus in order to 
pass the exam (for example, "Be sure you know the difference between symmetric and asymmetric 
encryption"). 
9 
Test Day Tips are short tips that will help you in organizing and remembering information for 
the exam (for example, "When preparing for the exam on test day, it may be helpful to have a 
sheet with definitions of abbreviations and acronyms handy for a quick last-minute review"). 
[] 
Notes from the Underground contain background information that goes beyond what you 
need to know from the exam, providing a deep foundation for understanding the security con- 
cepts discussed in the text. 
9 
Damage and Defense relate real-world experiences to security exploits while outlining 
defensive strategies. 
9 
Head of the Class discussions are based on the author's interactions with students in live 
classrooms, and the topics covered here are the ones students have the most problems with. 
Each chapter also includes hands-on exercises in planning and configuring the security measures dis- 
cussed. It is important that you work through these exercises in order to be confident you know how to 
apply the concepts you have just read about. 
You will find a number of helpful elements at the end of each chapter. For example, each chapter con- 
tains a Summary of Exam Objectives that ties the topics discussed in that chapter to the specific objectives pub- 
lished by CompTIA. Each chapter also contains an Exam Objectives Fast Track, which boils all exam objectives 
down to manageable summaries that are perfect for last-minute review. The Exam Objectives Frequently Asked 
Questions answer those questions that most often arise from readers and students regarding the topics covered 
in the chapter. Finally, in the Se!fTest section, you will find a set of practice questions written in a multiple- 
choice form similar to those you will encounter on the exam.You can use the Self Test Quick Answer Key that 
follows the Self Test questions to quickly determine what information you need to review again. The Se!fTest 
Appendix at the end of the book provides detailed explanations of both the correct and incorrect answers. 
Additional Resources 
There are two other important exam preparation tools included with this Study Guide. One is the DVD 
included in the back of this book. The other is the practice exam available from our Web site. 
9 
Training DVD-ROM. A complete Adobe PDF format version of the print Study Guide. A 
Practice Exam contain 60 questions, with detail answer explanations. Fast Tracks for quick topic 
review, provided in both HTML and PowerPoint format. 
9 
Web-based practice exams. Just visit us at www.syngress.com/certification to access a 
complete Security + Exam Simulation.These exams are written to test you on all of 
CompTIA's published certification objectives. The exam simulator runs in both "live" and 
"practice" mode. Use "live" mode first to get an accurate gauge of your knowledge and skills, 
and then use practice mode to launch an extensive review of the questions that gave you 
trouble. 
www.syngress.com 

Chapter 1 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
9 
Introduction to AAA 
9 
Access Control 
9 
Authentication 
Disabling Non-essential Services, Protocols, 
Systems, and Processes 
Exam Objectives Review- 
I-Vl Summary of Exam Objectives 
I-Vl Exam Objectives Fast Track 
l-Vl 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
I-Vl Self Test 
I-Vl Self Test Quick Answer Key 

Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Introduction 
Security+ is a security fundamentals and concepts exam. No security concepts 
exam would be complete without questions on Access Control, Authentication, and 
Auditing (AAA). AAA comprises the most basic fundamentals of work in the 
Information Technology (IT) security field, and is critical to understand for any IT 
security practitioner. In this chapter, you will study CompTIA's test objectives for 
Section 1,"General Security Concepts."You will be introduced to AAA and its 
finer details, as well as the concepts and terminology that will be explored and 
developed in later chapters. We end this chapter with a discussion on removing 
non-essential services to secure any platform you may be working on. 
It is important to remember that the Security+ exam is based on general 
IT security best practices, and requires an understanding of a wide range 
of IT security concepts. This means that most of the information that 
you need to pass the exam can be gained through research of the var- 
ious Requests for Comments (RFCs) published by the Internet 
Engineering Steering Group (IESG). While this book contains the infor- 
mation necessary to pass the exam, if you need more details on any spe- 
cific subject, the RFCs are a great resource. All of the RFCs can be found 
at the IESG RFC page located at http://tools.ietf.org/rfc/or searched for 
using the search engine located at www.rfc.net. 
Introduction to AAA 
AAA are a set of primary concepts that aid in understanding computer and net- 
work security as well as access control. These concepts are used daily to protect 
property, data, and systems from intentional or even unintentional damage. AAA is 
used to support the Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability (CIA) security con- 
cept, in addition to providing the framework for access to networks and equipment 
using Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) and Terminal 
Access Controller Access Control System (TACACS/TACACS+) . 
A more detailed description of AAA is discussed in RFC 3127, which can be 
found at http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3127.This RFC contains an evaluation of 
various existing protocols against the AAA requirements, and can help you under- 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
5 
stand the specific details of these protocols. The AAA requirements themselves can 
be found in P, FC 2989 located at http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2989. 
What is AAA? 
AAA is a group of processes used to protect the data, equipment, and confiden- 
tiality of property and information. As mentioned earlier, one of the goals of AAA 
is to provide Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability (CIA). CIA can be briefly 
described as follows: 
9 
Confidentiality The contents or data are not revealed 
9 Integrity The contents or data are intact and have not been modified 
9 Availability The contents or data are accessible if allowed 
AAA consists of three separate areas that work together. These areas provide a 
level of basic security in controlling access to resources and equipment in networks. 
This control allows users to provide services that assist in the CIA process for fur- 
ther protection of systems and assets. Let's start with basic descriptions of the three 
areas, and then break each down to explore their uses and the security they pro- 
vide. Finally, we will work with examples of each AAA component. 
www.syngress.com 

6 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Access Control 
Access control can be defined as a policy, software component, or hardware compo- 
nent that is used to grant or deny access to a resource. This can be an advanced 
component such as a Smart Card, a biometric device, or network access hardware 
such as routers, remote access points such as Remote Access Service (RAS), and 
virtual private networks (VPNs), or the use of wireless access points (WAPs). It can 
also be file or shared resource permissions assigned through the use of a network 
operating system (NOS) such as Microsoft Windows using New Technology File 
System (NTFS) in conjunction with Active Directory, Novell NetWare in conjunc- 
tion with Novell Directory Services (NDS) or eDirectory, and UNIX systems 
using Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), Kerberos, or Sun 
Microsystem's Network Information System (NIS) and Network Information 
System Plus (NIS+). Finally, it can be a rule set that defines the operation of a soft- 
ware component limiting entrance to a system or network.We will explore a 
number of alternatives and possibilities for controlling access. 
Authentication 
Authentication can be defined as the process used to verify that a machine or user 
attempting access to the networks or resources is, in fact, the entity being pre- 
sented.We will examine a process that proves user identity to a remote resource 
host.We will also review a method of tracking and ensuring non-repudiation of 
authentication (see Chapter 9). For this chapter, non-repudiation is the method used 
(time stamps, particular protocols, or authentication methods) to ensure that the 
presenter of the authentication request cannot later deny they were the originator 
of the request. In the following sections, authentication methods include presenta- 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
7 
tion of credentials (such as a username and password, Smart Card, or personal iden- 
tification number [PIN]) to a NOS (logging on to a machine or network), remote 
access authentication, and a discussion of certificate services and digital certificates. 
The authentication process uses the information presented to the NOS (such as 
username and password) to allow the NOS to verify the identity based on those 
credentials. 
Auditing 
Auditing, is the process of tracking and reviewing events, errors, access, and authenti- 
cation attempts on a system. Much like an accountant's procedure for keeping track 
of the flow of funds, you need to be able to follow a trail of access attempts, access 
grants or denials, machine problems or errors, and other events that are important 
to the systems being monitored and controlled. In the case of security auditing, you 
will learn about the policies and procedures that allow administrators to track 
access (authorized or unauthorized) to the network, local machine, or resources. 
Auditing is not enabled by default in many NOSes, and administrators must often 
specify the events or objects to be tracked. This becomes one of the basic lines of 
defense in the security and monitoring of network systems. Tracking is used along 
with regular reading and analysis of the log files generated by the auditing process 
to better understand if the access controls are working. 
Access Control 
As we further develop the concepts of AAA, we need to explore the subcompo- 
nents of the three parts. In the case of access control, we must further explore 
methods and groupings that apply to the area.We will look at new terminology 
and then explore, through examples, what the subcomponents control and how 
they are used to secure networks and equipment. 
One of the most important things to learn for the Security+ exam is the 
terminology used in the IT security industry. Throughout this chapter and 
others, you will be presented with a large number of terms and acronyms 
that may or may not be familiar to you. These are all industry-recognized 
terms and form the unique language used by IT security professionals. 
Knowing and understanding the terms and acronyms used in this book 
will help you to understand the questions presented on the exam. 
www.syngress.com 

Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
MAC/DAC/RBAC 
In discussing access control, Mandatory Access Control (MAC), Discretionary 
Access Control (DAC), and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) are individual 
areas that take on a new meaning. 
9 
MAC, in this context, is not a network interface card (NIC) hardware 
address, but rather a concept called Mandatory Access Control. 
9 
DAC is short for Discretionary Access Control, which is often referred to 
as the use of discretionary access control lists (DACLs). 
9 
RBAC should not be confused with rule-based access control, but is 
instead an access control method based on the use of the specific roles 
played by individuals or systems. 
All three methods have varying uses when trying to define or limit access to 
resources, devices, or networks. The following sections explore and illustrate each of 
the three access control methods. 
MAC 
MAC is generally built into and implemented within the operating system being 
used, although it may also be designed into applications. MAC components are 
present in UNIX, Linux, Microsoft's Windows operating systems, OpenBSD, and 
others. Mandatory controls are usually hard-coded and set on each object or 
resource individually. MAC can be applied to any object within an operating 
system, and allows a high level of granularity and function in the granting or 
dewing of access to the objects. MAC can be applied to each object, and can con- 
trol access by processes, applications, and users to the object. It cannot be modified 
by the owner or creator of the object. 
The following example illustrates the level of control possible.When using 
MAC, if a file has a certain level of sensitivity (or context) set, the system will not 
allow certain users, programs, or administrators to perform operations on that file. 
Think of setting the file's sensitivity higher than that of an e-mail program.You can 
read, write, and copy the file as desired, but without an access level of root, supe- 
ruser, or administrator, you cannot e-mail the file to another system, because the e- 
mail program lacks clearance to manipulate the file's level of access control. For 
example, this level of control is useful in the prevention of Trojan horse attacks, 
since you can set the access levels appropriately to each system process, thus 
severely limiting the ability of the Trojan horse to operate. The Trojan horse would 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
9 
have to have intimate knowledge of each of the levels of access defined on the 
system to compromise it or make the Trojan horse viable within it. 
To review briefly, MAC is: 
9 Non-discretionary The control settings are hard-coded and not modifi- 
able by the user or owner 
9 
Multilevel Control of access privileges is definable at multiple access 
levels 
9 Label-based May be used to control access to objects in a database 
9 Universally Applied Applied to all objects 
DAC 
DAC is the setting of access permissions on an object that a user or application has 
created or has control of. This includes setting permissions on files, folders, and 
shared resources. The "owner" of the object in most operating system (OS) envi- 
ronments applies discretionary access controls. This ownership may be transferred 
or controlled by root or other superuser/administrator accounts. It is important to 
understand that DAC is assigned or controlled by the owner, rather than being hard 
coded into the system. DAC does not allow the fine level of control available with 
MAC, but requires less coding and administration of individual files and resources. 
To summarize, DAC is: 
Discretionary Not hard-coded and not automatically applied by the 
OS/NOS or application 
Controllable 
types) 
Controlled by the owner of the object (file, folder, or other 
Transferable The owner may give control away 
RBAC 
1KBAC can be described in different ways. The most familiar process is a compar- 
ison or illustration utilizing the "groups" concept. In Windows, UNIX/Linux, and 
NetWare systems, the concept of groups is used to simplify the administration of 
access control permissions and settings.When creating the appropriate groupings, 
you have the ability to centralize the function of setting the access levels for various 
resources within the system.We have been taught that this is the way to simplify 
the general administration of resources within networks and local machines. 
www.syngress.com 

10 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
However, although the concept of RBAC is similar, it is not the exact same 
structure.With the use of groups, a general level of access based on a user or 
machine object grouping is created for the convenience of the administrator. 
However, when the group model is used, it does not allow for the true level of 
access that should be defined, and the entire membership of the group gets the 
same access. This can lead to unnecessary access being granted to some members of 
the group. 
RBAC allows for a more granular and defined access level, without the gener- 
ality that exists within the group environment. A role definition is developed and 
defined for each job in an organization, and access controls are based on that role. 
This allows for centralization of the access control function, with individuals or 
processes being classified into a role that is then allowed access to the network and 
to defined resources. This type of access control requires more development and 
cost, but is superior to MAC in that it is flexible and able to be redefined more 
easily. RBAC can also be used to grant or deny access to a particular router or to 
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) or Telnet. 
RBAC is easier to understand using an example. Assume that there is a user at a 
company whose role within the company requires access to specific shared 
resources on the network. Using groups, the user would be added to. an existing 
group which has access to the resource and access would be granted. RBAC on the 
other hand would have you define the role of the user and then allow that specific 
role access to whatever resources are required. If the user gets a promotion and 
changes roles, changing their security permissions is as simple as assigning them to 
their new role. If they leave the company and are replaced, assigning the appro- 
priate role to the new employee grants them access to exactly what they need to 
do their job without trying to determine all of the appropriate groups that would 
be necessary without RBAC. 
In summary, RBAC is: 
9 Job Based The role is based on the functions performed by the user 
9 
Highly Configurable 
Roles can be created and assigned as needed or as 
job functions change 
9 
More Flexible Than MAC MAC is based off of very specific informa- 
tion, whereas RBAC is based off of a user's role in the company, which 
can vary greatly. 

< 
--=- 
~. 
0 
,.,., ,-,-~ 
:u ='-~ 
,..,.r~ 
z 
~ 
:3"-~ 
Z ~  
-" 
0 
~ 
o 
,_ 
~" 
"+ 
--" 
-13 
~ 
&o 
o 
~ 
o 
o 
R n 
&~ 
_ 
,_,. 
~,o,_.~ 
-~ 
~ 
0"~ 
~ 
,.~ 
oo 
,-,_.< ~ ~ ~, _ 
~> 
~' " ~ 
"-" ~ -" :" - 
R 
~~ 
8 
- 
~o ~ 
~.~,~ 
~ 
~ 
o 
~ 
5 
,.,,, 
_--.~ 
~ 
~ 
- 
~o 
8 
. 
~., ~ 
._,., ,_,. 
,.,, 
. 
,< 
~~ 
,:,.o ~ 
~o,~~ 
-,~~~ 
~ 
~ 
-~ 
~'~-~ 
& 
~ 
~ 
9 
...~8 
13.. ::;u -i 
[:lu 
t,i) 1313 ::~.,- ~ 
9 o~ 
~'~ 
- 
,'~ ~- ,..,. & 
.~." ~ 
~ 
_. 
~ 
t~ 
~ 
~__- 
~. ~, ~- 
<2~ 
o 
~~ s ~_~ 
,,.+ 
8 o o.. 2 ,.., 
:3 
" 
I~ 
rb 
~ 
9 
-", -n R ~ "-,', 
~" ~ o~ ~.- 
= o S,-~ 
::::r ~" = 
.-...... ~" 
9 ,.,, ~ >- 
2--.o~ 
.-h 0 
~ 
t'l) 
~ 
"" ~8 
~ 
~ 
--" < 
0.. ~-r 
t'l) 
$ 
R .,,, 5- 
~, $ ~. ~. ~ 
0 
0 
~ 
~ 
",. 
~ 
Imdo 
~" 
~ 
t~ 
0 
~ 
~ 
o 
b,,,-, 9 
i~ ] 
<==., 
,,, 
"o 
o'q 
I= 
O 
tD 
e"l- 
9"q 
:~ 
=" 
B 
db 
4'-- 
d'b 
el'- 
~" 
~ 
e,~ 
9 
--. 
I 
I 

12 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Figure 1.1 Viewing the Discretionary Access Control Settings on a Folder 
Notice that the administrator account is granted full control permis- 
sion for this folder. Check the access settings for other users and groups 
that are defined on your machine. You should notice that the system 
has full control, but that various other access settings are in place for 
different types of access permissions. Within the Windows OS, this is the 
area that allows you to control and modify the DAC settings for your 
resources. 
Similar DAC settings are in place for all files and folders stored on NT 
File System (NTFS) partitions, as well as all objects that exist within 
Active Directory and all Registry keys. 
A similar function is available in most other OSes. As mentioned, 
UNIX and Linux use the chmod process to control access through DAC. 
NetWare also has a file access system in place that is administered by the 
administrator (who has "Supervisor" rights). 
Authentication 
Authentication, when looked at in its most basic form, is simply the process used to 
prove the identity of someone or something that wants access. This can involve 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
13 
highly complex and secure methods, which may involve higher costs and more 
time, or can be very simple. For example, if someone you personally know comes 
to your door, you visually recognize them, and if you want them to enter, you 
open the door. In this case, you have performed the authentication process through 
your visual recognition of the individual. All authentication processes follow this 
same basic premise; that we need to prove who we are or who the individual, ser- 
vice, or process is before we allow them to use our resources. 
Authentication allows a sender and receiver of information to validate each 
other as the appropriate entities with which they want to work. If entities wishing 
to communicate cannot properly authenticate each other, there can be no trust in 
the activities or information provided by either party. Only through a trusted and 
secure method of authentication can administrators provide for a trusted and secure 
communication or activity. 
The simplest form of authentication is the transmission of a shared password 
between entities wishing to authenticate each other. This can be as simple as a 
secret handshake or a key. As with all simple forms of protection, once knowledge 
of the secret key or handshake is disclosed to non-trusted parties, there can no 
longer be trust in who is using the secrets. 
Many methods can be used by an unauthorized person to acquire a secret key, 
from tricking someone into disclosing it, to high-tech monitoring of communica- 
tions between parties to intercept the key as it is passed between parties. However 
the code is acquired, once it is in a non-trusted party's hands, it can be used to 
falsely authenticate and identify someone as a valid party, forging false communica- 
tions or utilizing the user's access to gain permissions to the available resources. 
Original digital authentication systems shared a secret key across the network 
with the entity with which they wanted to authenticate. Applications such as Telnet 
and FTP are examples of programs that simply transmit the username and password 
in cleartext to the party they are authenticating. Another area of concern is Post 
Office Protocol 3 (POP3) e-mail, which, in its default state, sends the complete 
username and password information in cleartext, with no protection. 
The problem with this method of authentication is that anyone that monitors a 
network can possibly capture a secret key and use it to gain access to the services 
or to attempt to gain higher privileged access with your stolen authentication 
information. 
What methods can be used to provide a stronger defense? As discussed previ- 
ously, sharing a handshake or secret key does not provide long lasting and secure 
communication or the secure exchange of authentication information. This has led 
to more secure methods of protection of authentication mechanisms. The following 
www.syngress.com 

14 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
sections examine a number of methods that provide a better and more reliable 
authentication process. 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
15 
DEMONSTRATING THE PRESENCE OF CLEARTEXT PASSWORDS 
One of the operations performed in security monitoring and analysis is 
packet sniffing~the analysis of network traffic and packets being trans- 
mitted to and from the equipment. This involves using appropriate soft- 
ware to intercept, track, and analyze the packets being sent over the 
network. In this exercise, you are going to do some packet sniffing and 
detection work. The steps you use will give you the opportunity to expe- 
rience first-hand what has been discussed so far about authentication. 
Analysis of the traffic on your network provides you with the opportu- 
nity to detect unwanted and unauthorized services, equipment, and 
invaders in your network. 
Many products exist that allow you to analyze the traffic on your 
network. A number of these are proprietary. For example, Microsoft 
provides Network Monitor on Windows-based server products for use by 
administrators and server operators to examine network traffic to and 
from individual machines. 
A higher-powered version is available in other Microsoft products, 
including System Management Server (SMS) v. 2003 R2. (SMS is now at 
version 3.0.) 
Products are also available from vendors such as Fluke Networks and 
Agilent's Advisor product. 
Best of all, there are free products. To try this exercise, use any of 
the above products or one of the following: 
9 ettercap http://ettercap.sourceforge.net/ 
9 Wireshark www.wireshark.org 
This exercise is described using the free tool, Ettercap. Let's get 
started by verifying the presence of cleartext passwords that are sent on 
networks daily. 
Perform the following steps to set up for the exercise. 
1. Download and install your tool of choice. Note that Ettercap and 
Ethereal are available for most platforms. 
2. Find and note the following information: your POP3 server's fully 
qualified domain name (FQDN) or Internet Protocol (IP) address, 
www.syngress.com 

16 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
a valid username for that server, and a valid password for that 
server. 
3. Launch the application you are using (these notes are for 
Ettercap). 
4. In Ettercap, after you have launched the application with the-G 
option and are at the initial screen, click Sniff and select the 
Unified sniffing option. 
5. Choose to monitor the appropriate network interface if you have 
more than one interface configured. In Windows, pick the actual 
network adapter, not the NDISWAN virtual connection. 
6. You can then click Start and select Start sniffing. The screen 
should look something like that shown in Figure 1.2. 
Figure 1.2 Ettercap Main Screen 
7. Your display should now begin to detect and record the network 
activities on your LAN. 
To capture the traffic to your e-mail server, you can do either of the 
following: 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
17 
. 
Launch your e-mail application and retrieve your e-mail from the 
POP3 server. 
2. Using Telnet, open port 110 on your e-mail server's address, and 
enter USER <username> and PASS <password> to Iogin to the e- 
mail server. Enter quit to exit and return to Ettercap. 
3 
After you have authenticated manually or retrieved your e-mail, 
change to the Ettercap window, click Start and select Stop 
sniffing. 
4. Click View and select Connections. This will bring up the list of 
connections captured by Ettercap. Find the line in the Ettercap 
display that matches the POP3 server that you connected to and 
double-click on it. This will bring up a display showing the cap- 
tured data from your client and from the server. Sample output 
can be seen in Figure 1.3. 
Figure 1.3 Ettercap Packet Capture 
Notice that Ettercap has captured the username and password that 
you entered or that your e-mail program sent to the e-mail server. These 
credentials have been sent and received in cleartext, and thus are read- 
able by anyone actively monitoring the network either in local area 
www.syngress.com 

18 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
network (LAN) or at the connection at the e-mail server. As indicated, 
unless you have taken steps to secure this traffic, these passwords are 
not protected during this process. 
Kerberos 
Kerberos (currently Kerberos v5-1.6.1), is used as the preferred network authenti- 
cation protocol in many medium and large environments, to authenticate users and 
services requesting access to resources. Kerberos is a network protocol designed to 
centralize the authentication information for the user or service requesting the 
resource. This allows authentication of the entity requesting access (user, machine, 
service, or process) by the host of the resource being accessed through the use of 
secure and encrypted keys and tickets (authentication tokens) from the authenticating 
Key Distribution Center (KDC). It allows for cross-platform authentication, and is 
available in many implementations of various NOSes. Kerberos is very useful in the 
distributed computing environments currently used, because it centralizes the pro- 
cessing of credentials for authentication. Kerberos utilizes time stamping of its 
tickets, to help ensure they are not compromised by other entities, and an overall 
structure of control that is called a realm. Some platforms use the defined termi- 
nology, while others such as Windows 2003 use their domain structure to imple- 
ment the Kerberos concepts. 
Kerberos is described in RFC 1510, which is available on the Web at 
www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1510.txt?number=1510. Developed and owned by the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), information about the most current 
and previous releases of Kerberos is available on the Web at 
http: //web. mit. edu/Kerb eros. 
Let's look at how the Kerberos process works, and how it helps secure authenti- 
cation activities in a network. First, let's look at Figure 1.4, which shows the default 
components of a Kerberos v5 realm. 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
19 
Figure 1.4 Kerberos Required Components 
As can be seen in Figure 1.4, there is an authentication server requirement (the 
KDC). In a Kerberos realm, whether in a UNIX-based or Windows-based OS, the 
authentication process is the same. For this purpose, imagine that a client needs to 
access a resource on the resource server. Look at Figure 1.5 as we proceed, to 
follow the path for the authentication, first for logon, then at Figure 1.6 for the 
resource access path. 
Figure 1.5 Authentication Path for Logon Access in a Kerberos Realm 
www.syngress.com 

20 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
As seen in Figure 1.5, two events are occurring as credentials are presented 
(password, Smart Card, biometrics) to the KDC for authentication. This is due to 
the dual role of the KDC. It acts as both an Authentication Server and as a Ticket 
Granting Server. First, the authentication credential is presented to the KDC where 
it is authenticated using the Authentication Server mechanism. Secondly, the KDC 
issues a Ticket Granting Ticket (TGT) through the Ticket Granting Server mecha- 
nism that is associated with the access token while you are actively logged in and 
authenticated. This TGT expires when you (or the service) disconnect or log off 
the network, or after it times out. The Kerberos administrator can alter the expiry 
timeout as needed to fit the organizational needs, but the default is one day (86400 
seconds). This TGT is cached locally for use during the active session. 
Figure 1.6 shows the process for resource access in a Kerberos realm. It starts by 
presenting the previously granted TGT to the authenticating KDC. The authenti- 
cating KDC returns a session ticket to the entity wishing access to the resource. 
This session ticket is then presented to the remote resource server. The remote 
resource server, after accepting the session ticket, allows the session to be established 
to the resource. 
Figure 1.6 Resource Access in Kerberos Realms 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
21 
Kerberos uses a time stamp and we need to understand where and when the 
time stamp is used. Previously mentioned was the concept of non-repudiation (see 
Chapter 9), which is one reason for the use of the time stamps. In the case of 
Kerberos, the time stamp is also used to limit the possibility of replay or spoofing of 
credentials (see Chapter 2). Replay is the capture of information, modification of 
the captured information, and retransmission of the modified information to the 
entity waiting to receive the communication. If unchecked, this allows for imper- 
sonation of credentials when seeking access. Spoofing is the substitution of 
addressing or authentication information to try to attain access to a resource based 
on information acceptable to the receiving host, but not truly owned by the 
sender. The initial time stamp refers to any communication between the entity 
requesting authentication and the KDC. Normally, this initial time period will not 
be allowed to exceed ten minutes if based on the MIT Kerberos software default. 
Microsoft's Kerberos implementation has a five-minute time delta. If clocks are not 
synchronized between the systems, the credentials (tickets) will not be granted if 
the time differential exceeds the established limits. Session tickets from the KDC to 
a resource must be presented within this time period or they will be discarded. The 
session established between the resource server and the requesting entity is also 
time-stamped, but generally lasts as long as the entities logon credential is valid. 
This can be affected by system policies like logon hour restrictions, which are 
defined in the original access token. TGT tickets are not part of the default five- 
minute period. Rather, they are cached locally on the machine, and are valid for 
the duration of the logged-on session. 
CHAP 
One of the methods that can be used to protect information when using remote 
access to a resource is the Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP). 
CHAP is a remote access authentication protocol used in conjunction with Point- 
to-Point Protocol (PPP) to provide security and authentication to users of remote 
resources.You will recall that PPP replaced the older Serial Line Internet Protocol 
(SLIP). PPP not only allows for more security than SLIR but also does not require 
static addressing to be defined for communication. PPP allows users to use dynamic 
addressing and multiple protocols during communication with a remote host. 
CHAP is described in 1KFC 1994, available at www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1994.txt 
?number = 1994. The 1KFC describes a process of authentication that works in the 
following manner: 
www.syngress.com 

22 
Chapter 1 * General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
CHAP is used to periodically verify the identity of the peer using a three-way 
handshake. This is done upon initial link establishment, and may be repeated any- 
time after the link has been established. 
1. After the link establishment phase is complete, the authenticator sends a 
"challenge" message to the peer. 
2. The peer responds with a value calculated based on an ID value, a random 
value, and the password using a "one-way hash" function such as MD5. 
3. The authenticator checks the response against its own calculation of the 
expected hash value. If the values match, the authentication is acknowl- 
edged; otherwise the connection should be terminated. 
4. At random intervals, the authenticator sends a new challenge to the peer, 
and repeats steps 1 to 3. 
CHAP operates in conjunction with PPP to provide protection of the creden- 
tials presented for authentication, and to verify connection to a valid resource. It 
does not operate with encrypted password databases, and therefore is not as strong a 
protection as other levels of authentication. The shared secrets may be stored on 
both ends as a cleartext item, making the secret vulnerable to compromise or 
detection. CHAP may also be configured to store a password using one-way 
reversible encryption, which uses the one-way hash noted earlier. This provides 
protection to the password, because the hash must match the client wishing to 
authenticate with the server that has stored the password with the hash value. 
CHAP is better than Password Authentication Protocol (PAP), however, since PAP 
sends passwords across the network in cleartext. 
Certificates 
Certificates are created by a trusted third party called a Certification Authority (CA), 
which may also be called a Certificate Authority. CAs are systems that create, dis- 
tribute, store, and validate digitally created signature and identity verification infor- 
mation about machines, individuals, and services. This CA may be a commercially 
available service point, such as Verisign or Thawte.A CA can also be created within 
an enterprise to manage and create certificates that are used only within an organi- 
zation or with trusted partners. A certificate from a reputable provider indicates that 
the server being accessed is legitimate. CAs may also grant certificates for software 
signing. This process indicates to the individual downloading the software that it has 
been manufactured or written by the specified individual or company. The path for 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing ~ Chapter 1 
23 
the certificate should be verifiable and unbroken. This indicates a high probability 
that the software has not been tampered with since it was originally made available 
for download. Additionally, certificates may be used in processes such as data encryp- 
tion or in network protocols requiring their use, such as Internet Protocol Security 
(IPSec), when the sending and receiving machines must be verifiable. 
This process is part of the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) framework. 
Certificates are used more frequently since the development and expansion of 
Internet-based transactions has grown. X.509 is an ITU-T standard for PKI, and 
X.509 certificates are now used for Web-based authentication for access to remote 
systems, and for encryption of information on local machines. They are also used 
for directory services access in various operating systems, Smart Cards, digital sig- 
natures for e-mail, and encrypting e-mail. Additionally, they may be used for 
authentication when implementing a secure network protocol such as IPSec to 
protect data transmission within systems. All of these become part of the PKI, 
which is described as the plan or methods for exchange of authentication infor- 
mation and protection of that information (see Chapter 10). 
The certificates can be installed via the Web browser on client machines to 
identify and authenticate users. In some OSes such as Windows 2003, certificates 
can be mapped to user accounts in Active Directory, and then associated with the 
access tokens generated by the operating system when the user logs on, making the 
local installation of the certificate optional on the workstation being used.Web 
servers must have a Web server certificate installed in order to participate in SSL. 
Remember that certificates must be issued from a verifiable and identifi- 
able CA. This can be a commercial entity, such as Verisign or Thawte, or 
a standalone or enterprise CA within your organization. The path to the 
CA must be unbroken, or the certificate may be viewed as invalid. A 
compromised or physically unsecured CA will require recreation of your 
entire PKI infrastructure. 
Multiple aspects of the certificate may be verified including the cer- 
tificate expiry date, the domain associated with the certificate, and the 
validity of the CA. It is important to note that if the software verifying 
the certificate is not configured to trust the CA, the certificate will be 
considered invalid. 
www.syngress.com 

24 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Userna me/Password 
Username and password combinations have been used for authenticating uses for 
many years. Most OSes have had some form of local authentication that could be 
used if the OS was designed to be used by multiple users.Windows, Netware, 
UNIX, and Linux have all had local authentication paths early in their develop' 
ment. Although this is the most common authentication method, it is not without 
its problems. From a security standpoint, it is important to understand that the first 
line of defense of a system is the creation and maintenance of a password policy 
that is enforced and workable.You need to both implement and enforce the policy 
to ensure that this rudimentary protection is in place in your network. Most OSes 
have methods of utilizing username/password policies. 
Password policies that require a user-created password less than 6 characters 
long are regarded as low (or no) security level. Password policies that require 
between 8 and 13 characters are regarded as a medium security level. Policies 
requiring 14 or more characters are regarded as a high security level. These security 
levels are based on the difficulty of discovering the password through the use of 
dictionary and brute force attacks. Additionally, password policies should require 
that an acceptable password contain a combination of the following: 
9 Uppercase and lowercase alphabetic characters 
9 Numbers 
9 Special characters 
9 No dictionary words 
9 No portion of the username in the password 
9 No personal identifiers should be used including birthdays, social security 
number, pet's name, and so on 
To achieve the medium security level, implement the use of 8 characters, 
including uppercase and lowercase, numbers, and special characters. For high secu- 
rity, implement the medium security settings, and enforce the previous settings plus 
no dictionary words and no use of the username in the password. Be aware that the 
higher the number of characters or letters in a password, the more chance exists 
that the user will record the password and leave it where it can be found. Most 
policies work at about the 8-character range, and require periodic changes of the 
password as well as the use of special characters or numbers. 
r 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
25 
Strong password policies are covered in greater detail in Chapter 12. 
Tokens 
Token technolo2y is another method that can be used in networks and facilities to 
authenticate users. These tokens are not the access tokens that are granted during a 
logon session by the NOS. Rather, they are physical devices used for the randomiza- 
tion of a code that can be used to assure the identity of the individual or service 
which has control of them. Tokens provide an extremely high level of authentication 
because of the multiple parts they employ to verify the identity of the user. Token 
technology is currently regarded as more secure than most forms of biometrics, 
because impersonation and falsification of the token values is extremely difficult. 
Token authentication can be provided by way of either hardware- or software- 
based tokens. Let's take a look at the multiple pieces that make up theprocess for 
authentication using token technology. 
To start with, you must have a process to create and track random token access 
values.To do this, you normally utilize at least two components.They are: 
A hardware device that is coded to generate token values at specific 
intervals. 
A software or server-based component that tracks and verifies that these 
codes are valid. 
To use this process, the token code is entered into the server/software moni- 
toring system during setup of the system. This begins a process of tracking the 
token values, which must be coordinated. A user wishing to be authenticated visits 
the machine or resource they wish to access, and enters a PIN number in place of 
the usual user logon password. They are then asked for the randomly generated 
number currently present on their token.When entered, this value is checked 
against the server/software system's calculation of the token value. If they are the 
same, the authentication is complete and the user can access the machine or 
resource. Some vendors have also implemented a software component that can be 
installed on portable devices, such as handhelds and laptops, which emulates the 
token device and is installed locally. The authentication process is the same; how- 
ever, the user enters the token value into the appropriate field in the software, 
www.syngress.com 

26 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
which is compared to the required value. If correct, the user may log on and access 
the resource.Vendors such as 1KSA Security offer products and solutions such as 
SecurID to utilize these functions. Others implemented processes that involved the 
use of One Time Password Technology, which often uses a pre-generated list of 
secured password combinations that may be used for authentication, with a one- 
time use of each. This provides for a level of randomization, but in its basic imple- 
mentation is not as random as other token methods. 
Multi-factor 
Multi-factor authentication is the process in which we expand on the traditional 
requirements that exist in a single factor authentication like a password. To accom- 
plish this, multi-factor authentication will use another item for authentication in 
addition to or in place of the traditional password. 
Following are four possible types of factors that can be used for multi-factor 
authentication. 
9 A password or a PIN can be defined as a something, you know factor. 
9 A token or Smart Card can be defined as a something, you have factor. 
9 A thumbprint, retina, hand, or other biometrically identifiable item can be 
defined as a something, you are factor. 
9 Voice or handwriting analysis can be used as a something you do factor. 
For example, most password-based single authentication methods use a pass- 
word. In multi-factor authentication methods, you might enhance the "something 
you know" factor by adding a "something you have" factor or a "something you 
are" factor. 
A Smart Card or token device can be a "something you have" factor. Multi- 
factor authentication can be extended, if desired, to include such things as hand- 
writing recognition or voice recognition. The benefit of multi-factor authentication 
is that it requires more steps for the process to occur, thus adding another check- 
point to the process, and therefore stronger security. For instance, when with- 
drawing money from the bank with a debit card ("something you have") you also 
have to have the PIN number ("something you know"). This can be a disadvantage 
if the number of steps required to achieve authentication becomes onerous to the 
users and they no longer use the process or they attempt to bypass the necessary 
steps for authentication. 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
27 
To summarize, multi-factor authentication is more secure than other methods, 
because it adds steps that increase the layers of security. However, this must be bal- 
anced against the degree to which it inconveniences the user, since this may lead to 
improper use of the process. 
Mutual Authentication 
Mutual authentication is a process where both the requestor and the target entity 
must fully identify themselves before communication or access is allowed. This can 
be accomplished in a number of ways.You can share a secret or you can use a 
Diffie-Hellman key exchange (see Chapter 9) that provides a more secure method 
of exchange that protects the secret being used for the verification and authentica- 
tion process. Another method that can be used for mutual authentication is the use 
of certificates. To verify the identities, the CA must be known to both parties, and 
the public keys for both must be available from the trusted CA. This is occasionally 
used with SSL, where both the server and the client have certificates and each is 
used to confirm the identity of the other host. 
One area that uses the mutual authentication process is access of a user to a 
network via remote access or authentication via a RADIUS server. This case 
requires the presence of a valid Certificate to verify that the machine is the entity 
that is allowed access to the network. For instance, early implementations of 
Windows-based RAS servers had the ability to request or verify a particular tele- 
phone number to try to verify the machine location.With the development of call 
forwarding technologies, however, it became apparent that this was no longer satis- 
factory. Mutual authentication allows you to set secure parameters and be more 
confident that communication is not being intercepted by a Man-in-the-Middle 
(MITM) attacker (see Chapter 2 and Chapter 9) or being redirected in any way. 
Mutual authentication provides more secure communications by positively 
identifying both sides of a communication channel. However, it is often difficult or 
costly to implement. An example of this is in the online banking industry. Online 
banks use SSL certificates to confirm that the site the customer is communicating 
with is indeed the site they are expecting.With mutual authentication, this confir- 
mation would be expanded so that the online banking site is certain that the user 
accessing an account is actually who they say they are. Setting up mutual authenti- 
cation in this manner would involve requiring each user to obtain a certificate 
from a CA trusted by the online bank. Instructing the user on how to accomplish 
this would be a daunting task. And what if they need to access their account from a 
different system? If the certificate is based off of their home computer, they may 
www.syngress.com 

28 
Chapter 1 ,, General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
need to obtain another certificate for use on a second system. Additional complexi- 
ties such as lost certificates and the use of shared systems would also apply. 
With these complexities, mutual authentication is not implemented as fre- 
quently as it probably should be to ensure secure communications. Many security 
implementations such as IPsec or 802.1x as well as others provide the option of 
using mutual authentication, but it is up to the entities implementing the security 
to choose whether or not they will use that option. 
Biometrics 
Biometric devices can provide a higher level of authentication than, for example, a 
username/password combination. However, although they tend to be relatively 
secure, they are not impervious to attack. For instance, in the case of fingerprint 
usage for biometric identification, the device must be able to interpret the actual 
presence of the print. Early devices that employed optical scans of fingerprints were 
fooled by fogging of the device lenses, which provided a raised impression of the 
previous user's print as it highlighted the oils left by a human finger. Some devices 
are also subject to silicon impressions or fingerprinting powders that raise the 
image. Current devices may require a temperature or pulse sense as well as the fin- 
gerprint to verify the presence of the user, or another sensor that is used in con- 
junction with the print scanner, such as a scale. Biometrics used in conjunction 
with Smart Cards or other authentication methods lead to the highest level of 
security. 
Remember that the Security+ exam is designed to test you on your 
knowledge of basic security concepts and expects that you have some 
experience in the IT security field. Before taking the exam, it may help 
to take some time and think about the various security-related proce- 
dures, software, and hardware that you have seen or used in the past. 
Consider things such as your authentication to your e-mail system and 
think of the access control methods used by the system. Putting the con- 
cepts we discuss into real-world scenarios that you have experienced will 
help cement them in your mind and increase your understanding of the 
concepts. 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
29 
Auditing 
Auditing provides methods for tracking and logging activities on networks and sys- 
tems, and links these activities to specific user accounts or sources of activity. In the 
case of simple mistakes or software failures, audit trails can be extremely useful in 
restoring data integrity. They are also a requirement for trusted systems to ensure 
that the activity of authorized individuals can be traced to their specific actions, 
and that those actions comply with defined policy. They also allow for a method of 
collecting evidence to support any investigation into improper or illegal activities. 
Auditing Systems 
Auditing of systems must occur with a thorough understanding of the benefits of 
the process. As you create your auditing procedures, you are trying to develop a 
path and trail system in the logging of the monitored events that allows you to 
track usage and access, either authorized or unauthorized. To do this, you must 
consider the separation of duties that improves security and allows for better defini- 
tion of your audit policies and rules. 
To assist in catching mistakes and reducing the likelihood of fraudulent activi- 
ties, the activities of a process should be split among several people. This process is 
much like the RBAC concepts discussed earlier. This segmentation of duties allows 
the next person in line to possibly correct problems simply because they are being 
viewed with fresh eyes. 
From a security point of view, segmentation of duties requires the collusion of 
at least two people to perform any unauthorized activities. The following guidelines 
assist in assuring that the duties are split so as to offer no way other than collusion 
to perform invalid activities. 
9 
No access to sensitive combinations 
of capabilities. A classic 
example of this is control of inventory data and physical inventory. By sep- 
arating the physical inventory control from the inventory data control, you 
remove the unnecessary temptation for an employee to steal from inven- 
tory and then alter the data so that the theft is left hidden. 
9 
Prohibit conversion and concealment. Another violation that can be 
prevented by segregation is ensuring that there is supervision for people 
who have access to assets. An example of an activity that could be pre- 
vented if properly segmented follows a lone operator of a night shift. This 
operator, without supervision, could copy (or "convert") customer lists and 
www.syngress.com 

30 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
then sell them to interested parties. There have been instances reported of 
operators actually using the employer's computer to run a service bureau. 
9 
The same person cannot both originate and approve transactions. 
When someone is able to enter and authorize their own expenses, it intro- 
duces the possibility that they might fraudulently enter invalid expenses 
for their own gain. 
These principles, whether manual or electronic, form the basis for why audit 
logs are retained. They also identify why people other than those performing the 
activities reported in the log should be the ones who analyze the data in the log file. 
In keeping with the idea of segmentation, as you deploy your audit trails, be 
sure to have your log files sent to a secure, trusted location that is separate and non- 
accessible from the devices you are monitoring. This will help ensure that if any 
inappropriate activity occurs, the person who performs it cannot falsify the log file 
to state the actions did not take place. 
EXERCISE 1.03 
CONFIGURING AUDITING IN MICROSOFT WINDOWS 
During the discussion of using auditing as a method to track access 
attempts within systems, it was mentioned that you must define an 
audit policy that reflects the needs of your organization and the need 
to track access in your system. This process is used to configure the types 
of activity or access you wish to monitor. For this exercise on auditing, 

'=rl 
m= 
c 
m 
~ z: 
8 
8 c 
~" 
3 o- 
~-o~ 
" - -  
C 
9 
,.,, 
-.o~ 
S" 
5" 
" 
9 m~. 
~ 
-- 
- 
~ 
o_ o 
~ 
- 
= 
-,-,- 
,,, 
m 
& 
~- 
- 
~ ~ 0 , ~ 8 ~ ~ ' o > ~  
o- 
,.,,, 
o 
9 
> 
~' 
~ 
o 
~- 
-. 
= 
o 
E ~ ~"+o 
~, 
o 
=,.-~o_& 
~~ 
,-,. 
-- 
--~ 
t'~ 
" 
"~. 
- 
n 
~" 
C- 
C- 
D-LO 
rD 
rl:) 
-- 
-- 
L~ 
rD 
0 
~ 
o_ ~'." 
~, ~ 
"o"o 
~ 
9 
,-, 
o 
< 
~ 
m ~.'>c 
~ 
o 
~ 
m 
R m ~" 
9 
-- 
el" 
'~ 
(~" 
,.,, 
O.-o 
~ 
~q~,'< 
s" 
~ 
= 
.. 
~, 
~ 
~o ~o 
~ 
~- 
~ 
.~ 
> 
= 
o 
~ o~_c 
~ ~- 
-'~'-"-. 
9 
--" 
~ 
~" 
"4" 0 
:D" ~ 
=,.o~~. 
--,~,-,- 
'<.5" 
~" 
,,, 
= 
~ &~, o" 
~ 
~" --~ 
~.. ~ o_ 
_~ 
~ 
~ 
o-~ 
~ 
0 
t~ 
--. 
0 
9 
-, ~~ 
~c 
o 
~ 
&-'~ 
o 
n 
= 
_.5"= 
_ . ~  
,., 
--. 
s 
= 
S* 
~:c 
o 
o~ m o 
,.5"> 
o 
> 
.... 
~ 
~ 
~ 
(D 
,-+ 
~ 
--. 
O_h 
0 
~ 
,,~ 
,-,3 
,-, 
c 
#
=
 
-" 
-. 
-. 
~. 
-.~- 
~ ~  
n,4.~o 
3 
~ 
o 
_. 
rl) 
,.+ 
~ 
(1:) 
--" 
-'n ,..+ 
~5" 
=-3 
-- 
~ 
~, 
c ~o 
~ ~ 
~ ~ 
~ 
3 
~ ' m  
o 
_~-- 
m 
o.,~--~.,-,- 
= 
3 
=" 
-. 
- 
~ 
-'~ 
-. 
9 
~ 
"+ 
,4-'< 
9 
~" 
~ 
~" ~ 
O_ 
0 
~ 
0 
~.. 
E;~-O 
0 
~ 
rD 
~ 
X~_, 
m 
= 
tl) 
3 
m 
.+ 
0 
m 
--C 
~'~. 
-.-+ 
0 
~." ~'~< 
--. 
C 
m 
'-, 
--" 
tO 
=3" 
c- 
_~ 
i 
W 

32 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Next, double-click the Audit Logon Events item, which will open the 
Properties screen shown in Figure 1.8. Select both check boxes to enable 
auditing of both successful and failed Iogon events. When auditing 
Iogon events you are logging events requiring credentials on the local 
machine. Note that the first auditing choice is "Audit account Iogon 
events." In this selection, auditing is tracked only for those asking for 
authentication via accounts that are stored on this machine, such as 
with a domain controller. The setting being used tracks all requests with 
an exchange of authentication information on the local machine where 
it is configured. 
Figure 1.8 Selecting the Appropriate Item for Auditing 
As shown in Figure 1.9, the security setting condition has changed to 
reflect your choices. Your screen should also reflect that you are now 
auditing "Success and Failure for Logon Events." 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
33 
Figure 1.9 Auditing Conditions Enabled and Defined 
Following successful initialization of auditing, you must test the set- 
tings to make sure the system is performing the auditing tasks that have 
been set up. For this exercise, log off your machine, then attempt to 
Iogon using credentials that you know do not exist or using an incorrect 
password. Then, log back on correctly and return to the exercise. 
Proceed to Event Viewer in the Administrative Tools folder by traversing 
Start I Programs I Administrative Tools I Event Viewer. Double-click on 
Security; you should see a screen similar to the one shown in Figure 
1.10. Note that we have audited and recorded both success and failure 
events, noted by the key and lock icons. Highlight a Failure Audit event, 
as shown, and then double-click on the item. 
www.syngress.com 

34 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Figure 1.10 The Security Event Window in Event Viewer 
After double-clicking on a Failure Audit item, you will see a screen 
similar to the one depicted in Figure 1.11. Note that in this particular 
case, an unknown user (Sam) tried to Iogon and was unsuccessful. The 
auditing process is working, and detected the attempted breach. 
Now that you have successfully implemented auditing, do not forget 
that auditing is useless if you never review the logs and records it gener- 
ates. Auditing is also capable of tracking access by processes, applica- 
tions, and users to other objects within a particular environment. You 
should define a strong audit policy that checks access and authentica- 
tion to critical files, and randomly checks other resources to detect 
trends and attacks and limit their damage. 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
Figure 1.11 A Logon/Logoff Failure Event Description 
35 
Logging 
The logging features provided on most networks and systems involve logging 
known or partially known resource event activities.While these logs are sometimes 
used for analyzing system problems, they are also useful for finding security issues 
through processing the log files and checking for both valid and invalid system 
activities 
Most modern database applications support some level of transaction log 
detailing the activities that occurred within the database. This log can then be used 
to rebuild the database or to create a duplicate database at another location. 
Providing this detailed level of database logging consumes a great deal of drive 
space. This intense logging is not needed for most applications.You will generally 
only have basic informative messages utilized in system resource logging unless 
additional audit details are enabled. 
A great deal of information on logging and log analysis can be found at 
http://www.loganalysis.org. Additionally more information on log analysis can be 
www.syngress.com 

36 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
found in the Syngress books Security Log Management: Identifying Patterns in the 
Chaos and Microsoft Log Parser Toolkit. 
System Scanning 
System scanning, when viewed from the context of a security system specialist or 
security administrator, is the use of appropriate technologies to detect and repair 
potential areas of vulnerability within the system. This involves tools that are used 
to evaluate potential or real problems that could lead to a security breach. Among 
these, you may see or use tools that: 
9 
Check the strength of and compliance with password policies 
9 Measure the ability to access networks from an outside or foreign network 
9 Provide analysis of known security vulnerabilities in NOS or hardware 
devices 
9 Test a system's responses to various scenarios that could lead to Denial of 
Service (DOS) or other problems such as a system crash. 
System scanning is useful in a number of different areas. In addition to scanning 
for security weaknesses, it is useful in monitoring tools that have been used in the 
past to monitor network and device performance, as well as in specialized scanning 
r 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
37 
methods used to detect and repair potential weaknesses.While the primary 
emphasis is to provide security, you also have an obligation under the concepts of 
AAA and the CIA triad discussed earlier, to provide system availability and depend- 
ability. Use of the appropriate network and machine monitoring tools can help to 
detect and eliminate congestion and traffic problems on the network, high pro- 
cessor loads or other deviances in systems, and bad or failing components. This, in 
turn, allows you to be alerted to potential problems that may accompany other 
types of activity. In the current environment, there are a number of security scan- 
ning options available. A list of these can be found at http'//sectools.org. 
Along with the ability to evaluate and mount attacks against systems, you must 
also use tools that are appropriate to the NOS that you are using, clients you are 
operating, and the devices you use to communicate on the networks. As you scan, 
you are searching for known problems that exist in each of these areas, and 
detailing the potential for harm to your systems. Use these tools to proactively 
check and repair these vulnerabilities and to provide a stable and problem-flee 
environment. 
There are many benefits to being proactive in the system and network scanning 
area. It is much better to spot trends and track them in relation to potential attacks 
or DoS attacks, than to be taken unaware.Vigilance, good planning, and use of the 
tools can eliminate many of the security issues that occur. Remember that a high 
percentage of attacks or problems in systems come from inside networks. Scan and 
be informed. 
In the Security+ exam, removal and control of non-essential services, 
protocols, systems, and programs is tested generally, but is also covered 
again later in the Security+ exam objectives when discussing system, OS, 
NOS, and application hardening. Pay attention to the descriptions pre- 
sented here, and to the concepts and procedures presented in Chapter 8 
when discussing hardening of these components. 
www.syngress.com 

38 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Disabling Non-essential Services, 
Protocols, Systems and Processes 
This section of the Security+ exam covers a number of different areas that should be 
examined and controlled in your network and system environments.We hear often 
that we should disable unnecessary or unneeded services.While here, we will look 
not only at services, but also at protocols, systems, and processes that rob systems of 
resources and allow potential attacks to occur that could damage your systems. 
The basic premise behind this discussion is very simple. If there is something 
enabled that is not being actively used, it is an unnecessary security risk. The solu- 
tion is simply to disable or inactivate the service, protocol, system, or process which 
is not needed. Keep in mind that some of these may not be actively used by indi- 
viduals, but may be dependencies for other services, protocols, systems, or processes. 
Consequently, you should be careful when you are disabling things and ensure that 
you have a good understanding of exactly what it is you are doing. 
Non-essential Services 
Let's begin with a discussion about the concept of non-essential services. Non- 
essential services are the ones you do not use, or have not used in some time. For 
many, the journey from desktops to desktop support to servers to entire systems 
support involves a myriad of new issues to work on. And as we progressed, we 
wanted to see what things could be done with the new hardware and its capabili- 
ties. In addition, we were also often working on a system that we were not com- 
fortable with, had not studied, and had little information about. Along with having 
a superior press for using the latest and greatest information, we hurried and imple- 
mented new technologies without knowing the pitfalls and shortcomings. 
Non-essential services may include network services, such as Domain Name 
System (DNS) or Dynamic Host Control Protocol (DHCP), Telnet, Web, or FTP 
services. They may include authentication services for the enterprise, if located on a 
non-enterprise device. They may also include anything that was installed by default 
that is not part of your needed services. 
Systems without shared resources need not run file and print services. In a 
Linux environment, if the machine is not running as an e-mail server, then remove 
sendmail. If the system is not sharing files with a Windows-based network, then 
remove Samba. Likewise, if you are not using NIS for authentication, you should 
disable the service or remove it. 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
39 
This is applicable for any type of operating system. The Security+ exam is 
operating system agnostic, meaning that the same general principles apply regardless 
of the operating system that you use. Being familiar with the services that are 
unnecessary for the specific operating system that you are working with is an 
important part of ensuring that the system is well secured. The basic premise is to 
disable the services that you do not need. The list of services that this covers varies 
by operating system or even the specific version or release of the operating system. 
Non-essential Protocols 
Non-essential protocols can provide the opportunity for an attacker to reach or 
compromise your system. These include network protocols such as Internetwork 
Packet Exchange/Sequenced Packet Exchange (IPX/SPX or in Windows Operating 
Systems, NWLink) and NetBIOS Extended User Interface (NetBEUI). It also 
includes the removal of unnecessary protocols such as Internet Control Messaging 
Protocol (ICMP), Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP), and specific 
vendor supplied protocols such as Cisco's Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP), which is 
used for communication between Cisco devices, but may open a level of vulnera- 
bility in your system. Evaluation of protocols used for communication between net- 
work devices, applications, or systems that are proprietary or used by system device 
manufacturers, such as the protocols used by Cisco to indicate private interior gate- 
ways to their interoperating devices, should also be closely examined. 
Evaluation of" the protocols suggested for removal may show that they are 
needed in some parts of the system, but not others. Many OS platforms allow the 
flexibility of binding protocols to certain adaptors and leaving them unbound on 
others, thus reducing the potential vulnerability level. 
Disabling Non-essential Systems 
While working with the development and growth of networks and environments, 
we often retain older systems and leave them active within the overall system. This 
can be a serious breach, as we may not pay attention to these older systems and 
keep them up to date with the latest security patches and tools. It is important to 
realize that older systems, particularly those whose use is extremely low, should 
have a planned decommissioning policy in place. Systems not necessary for your 
particular operation should be disabled, removed, and sterilized with good informa- 
tion removal practices before being recycled, donated, or destroyed. 
www.syngress.com 

40 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Disabling Non-essential Processes 
Processes running on your systems should be evaluated regarding their necessity to 
operations. Many processes are installed by default, but are rarely or never used by 
the OS. In addition to disabling or removing these processes, you should regularly 
evaluate the running processes on the machine to make sure they are necessary. As 
with disabling unnecessary protocols and services and systems, you must be aware 
of the need for the processes and their potential for abuse that could lead to system 
downtime, crashes, or breach. UNIX, Linux, Windows server and workstation sys- 
tems, and Netware systems all have mechanisms for monitoring and tracking pro- 
cesses, which will give you a good idea of their level of priority and whether they 
are needed in the environments you are running. 
Disabling Non-Essential Programs 
Like the other areas we have discussed, it is appropriate to visit the process of dis- 
abling or removing unnecessary programs. Applications that run in the background 
are often undetected in normal machine checks, and can be compromised or oth- 
erwise affect your systems negatively. An evaluation of installed programs is always 
appropriate.Aside from the benefit of more resources being available, it also elimi- 
nates the potential that a breach will occur. 
DISABLING WINDOWS 
2003 
OR WINDOWS 
XP 
SERVICES 
As discussed in this section, it is important to eliminate unused services, 
protocols, processes, and applications to eliminate potential security vul- 
nerabilities. It is also important to eliminate these extra functions and 
capabilities to maximize the performance of the systems. Items not in 
use require no resources, so there is an added benefit to disabling 
unused portions of the systems. In this exercise, we will disable the 
Telnet service to eliminate the potential for attack. 
Be cautious when accessing or modifying controls that may disable or 
remove system services or processes. Incorrect settings or use of the con- 
trols may disable your machine and require a complete reinstallation. 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
41 
Do not perform these tasks on a production machine without the 
permission of your administrator or employer. The consequences can be 
severe. 
To begin, access the Services MlVlC window. This may be reached by 
clicking Start I Programs IAdministrative Tools IServices in either 
Windows 2003 or Windows XP Professional. When the window is open, 
scroll down and highlight the Telnet Server item. As shown in Figure 
1.12, you should see that the service is set for manual start, but is not 
currently started. 
Figure 1.12 The Services Panel MMC Window 
To change the properties or startup type of a service, double-click 
the service name. You will view a window as shown in Figure 1.13. For 
this exercise, choose the Telnet service name, and double-click it to 
reach the window shown in the figure. If you expand the startup type 
drop-down menu, you will see that you can choose from automatic, 
manual, or disabled. 
www.syngress.com 

42 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Figure 1.13 The Telnet Service Properties Page 
As shown in Figure 1.14, select the Disabled setting and click Apply. 
You will see that the state of the startup type has changed from 
Manual to Disabled, as shown in Figure 1.15. 
When you have successfully disabled the service, open a command 
prompt window (type cmd at the Run line on the Start menu) and type 
the following command: net start telnet server. If you have successfully 
disabled the service, you should receive a message informing you that 
the service is disabled. 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
43 
Figure 1.14 Selecting to Disable the Telnet Service 
Figure 1.15 Telnet Service Disabled 
www.syngress.com 

44 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
In this chapter, you worked on concepts tested in the Security+ exam relating to 
general security concepts. These objectives include having a working knowledge of 
the concepts of AAA. These concepts are widely used to support the concept of 
CIA, by providing the methodology to protect resources and track the access given 
to them. 
We found that as we looked at the separate components of AAA, there were a 
number of ways to accomplish the goal of controlling the security of our networks 
and systems by using the appropriate methodologies. We discovered that we have 
three distinct methods of providing access control. MACs are rules that are defined 
and hard-coded into operating systems and applications to allow or deny access to 
services or applications. In the case of DAC, the user or service that owns an 
object, such as a file, has control of who or what else has the ability to access the 
file or object, and at what level. Finally, we explored the capabilities of RBAC. This 
method, while requiring much more initial design and administrative resources to 
set up, allowed us to refine and sharpen the level of access based on job function, 
rather than the more general group concept used in the past. This method allows 
much more flexibility in definition of the access level. 
We looked at the concept of authentication and found that there are a number 
of different methods that can be used to authenticate.We looked at the danger of 
cleartext username and password transmission on our networks, and a number of 
methods that provide for a stronger verification of the entity requesting the use of 
our systems or resources. In the realm of authentication, we also looked at the con- 
cept of realms and the way they are used by Kerberos to provide authentication 
services. Certificates, and the CA hierarchy that goes with them, can be used to 
verify the authenticity of machines, users, software, and communications. We also 
viewed the concept of using third-party authentication tools such as multi-factor 
authentication, which can be provided by the use of a PIN and identification card, 
Token technologies, and the use of biometrics and biometric devices. 
Further exploration of the AAA components led us to discuss and work with 
the concept of auditing. It is important to define the appropriate policy that con- 
trols, monitors and evaluates the activity that is occurring in and on our systems. 
This includes monitoring the conditions of access and the authorization processes 
to ensure the appropriate levels of control are maintained throughout the system. 
We learned that it is important to maintain appropriate records, to control access to 
those records, and to analyze them appropriately to help determine the condition 
of the system. 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
45 
Additionally, we reviewed the concepts of disabling or removing unnecessary 
services, protocols, and applications from our environment, to help minimize the 
effects that could occur from weaknesses. This process includes the evaluation and 
detection of inappropriate applications, services, and components within systems 
that can lead to system compromise, and also showed us that removal of these 
unnecessary components can assist in freeing up resources for use within the 
system. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Introduction to AAA 
gl 
AAA is made up of three distinct 
authentication, and auditing. 
but interdependent parts: access control, 
Access control consists of the rules for controlling the methods and 
conditions of access to your system. 
Authentication defines the methods for setting the rules for establishing 
the methods of authentication of the service or user requesting access to 
the system or resources. 
Auditing contains the suggestions and procedures for monitoring access 
and authentication processes in your systems, and secures the log files and 
records of these efforts. 
Access Control 
MAC is a level of access that is defined and hard-coded in the OS or 
application, and not easily changed. 
Vr 
DAC are defined by the owner of an object (such as files), and are 
modifiable and transferable as desired. 
1KBACs are defined by job function and are definable with nmch more 
control. 
www.syngress.com 

46 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
Authentication 
V------d Kerberos is a multi-platform authentication method that requires tickets 
(tokens) and a KDC. It exists as a realm in most platforms, and is utilized 
in the domain environment in Windows Active Directory structures. 
CHAP can utilize a shared secret, and uses a one-way hash to protect the 
secret. 
gl Certificates require a CA, which is used to create the digital certificates 
used for digital signatures, mutual identification, and verification. 
gl Username/password is the most basic security usage, and is available in 
most platforms. 
gl Tokens are hardware and software devices for random generation of 
passcodes to further secure the authentication process. 
Multi-factor authentication is the use of more than one type of 
authentication concurrently to strengthen the authentication process, such 
as requiring a card and PIN together. 
gl Mutual authentication consists of using various methods to verify both 
parties to the transaction to the other. 
V4I Biometrics is used with devices that have the ability to authenticate 
something you already have, such as a fingerprint or retinal image. 
Auditing 
An auditing policy must be established and evaluated to determine what 
resources or accesses need to be tracked. 
gl Usually retained in log files, which may be used to track paths and 
violations. Good logging may be used for prosecution, if necessary. 
gl Important that someone is responsible for viewing and analyzing regularly. 
Removing Non-essential Services 
gl Remove unused and unneeded components from servers, network 
components, and workstations, including functions such as DNS and 
DHCR 


48 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
A" A good place to start learning the process of hardening is by looking at the 
guidelines published by the NSA. These can currently be found at 
www.nsa.gov/snac/downloads_os.cfm?MenuID=scg10.3.1.1 or through a 
search on the http'//www.nsa.gov Web site. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
1. You are acting as a security consultant for a company wanting to decrease their 
security risks. As part of your role, they have asked that you develop a security 
policy that they can publish to their employees. This security policy is intended 
to explain the new security rules and define what is and is not acceptable from 
a security standpoint as well as defining the method by which users can gain 
access to IT resources.What element of AAA is this policy a part of?. 
A. Authentication 
B. Authorization 
C. Access Control 
D. Auditing 
2. One of the goals of AAA is to provide CIA.A valid user has entered their ID 
and password and has been authenticated to access network resources.When 
they attempt to access a resource on the network, the attempt returns a message 
stating, "The server you are attempting to access has reached its maximum 
number of connections." Which part of" CIA is being violated in this situation? 
A. Confidentiality 
B. Integrity 
C. Availability 
D. Authentication 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing * Chapter 1 
49 
, 
o 
A user from your company is being investigated for attempting to sell propri- 
etary information to a competitor.You are the IT security administrator 
responsible for assisting with the investigation. The user has claimed that he did 
not try to access any restricted files and is consequently not guilty of any 
wrongdoing.You have completed your investigation and have a log record 
showing that the user did attempt to access restricted files. How does AAA help 
you to prove that the user is guilty regardless of what he says? 
A. Access Control 
B. Auditing 
C. Authorization 
D. Non-repudiation 
You have been brought in as a security consultant for a programming team 
working on a new operating system designed strictly for use in secure govern- 
ment environments. Part of your role is to help define the security require- 
ments for the operating system and to instruct the programmers in the best 
security methods to use for specific functions of" the operating system. What 
method of access control is most appropriate for implementation as it relates to 
the security of the operating system itself?. 
A. MAC 
B. DAC 
C. RBAC 
D. All of the above 
~ You are designing the access control methodology for a company implementing 
an entirely new IT infrastructure. This company has several hundred employees, 
each with a specific job function. The company wants their access control 
methodology to be as secure as possible due to recent compromises within 
their previous infrastructure.Which access control methodology would you use 
and why? 
ao 
Bo 
RBAC because it is job-based and more flexible than MAC 
RBAC because it is user-based and easier to administer 
C. Groups because they are job-based and very precise 
D. Groups because they are highly configurable and more flexible than MAC 
www.syngress.com 

50 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
. 
You are performing a security audit for a company to determine their risk from 
various attack methods. As part of your audit, you work with one of the com- 
paw's employees to see what activities he performs during the day that could 
be at risk. As you work with the employee, you see him perform the following 
activities: 
9 Log in to the corporate network using Kerberos 
9 Access files on a remote system through a Web browser using SSL 
9 Log into a remote UNIX system using SSH 
9 Connect to a POP3 server and retrieve e-mail 
Which of these activities is most vulnerable to a sniffing attack? 
A. Logging in to the corporate network using Kerberos 
B. Accessing files on a remote system through a Web browser using SSL 
C. Logging into a remote UNIX system using SSH 
D. Connecting to a POP3 server and retrieving e-mail 
o 
You are reading a security article regarding penetration testing of various 
authentication methods. One of the methods being described uses a time- 
stamped ticket as part of its methodology. Which authentication method would 
match this description? 
A. Certificates 
B. CHAP 
C. Kerberos 
D. Tokens 
~ 
You are validating the security of various vendors that you work with to ensure 
that your transactions with the vendors are secure. As part of this, you validate 
that the certificates used by the vendors for SSL communications are valid.You 
check one of the vendor's certificates and find the information shown in Figure 
1.1. From the information shown, what vendor would you have to trust as a 
CA for this certificate to be valid? 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 9 Chapter 1 
51 
Figure 1.16 Sample Vendor Certificate 
o 
A. Syngress 
B. Thawte 
C. Microsoft 
D. All of the above 
You have been brought in to analyze the overall security strength of a banking 
organization. As part of your analysis, you work with the existing security 
administrator to see what issues she has to deal with on a daily basis. She 
receives a help desk ticket stating that a teller issued a credit to his own account 
then authorized the credit so that he was able to prevent bouncing a check. 
According to the human resources department who called in the ticket, he said 
that he planned on removing the credit later after he got paid. The security 
administrator made a change to the security policies around one of the fol- 
lowing areas. If she analyzed the issue correctly, which area did she change the 
policy for? 
www.syngress.com 

52 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
10. 
A~ 
Bo 
Co 
D~ 
System logging in order to capture events similar to this in the future 
Segmentation of duties to prevent a teller from issuing and authorizing a 
credit 
System scanning in order to test other areas of the software for vulnerabili- 
ties similar to this 
Log analysis to ensure that future events like this are flagged for follow-up. 
As an administrator for a large corporation, you take your job very seriously 
and go through all of the systems' log data daily. While going through the for- 
tieth log of the day, you decide that you're spending too much time skipping 
over meaningless information to get to the few chunks of data that you can 
do something with. Which of the following options should you consider to 
reduce the amount of effort required on your part without compromising the 
overall security of the environment? 
A. Reduce the frequency of system scans so that fewer logs are generated 
B. Tune the logging policy so that only important events are captured 
C. Write logs less frequently to reduce the amount of log data 
D. Use segmentation of duties to move analysis of the log files to other team 
members with more time 
11. You have a variety of tools available to you as a security administrator that 
help with your security efforts. Some of these tools are tools created to per- 
form penetration testing or "pen testing." Based on your experience, what is 
the best use of these tools in your role as a security administrator? 
No 
Bo 
C~ 
Do 
Break through a system's security to determine how to best protect it 
Test a system's response to various attack scenarios 
Check compliance of a system against desktop security policies 
Determine a logging policy to use which ensures the capture of log data 
for recent attack types 
12. You are performing an audit to attempt to track down an intruder that man- 
aged to access a system on your network.You suspect that the intruder may 
have been a former employee who had intimate knowledge of the IT infras- 
tructure. As part of your audit, which of the following would you consider 
crucial to tracking the intruder? 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing * Chapter 1 
53 
A. Log file analysis 
B. System scanning 
C. Penetration testing 
D. Segregation of duties 
13. You have been asked to configure a remote access server (RAS) for external 
dial-up users to use on your TCP/IP-based network. As part of this configura- 
tion, you must determine which protocols to allow to be routed through the 
RAS and which to explicitly deny.Which of the following would you choose 
to explicitly deny? 
A. TCP/IP 
B. IPX/SPX 
C. NETBIOS 
D. CDP 
14. The screenshot below is from a file server on your corporate network.You 
had a suspicion that there were some services running on the system that were 
unnecessary. By performing a 'netstat-a' you confirmed that there is a service 
listening on a well-known port which is not necessary for a file server.Which 
service is this? 
Figure 1.17 Netstat Screenshot 
www.syngress.com 

54 
Chapter 1 9 General Security Concepts: Access Control, Authentication, and Auditing 
A. POP3 
B. Oracle RDBMS 
C. HTTP 
D. SNMP 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and epxlanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. C 
8. B 
2. 
C 
9. B 
3. D 
10. B 
4. A 
I1. B 
5. A 
12. A 
6. D 
13. B 
7. 
C 
14. C 
www.syngress.com 
I~ '~ 
~1 

Chapter 2 
Domain 1.0 Objectives in this chapter" 
9 
Active Attacks 
Social Engineering 
Vulnerability Scanning 
9 
Malicious Code Attacks 
Exam Objectives Review" 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
Self Test 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
55 

56 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
Attacks 
One of the more exciting and dynamic aspects of network security relates to 
attacks. A great deal of media attention and many vendor product offerings have 
been targeting attacks and attack methodologies. This is perhaps the reason that 
CompTIA has been focusing many questions in this particular area. While there are 
many different varieties and methods of attack, they can generally all be grouped 
into several categories: 
9 By the general target of the attack (application, network, or mixed) 
9 By whether the attack is active or passive 
9 By how the attack works (e.g., via password cracking, or by exploiting 
code and cryptographic algorithms) 
It's important to realize that the boundaries between these three categories 
aren't fixed. As attacks become more complex, they tend to be both application- 
based and network-based, which has spawned the new term "mixed threat applica- 
tions." An example of such an attack can be seen in the MyDoom worm, which 
targeted Windows machines in 2004.Victims received an e-mail indicating a 
delivery error, and if they executed the attached file, MyDoom would take over. 
The compromised machine would reproduce the attack by sending the e-mail to 
contacts in the user's address book, and copying the attachment to peer-to-peer 
(P2P) sharing directories. It would also open a backdoor on port 3127, and try to 
launch a denial of service (DOS) attack against The SCO Group or Microsoft. So, as 
attackers get more creative, we have seen more and more combined and sophisti- 
cated attacks. In this chapter, we'll focus on some of the specific types of each 
attack, such as" 
Active Attacks These include DoS, Distributed Denial of Service 
(DDoS), buffer overflow, synchronous (SYN) attack, spoofing, Man-in-the- 
Middle (MITM), replay, Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol 
(TCP/IP) hijacking, wardialing, dumpster diving, social engineering and 
vulnerability scanning. 
Passive Attacks These include sniffing, and eavesdropping. 
Password Attacks These include brute-force and dictionary-based pass- 
word attacks. 
www.syngress,com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
57 
Code and Cryptographic Attacks These include backdoors, viruses, 
Trojans, worms, rootkits, software exploitation, botnets and mathematical 
attacks. 
Active Attacks 
Active attacks can be described as attacks in which the attacker is actively 
attempting to cause harm to a network or system. The attacker isn't just listening 
on the wire, but is attempting to breach or shut down a service. Active attacks tend 
to be very visible, because the damage caused is often very noticeable. Some of the 
more well known active attacks are DoS/DDoS, buffer overflows, SYN attacks, and 
Internet Protocol (IP) spoofing; these and many more are detailed in the following 
section. 
DoS and DDoS 
To understand a DDoS attack and its consequences, you first need to grasp the 
fundamentals of DoS attacks. The progression from understanding DoS to DDoS is 
quite elementary, though the distinction between the two is important. Given its 
name, it should not come as a surprise that a DoS attack is aimed squarely at 
ensuring that the service a computing infrastructure usually delivers is negatively 
affected in some way. This type of attack does not involve breaking into the target 

58 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
system. Rather, a successful DoS attack reduces the quality of the service delivered 
by some measurable degree, often to the point where the target infrastructure of 
the DoS attack cannot deliver a service at all. In early 2000, high profile sites like 
Yahoo, eBay, CNN, and Amazon were hit by DDoS attacks that crippled their 
availability for hours. 
A common perception is that the target of a DoS attack is a server, though this 
is not always the case. The fundamental objective of a DoS attack is to degrade ser- 
vice, whether it is hosted by a single server or delivered by an entire network 
infrastructure. A DoS attack attempts to reduce the ability of a site to service 
clients, whether those clients are physical users or logical entities such as other 
computer systems. This can be achieved by either overloading the ability of the 
target network or server to handle incoming traffic, or by sending network packets 
that cause target systems and networks to behave unpredictably. Unfortunately for 
the administrator, "unpredictable" behaviour usually translates into a hung or 
crashed system. 
Although DoS attacks do not by definition generate a risk to confidential or 
sensitive data, they can act as an effective tool to mask more intrusive activities that 
could take place simultaneously. While administrators and security officers are 
attempting to rectify what they perceive to be the main problem, the real penetra- 
tion could be happening elsewhere. 
Some of the numerous forms of DoS attacks can be difficult to detect or 
deflect.Within weeks, months, or even days of the appearance of a new attack, 
subtle "copycat" variations begin appearing elsewhere. By this stage, not only must 
defenses be deployed for the primary attack, but also for its more distant cousins. 
Most DoS attacks take place across a network, with the perpetrator seeking to 
take advantage of the lack of integrated security within the current iteration of IP 
(i.e., IP version 4 [IPv4]). Hackers are fully aware that security considerations have 
been passed on to higher-level protocols and applications. IP version 6 (IPv6), 
which may help rectify some of these problems, includes a means of validating the 
source of packets and their integrity by using an authentication header. Although 
the continuing improvement of IP is critical, it does not resolve today's problems, 
because IPv6 is not yet in widespread use. 
DoS attacks not only originate from remote systems, but can also be launched 
against the local machine. Local DoS attacks are generally easier to locate and rec- 
tify, because the parameters of the problem space are well defined (local to the 
host). A common example of a locally based DoS attack is a fork bomb that repeat- 
edly spawns processes to consume system resources. 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks * Chapter 2 
59 
The financial and publicity-related implications of an effective DoS attack are 
hard to measure~at best they are embarrassing, and at worst they are a deathblow. 
Companies reliant on Internet traffic and e-purchases are at particular risk from 
DoS and DDoS attacks. The Web site is the engine that drives e-commerce, and 
customers are won or lost on the basis of the site's availability and speed. If a site is 
inaccessible or unresponsive, an alternate virtual storefront is usually only a few 
clicks away. A hacker, regardless of motive, knows that the best way to hurt an e- 
business is to affect its Internet presence in some way. DoS attacks can be an effi- 
cient means of achieving this end; the next sections cover two elemental types of 
DoS attacks: Resource Consumption attacks (such as SYN flood attacks and amplifica- 
tion attacks) and Malformed Packet attacks. 
Resource Consumption Attacks 
Computing resources are, by their very nature, finite. Administrators around the 
world bemoan the fact that their infrastructures lack network bandwidth, central 
processing unit (CPU) cycles, Random-Access Memory (RAM), and secondary 
storage. Invariably, the lack of these resources leads to some form of degradation of 
the services the computing infrastructure delivers to clients. The reality of having 
finite resources is highlighted even further when an orchestrated attack consumes 
these precious resources. 
The consumption of resources involves the reduction of available resources, 
whatever their nature, by using a directed attack. One of the more common forms 
of a DoS attack targets network bandwidth. In particular, Internet connections and 
the supporting devices are prime targets of this type of attack, due to their limited 
bandwidth and their visibility to the rest of the Internet community.Very few busi- 
nesses are in the fortunate position of having excessive Internet bandwidth, and 
when a business relies on its ability to service client requests quickly and efficiently, 
a bandwidth consumption attack can bring the company to its knees. 
Resource consumption attacks predominantly originate from outside the local 
network, but you should not rule out the possibility that the attack is from within. 
These attacks usually take the form of a large number of packets directed at the 
victim, a technique commonly known asfloodin~. 
A target network can also be flooded when an attacker has more available 
bandwidth than the victim and overwhelms the victim with pure brute force. This 
situation is less likely to happen on a one-to-one basis if the target is a medium- 
sized e-commerce site. Such companies generally have a larger "pipe" than their 
attackers. On the other hand, the availability of broadband connectivity has driven 

60 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
high-speed Internet access into the homes of users around the world. This has 
increased the likelihood of this type of attack, as home users replace their analog 
modems with Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) and cable modem technologies. 
Another way of consuming bandwidth is to enlist the aid of loosely configured 
networks, causing them to send traffic directed at the victim. If enough networks 
can be duped into this type of behaviour, the victim's network can be flooded with 
relative ease. These types of attacks are often called amplification attacks, with a smu~ 
attack~which sends an Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) request to a 
broadcast address, causing all hosts in the network to send I CMP replies to the 
victim~being a classic one. 
Other forms of resource consumption can include the reduction of connections 
available to legitimate users and the reduction of system resources available to the 
host operating system (OS) itself. "Denial of service" is a very broad term, and con- 
sequently various types of exploits can fit the description due to the circumstances 
surrounding their manifestation.A classic example is the Structured Query 
Language (SQL) Slammer worm, which exploited a known vulnerability in 
Microsoft SQL Server to generate excessive amounts of network traffic in attempts 
to reproduce itself to other vulnerable system, which resulted in a global slowdown 
of the Internet on January 25, 2003. 
Another form of DoS is the now ever-present e-mail spare, or Unsolicited Bulk 
Email (UBE). Spammers can send a large amount of unwanted e-mail in a very 
short amount of time. If a company's mail server is bombarded with spam, it may 
slow down, fail to receive valid e-mails, or even crash entirely. Getting spammed is 
a very real DoS danger and e-mail protection is now high on every company's 
security checklist. 
SYN Attacks 
A SYN attack is a DoS attack that exploits a basic weakness found in the TCP/IP 
protocol, and its concept is fairly simple. As discussed later in this chapter, a standard 
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) session consists of the two communicating 
hosts exchanging a SYN I SYN/acknowledgement (ACK) I ACK. The 
expected behavior is that the initiating host sends a SYN packet, to which the 
responding host will issue a SYN/ACK and wait for an ACK reply from the ini- 
tiator.With a SYN attack, or SYN flood, the attacker simply sends only the SYN 
packet, leaving the victim waiting for a reply. The attack occurs when the attacker 
sends thousands and thousands of SYN packets to the victim, forcing them to wait 
for replies that never come.While the host is waiting for so many replies, it can't 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
61 
accept any legitimate requests, so it becomes unavailable, thus achieving the pur- 
pose of a DoS attack. For a graphical representation of a SYN attack, refer to 
Figure 2.1. Some stateful firewalls protect against SYN attacks by resetting pending 
connections after a specific timeout. Another protection is with the use of SYN 
cookies, where a computer under attack responds with a special SYN/ACK packet 
and does not wait for an ACK response. Only when the ACK packet in response to 
the SYN/ACK packet returns, does the entry generate a queue entry from infor- 
mation within the special SYN/ACK packet. 
Figure 2.1 SYN Attack Diagram 
Thousands of 
~- 
SYN Packets 
~ ~ ~ ~ 
////////i 
/ / / 
/ 
/ / / 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ / 
/ 
/ 
II/ 
I 
/11 
I 
I!11 
~,  
,s_ 
I- 
Victim 
Awaiting SYN/ACK Reply 
Attacker 
Sending .Only 
SYN Packets 
DDoS Attacks 
Though some forms of DoS attacks can be amplified by multiple intermediaries, 
the first step of a DoS exploit still originates from a single machine. However, DoS 
attacks have evolved beyond single-tier (SYN flood) and two-tier (smurI 0 attacks. 
DDoS attacks advance the DoS conundrum one more painful step forward. 
Modern attack methodologies have now embraced the world of distributed multi- 
tier computing. One of the significant differences in the methodology of a DDoS 
attack is that it consists of two distinct phases. During the first phase, the perpe- 
trator compromises computers scattered across the lnternet and installs specialized 
software on these hosts to aid in the attack. In the second phase, the compromised 
hosts (referred to as zombies) are then instructed through intermediaries (called 
www.syngress.com 

62 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
masters) to commence the attack. The most widely known DDoS attacks are 
Trinoo, Tribe Flood Network, and Stacheldracht. 
Hundreds, possibly thousands, of zombies can be co-opted into the attack by 
diligent hackers. Using the control software, each of these zombies can then be 
used to mount its own DoS attack on the target. The cumulative effect of the 
zombie attack is to either overwhelm the victim with massive amounts of traffic or 
to exhaust resources such as connection queues. 
Additionally, this type of attack obfuscates the source of the original attacker: 
the commander of the zombie hordes. The multi-tier model of DDoS attacks and 
their ability to spoof packets and to encrypt communications, can make tracking 
down the real offender a tortuous process. 
The command structure supporting a DDoS attack can be quite convoluted 
(see Figure 2.2), and it can be difficult to determine a terminology that describes it 
clearly. Let's look at one of the more understandable naming conventions for a 
DDoS attack structure and the components involved. 
Software components involved in a DDoS attack include: 
9 
Client The control software used by the hacker to launch attacks. The 
client directs command strings to its subordinate hosts. 
9 Daemon 
Software programs running on a zombie that receive incoming 
client command strings and act on them accordingly. The daemon is the 
process responsible for actually implementing the attack detailed in the 
command strings. 
Hosts involved in a DDoS attack include" 
9 Master A computer that runs the client software. 
9 
Zombie A subordinate host that runs the daemon process. 
9 Target The recipient of the attack. 
In order to recruit hosts for the attack, hackers target inadequately secured 
machines connected in some form to the Internet. Hackers use various inspection 
techniques~both automated and manual~to uncover inadequately secured net- 
works and hosts. After the insecure machines have been identified, the attacker 
compromises the systems through a variety of ways. The first task a thorough 
hacker undertakes is to erase evidence that the system has been compromised, and 
also to ensure that the compromised host will pass a cursory examination. Some of 
the compromised hosts become masters, while others are destined to be made into 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
63 
zombies. Masters receive orders that they then trickle through to the zombies for 
which they are responsible. The master is only responsible for sending and receiving 
short control messages, making lower bandwidth networks just as suitable as higher 
bandwidth networks. 
Figure 2.2 A Generic DDoS Attack Tree 
On the hosts not designated as zombies, the hacker installs the software (called 
a daemon) used to send out attack streams. The daemon runs in the background on 
the zombie, waiting for a message to activate the exploit software and launch an 
attack targeted at the designated victim. A daemon may be able to launch multiple 
types of attacks, such as User Datagram Protocol (UDP) or SYN floods. Combined 
with the ability to use spoofing, the daemon can prove to be a very flexible and 
powerful attack tool. 

64 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
Despite its rather evil-sounding name, a daemon is defined as any pro- 
gram that runs on a continuous basis and handles requests for service 
that come in from other computers. There are many legitimate and 
useful daemon programs that have nothing to do with launching 
attacks (e.g., the line printer daemon [LPD] that runs on a remote print 
server to monitor for print requests). The term is more often used in ref- 
erence to UNIX/Linux systems. On Windows systems, services can be con- 
sidered the analogue of daemons, which run in the background waiting 
for requests. 
After the attacker has recruited a sufficient number of zombies, he can contact 
the masters and instruct them to launch a particular attack. The master then passes 
on these instructions to multiple zombies who commence the DDoS attack. After 
the attack network is in place, it can take only a few moments to launch a dis- 
tributed attack.With similar speed, the hacker can also halt the attack. 
The basic flow of the attack then becomes: 
9 
For Hosts Attacker to master to zombie to target 
9 
For Software Attacker to client to daemon to target 
The use and development of DDoS programs have piqued the interest of gov- 
ernments, businesses, and security experts alike, in no small part because it is a class 
of attack that is extremely effective while simultaneously being hard to trace. 
Know the difference between DoS and a DDoS attacks. A DoS attack is 
simply any attack that makes a network or computing resource unavail- 
able. A DDoS is very unique in that it orchestrates many packets to be 
directed to one host from multiple machines called zombies. These are 
easily confused terms, stemming from the same idea, but distinct in 
their scope. DoS is a very general term describing any kind of attack 
that knocks out a service, while DDoS is a term that describes one spe- 
cific type of DoS attack. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
65 
Software Exploitation and Buffer Overflows 
Despite their best intentions, programmers make mistakes. These mistakes often 
lead to weaknesses in the software that can be exploited through buffer overflows, 
one of the most common ways for an attacker to gain access to a system. As the 
name suggests, this is nothing more than an attack that writes too much data to a 
program's buffer. The buffer is an area of temporary memory used by the program 
to store data or instructions. To create a buffer overflow attack, the attacker simply 
writes too much data to that area of memory, overwriting what is there. This extra 
data can be garbage characters, which would cause the program to fail; more com- 
monly, the extra data can be new instructions, which the victim computer will run. 
An attacker can generally gain access to a system very quickly and easily through 
buffer overflows. There are many examples of buffer overflow attacks. One 
common buffer overflow attack was the Sasser worm, which caused problems in 
networks during 2004. Sasser used a buffer overflow in the Windows Local Security 
Authority Subsystem Service (LSASS) to infect a machine and then replicate to 
neighboring machines. As is usually true, a recently patched or firewalled system 
would not be vulnerable to the attack. Even more, Microsoft's Windows Vista 
includes a feature called ASLR (Address Space Layout Randomization), which 
places system data areas like executables, libraries, and stacks in random places, 
making it a lot more difficult for buffer overflow exploits to put code in a location 
that will be executed. 
For the test you do not need to know exactly how a buffer overflow 
works, only what a buffer overflow is and what its inherent risks are. 
We recommend that security practitioners have a good understanding 
of overflows, as they are very common. For more information on buffer 
overflows, see Chapter 8 of Hack Proofing Your Network, Second 
Edition (Syngress Publishing, ISBN: 1-928994-70-9). 
Another type of software exploitation is found in a program's failure to deal 
with unexpected input. When a program asks a user for input, it looks for a certain 
response. A basic example of this would be if you were to use a program that asked 
you to choose either Option 1 or Option 2.You would generate unexpected input 
if you were to enter a 3. Most programs will catch this error and tell you that you 
www.syngress.com 

66 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
only have two choices, but some don't have proper error handling routines. This 
may sound like a really trivial and uncommon attack methodology, because it is 
easy to catch from the programming standpoint. However, as mentioned earlier, 
mistakes do happen. For example, consider the lesson learned by an early e-com- 
merce site. Their shopping cart program would allow users to enter negative num- 
bers of items into their cart. A malicious user could order-2 books at $50 each, 
and would be credited $100 on his or her credit card. This continued for several 
days before an accountant caught the problem. It is extremely important for a pro- 
grammer to completely check all input a program receives, and to clean it or sani- 
tize it to avoid introducing vulnerabilities while parsing the input. 
MITM Attacks 
As you have probably already begun to realize, the TCP/IP protocols were not 
designed with security in mind and contain a number of fundamental flaws that 
simply cannot be fixed due to the nature of the protocols. One issue that has 
resulted from IPv4's lack of security is the MITM attack. To fully understand how a 
MITM attack works, let's quickly review how TCP/IP works. 
The TCP/IP was formally introduced in 1974 byVinton Cerf. The original 
purpose of TCP/IP was not to provide security; it was to provide high-speed com- 
munication network links. 
A TCP/IP connection is formed with a three-way handshake. As seen in Figure 
2.3, a host (Host A) that wants to send data to another host (Host B) will initiate 
communications by sending a SYN packet. The SYN packet contains, among other 
things, the source and destination IP address as well as the source and destination 
port numbers. Host B will respond with a SYN/ACK. The SYN from Host B 
prompts Host A to send another ACK and the connection is established. 
If a malicious individual can place himself between Host A and Host B, for 
example compromising an upstream router belonging to the ISP of one of the 
hosts, he can then monitor the packets moving between the two hosts. It is then 
possible for the malicious individual to analyze and change packets coming and 
going to the host. It is quite easy for a malicious person to perform this type of 
attack on Telnet sessions, but, the attacker must first be able to predict the right 
TCP sequence number and properly modify the data for this type of attack to 
actually work~all before the session times out waiting for the response. Obviously, 
doing this manually is hard to pull off; however, tools designed to watch for and 
modify specific data have been written and work very well. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
67 
Figure 2.3 A Standard TCP/IP Handshake 
I! i.I 
I-' 
Host A 
SYN 
SYN/ACK 
ACK 
Y 
gh,~ 
! I.I 
N~ 
Host B 
There are a few ways in which you can prevent MITM attacks from hap- 
pening, like using a TCP/IP implementation that generates TCP sequence numbers 
that are as close to truly random as possible. 
TCP/IP Hijacking 
TCP/IP hijacking, or session hijacking, is a problem that has appeared in most 
TCP/IP-based applications, ranging from simple Telnet sessions to Web-based e- 
commerce applications. In order to hijack a TCP/IP connection, a malicious user 
must first have the ability to intercept a legitimate user's data, and then insert him- 
self or herself into that session much like a MITM attack. A tool known as Hunt 
(www.packetstormsecurity.org/sniffers/hunt/) is very commonly used to monitor 
and hijack sessions. It works especially well on basic Telnet or File Transfer Protocol 
(FTP) sessions. 
A more interesting and malicious form of session hijacking involves Web-based 
applications (especially e-commerce and other applications that rely heavily on 
cookies to maintain session state). The first scenario involves hijacking a user's 
cookie, which is normally used to store login credentials and other sensitive infor- 
mation, and using that cookie to then access that user's session. The legitimate user 
will simply receive a "session expired" or "login failed" message and probably will 
not even be aware that anything suspicious happened. The other issue with Web 
server applications that can lead to session hijacking is incorrectly configured ses- 
sion timeouts. A Web application is typically configured to timeout a user's session 
after a set period of inactivity. If this timeout is too large, it leaves a window of 
opportunity for an attacker to potentially use a hijacked cookie or even predict a 
session ID number and hijack a user's session. 
In order to prevent these types of attacks, as with other TCP/IP-based attacks, 
the use of encrypted sessions are key; in the case of Web applications, unique and 
pseudo-random session IDs and cookies should be used along with Secure Sockets 
Layer (SSL) encryption.This makes it harder for attackers to guess the appropriate 

68 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
sequence to insert into connections, or to intercept communications that are 
encrypted during transit. 
Replay Attacks 
In a replay attack, a malicious person captures an amount of sensitive traffic, and 
then simply replays it back to the host in an attempt to replicate the transaction. 
For example, consider an electronic money transfer. User A transfers a sum of 
money to Bank B. Malicious User C captures User A's network traffic, then replays 
the transaction in an attempt to cause the transaction to be repeated multiple times. 
Obviously, this attack has no benefit to User C, but could result in User A losing 
money. Replay attacks, while possible in theory, are quite unlikely due to multiple 
factors such as the level of difficulty of predicting TCP sequence numbers. 
However, it has been proven, especially in older OSes, that the formula for gener- 
ating random TCP sequence numbers isn't truly random or even that difficult to 
predict, which makes this attack possible. 
Another potential scenario for a replay attack is this" An attacker replays the 
captured data with all potential sequence numbers, in hopes of getting lucky and 
hitting the right one, thus causing the user's connection to drop, or in some cases, 
to insert arbitrary data into a session. 
As with MITM attacks, the use of random TCP sequence numbers and encryp- 
tion like Secure Shell (SSH) or Internet Protocol Security (IPSec) can help defend 
against this problem. The use of timestamps also helps defend against replay attacks. 
Spoofing Attacks 
Spoofing means providing false information about your identity in order to gain 
unauthorized access to systems, or, in even simpler terms, pretending to be 
someone you are not. These attacks can either be IR e-mail, or Web site spoofing. 
IP Spoofing 
The most classic example of spoofing is IP spoofing.TCP/IP requires that every 
host fills in its own source address on packets, and there are almost no measures in 
place to stop hosts from lying. Spoofing, by definition, is always intentional. 
However, the fact that some malfunctions and misconfigurations can cause the 
exact same effect as an intentional spoof, causes difficulty in determining whether 
an incorrect address indicates a spoof. 
Spoofing is really easy and is a result of some inherent flaws in TCP/IP. TCP/IP 
basically assumes that all computers are telling the truth. There is little or no 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
69 
checking done to verify that a packet really comes from the address indicated in 
the IP header.When the protocols were being designed in the late 1960s, engineers 
didn't anticipate that anyone would or could use the protocol maliciously. In fact, 
one engineer at the time described the system as flawless because "computers don't 
lie."There are different types of IP spoofing attacks. These include blind spoofing 
attacks in which the attacker can only send packets and has to make assumptions or 
guesses about replies, and informed attacks in which the attacker can monitor, and 
therefore participate in, bidirectional communications. 
There are ways to combat spoofing, however. Stateful firewalls usually have 
spoofing protection whereby they define which IPs' are allowed to originate in 
each of their interfaces. If a packet claimed to be from a network specified as 
belonging to a different interface, the packet is quickly dropped. This protects from 
both blind and informed attacks. An easy way to defeat blind spoofing attacks is to 
disable source routing in your network at your firewall, at your router, or both. 
Source routing is, in short, a way to tell your packet to take the same path back 
that it took while going forward. This information is contained in the packet's IP 
Options, and disabling this will prevent attackers from using it to get responses back 
from their spoofed packets. 
Spoofing is not always malicious. Some network redundancy schemes rely on 
automated spoofing in order to take over the identity of a downed server. This is 
due to the fact that the networking technologies never accounted for the need for 
one server to take over for another. 
Technologies and methodologies exist that can help safeguard against spoofing 
of these capability challenges.These include: 
9 Using firewalls to guard against unauthorized transmissions 
9 Not relying on security through obscurity, the expectation that using undocu- 
mented protocols will protect you 
[] 
Using various cryptographic algorithms to provide differing levels of 
authentication 
Knowledge of TCP/IP is really helpful when dealing with spoofing and 
sequence attacks. Having a good grasp of the fundamentals of TCP/IP 
will make the attacks seem less abstract. Additionally, knowledge of not 
only what these attacks are, but how they work, will better prepare you 
to answer test questions. 
www.syngress.com 

70 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
Subtle attacks are far more effective than obvious ones. Spoofing has an advan- 
tage in this respect over a straight vulnerability exploit. The concept of spoofing 
includes pretending to be a trusted source, thereby increasing the chances that the 
attack will go unnoticed. 
If the attacks use just occasional induced failures as part of their subtlety, users 
will often chalk it up to normal problems that occur all the time. By careful appli- 
cation of this technique over time, users' behavior can often be manipulated. 
EXERCISE 2.01 
ARP SPOOFING 
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) spoofing can be quickly and easily 
done with a variety of tools, most of which are designed to work on 
UNIX OSes. One of the best all-around suites is a package called dsniff. It 
contains an ARP spoofing utility and a number of other sniffing tools 
that can be beneficial when spoofing. 
To make the most of dsniff you'll need a Layer 2 switch into which 
all of your lab machines are plugged. It is also helpful to have various 
other machines doing routine activities such as Web surfing, checking 
post office protocol (POP) mail, or using Instant Messenger software. 
1. To run dsniff for this exercise, you will need a UNIX-based 
machine. To download the package and to check compatibility, 
visit the dsniff Web site at www.monkey.org/~dugsong/dsniff. 
2. After you've downloaded and installed the software, you will see 
a utility called arpspoof. This is the tool that we'll be using to 
impersonate the gateway host. The gateway is the host that 
routes the traffic to other networks. 
3. You'll also need to make sure that IP forwarding is turned on in 
your kernel. If you're using *BSD UNIX, you can enable this with 
the sysctl command (sysctl-w net.inet.ip.forwarding=l). After 
this has been done, you should be ready to spoof the gateway. 
4. arpspoof is a really flexible tool. It will allow you to poison the 
ARP of the entire local area network (LAN), or target a single 
host. Poisoning is the act of tricking the other computers into 
thinking you are another host. The usage is as follows: 
home# arpspoof -i fxpO i0.I0.0.I 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
71 
This will start the attack using interface fxpO, and will intercept 
any packets bound for 10.10.0.1. The output will show you the 
current ARP traffic. 
5. Congratulations, you've just become your gateway. 
You can leave the arpspoof process running, and experiment in 
another window with some of the various sniffing tools which dsniff 
offers. Dsniff itself is a jack-of-all-trades password grabber. It will fetch 
passwords for Telnet, FTP, Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Instant 
Messaging (IM), Oracle, and almost any other password that is trans- 
mitted in the clear. Another tool, mailsnarf, will grab any and all e-mail 
messages it sees, and store them in a standard Berkeley mbox file for 
later viewing. Finally, one of the more visually impressive tools is 
WebSpy. This tool will grab Universal Resource Locator (URL) strings 
sniffed from a specified host, and display them on your local terminal, 
giving the appearance of surfing along with the victim. 
You should now have a good idea of the kind of damage an attacker 
can do with ARP spoofing and the right tools. This should also make 
clear the importance of using encryption to handle data. Additionally, 
any misconceptions about the security or sniffing protection provided by 
switched networks should now be alleviated thanks to the magic of ARP 
spoofing! 
E-mail Spoofing 
Spam is a major problem in today's Internet. And some of the techniques that 
spammers use include e-mail spoofing, where the e-mail sender changes the 
FROM field of the e-mail so that it appears that the message came from a trusted 
source or domain. 
Few users would open an e-mail from mailto:defcon@xploits.com with an 
attachment called "Sex), Screensaver.scr," but a lot more users would open an attach- 
ment called "Vacation Schedules.xls" from mailto:hr@yourcompany.com. E-mail 
spoofing is extremely easy to do, as seen in Exercise 2.02, and hard to stop. User 
education is the best defense against e-mail spoofing, along with proper configura- 
tion of the e-mail protection programs the company has. 
www.syngress.com 

72 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
E-MAI L SPOOFI NG 
It is almost trivial to spoof an e-mail's sender address, and we can show 
you how using any e-mail client (e.g., Microsoft Outlook Express). 
Normally, you define e-mail accounts in Outlook Express, including your 
name, e-mail address, password, and mail server. However, in most cases, 
to send an e-mail the password is not used, as most Simple Mail Transfer 
Protocol (SMTP) traffic is not authenticated. 
Let's say you want to send your colleague an e-mail as if it was sent 
from a Dr. Sam Carter, from a fictitious government agency. First, you 
need to find out the mail server your colleague receives e-mail from. 
Open a command prompt and type nslookup, then input the set 
type=lVlX command, and enter the domain name of the e-mail address. 
You should get a listing like this: 
Microsoft 
Windows 
XP 
[Version 
5.1.2600] 
(C) Copyright 
1985-2001 
Microsoft 
Corp. 
C-\Documents 
and Settings\user>nslookup 
Default 
Server- 
dns.yourdomain.com 
Address : 
i0.1.1.1 
> set type=MX 
> destinationdomain.com 
Server: 
dns.yourdomain.com 
Address: 
i0.I.I.I 
Non-authoritative 
answer : 
destinationdomain.com 
MX preference 
= I0, mail exchanger 
= 
mail. destinationdomain, 
com 
destinationdomain.com 
MX preference 
= 20, mail exchanger 
= 
mail2, destinationdomain, 
com 
dest inat iondomain, com 
mail. destinationdomain, 
com 
mail2, destinationdomain, 
com 
> 
www.syngress.corn 
nameserver 
= nsl.domainserver.com 
internet 
address 
= 172.16.1.1 
internet 
address 
: 172.16.2.1 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
73 
Look for the MX entry with the lowest preference; in this case 
mail. desti n atio ndoma i n. com. 
Now, go to Outlook Express, and go to Tools ] Accounts and create a 
new account. In the appropriate screens, enter e-mail 
sam.carter@sgc.com, name Sam Carter, mail.destinationdomain.com as 
the mail server, and anything in the username/password fields. Now 
simply create a new e-mail to your victim, and he or she should receive 
an e-mail from Dr. Sam Carter. The only way they could tell it is a fake e- 
mail is by looking at the e-mail headers and verifying the IP address 
used to send the e-mail~but that's very hard to do for the average user. 
Even more, if servers do not have spoof protection configured (so 
that e-mail FROM a domain cannot also be sent TO a domain), it's also 
simple to send an e-mail to your victim posing as his boss. Simply enter 
his bosses' name and e-mail address in the account properties. 
Several frameworks have been proposed to defend against e-mail 
spoofing, but there's not a single common adopted. The Sender Policy 
Framework (SPF) is gaining traction, but it's still a long way from being 
a universal standard. In the meantime, users need to be educated on the 
potential for e-mail spoofing and to use common sense before believing 
and opening messages and attachments. 
Web Site Spoofing 
Web site spoofing occurs when an attacker creates a Web site very similar, if not 
identical, to another site, usually an e-commerce, banking, or gambling destination. 
The main purpose of Web site spoofing is to trick the visitors into thinking they 
are using the original site, so they will enter their credentials (username, password, 
PIN, and so forth), which will be captured by the owners of the spoofed site.When 
attackers create a spoofed system, they often just recreate as much of the original as 
necessary to create an illusion of the real thing. With this fagade, they've managed 
to build enough to establish their trick, but have avoided a lot of the complexities 
that may have been involved with the original system. Armed with the real creden- 
tials of a valid user, attackers can wreak all kinds of havoc on the victim's account. 
Phishing 
Phishing is a combination of e-mail and Web site spoofing, and it's one of the most 
dangerous attacks currently active. The basic Phishing attack starts with a spammer 
r 
www.syngress.com 

74 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
sending out massive amounts of mail impersonating a Web site they have spoofed. 
They claim to be from the human resource department, accounts receivable, com- 
plaints, and so forth, and produce an official looking notice alerting the user they 
need to login to their account for one reason or another. The "link" to the official 
site masquerades a connection to the spoofed site. Once the user goes to the 
spoofed site, it's very hard to differentiate it from the real one. Once the user enters 
the credentials, usually they are redirected to the real site after the attacker has 
stolen the credentials, and the user doesn't have any idea of what happened. 
The best way to protect from phishing and Web site spoofing is to always keep 
your Internet browser patched, and to check the URL address bar to verify the 
correct site is accessed. Phishing is so dangerous that the latest versions of major 
browsers, including Internet Explorer, Firefox and Opera, have added built-in 
phishing protection, and sites like Google and eBay offer their own toolbar that 
include anti-phishing protection.You can visit the Anti-Phishing Working Group, a 
coalition of industry and law-enforcement agencies focusing on eliminating fraud 
and identity theft that result from phishing, pharming, and other e-mail spoofing 
efforts. For more information go to www.antiphishing.org. 
In closing, identity is one of the most critical needs in network security; unfor- 
tunately, it is also the most often unappreciated need. As it stands, online identity is 
easy to claim but difficult to verify. 
Wardialing 
Wardialing, which gets its name from the film "WarGames," is the act of dialing 
large blocks of telephone numbers, via modem, searching for a computer with 
which to connect. The attacker in this case uses a program known as a wardialer to 
automate this process. These programs are usually quite flexible and will dial a 
given block of numbers at a set interval, logging whatever they may happen to 
find. While this technique was previously heavily used, telecom technology now 
makes it easier to identify war dialers, therefore making it slightly more of a risk to 
potential attackers. 
From the viewpoint of someone in charge of securing a large corporate infras- 
tructure, it makes sense to wardial all known company lines to check for modems 
that may be connected without your knowledge. Though the practice is on a 
decline, installation of unauthorized modems by employees still represents a huge 
threat to enterprise security. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
75 
For more information on wardialing and wardriving, refer to Chapters 4 
and 6, respectively. 
Dumpster Diving 
Dumpster diving is the process of physically digging through a victim's trash in an 
attempt to gain information. Often it is easy to find client or product information, 
internal memos, and even password information that have been placed in wastebas- 
kets. In one famous example, a major clothing company had simply discarded 
photos and information about their upcoming clothing lineup. It didn't take long 
for the carelessly discarded information to wind up in the hands of competitors, 
doing great damage to the victim company's plans for a unique product launch. It 
is important to make sure that your organization has a method of securely dis- 
posing of the hard copies of confidential information. Even a $15 paper shredder 
can be enough to help protect your assets. Dumpster diving is closely related to the 
next topic, social engineering. 
Another issue related to dumpster diving is the disposal of a company's remov- 
able and fixed media. Before a computer is discarded, reassigned, or returned when 
a lease expires, it's very important to completely wipe the data from the computer 
and then physically destroy the drives and media. Security researchers and vendors 
have been able to purchase used computers and hard disks from auction sites, and 
then use tools to recover the contents owners thought they erased. Media like 
CDs, DVDs and floppy disks should be destroyed or shredded, and storage like hard 
disks should use a wiper utility, or even a machine to degauss the disk, which mag- 
netically erases the data and leaves the drive unusable. 
Social Engineering 
Social engineering is often overlooked in security plans and scenarios, which is 
unfortunate, because it is one of the most dangerous and easily used methods to 
infiltrate a victim's network. The concept is nothing more than creative lying; a con 
game by a con artist. The lies are often backed up by materials found in dumpster 
diving, which involves digging through the victim's trash, looking for important 
documents, phone lists, and so forth. A much easier way to get information on a 
www.syngress.com 

76 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
potential victim is the company's Web site, which usually lists executive personnel, 
phone lists, and other information that can be used to trick a victim. Knowing a 
few important names, for example, can make the attacker seem more authentic and 
can allow him to pose as someone he is not, perhaps asking for classified informa- 
tion over the telephone. This information can be something as trivial as someone's 
telephone number, or as confidential as someone's server password and login ID. 
Unfortunately, you can't firewall employees, but you can make them aware of 
policies regarding disclosure of information, especially over the telephone or via e- 
mail. The human factor can often be the weakest link in the security of a network. 
However, the positive side is that most employees do not wish to harm the com- 
pany, and will follow disclosure procedures if they are made aware of the problem. 
It's very important to recognize the threat that social engineering poses. 
Employee education and creating a Password Protection Policy are the best ways to 
defend against social engineering. 
EXERCISE 2.03 
PERFORMING SOCIAL ENGINEERING ATTACKS 
The best way to see the success that can be had with social engineering 
is to try it. With permission from your employer, make phone calls to 
random employees and do some information gathering. Have a list of 
questions handy, and, if necessary, practice what you will say. The 
smoother and more confident your delivery, the more successful you will 
be. 
Be careful to not ask sensitive questions without a proper introduc- 
tion. Avoid asking questions such as "Hi, I'm from tech support; what is 
your password, please?" Instead, try a different approach to first gain 
trust. For example, get the number of a pay phone that accepts 
incoming calls. Telephone your victim and prepare a story about 
needing to verify passwords on the server, or something of that nature. 
Now, inform the victim that "for security reasons" you'd like him or her 
to call you back at the following number, and give the pay phone 
number. When the victim calls back, be certain to answer the telephone 
professionally, and have the victim give you his or her password or other 
important information. It is important to establish some kind of trust or 
authority before requesting the information. 
Social engineering takes practice (and a certain amount of talent) 
and every situation is different, so there isn't really any right or wrong 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
77 
way to do it. As stated earlier, the victim must believe you are who you 
say you are. Try to think of plausible situations, and, if possible, know 
the names of other people in the organization that you are social engi- 
neering. Familiarity means comfort, and comfort means trust. With 
these tips in mind, along with some practice, you are likely to be able to 
obtain the information you request. 
Vulnerability Scanning 
Vulnerability scanning is important to both attackers and those responsible for 
security hosts and networks. This refers to the act of probing a host in order to find 
an exploitable service or process. There are a number of tools that can assist in vul- 
nerability scanning. A basic example is a tool called Nmap. It is a port scanner, 
which sends packets to a host in order to generate a list of services the host is run- 
ning, and it will also return the OS type.With this information, an attacker can get 
a better idea of what type of attack may be suitable for that particular host. For 
example, it would not make sense to launch an IIS attack against a UNIX machine, 
so knowing the OS and installed services means an attacker can better search for an 
exploit that will work. 
A more sophisticated vulnerability scanning tool is Nessus. It is a freeware tool, 
which can be set up to scan multiple types of architectures for vulnerabilities using 
a list of known attack types. It has several modes of operation, but in its default 
mode, it will generate a very readable output detailing what services are currently 
exploitable, and which may be exploitable. It also offers suggestions on how to 
improve the security of a host. It's a great tool for evaluating the security of your 
systems, and can be downloaded from www.nessus.org. 
Another free utility is Microsoft's Security Baseline Analyzer, which can be 
downloaded from www.microsoft.com/technet/security/tools/mbsahome.mspx. It 
can be used to assess your own company's security, and will list patches and config- 
urations that should be changed on Microsoft machines to improve their security. 
www.syngress.com 

78 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
EXERCISE 2.04 
TESTING YOUR NETWORK'S PORTS 
For this exercise, you will need a copy of the Nmap port scanning tool. 
The UNIX version and links to a Windows version can be found at 
www.insecure.org. Nmap is a powerful port scanning utility that can be 
used to gain information about a single host or an entire network; it 
can even determine OS types. 
The basic command used with Nmap is nmap <ipaddress>. If you are 
running as the unprivileged user, this will default to a TCP scan, which 
essentially establishes a full TCP connection to each port on the target 
system. 
There are a number of useful options, some of which will require 
you to run as root. 
Consider Nmap-sS-O-v <ipaddress>: This scan only sends the SYN 
packets, and thus is considered a stealth scan. The-O specifies that we'd 
like Nmap to determine the OS type, and the-v requests the verbose 
mode, so we see exactly what the program is doing, while it's doing it. 
You may notice that it takes a really long time to scan hosts. This is 
because Nmap scans all ports by default. You may wish to shorten the 
scan time by limiting it to certain ports. This can be done via the-p 
command. For example, Nmap-sS-v-p '1-1024' will use a SYN scan to 
scan only ports 1-1024. 
Nmap can also be used to scan networks for responding hosts. This 
function is called the ping scan and can be invoked with the-sP option. 
There are many more things that can be done with Nmap, so make 
sure you have a test lab environment ready and start trying the many 
different options. 
Passive Attacks 
During a passive attack, the direct opposite of an active attack, the attacker isn't 
directly affecting the victim's network. Rather, the attacker is passively listening for 
something to occur, or trying to gather information. Some passive attacks can be 
likened to eavesdropping on someone's conversation, or using binoculars to spy on 
someone. There are quite a few interesting ways that passive attacks can occur, 
which will be described in detail in the following sections. 
www.syngress.com 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
79 
Sniffing and Eavesdropping 
Sniffing means eavesdropping on a network. A sniffer is a tool that enables a 
machine to see all packets that are passing over the wire (or through the air on a 
wireless network), even the ones not destined for that host. This is a very powerful 
technique for diagnosing network problems, but it can also be used maliciously to 
scan for passwords, e-mail, or any other type of data sent in the clear. For sniffing to 
function, the network card has to be configured in promiscuous mode (which allows 
it to process all packets on the wire) by the sniffer program. Tcpdump is the most 
common UNIX sniffing tool, and comes with many Linux distributions. Snoop is 
the Solaris equivalent. These two programs are command-line-based, and will 
simply begin dumping all of the packets they see, in a readable format. They are 
fairly basic in their functionality, but can be used to gain information about 
routing, hosts, and traffic types. For more detailed command-line scanning, 
WireShark from www.wireshark.org is a fully graphical sniffing program that has 
many advanced features. One of the more powerful features of WireShark is the 
ability to reassemble TCP streams and sessions. After capturing an amount of data, 
an attacker can easily reassemble Web pages viewed, files downloaded, or e-mail 
sent, all with the click of the mouse. The threat from sniffing is yet another argu- 
ment for the use of encryption to protect any kind of sensitive data on a network. 
Another type of eavesdropping relies on the use of keI, loggers. These are pro- 
grams that run hidden in the OS, and record all keys typed by the user. Password, 
accounts, usernames, and more can be discovered with a keylogger running on an 
unsuspecting machine. Some keyloggers even take screenshots at regular intervals 
and send them to the owner of the program (or attacker). To protect against key- 
loggers, you should regularly run an anti-virus and anti-spyware program on 
desktop computers. 
Password Attacks 
Password attacks are extremely common, as they are easy to perform and often 
result in a successful intrusion. There are two basic types of password guessing that 
can be performed: brute force or dictionary-based attacks. Each of these methods is 
explained in detail in the following sections. Remember that the simplest password 
attack is just guessing passwords. If the attacker knows the victim well, the use of 
personal information like birthdays, children's names, pets, and hobbies can be used 
to make educated guesses. Always create a password that cannot be associated with 
yourself. 
www.syngress.com 

80 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
Password attacks can be either online or offline. In online attacks, passwords are 
passed directly to the attacked system via remote login attempts or manual entry. 
However, they are very noisy, usually get the attention of any reasonable security 
administrator, and many systems have an account lockout feature after an unsuc- 
cessful number of attempts. Offline attacks are more dangerous, but harder to do. 
They usually involve stealing a copy of the username and hashed password listing 
and then methodically encrypting possible passwords using the same hashing func- 
tion. If a match is found, the password is considered cracked. 
Before specific methods for applying brute force can be discussed, a brief expla- 
nation of password encryption is required. Most modern OSes use some form of 
password hashing to mask the exact password (see Chapter 9 for more information 
regarding hashing). Because passwords are never stored on the server in cleartext 
form, the password authentication system becomes much more secure. Even if 
someone who is unauthorized somehow obtains the password list, he will not be able 
to make immediate use of it, making it more likely that system administrators will 
have time to change all of the relevant passwords before any real damage is done. 
Passwords are generally stored in what is called hashed format.When a password 
is entered into the system, it passes through a one-way hashing function, such as 
Message Digest 5 (MD5), and the output is recorded. Hashing functions are one- 
way encryption only, and once data has been hashed, it cannot be restored. A server 
doesn't need to know what your password is. It needs to know that you know what 
it is.When you attempt to authenticate, the password you provided is passed 
through the hashing function and the output is compared to the stored hash value. 
If these values match, you are authenticated. Otherwise, the login attempt fails, and 
is logged by the system (assuming logging of such events is configured). 
Brute Force Attacks 
Brute force, in its simplest definition, refers to trying as many password combina- 
tions as possible until hitting on the right one. It is a method commonly used to 
obtain passwords, especially if the encrypted password list is available.While the 
exact number of characters in a password is usually unknown, most passwords can 
be estimated to be between four and 16 characters. Since only about 100 different 
values can be used for each character of the password, there are only about 1004 to 
1001~ likely password combinations. Though massively large, the number of possible 
password combinations is finite and is therefore vulnerable to brute force attack. 
It's important to take the birthday paradox into account when talking about 
brute force attacks. The birthday paradox predicts that within a group as small as 23 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
81 
people, there is a 50 percent chance that two people will share the same birthday. 
The mathematics are complex, but the birthday paradox predicts that finding a 
value that has the same hash as another value doesn't require calculating all options, 
far less than that. In theory, it can be used to trick a system into accepting a dif- 
ferent password than the real one, as long as both have the same hash result. In 
practice it is hard to use, since a typical MD5 or Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-I) 
hashing algorithm has 2 to the 128 th or 2 to the 160 th different values, respectively. 
Dictionary-based Attacks 
Appropriate password selection minimizes~but cannot completely eliminate~a 
password's ability to be cracked. Simple passwords such as any individual word in a 
language make the weakest passwords because they can be cracked with an elemen- 
tary dictionary attach. In this type of attack, long lists of words of a particular lan- 
guage called dictionary.files are searched to find a match to the encrypted password. 
More complex passwords that include letters, numbers, and symbols require a dif- 
ferent brute force technique that includes all printable characters and generally take 
much longer to run. 
Malicious Code Attacks 
Code attacks are carefully crafted programs written by attackers and designed to do 
damage. Trojan horses, viruses, spyware, rootkits, and malware, are all examples of 
this kind of attack. These programs are written to be independent and do not 
always require user intervention or for the attacker to be present for their damage 
to be done. This section discusses these types of attacks and gives an in-depth look 
at each. 
Malware is malicious software. While it has been around for many years, users 
in the past were required to physically transport the software between machines, 
often through floppy diskettes or other removable media to which the program 
wrote itself without the user's knowledge. This limitation has changed dramatically 
with the widespread use of the Internet, where an exploitable vulnerability or an e- 
mail attachment can make it very easy for malware to disseminate. Among the 
many types of malware we will look at are viruses, Trojan Horses, logic bombs, 
rootkits, and spyware. 
Protection against malware varies but usually includes a good user education 
program, and diligently applying the software patches provided by vendors. In the 
established security community, when researchers discover a flaw or vulnerability, 
www.syngress.com 

82 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
they report it to the software vendor, who typically works on quickly developing a 
fix to the flaw. The vulnerability (without an exploit) is reported once a fix has 
been found and is available. Although there are exceptions to the rule, this is stan- 
dard operating procedure. However, if the flaw is discovered by hackers, it is pos- 
sible than an exploit is developed and disseminated through the hacking 
community before the vendor is aware of the flaw or a patch is developed. Such an 
exploit is called a zero-day attack, because there is no warning before the attack can 
take place. The best defenses against zero-day attacks are security devices that can 
detect attacks without the need for attack signatures. 
Viruses 
A computer virus is defined as a self-replicating computer program that interferes 
with a computer's hardware, software or OS.Viruses are designed to replicate and to 
elude detection. Like any other computer program, a virus must be executed to 
function (it must be loaded into the computer's memory) and then the computer 
must follow the virus's instructions. Those instructions constitute the payload of the 
virus. The payload may disrupt or change data files, display a message, or cause the 
OS to malfunction. 
Using that definition, let's explore in more depth exactly what a virus does and 
what its potential dangers are.Viruses spread when the instructions (executable 
code) that run programs are transferred from one computer to another. A virus can 
replicate by writing itself to floppy disks, hard drives, legitimate computer pro- 
grams, across the local network, or even throughout the Internet. The positive side 
of a virus is that a computer attached to an infected computer network or one that 
downloads an infected program does not necessarily become infected. Remember, 
the code has to actually be executed before your machine can become infected. 
However, chances are good that if you download a virus to your computer and do 
not explicitly execute it, the virus may contain the logic to trick your OS into 
running the viral program. Other viruses exist that have the ability to attach them- 
selves to otherwise legitimate programs. This could occur when programs are cre- 
ated, opened, or even modified.When the program is run, so is the virus. 
Let's take a closer look at the different categories that a virus could fall under 
and the definitions of each: 
Parasitic 
Parasitic viruses infect executable files or programs in the com- 
puter. This type of virus typically leaves the contents of the host file 
unchanged, but appends to the host in such a way that the virus code is 
executed first. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
83 
9 Bootstrap Sector Bootstrap sector viruses live on the first portion of 
the disk, known as the boot sector (this includes both hard and floppy disks). 
This virus replaces either the programs that store information about the 
disk's contents or the programs that start the computer. This type of virus 
is most commonly spread via the physical exchange of floppy disks. 
9 Multi-partite Multi-partite viruses combine the functionality of the par- 
asitic virus and the bootstrap sector viruses by infecting either files or boot 
sectors. 
9 
Companion 
Instead of modifying an existing program, a companion 
virus creates a new program with the same name as an already existing 
legitimate program. It then tricks the OS into running the companion 
program, which delivers the virus payload. 
9 Link Link viruses function by modifying the way the OS finds a pro- 
gram, tricking it into first running the virus and then the desired program. 
This virus is especially dangerous, because entire directories can be 
infected. Any executable program accessed within the directory will 
trigger the virus. 
9 
Data File A data file virus can open, manipulate, and close data files. 
Data file viruses are written in macro languages and automatically execute 
when the legitimate program is opened. A well-known type of data file 
virus is a macro virus like the Melissa virus that infected users of Microsoft 
Word 97 and Word 2000. 
www.syngress.com 

84 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
Worms 
A worm is a self-replicating program that does not alter files but resides in active 
memory and duplicates itself by means of computer networks.Worms run auto- 
matically within OSes and software and are invisible to the user. Often, worms 
aren't even noticed on systems until the network resources are completely con- 
sumed, or the victim PC's performance is degraded to unusable levels. Some worms 
are not only self-replicating but also contain a malicious payload. 
There are many ways in which worms can be transmitted, including e-mail, 
Internet chat rooms, P2P programs, and of course the Internet. It's worthwhile to 
look at some of the most famous worms of the past years. 
9 
The Nimda and Code Red worms in 2001 attacked known vulnerabilities 
in Microsoft's Internet Information Server (IIS)Web Server. These two 
worms and their variants replicate themselves on the victim machines and 
begin scanning the network for additional vulnerable machines. Nimda 
and Code Red certainly set another precedent for the danger of worms, 
and are not harmless. Nimda creates open network shares on infected 
computers, and also creates a Guest account with Administrator privileges, 
thus allowing access to the system and opening it up to whatever a knowl- 
edgeable hacker wants to do to it. Code Red (and its variant, Code Red 
II, which also opened a backdoor for the attacker) defaces Web sites, 
degrades system performance and causes instability by spawning multiple 
threads and using bandwidth. 
9 
The SQL Slammer worm in 2003 exploited a known buffer overflow in 
Microsoft's SQL Server and Microsoft SQL Server Desktop Engine 
(MSDE). It caused infected machines to generate enormous amounts of 
traffic in attempts to reproduce itself. Local networks and the Internet 
itself slowed down considerably, and infected thousands of machines and 
servers. 
9 
The Blaster worm in 2003 exploited a known buffer overflow in 
Microsoft's Distributed Component Object Model (DCOM) Remote 
Procedure Call (RPC) service, and caused instability and spontaneous 
reboots in infected machines. It also tried to perform a DDoS attack 
against windowsupdate.com, which was easily thwarted. 
9 
The Sasser worm in 2004 exploited a known buffer overflow in 
Microsoft's LSAS service through port 139, and caused infected machines 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
85 
to spontaneously reboot. It affected networks including those of Delta 
Airlines, Goldman Sachs, and the British Coastguard. 
9 
The Zotob worm in 2005 used a vulnerability in Microsoft Windows's 
Plug-and-Play service to spread through networks. It was prominent in 
that it infected CNN computers and so was reported live on television. A 
year later, a Moroccan teenager was sentenced for its creation. 
It's easy to see that effective protection against many worms is the timely and 
prompt installation of patches released by software vendors, especially Microsoft 
because of its market presence. It is also important to correctly configure firewalls 
to allow only necessary ports both inbound and outbound: Slammer, Blaster and 
Sasser replicated using Network Basic Input/Output System (NetBIOS) and SQL- 
Server ports, which should not be allowed exposed outside the enterprise network. 
Trojan Horses 
A Trojan horse closely resembles a virus, but is actually in a category of its own. 
The Trojan horse is often referred to as the most elementary form of malicious 
code. A Trojan horse is used in the same manner as it was in Homer's Iliad; it is a 
program in which malicious code is contained inside of what appears to be harm- 
less data or programming. It is most often disguised as something fun, such as a 
cool game. The malicious program is hidden, and when called to perform its func- 
tionality, can actually ruin your hard disk. One saving grace of a Trojan horse, if 
there is one, is that it does not propagate itself from one computer to another (self- 
replication is a characteristic of the worm). 
A common way for you to become the victim of a Trojan horse is for someone 
to send you an e-mail with an attachment that purports to do something useful. To 
-the naked eye, it will most likely not appear that anything has happened when the 
attachment is launched. The reality is that the Trojan has now been installed (or ini- 
tialized) on your system.What makes this type of attack scary is the possibility that 
it may be a remote control program. After you have launched this attachment, 
anyone who uses the Trojan horse as a remote server can now connect to your 
computer. Hackers have tools to determine what systems are running remote con- 
trol Trojans, which can include communication over chat networks, e-mails, or Web 
pages, to alert the hacker that a new system has been infected and is available. After 
the specially designed port scanner on the hacker's end finds your system, all of 
your files are accessible to that hacker. Two common Trojan horse remote control 
programs are Back Orifice and NetBus, which was distributed through the whack- 
a-mole game. 
r 
9 
www.syngress.com 

86 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
As an example, the QAZ Trojan horse infected computers in 2000. This is the 
Trojan that was used to hack into Microsoft's network and allowed the hackers to 
access source code. This particular Trojan spreads within a network of shared com- 
puter systems, infecting the Notepad.exe file. It opens port 7597 (part of a block of 
unassigned ports) on the network, allowing a hacker to gain access at a later time 
through the infected computer. If the user of an infected system opens Notepad, 
the virus is run. QAZ Trojan will look for individual systems that share a net- 
worked drive and then seek out the Windows folder and infect the Notepad.exe file 
on those systems. The first thing that QAZ Trojan does is to rename Notepad.exe to 
Note.corn, and then the Trojan creates a virus-infected file Notepad.exe. QAZ Trojan 
then rewrites the system registry to load itself every time the computer is booted. 
This Trojan was particularly insidious, because most users had been told that text 
files were safe from viruses, so they didn't hesitate running a program associated 
with Notepad. 
Rootkits 
A rootkit is type of malware that tries to conceal its presence from the OS and anti- 
virus programs in a computer. Its name comes from the UNIX world, where 
hackers try to keep root-level (superuser) access to a computer long after they infect 
it.A rootkit can modify the basic blocks of an OS like the kernel or communication 
drivers, or replace commonly used system programs with rootkit versions. Security 
researchers have even demonstrated rootkits that install as a virtual machine man- 
ager, and then loads the victim's OS as a virtual machine. Such a rootkit would be 
virtually impossible to detect. Rootkits can make it easy for hackers to install remote 
control programs or software that can cause significant damage. 
The most famous and widespread rootkit infestation happened in 2005, when 
Sony BMG Music Entertainment used a rootkit to implement copy protection in 
some of its music CDs. Even worse, other attackers could use the rootkit's stealth 
features to hide their own viruses on infected computers. The rootkit was very hard 
to uninstall, and according to some researchers, it could have infected over 500,000 
computers. Eventually, major anti-virus vendors included removal tools for the 
rootkit, but it was a public relations nightmare for Sony. An earlier rootkit is 
t0rnkit, which can be used to infect and take control over Linux machines. 
Back Doors 
A back door is essentially any program or deliberate configuration designed to 
allow for remote access to a system. Trojans, rootkits, and even legitimate programs 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
87 
can be used to install a back door. Sometimes this is done in stealth and other times 
not. Types of backdoors can include legitimate programs like Microsoft's Remote 
Desktop, Virtual Network Computing (VNC) (available at www.realvnc.com), and 
PC Anywhere (available at www.symantec.com), and malicious programs specifi- 
cally written to provide back door access like BackOrifice, SubSeven, and T0rnkit. 
Be less concerned with the specific functions of the different back door 
programs available, and concentrate on the different types and their 
general use. Knowing what a back door is used for is more important 
on the test than knowing each of the types. 
Most common antivirus software will detect specific malicious backdoors, but 
unfortunately cannot help you when a legitimate program is configured to allow 
back door access.You will only detect such a scenario by being aware of what ser- 
vices are running on your system. Personal firewalls like the Windows Firewall or 
Check Point's Zone Alarm (available at www.zonelabs.com) that block outgoing 
and incoming connections based on user configurable rulesets, are much more 
effective in blocking legitimate programs configured as back doors. 
Another kind of back door is one that is left in or written into a program by the 
programmers. This is generally done within a program by creating a special password 
that will allow access. For example, Award BIOS used to have a back door password, 
which would bypass a password-protected machine. By entering CONDO at the 
password screen, the security mechanism would be immediately bypassed. This kind 
of back door can also be left by system administrators, to make maintenance "easier." 
Often, new administrators will bind a root shell to a high port on a UNIX host, 
giving them immediate root level access by just Telneting to that port. Other, craftier 
back doors can replace existing programs, such as the telnetd program. There is a 
backdoor version of telnetd that will, with a preset username and password, grant 
root access to attackers. Malicious programmers have also written back-door code 
into some older versions of SSH1, which would e-mail the passwords of those log- 
ging in to a specified e-mail account. This is why it is always important to verify the 
MD5 checksum of software when downloading it from the Web. 
www.syngress.com 

88 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
While it isn't necessary to have installed backdoor or virus software on a 
test machine in order to pass this exam, it can be useful in gaining a ~ 
greater understanding of the concept. Reading about a topic is one 
thing, but seeing it running in the wild is another. Hands-on experience 
can make the concepts seem more tangible, while giving insight into 
not just what malware is, but how it actually works. The added famil- 
iarity can ease nerves on the test day. However, be sure you get this 
hands-on experience in a controlled test environment; do not install 
these programs on machines that are connected to a production net- 
work or the Internet. Even better, try using a virtual machine. 
A backdoor attack that was common some years ago was Back Orifice. It con- 
sists of a client application and a server application. The only way for the server 
application of Back Orifice to be installed on a machine is for it to be deliberately 
installed. This is the reason this server application is commonly disguised via a 
Trojan horse. After the server application has been installed, the client machine can 
transfer files to and from the target machine, execute an application on the target 
machine, restart or lock up the target machine, and log keystrokes from the target 
machine. All of these operations are of value to a hacker. The original Back Orifice 
only worked in Windows 95 and 98, while Back Orifice 2000 (BO2k) also runs on 
Windows 2000, ME and XP. Even if a machine is infected, a properly configured 
firewall prevents the client application from connecting to the victim. 
Another common remote control Trojan horse was named the SubSeven Trojan. 
Sent within a software called Whack-a-Mole, after execution it displayed a cus- 
tomized message to mislead the victim. SubSeven allowed the attacker to have 
nearly full control of the victim's computer with the ability to delete folders and/or 
files, taking screen shots of the current desktop, control the mouse point, sniff 
traffic off the victim's network, and even eavesdrop through the victim computer's 
microphone. It can run on Windows NT, 9x, 2000, and XP. 
While the concepts behind worms, viruses, spyware, rootkits, logic 
bombs, and Trojan horses are very similar, it's important to be sure you 
can quickly differentiate. There is often a fine line between a virus and 
a worm, so be sure to know the specific differences between them. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
89 
Logic Bombs 
A logic bomb is a type of malware that can be compared to a time bomb. They are 
designed to do their damage after a certain condition is met. This can be the 
passing of a certain date or time, or it can be based on the deletion of a user's 
account. Often attackers will leave a logic bomb behind when they've entered a 
system to try to destroy any evidence that system administrators might find. One 
well-known logic bomb was known as the Chernobyl virus. It spread via infected 
floppy disks or through infected files, and replicated itself by writing to an area on 
the boot sector of a disc.What made Chernobyl different from other viruses is that 
it didn't activate until a certain date, in this case, April 26, the anniversary of the 
Chernobyl disaster. On that day, the virus caused havoc by attempting to rewrite 
the victim's system BIOS and by erasing the hard drive. Machines that were the 
unfortunate victims of this virus required new BIOS chips from the manufacturer 
to repair the damage.While most logic bombs aren't this well publicized, they can 
easily do similar or greater damage. 
Other examples of well-known logic-bombs include the Michelangelo virus, 
which was set to go off on March 6, the birthday of the famous Renaissance painter, 
and delete the data from hard disks; the DDoS attack Blaster attempted on window- 
supdate.com, and Code Red's attempted attack to the White House Web site. 
Spyware and Adware 
Spyware programs, as their name implies, spy on the machines they are installed on. 
They gather personal information, with or without the user's permission, and use it 
for many purposes. Spyware has become such a pervasive problem that dozens of 
anti-spyware programs have been created. Most spyware programs do not have 
harmful payloads, and their danger lies in the instability and the consumption of 
computing resources they cause in infected systems. 
There are a lot of types of spyware in terms of their purpose, their installation 
method, their collection methods, and so forth. Purposes can include marketing 
(showing ads while browsing, also called admare), traffic redirection (taking users to 
sites they didn't intend to visit), and even criminal purposes (stealing passwords and 
credit card numbers, sending it to the spyware's creator). Spyware can be willingly 
installed by users downloading them from Web sites, but more often than not they 
are tricked into installing spyware, covertly installed as part of another utility's 
installation, or use an exploitable vulnerability in browsers. As for the method of 
collecting information, they can record and inform on Web site browsing history, 
look for information stored in the computer's file system, or even log keystrokes 
looking for passwords. 
www.syngress.com 

90 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
It is important to compare spyware versus other malware. Spyware usually does 
not self-replicate, meaning that they need to be installed in each computer they 
infect. Some spyware are well-behaved and even legal, used to pay for a particular 
program's use. Many spyware take the form of browser toolbars, and infected 
machines usually have more than one (sometimes up to a dozen) spyware installed. 
As they're normally linked to browsing activity, they can flood the victim's desktop 
with non-stop pop-up windows, many to pornographic sites. 
Some of the most common spyware include Gator, BargainBuddy, Bonzi 
Buddy, 180 solutions, Internet Optimizer, and a whole lot more. Fortunately, there 
are a lot of spyware protection programs available. They include Microsoft Defender 
and the integrated anti-spyware functionality in Windows Vista, and classic pro- 
grams like Ad-Aware, Spyware Doctor, and many more. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
91 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
In this chapter, we covered a number of different attacks and attack scenarios. The 
Security+ exam will focus on these attack sections, so be mindful of this while 
reviewing and make certain you are able to differentiate the attack types. 
Specifically, pay attention to social engineering, rootkits, spyware, malware, DoS, 
and TCP/IP-based attacks. Make certain you know why DoS attacks are effective 
and what some of the common defense methods are. 
In the DoS/DDoS section, we reviewed the fundamentals of a DoS attack, and 
why they are so easy to perform but difficult to defend.We also covered the differ- 
ence between a DoS attack and a DDoS attack and the different components of a 
DDoS attack, such as client, daemon, master, and zombie. The next section covered 
buffer overflow attacks, and described how attackers use flawed application code to 
inject their own malicious code into a system. 
We then covered how a TCP/IP connection is made and moved on to different 
TCP/IP-based attacks such as MITM, replay and TCP/IP session hijacking.We 
then covered various types of spoofing (defined as providing false information 
about your identity in order to gain access to systems), including IP, e-mail, Web 
site spoofing, and phishing attacks. 
We then discussed social engineering, providing steps on how to both use and 
defend against it. We discussed dumpster diving and how it can be used to 
strengthen a social engineering attack. Social engineering is an important concept 
for this exam, so be certain you understand it. 
Password attacks, both brute force and dictionary-based, were covered, as well as 
simply guessing a password with information related to the victim. 
The final sections of the chapter covered malware.We discussed viruses, worms, 
rootkits, Trojan horses, and spyware. Each of these is likely to be in the exam, so be 
sure to know the differences between them, but don't worry too much about 
knowing the specific versions of each. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Active Attacks 
gl Active attacks can take many shapes, but the three most common forms 
are network-based, application-based, and mixed threat attacks. 
www.syngress.com 

92 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
El 
gl 
El 
El 
El 
El 
Network-based attacks include DDoS attacks (which utilize many different 
computers to attack a single host), session hijacking (where attackers steal 
users' sessions), MITM attacks (where attackers sandwich themselves 
between the user and server in an attempt to steal information), SYN 
Attacks (where the three-way handshake is not completed so that the target 
stops accepting connections), and Replay attacks (where a packet is resent 
in hopes of repeating a transactions several times). 
Spoofing attacks are very dangerous, because it's easy for attackers to 
appear that which they are not. IP spoofing changes the packets to appear 
as if the packet's source is a trusted network. E-mail spoofing changes the 
senders address to masquerade as someone else.Web site spoofing creates a 
site copy to fool victims into revealing their credentials. Phishing mixes e- 
mail and Web site spoofing into a powerful and dangerous attack. 
Application-based attacks are any attacks against the applications 
themselves. The most common forms of these are buffer overflow attacks, 
where the attacker sends too much data to the application, causing it to 
fail and execute "attacker-supplied" malicious code. 
Mixed-threat attacks are those that are comprised of both network- and 
application-based attacks. Many worms fall into this category, as they have 
the ability to compromise hosts by using buffer overflows, and generate 
enormous amounts of network traffic by scanning for new vulnerable hosts. 
Social engineering is a potentially devastating technique based on lying in 
order to trick employees into disclosing confidential information. 
Using a technique known as dumpster diving, attackers can learn a lot 
about a company; this knowledge can then be used to lend an air of 
credibility to their claims to be someone they're not, as they quiz 
employees for such information as system usernames and passwords. 
Vulnerability scanning is the act of checking a host or a network for 
potential services that can be attacked. Scanning tools like Nessus can give 
a full picture of vulnerable applications, while others like Nmap can be 
used stealthily to gain a more general picture of the security of the host. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
93 
Passive Attacks 
El Packet sniffers such as Tcpdump or Wireshark can be used to view all 
traffic on a network. This is helpful for administrators to diagnose network 
problems, but can also be used by attackers to harvest valuable information 
sent in the clear. Protect yourself by encrypting sensitive data, and using 
more secure management tools like SSH rather than Telnet. 
Password Attacks 
gl Password attacks are extremely common, as they are easy to perform and 
often result in a successful intrusion. 
gl Brute force, in its simplest definition, refers to simply trying as many 
password combinations as possible until hitting on the right one. 
[--d Simple passwords, such as any individual word in a language, make the 
weakest passwords, because they can be cracked with an elementary 
dictionary attack. In this type of attack, long lists of words of a particular 
language called dictionary files are searched for a match to the encrypted 
password. 
Code Attacks 
gl 
gl 
Viruses are programs that automatically spread, usually when an innocent 
victim executes the virus' payload, and generally cause damage.Viruses 
have a long history in computing, and take many different forms. Today's 
antivirus software is effective in catching most viruses before they can 
spread or cause damage. 
Worms are basically network viruses, spread without user knowledge that 
wreak havoc on computers and systems by consuming vast resources. 
Because they are self-replicating, a worm outbreak can reach hundreds of 
thousands of machines in a matter of days or hours. 
Trojan horses are different from viruses in that they require the user to run 
them. They usually come hidden, disguised as some kind of interesting 
program, or sometimes even as a patch for a virus or common computer 
problem. Installing back doors or deleting files are common behaviors for 
Trojan horses. Most antiviral software can catch and disable Trojan horses. 
www.syngress.com 


General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
95 
Q" How can my applications be protected against buffer overflow attacks? 
A" It's impossible to provide 100 percent protection, but a good start is making 
sure you are current with patches from the software vendor. Another approach 
for developers is to perform code reviews, looking for overlooked flaws in the 
code that could potentially be exploitable, and adopting secure coding practices 
with a security development lifecycle. 
Q: Is there any way to protect against dumpster diving? 
A" Having a policy in place that requires shredding of any discarded company doc- 
uments will provide a decent amount of protection against dumpster diving. 
Remember, any document with employee names, phone numbers, or e-mail 
addresses could be potentially used against you by a social engineer. 
Q: 
A" 
What can be done to guard against the dangers of social engineering? 
A policy forbidding the disclosure of information over the phone and e-mail is 
a good place to start.Warn employees that they need to be able to verify the 
identity of any person requesting information. Let them know that they will 
not be reprimanded for strictly enforcing this policy. Some employees worry 
that if a "boss" asks for information, they should give it immediately. 
Additionally, create an environment where information is obtained in appro- 
priate ways, rather than blindly over the telephone or via e-mail. 
Q: 
A: 
My company has a firewall, do I need to worry about worms? 
Yes. Many users these days have laptop computers that are connected to a 
number of different networks. Each new network is a new vector for worm 
attack. Many companies stand to face outages caused by worms brought in on 
employee laptops. Also, some worms/virus/Trojans are unwittingly downloaded 
from seemingly harmless Web sites. Firewalls need to inspect all allowed traffic 
to filter out attacks through normally safe protocols. 
Q" What's the best way to keep on top of new security vulnerabilities, exploits, and 
dangers that my company faces? 
A: There are a multitude or resources to keep you informed on the latest security 
concerns.You should subscribe to at least one (and maybe more) e-mail bul- 
letins and security-related newsletters. Some of the most common include 
those from Microsoft (www.microsoft.com/security), SANS (www.sans.org), 
www.syngress.com 

96 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
US-CERT (www.us-cert.gov/cas/signup.html), Securiteam 
(www-securiteam-com/mailinglist-html), and SecurityTracker (www.security- 
tracker.com/signup/signup_now.html) . 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
, 
o 
o 
The company's HelpDesk begins to receive numerous calls because customers 
can't access the Web site's e-commerce section. Customers report receiving a 
message about an unavailable database system after entering their credentials. 
Which type of attack could not be taking place? 
A. A DDoS against the company's Web site 
B. A Web site spoofing of the company's Web site 
C. A DoS against the database system 
D. A virus affecting the Web site and/or the database system. 
Your Company's CEO is afraid of a DDoS attack against the company Web 
site, and has asked you to increase the connection to the Internet to the fastest 
speed available.Why won't this protect from a DDoS attack? 
A. A DDoS attack refers to the connection to the Internet, not to Web sites. 
B. A DDoS attack can marshall the bandwidth of hundreds or thousands of 
computers, which can saturate any Internet pipeline the company can get. 
C. A DDoS attack can also be initiated from the internal network; therefore, 
increasing the Internet pipeline won't protect against those attacks. 
D. Increasing the Internet connection speed has no influence on the effective- 
ness of a DDoS attack. 
CodeP,.ed was a mixed threat attack that used an exploitable vulnerability in 
IIS to install itself, modify the Web site's default page, and launch an attack 
against a the Web site www.whitehouse.gov on August 15.Which type of mal- 
ware was not part of Code Red? 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
97 
o 
, 
. 
~ 
a. Worm 
B. Spyware 
C. Logic Bomb 
D. DDoS 
The mail server is receiving a large number of spam e-mails and users have 
hundreds of unwanted messages in their mailbox. What kind of attack are you 
receiving? 
A. A rootkit 
B. A DoS flooding attack 
C. A virus 
D. A Logic bomb 
You suspect your network was under a SYN Attack last night. The only data 
you have is a session captured by a sniffer on the affected network.Which of 
the following conditions is a sure-tell sign that a SYN attack is taking place? 
A. A very large number of SYN packets. 
B. Having more SYN ] ACK packets in the network than SYN packets. 
C. Having more SYN ]ACK packets in the network than ACK packets. 
D. Having more ACK packets in the network than SYN packets. 
While analyzing your logs, you notice that internal IPs are being dropped, 
because they are trying to enter through the Internet connection.What type 
of attack is this? 
A. DoS 
B. MITM 
C. Replay Attack 
D. IP Spoofing 
Your Chief Executive Officer (CEO) practices complete password security. He 
changes the password every 30 days, uses hard-to-guess, complex, 10-character 
passwords with lowercase, uppercase, numbers and special symbols, and never 
writes them down anywhere. Still, you have discovered a hacker that for the 
past year has been using the CEO's passwords to read his e-mail.What's the 
likely culprit behind this attack. 
www.syngress.com 

98 
Chapter 2 * General Security Concepts: Attacks 
A. A logic bomb 
B. A worm 
C. A keylogger 
D. Social Engineering 
~ 
Packet sniffing will help with which of the following? (Select all that apply.) 
A. Capturing e-mail to gain classified information 
B. Launching a DDoS attack with zombie machines 
C. Grabbing passwords sent in the clear 
D. Developing a firewall deployment strategy 
~ 
Which of the following are sniffers? (Select all that apply.) 
A. Wireshark 
B. Tcpdump 
C. Nessus 
D. Snoop 
10. Which password attack will take the longest to crack a password? 
A. Password guessing 
B. Brute force attack 
C. Dictionary attack 
D. All attacks are equally fast 
11. What are some of the advantages of off-line password attacks? (Select all that 
apply.) 
A. They do not generate noise on the target network or host. 
B. They are not locked out after a set amount of tries. 
C. They can be used to reset the user's password without the need for 
cracking. 
D. They can be initiated by zombies. 

General Security Concepts: Attacks 9 Chapter 2 
99 
12. Your machine was infected by a particularly destructive virus. Luckily, you 
have backups of your data.Which of the following should you do first? 
A. Restore the data from the backups. 
B. Scan the data from the backups for virus infection. 
C. Use the installed anti-virus program to scan and disinfect your machine. 
D. Boot from an anti-virus CD or floppy to scan and disinfect your machine. 
13. Because of their prevalence, phishing protection is offered in many products. 
Which of the following offer built-in phishing protection? (Select all that 
apply.) 
A. Windows Vista 
B. Microsoft Internet Explorer 7 
C. Mozilla Firefox 2 
D. Opera 9 
14. What are good ways to protect against worms? (Select all that apply.) 
A. User Education Programs 
B. Correct firewall configuration 
C. Timely software patches 
D. Anti-virus scans 
www.syngress.com 

100 
Chapter 2 9 General Security Concepts: Attacks 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and epxlanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. A 
8. A and C 
2. B 
9. A, B, and D 
3. B 
10. B 
4. B 
11. A and B 
5. C 
12. D 
6. D 
13. A, B, C, and D 
7. C 
14. B and C 
www.syngress.com 

Chapter 3 
Security+ Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
The Need for Communication Security 
Remote Access Security 
Messaging Security 
Exam Objectives Review- 
i-r 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
I-r 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
I-r 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
I-r 
Self Test 
I-r 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
103 

104 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Introduction 
The Security+ exam covers communication security. Data transmissions, particu- 
larly via e-mail or remote access methods, are typically an entity's most exploited 
vulnerability. With the advent of high-speed Internet, securing remote access tech- 
nologies has become a greater focus for security professionals than ever before. 
While the ability to dial into the workplace was once a luxury afforded those who 
worked for prestigious corporations on the bleeding edge of technology, nearly 
everyone in corporate America now expects their employer to provide some level 
of connectivity to their work environment from home.Vendors ship virtual private 
network (VPN) clients as part of operating systems (OSes) or as free downloads, 
and even Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) devices enable the use of VPN and 
Terminal Services software. Business models have also changed to incorporate 
"remote work forces" and the building of shared "network spaces" that enable 
secure collaboration with partner companies who require access to company 
resources. 
The practice of implementing and managing e-mail communication has also 
morphed. PDAs~once known as electronic DayTimers~are now pocket-sized 
mobile computers running OSes that can both transmit and store e-mail and docu- 
ments. E-mail is no longer "retrieved" from servers via a push/pull technology, but 
is now sent to devices across the world via an over the air "push" from internal e- 
mail servers. Even laptop users can establish encrypted sessions to these servers from 
public locations without the use of aVPN connection via technology that comes 
"out of the box" in a typical installation of Outlook. Beyond this, the concept of 
"messaging" includes technologies beyond e-mail: Instant Messaging (IM) clients 
are now provided by public vendors such as Yah0o! and AOL, as well as major cor- 
porate solutions players like Microsoft. As such, IM solutions now include file 
transfer and workspace technologies that bring both collaboration efficiencies and 
vulnerabilities to the work place. 
This chapter covers the technologies that a Security+ technician needs to be 
familiar with when dealing with VPNs and the Point-to-Point Tunneling 
Protocol/Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (PPTP/L2TP) protocols that aid in protecting 
communications. Technologies used for remote access such as Remote 
Authentication Dial-in User Service (P,_ADIUS),Terminal Access Controller Access 
Control System+ (TACACS+), Secure Sockets Layer (SSL),VPN, and Citrix solu- 
tions are also defined later in this chapter. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
105 
Do not confuse remote access with remote control. Remote access is the 
process of creating a connection from a remote location (such as a home 
office, hotel room, and so forth), whereas remote control programs such 
as Microsoft's Remote Desktop, PCAnywhere, and VNC are used for 
emulating PC consoles remotely. Although using a remote control pro- 
gram may enable access to resources on their network, a network is not 
established between that location and yours: rather, you have extended 
the desktop of that machine to yours. 
While the Security+ exam requires that you know how to protect personal e- 
mail vulnerabilities with Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) as well as how to mitigate the 
concerns of spam and viruses, vulnerabilities brought upon by the advent of mal- 
ware, IM, and collaboration tools require that you be familiar with how these ser- 
vices function and how they can be secured. 
The Need for Communication Security 
The need for communications-based security can be traced back thousands of years 
to the days of ancient Egypt. Hieroglyphics were used by the Egyptians to commu- 
nicate, assuming that only those familiar with the meaning of the drawings would 
be able to decipher the messages. 
As time went on, society became more complex and so did communications 
security. Although the technologies have changed, the underlying reasoning behind 
securing communications has not~that people need a secure method of sharing 
information. As recently as five years ago, the general consensus was that all a user 
had to do to protect their network was install a firewall in front of their Internet 
connection and load anti-virus software on their network. Today, things are quite 
different. Intellectual property including customer data has become the lifeblood of 
today's corporations. The need has become so great to secure these assets that an 
entire new field of law has emerged to deal with this. The protection of customer's 
data has become a matter of local and international law. The Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
2002 (SOX) are just a few of the regulations that force a company to adhere to 
complex security precautions. 

106 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Hacking tools are readily available on the Internet and can be found and used 
by individuals who neither understand how to use them or the potential dangers of 
the vulnerabilities they are exploiting. 
Novice hackers are known as "script kiddies" and "click kiddies." Books 
(such as Syngress' Hack Proofing Your Network, Second Edition ISBN: 1- 
928994-70-9) are available at local bookstores that provide information 
on how different types of attacks are carried out. Hacking has become 
so popular that underground networks for passing information and 
techniques now exist. In today's environment, a security professional 
must be extremely diligent in the protection of their assets. 
Communications-based Security 
Security professionals are tasked with providing confidentiality, integrity, and avail- 
ability to information passing over public (and private) networks. In terms of net- 
work security, there are three methods of passing communications to a centralized 
network: 
9 
On-site connection to the local network 
9 Remote access 
9 Messaging 
Because more people are using the Internet, many companies offer their 
employees the opportunity to work from home. This creates a dilemma for security 
professionals, because they have to be able to meet the needs of the users and still 
keep the company's network secure. Remote access servers and VPNs are common- 
place in most networks today. Major players in this arena are Microsoft (Terminal 
Server), Citrix (MetaFrame), Cisco (Pix/ASA), and Juniper. Ensuring that the 
implementation of these technologies is secure is as important as making sure they 
work properly. 
Since more and more employees are moving from simple mobile phones to 
PDAs and smartphones, and because many companies provide employees with lap- 
tops that come with wireless technology enabled, the security professional must 
turn their attention to the securing of these "open air" technologies. 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
107 
Remote Access Security 
In the popular TV show, 24, the Los Angeles Counter Terrorist Unit (CTU) consis- 
tently undermines the efforts of insidious masterminds of terror who plot to rob 
America of its dreams, ideals, and sense of security. While nerve racking and enter- 
taining at a plot level, the security professional is constantly amused by the use of 
the technology that is always lightening fast, effortlessly established, and either com- 
pletely secure or completely compromised. In any given season, laptops and com- 
puters are blown-up and the disks recovered via "decryption" utilities, and CTU's 
routers are replaced, and in the process a "spying" device is placed on the network, 
and mobile phones are turned into tracking devices with the push of a button and 
are able to download satellite photos. And speaking of satellites, these space-age 
vehicles are constantly being compromised and redirected without proper autho- 
rization and the secure communications "monitored and intercepted" by bad guys. 
With Hollywood, the sky is the limit! 
The truth is that although technology has made huge strides in the past 20 
years, there are still many holes in remote access security. Most of the technology 
that Jack Bauer has at his disposal on 24 is based on some very real technologies, 
particularly in the matter of sharing information between remote workers and the 
CTU main office. Remote Access Servers (RAS), Network Access Servers (NAS), 
VPNs, authentication servers such as RADIUS, TACACS, and TACACS+, and 
other technologies have been designed to keep out unauthorized users, but chan- 
neling these wirelessly and over open air is a completely different thing. 
It is the responsibility of the security professional to ensure that everything has 
been done to secure their networks. Security professionals must find the balance 
between offering users the ability to work from remote locations, and ensuring that 
the network is protected. One area of remote access that has grown exponentially is 
wireless networking. Let's begin our discussion of remote access security by dis- 
cussing this growing arena. 
When the phrase "connect wirelessly" is used, the technologies at work 
in the background can now be very different things. Wireless connec- 
tivity for a laptop in a corporate environment is established and secured 
via 802.1x, while wireless Internet connectivity for a PDA is via cell tower 
backbones. The ability to compress, encrypt, and authenticate on these 
networks is very different. 
www.syngress.com 

108 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
802.1x 
In Chapter 4, users will become familiar with wireless local area networks 
(WLANs) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.11 
standard for wireless networking. It is so simple to implement wireless networking 
technology, that most novice users can install it themselves.What most novice users 
do not realize is that as soon as they transmit their first piece of data across their 
new network they have opened up a can of worms! 
This is where the varied 802.1 standard enters. In 1999,Wired Equivalent 
Privacy (WEP) protocol was established to enhance the level of security offered on 
a WLAN. Due to a variety of weaknesses (see the section below on vulnerabilities), 
WEP was deemed as insufficient to protect confidential data in a modern organiza- 
tion. As such, in April 2003, the Wi-Fi Alliance introduced an interoperable security 
protocol known a WiFi Protected Access (WPA), based on draft 3 of the IEEE 
802.1 li standard. 
WPA was meant to be a replacement for WEP such that any network could 
move to the standard without the extra expense of additional or replacement hard- 
ware. Herein lay the only real weakness in the new standard, which was understood 
from the start: the algorithm used in WPA (Michael) was made as strong as possible 
while maintaining a level of usability on legacy adapters. As such, the design of 
WPA fell short of what was already an achievable level of security in 2003 when it 
was released. Still, it was a solid source of security, boasting cryptographic support 
from the Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP) based on the 1KC4 cipher, which 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
109 
dynamically changes keys as the system is used. In addition, WPA included support 
for Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), Extensible Authentication Protocol- 
Transport Layer Security (EAP-TLS), Extensible Authentication Protocol-Tunneled 
Transport Layer Security (EAP-TTLS), or Protected Extensible Authentication 
Protocol (PEAP). 
Although EAP is covered in greater detail later in this chapter, it is 
important to distinguish it from its variants (i.e., EAP/TLS, TTLS, and 
PEAP). 
EAP, defined by RFC 3748, is an authentication framework providing 
a functionality for a variety of authentication mechanisms. It does not 
provide encryption itself, but rather the ability to utilize several encryp- 
tion methods within an authentication construct. 
EAP-TLS is considered a very secure form of authentication as it 
employs the security of TLS, which is the successor to SSL, and makes use 
of both server-side and client-side certificates. Although considered very 
secure (especially when client-side certificates are stored on devices like 
Smart Cards), the overhead of this form of authentication keeps it from 
being a more frequently implemented solution. 
EAP-TTLS also provides very good security utilizing Public Key 
Infrastructure (PKI) certificates on the authentication server only to 
create a tunnel between the client and the server. 
PEAP is the result of a joint development effort from Microsoft, Cisco 
Systems, and RSA Security. Like EAP-TTLS, it provides security via server- 
side PKI certificates. There are at least two sub-types of PEAP certified 
for the WPA and WPA2 standard: PEAPv0/EAP-MSCHAPv2 (Microsoft 
Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol) and PEAPvl/EAP-GTC 
(Generated Token Card). 
The year after WPA was released, WPA2 was brought forth. Based on the 
Robust Security Network (1KSN) mechanism, WPA2 utilized an Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES)-based algorithm, Counter-Mode/CBC-Mac Protocol 
(CCMP), that is considered to be fully secure. In fact, as of March 2006,WPA2 
certification is required on any device that is slated for Wi-Fi certification.WPA2 is 
supported on Windows XP, Windows Vista, Linux, and Apple AirPort clients and 
Apple's Airport Extreme appliances. 

110 
Chapter 3 * Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
The argument can be made that wireless technologies are part of a local 
area network (LAN), not a remote access technology. For the Security+ 
exam, think of wireless as being a "remote access" because there is no 
direct physical (cabled) connection from a laptop, PDA, or smartphone. 
When a wireless user (or supplicant) wants to access a wireless network, 802.1x 
forces them to authenticate to a centralized authority called an autkenticator. 802.1x 
uses the EAP for passing messages between the supplicant and the authenticator. 
When communication begins, the authenticator places the user into an unautkorized 
state. While in this unauthorized state, the only messages that can be transmitted are 
EAP start messages. At this point, the authenticator sends a request to the user 
asking for their identity. The client then returns their identity to the authenticator, 
which in turn forwards it to the autkentication server, which is running an authenti- 
cation service such as RADIUS. 
The authentication server authenticates the user and either accepts or rejects 
the user based on the credentials provided. If" the user provides the correct creden- 
tials, the authenticator changes the user's state to "authorized" thus allowing the 
user to move freely within the WLAN. Figure 3.1 depicts how the authentication 
process works. 
Figure 3.1 The 802. lx Authentication Process 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
111 
EAP 
EAP was originally defined under RFC 2284 and then redefined under the 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Internet draft dated September 13, 2002. 
EAP is an authentication protocol designed to support several different authentica- 
tion mechanisms. It runs directly over the data link layer and does not require the 
use of Internet Protocol (IP). 
You can read more on the IETF Internet draft on EAP at 
www.potaroo.net/ietf/ids/draft-ietf -pppext-rfc2284bis-O6.txt. 
EAP comes in several different forms" 
9 EAP over IP (EAPolP) 
9 Message DigestAlgorithm/Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol 
(EAP-MD5-CHAP) 
9 EAP-TLS 
9 EAP-TTLS 
9 RADIUS 
9 LEAP Cisco 
Each form of EAP has its own characteristics, but for the purpose of the 
Security+ exam you will only need to know what it is and its different formats. 
Vulnerabilities 
802.1x is not without its share of vulnerabilities. The WEP uses a stream cipher 
known as the RC4 encryption algorithm.A stream cipher operates by expanding a 
short key into a key stream. The sender combines the key stream with the original 
message (known as the plaintext messa2e ) to produce ciphertext. The receiver has a 
copy of the same key, and uses it to generate an identical key stream. The receiver 
then applies the key to the ciphertext, and views the plaintext message. 
7 
www.syngress.com 

112 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Ciphers are covered in greater detail in Chapter 9. 
This mode of operation makes stream ciphers vulnerable to attacks. If" an eaves- 
dropper intercepts two ciphertexts encrypted with the same key stream, they can 
obtain the eXclusive OR (XO1K) of the two plaintexts. Knowledge of this XOR 
can enable statistical attacks to recover the plaintexts. 
One particular vulnerability was discovered by the Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir 
group. The attack (known as the Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir attack) is exploited 
because of the key scheduling algorithm ofRC4. There are certain weak keys, that 
allow for statistical determination of the keys when those keys are used. The 
Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir attack involves guesswork and creativity, since you 
have to guess the first byte of plaintext data being transmitted.When data is 
encrypted before transmission, a piece of data called the initialization vector (IV) is 
added to the secret key. Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir discovered that the IV was 
transmitted in the clear, and they recovered the 128-bit secret key used in a pro- 
duction network. 
There are also tools available for download on the Internet, which can be used 
to exploit the vulnerabilities oFWEE Two of the most common tools are AirSnort 
and WEPCrack. 
AirSnort 
AirSnort (http://sources 
or http://airsnort.shmoo.com/) 
is a tool used to recover encryption keys. AirSnort passively monitors transmissions 
and recreates the encryption key once it has collected enough packets. For AirSnort 
to be effective, it must collect between 5 and 10 million packets. Collecting this 
many packets takes time. In an 8-hour day, the average person produces approxi- 
mately 250,000 packets. To collect the minimum of 5 million packets would take 
about three weeks. Once AirSnort has enough packets, it recreates the encryption 
password in less than one second. In more busy networks, 10 million packets could 
be collected in a matter of a few hours. 
AirCrack and WepLab 
Variations of AirSnort and a short lived tool called Chopper, AirCrack, and WepLab 
provide the same functionality as AirSnort, but require less packets to do so. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging ~ Chapter 3 
113 
Typically, a 128-bit key can 
minutes. 
be returned in as little as a few seconds to a few 
WEPCrack 
While AirSnort is known for capturing packets and recreating secret keys, 
WEPCrack simply breaks the secret keys.WEPCrack was one of the first software 
packages able to break the security ofWEP technology.WEPCrack is available for 
download at" http'//sourceforge.net/projects/wepcrack. 
Wireless technologies are covered in greater detail in Chapter 4. 
Media Access Control Authentication 
Media Access Control (MAC) authentication is a weak form of authentication. 
MAC addresses are 48-bit unique identifiers that are assigned to every network 
interface by the manufacturer. During MAC authentication, a wireless client's MAC 
address is checked against an authentication server on the network, and the server 
checks the address against a list of allowed MAC addresses. Spoofing of MAC 
addresses is trivial and so MAC-based authentication is dramatically less secure than 
EAP authentication. However, MAC-based authentication provides an alternate 
authentication method for client devices that do not have EAP capability. In most 
r 
www.syngress.com 

114 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
modern OSes, EAP capabilities exist. MAC-based authentication should not be used 
unless it is in conjunction with another form of authentication such as EAR 
VPN 
A VPN provides users with a secure method of connectivity through a public inter- 
network such as the Internet. Most companies use dedicated connections to con- 
nect to remote sites, but when users want to send private data over the Internet 
they should provide additional security by encrypting the data using aVPN. 
When a VPN is implemented properly, it provides improved wide-area security, 
reduces costs associated with traditional WANs, improves productivity, and improves 
support for users who telecommute. Cost savings are twofold. First, companies save 
money by using public networks (such as the Internet) instead of paying for dedi- 
cated circuits (such as point-to-point T1 circuits) between remote offices. Secondly, 
telecommuters do not have to pay long-distance fees to connect to RAS servers. 
They can simply dial into their local Internet Service Provider (ISP) and create a 
virtual tunnel to their office. A tunnel is created by wrapping (or encapsulating,) a data 
packet inside another data packet and transmitting it over a public medium. 
Tunneling requires three different protocols: 
Carrier Protocol The protocol used by the network (IP on the 
Internet) that the information is traveling over 
Encapsulating Protocol This term includes both the tunneling protocol 
(PPTR L2TP) and the encrypting protocol (IPSec, Secure Shell [SSH]) 
that is wrapped around the original data 
Passenger Protocol The original data being carried 
For the Security+ exam you need to remember the three protocols used 
in a VPN tunnel. Think of a letter being sent through the mail: the letter 
is the passenger, which is encapsulated in an envelope, and addressed in 
a way that the carrier (the post office) can understand. 
Essentially, there are two different types of VPNs" site-to-site and remote access. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
115 
Site-to-site VPN 
Site-to-site VPNs are normally established between corporate offices that are sepa- 
rated by a physical distance extending further than normal campus area.VPNs are 
available in software (such as the Windows VPN available on Windows Server 2003 
RRAS Server and Microsoft ISA 2006 Firewall) and hardware (firewalls such as 
Nokia/Checkpoint and Cisco's PIX and ASA) implementations. It had been a gen- 
eral understanding that software implementations are easier to maintain, mostly due 
to the familiar graphical user interface (GUI). However, manufacturers of hard- 
ware-based solutions have gone to great lengths to provide more usable interfaces, 
and since hardware implementations have always been considered more secure 
(they are not impacted by OS vulnerabilities), there has been a rise in the calling 
for security professionals to have a working knowledge of both hardware and soft- 
ware solutions. 
Regardless of whether or not the VPN service of choice is established by hard- 
ware or software solutions, the fundamentals of tunneling remain the same. For 
example, Company XYZ has offices in Boston and Phoenix. As seen in Figure 3.2, 
both offices connect to the Internet via a T1 connection. They have implemented 
VPN-capable firewalls in both offices, and established an encryption tunnel 
between them. 
Figure 3.2 A Site-to-site VPN Established Between Two Remote Offices 

116 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
The first step in creating a site-to-site VPN is selecting the tunneling protocol 
to be use. PPTP and L2TP are two common tunneling protocols in use. Once a 
tunnel is established, encryption protocols are used to secure data passing through 
the tunnel. Common protocol choices for securing data during transmission are 
IPSec and SSL. As data is passed from one VPN to another, it is encapsulated at the 
source and unwrapped at the target. The process of establishing the VPN and wrap- 
ping and unwrapping the data is transparent to the end user. 
IPSec is anotherVPN protocol that is widely used. Here, the underlying con- 
nection is maintained through the use of IP while two new network protocols, 
Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulated Security Protocol (ESP) are used to 
protect the data. IPSec VPNs can be deployed in one of two modes: transport 
mode or tunnel mode. In transport mode the IPSec-protected data is carried in IP 
packets that utilize the original IP addresses of the two VPN peers. In Tunnel mode 
the entire IP packet is encapsulated and encrypted and a new IP header of the two 
VPN peers is used to transmit the data from one end to the other. 
Most commercially available firewalls come with a VPN module that can be set 
up to easily communicate with another VPN-capable device. Companies now use 
VPN concentrators, which have the capability to support the VPN technologies we 
just covered, but also the ability to increase performance and management of mul- 
tiple VPNs. Cisco's ASA line, for example, contains devices like the 5540 that pro- 
vide firewall,VPN, concentration, IDS/IPS, and Anti X (malware, spyware, and so 
forth) services. 
Whichever product or service is chosen, it is important to ensure that each end 
of the VPN is configured with the correct protocols and settings. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging * Chapter 3 
117 
Remote Access VPN 
A remote access VPN, known as a virtual private dial-up network (VPDN), differs 
from a site-to-site VPN in that end users are responsible for establishing the VPN 
tunnel between their workstation and their remote office. An alternative to con- 
necting directly to the corporateVPN is connecting to an enterprise service 
provider (ESP) that ultimately connects them to the corporateVPN. 
In either case, users connect to the Internet or an ESP through a point of pres- 
ence (POP) using their particular VPN client software. Once the tunnel is set up, 
users are forced to authenticate with the VPN server, usually by two or three factor 
authentication. 
Figure 3.3 Client Workstation Establishes a VPN Tunnel to Remote Host 
RADIUS 
As noted in the discussion about 802.1x, users need a centralized entity to handle 
authentication. Initially, RADIUS was created by Livingston Enterprises to handle 
dial-in authentication. Then its usage broadened into wireless authentication and 

118 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
VPN authentication. RADIUS is the most popular of all the authentication, autho- 
rization, and accounting (AA) servers, including TACACS, TACACS+, and 
DIAMETER. A RAS must be able to authenticate a user, authorize the authenti- 
cated user to perform specified functions, and log (that is, account for) the actions 
of users for the duration of the connection. 
When users dial into a network, RADIUS is used to authenticate usernames 
and passwords.A RADIUS server can either work alone or in a distributed envi- 
ronment (known as distributed RADIUS) where RADIUS servers are configured in 
a tiered (hierarchical) structure. 
In a distributed RADIUS environment, a RADIUS server forwards the authen- 
tication request to an enterprise RADIUS server using a protocol called proxy 
RADIUS.The enterprise RADIUS server handles verification of user credentials 
and responds back to the service provider's RADIUS server. 
One of the reasons that RADIUS is so popular is that it supports a number of 
protocols including: 
9 
Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) 
9 
Password Authentication Protocol (PAP) 
9 
Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP) 
Authentication Process 
RADIUS authentication consists of five steps (Figure3.4)" 
1. Users initiate a connection with an ISP RAS or corporate RAS. Once a 
connection is established, users are prompted for a username and password. 
The RAS encrypts the username and password using a shared secret, and passes 
the encrypted packet to the RADIUS server. 
3. The RADIUS server attempts to verify the user's credentials against a cen- 
tralized database. 
4. 
If the credentials match those found in the database, the server responds 
with an access-accept message. If the username does not exist or the pass- 
word is incorrect, the server responds with an access-reject message. 
5. The RAS then accepts or rejects the message and grants the appropriate 
rights. 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
119 
Figure 3.4 RADIUS Authentication Process 
See Chapter 9 for a discussion of shared secrets and other cryptography 
terms and concepts. 
Vulnerabilities 
Certain "flavors" of RADIUS servers and Web servers can be compromised by 
buffer-overflow attacks. A buffer-overflow attack occurs when a buffer is flooded with 
more information than it can hold. The extra data overflows into other buffers, 
which may be accessible to hackers. 
www.syngress.com 

120 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
TACACS/+ 
RADIUS is not the only centralized RAS. TACACS is also used in authenticating 
remote users. TACACS has gone through three major "generations,"TACACS, 
XTACACS, and TACACS+. For the Security+ exam, you need to know about 
TACACS and TACACS+; however, for continuity purposes, XTACACS will also 
be discussed. 
TACACS 
As stated previously, TACACS is the "old man" of centralized remote access 
authentication. TACACS was first developed during the days of ARPANET, which 
was the basis for the Internet. TACACS is detailed in RFC 1492, which can be 
found at httwww.cis.ohio-state.edu/cgi-bin/rfc/rfc 1492.html. Although TACACS 
offers authentication and authorization, it does not offer any accounting tools.As 
mentioned earlier, a good RAS must fit all the criteria of the AAA model. Similar 
to RADIUS, a dial-up user connects to a RAS that prompts the user for their cre- 
dentials. The credentials are then passed to the TACACS server, which either per- 
mits or denies access to the network. 
XTACACS 
Initially, TACACS utilized the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) to handle commu- 
nications. The problem with UDP is that it does not provide packet sequencing or 
connection reliability. Therefore, services such as TACACS must make sure that the 
entire message has arrived and is intact. To overcome this shortcoming, Cisco 
Systems developed Extended TACACS (or XTACACS). In XTACACS, the trans- 
port protocol was changed from UDP to Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), 
ensuring that messages would be divided into packets and reassembled when 
received at the intended destination. XTACACS was a step in the right direction, 
but it did not provide all of the functionality needed for a centralized remote access 
authentication solution. 
The above information on XTACACS is provided for historical back- 
ground only. XTACACS is rarely deployed in modern installations, and is 
not a topic of the Security+ exam. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
121 
TAC AC S + 
Cisco decided to develop a proprietary version of TACACS known as TACACS+. 
The driving factor behind TACACS+ was to offer networking professionals the 
ability to manage all remote access components from a centralized location. 
TACACS+ is also credited with separating the AAA functions. TACACS+ is con- 
sidered proprietary because its packet formats are completely different from those 
in TACACS or XTACACS, making TACACS+ incompatible with previous ver- 
sions. Unlike previous versions of TACACS that used one database for all AA, 
TACACS+ uses individual databases for each. TACACS+ was the first revision to 
offer secure communications between the TACACS+ client and the TACACS+ 
server. Like XTACACS, TACACS+ uses TCP as its transport. TACACS+ continues 
to gain popularity because it is easy to implement and reasonably priced. 
Make sure you understand the difference between TACACS and 
TACACS+. The most important thing to remember is that TACACS uses 
UDP as its transport protocol while TACACS+ uses TCR Also, TACACS+ is 
a proprietary version owned by Cisco. 
Vulnerabilities 
The largest vulnerability in TACACS+ is the comparative weakness of the encryp- 
tion mechanism. It's possible for someone with physical network access to capture 
an authentication request from a client and manipulate it. This request would be 
accepted by the server; the encrypted reply would be sent but because the cleartext 
of that reply would be known, breaking the encryption would be a fairly simple 
task. Even worse, the encryption used in TACACS+ is based on a shared secret that 
is rarely changed, so a compromise at any point would ultimately expose future 
compromises. It is, therefore, a very good idea to regularly change the shared secrets 
used by TACACS+ clients. 
One of the biggest complaints regarding TACACS+ is that it does not offer 
protection against replay attacks. Replay attacks occur when a hacker intercepts an 
encrypted packet and impersonates the client using the information obtained from 
the decrypted packet.When files are sent over a network using Transmission 
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), they are split into segments suitable 
www.syngress.com 

122 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
for routing. This is known as packet sequencing.At the receiving end, the TCP/IP 
organizes the file into its original format before it was sent. Packet sequencing 
(along with time stamping) is the general method of preventing replay attacks; 
however, TACACS+ sessions always start with a sequence number of 1. If a packet 
cannot be reorganized in the proper sequence at the receiving end, the entire mes- 
sage (or file) is unusable. Other common weaknesses of TACACS+ include: 
9 Birthday Attacks The pool ofTACACS+ session IDs is not very large, 
therefore, it is reasonable that two users could have the same session ID 
9 Buffer Overflow Like RADIUS, TACACS+ can fall victim to buffer- 
overflow attacks. 
9 Packet Sniffing The length of passwords can be easily determined by 
"sniffing" a network. 
9 Lack of Integrity Checking An attacker can alter accounting records 
during transmission because the accounting data is not encrypted during 
transport. 
PPTP/L2TP 
As mentioned earlier, there are several standard tunneling protocol technologies in 
use today. Two of the most popular are PPTP and L2TR which are Layer 2 (Data 
Link Layer) encapsulation (tunneling) protocols using ports 1723 and 1701, respec- 
tively. However, PPTP and L2TP use different transport protocols: PPTP uses TCP 
and L2TP uses UDR 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
123 
Create a mental grid for remembering the difference between PPTP and 
L2TP. PPTP I 1723 I TCP, L2TP I 1701 I UDP. 
PPTP 
PPTP's popularity is mainly because it was the first encapsulation protocol on the 
market, designed by engineers at Microsoft. Thus it is supported in all Windows 
OSes. L2TP is not supported in Windows 9x/ME or NT 4.0, although these OSes 
(except Windows 95) can create L2TP connections using the Microsoft 
L2TP/IPSecVPN client add-on. PPTP establishes point-to-point connections 
between two computers by encapsulating the PPP packets being sent.Although 
PPTP has helped improve communications security, there are several issues with it. 
PPTP encrypts the data being transmitted, but does not encrypt the infor- 
mation being exchanged during negotiation. In Microsoft implementa- 
tions, Microsoft Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE) protocol is used to 
encrypt the data. 
PPTP is protocol-restrictive, meaning it will only work over IP networks 
9 PPTP cannot use the added benefit oflPSec 
www.syngress.com 

124 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
CREATING A CLIENT CONNECTION IN WINDOWS VISTA 
Microsoft has made it easy to create VPN client connections in their 
newest OS, Windows Vista. In Vista, users can create VPN connections as 
easily as they can create dial-up connections to the Internet. Let's walk 
through the steps of creating a VPN client connection. 
1. Click Start lConnect To 
2. In the "Connect to a network" window (Figure 3.5), choose Set 
up a connection or network. 
Figure 3.5 Connect to a Network Window 
11 
At the "Connect to a Network" screen (Figure 3.6), scroll down to 
Connect to a workplace, highlight it and click Next. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
125 
Figure 3.6 Choose a Connection Option Screen 
. 
In the "How do you want to connect?" window, select the Use 
my Internet connection (VPN) option (Figure 3.7) and click Next. 
Figure 3.7 Selecting InternetNPN or Dial-up 
www.syngress.com 

126 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
5. When prompted for a destination address to connect to (Figure 
3.8), enter either the server name (such vpn.companyxyz.com) or 
IP address. You would also select at this time any additional 
options for the connection, such as the use of a Smart Card and 
whether or not the connection is made available to other users 
of the machine. Enter a name for the connection and determine 
whether or not to connect immediately. 
Figure 3.8 Entering Target Address Information for VPN Client 
, 
, 
Next, you will be prompted for credentials to Iogon to the 
remote access server (Figure 3.9). You may elect to have the client 
retain your password, and optionally the name of the domain. 
Once the information in the credential window has been 
entered, the Connect window is enabled. Clicking Connect will 
initiate the connection. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
Figure 3.9 Providing Credentials for Logon 
127 
L2TP 
As with TACACS+, Cisco believed they could design a better tunneling protocol, 
which was the creation of the Layer 2 Forwarding (L2F) protocol. Unfortunately, 
L2F was not much better than PPTP. Specifically, L2F provided encapsulation (tun- 
neling) but it did not encrypt the data being encapsulated. 
To use the features of both PPTP and L2E L2TP was developed through a 
joint venture between Microsoft and Cisco. L2TP was a major improvement, but 
still did not offer encryption. To remedy this, L2TP was designed to use IPSec for 
encryption purposes. The differences between PPTP and L2TP that you need to 
know for the Security+ exam are: 
9 L2TP requires IPSec in order to offer encryption. 
9 
L2TP is often implemented as a hardware solution (though also available 
on Windows 1KAS servers), where PPTP is not. 
9 L2TP can run on top of protocols such as IP, Internetwork Packet 
Exchange (IPX), and Systems Network Architecture (SNA), where PPTP 
can work only on IP networks. 
9 Using L2TP with IPSec provides per-packet data origin authentication 
(proof that the data was sent by an authorized user), data integrity (proof 
www.syngress.com 

128 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
that the data was not modified in transit), replay protection (prevention 
from resending a stream of captured packets), and data confidentiality (pre- 
vention from interpreting captured packets without an encryption key). 
L2TP/IPSec connections require two levels of authentication: computer- 
level authentication using certificates or pre-shared keys for IPSec sessions, 
and user-level authentication using PPP authentication protocol for the L2TP 
tunnel. 
Some advantages of the L2TP/IPSec combination over PPTP are: 
9 IPSec provides per-packet data origin, data integrity, replay protection, and 
data confidentiality. In contrast, PPTP only provides per-packet data confi- 
dentiality. 
9 L2TP/IPSec connections require two levels of authentication: computer- 
level authentication and user-level authentication. 
9 PPP frames exchanged during user-level authentication are never sent 
unencrypted, because the PPP connection process for L2TP/IPSec occurs 
after the IPSec security association (SA) is established. 
Make sure you understand the differences between PPTP and L2TP, 
including pros, cons, and protocols related to each. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
129 
SSH 
SSH is a cryptographically secure replacement for standard Telnet, Remote Login 
(rlogin), Remote Shell (RSH), and RCP commands. SSH consists of both a client 
and a server that use public key cryptography to provide session encryption. It also 
provides the ability to forward arbitrary ports over an encrypted connection. 
SSH has received wide acceptance as the secure mechanism for access to 
remote systems interactively. SSH was conceived and developed by Finnish devel- 
oper, TatuYlonen.When the original version of SSH became a commercial ven- 
ture, the license became more restrictive. A public specification was created, 
resulting in the development of a number of versions of SSH-compliant client 
and server software that do not contain the restrictions (most significantly, those 
that restrict commercial use). 
SSH deals with the confidentiality and integrity of information being passed 
between a client and host. Since programs such as Telnet and rlogin transmit user- 
names and passwords in cleartext, sniffing a network is easy. By beginning an 
encrypted session before the username and password are transmitted, confidentiality 
is guaranteed. SSH protects the integrity of the data being transmitted by the use of 
session keys. The client keeps a list of user keys for servers with which it previously 
established secure sessions. If the key matches, the secure session is established and 
the integrity of the data being transmitted is confirmed. Using SSH helps protect 
against different types of attacks including packet sniffing, IP spoofing, and manipu- 
lation of data by unauthorized users. 
How SSH Works 
When a client wants to establish a secure session with a host, the client initiates 
communication by requesting an SSH session. Once the server receives the request 
from the client, the two perform a handshake, which includes the verification of the 
protocol version. Next, session keys are exchanged between the client and the 
server. Once session keys have been exchanged and verified against a cache of host 
keys, the client can begin the secure session. Figure 3.10 depicts the SSH authenti- 
cation process. 
www.syngress.com 

130 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Figure 3.10 SSH Communications are Established in Four Steps 
IPSec 
The IPSec protocol, as defined by the IETE is "a framework of open standards for 
ensuring private, secure communications over IP networks, through the use of 
cryptographic security services." This means that IPSec is a set of standards used for 
encrypting data so that it can pass securely through a public medium, such as the 
Internet. Unlike other methods of secure communications, IPSec is not bound to 
any particular authentication method or algorithm, which is why it is considered 
an "open standard." Also, unlike older security standards that were implemented at 
the application layer of the OSI model, IPSec is implemented at the network layer. 
Remember that IPSec is implemented at the network layer, not the 
application layer. 
The advantage to IPSec being implemented at the network layer (versus the 
application layer) is that it is not application-dependent, meaning users do not have 
to configure each application to IPSec standards. IPSec also has the ability to be 
implemented in two different modes of operation: 
Transport Mode IPSec implemented in transport mode (Figure 3.8) 
specifies that only the data (or payload) be encrypted during transfer. The 
advantage to this is speed~since the IP headers are not encrypted, the 
packets are smaller. The downside to transport mode is that a hacker can 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
131 
sniff the network and gather information about end parties. Transport 
mode is used in host-to-hostVPNs. 
Tunnel Mode Unlike transport mode where only the data is encrypted, 
in tunnel mode (Figure 3.9) both the data and the IP headers are 
encrypted. The advantage is that neither the payload nor any information 
about end parties can be sniffed. The disadvantage is speed, since the size 
of the encrypted packet increases. Tunnel mode is used in host-to-gateway 
or gateway-to-gateway VPNs. 
Figure 3.11 Using IPSec in Transport Mode Only Encrypts the Data Payload 
Figure 3.12 Using IPSec in Tunnel Mode Encrypts Both the Data and IP 
Headers 
www.syngress.com 

132 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
IPSec is made up of two separate security protocols. AH protocol is responsible 
for maintaining the authenticity and integrity of the payload. AH authenticates 
packets by signing them, which ensures the integrity of the data. Since the signa- 
ture is specific to the packet being transmitted, the receiver is assured of the data 
source. Signing packets also provides integrity, since the unique signature prevents 
the data from being modified. Encapsulating security payload (ESP) protocol also 
handles the authenticity and integrity of payloads, but also adds the advantage of 
data confidentiality through encryption. AH and encapsulating security payload can 
be used together or separately. If used together, the entire packet is authenticated. 
An easy way to remember the difference between AH and ESP is to use 
the E in ESP to remember "Encryption." 
IPSec Authentication 
To ensure the integrity of data being transmitted using IPSec, there has to be a 
mechanism in place to authenticate end users and manage secret keys. This mecha- 
nism is called Internet Key Exchange (IKE). IKE is used to authenticate the two 
ends of a secure tunnel by providing a secure exchange of a shared key before 
IPSec transmissions begin. 
For IKE to work, both parties must use a password known as a pre-shared key. 
During IKE negotiations, both parties swap a hashed version of a pre-shared key. 
When they receive the hashed data, they attempt to recreate it. If they successfully 
recreate the hash, both parties can begin secure communications. IKEv2 uses 
sequence numbers and acknowledgments to provide reliability, but this mandates 
some error processing logistics and shared state management. IKE could end up in 
a dead state due to the lack of such reliability measures, where both parties were 
expecting the other to initiate an action which never eventuated. Dead-Peer- 
Detection was a work-around implemented in IKE for this particular action. 
IPSec also has the ability to use digital signatures. A digital signature is a certifi- 
cate signed by a trusted third party called a certificate authority (CA) that offers 
authentication and nonrepudiation, meaning the sender cannot deny that the message 
came from them.Without a digital signature, one party can easily deny they were 
responsible for messages sent. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
133 
Although public key cryptoloo~raphy ("User A" generates a random number and 
encrypts it with "User B's" public key, and User B decrypts it with their private key 
[described in Chapter 10]) can be used in IPSec, it does not offer nonrepudiation. 
The most important factor to consider when choosing an authentication method is 
that both parties must a~ree on the method chosen. IPSec uses an SA to describe how 
parties will use AH and encapsulating security payload to communicate. The SA 
can be established through manual intervention or by using the Internet Security 
Association and Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP). The Diffie-Hellman key 
exchange protocol, described in detail in Chapter 9, is used for the secure exchange 
of pre-shared keys. 
ISAKMP 
The advantage to using IKE over the manual method is that the SA can be estab- 
lished when needed, and can be set to expire after a certain amount of time. 1KFC 
2408 describes the ISAKMP as a framework for establishing, negotiating, modi- 
fying, and deleting SAs between two parties. By centralizing the management of 
SAs, ISAKMP reduces the amount of duplicated functionality within each security 
protocol. ISAKMP also reduces the amount of time required for communications 
setup, by negotiating all of the services at once. 
For the Security+ exam remember the three Is: IPSec, IKE, and ISAKMR 
www.syngress.com 

134 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Vulnerabilities 
So far, we have discussed the vulnerabilities specific to the different types of RAS; 
however, there are also many vulnerabilities that are common to all methods. Some 
of the more common types are eavesdropping (sniffing), data modification, identity 
spoofing, and user error. 
Eavesdropping 
Eavesdropping\ is simply attaching to a network in a manner that allows you to 
"hear" all the traffic being passed over the wire. This is known as a passive attack, 
since data is observed but not modified. 
A sniffer can be attached to a network to pick up information that is passed in 
cleartext. Protocols such as Telnet, rlogin, and Post Office Protocol 3 (POP3) are 
often victim to sniffing, because usernames and passwords are sent in cleartext. 
Sniffing is also considered a passive attack, because the data is observed but not 
modified. 
Data Modification 
Data modification is just as it sounds. Data is intercepted by a third party, modified, 
and sent to the party originally intended to receive it. This type of attack is known 
as a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack. A good example of this is a program called 
sshmitm. Sshmitm implements a MITM attack against SSH-secured traffic by lis- 
tening to traffic between a client and host. Sshmitm intercepts the requests from 
the client and replies with a fake server response. It then takes the original request 
from the client and forwards it to the host, and then intercepts the response from 
the host. At this point, the attacker has the ability to send messages to the client and 
server as if they were from the expected originator. 
As discussed in the section on IPSec, digital signatures can be used to remedy 
data modification because they offer nonrepudiation. Nonrepudiation is a way to 
guarantee that senders cannot deny they sent a message. Nonrepudiation also means 
that recipients cannot deny receiving a message. Additional details regarding nonre- 
pudiation are found in Chapter 9. 
Identity Spoofing 
Since information about senders and receivers is stored in IP packet headers, it is 
easy to construct packets to look like they came from a different sender. Normally, 
hackers will listen on a public network (such as the Internet) and examine packets 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
135 
until they believe they have found a trusted host that is allowed to pass data 
through a firewall. Once a hacker finds this address, they can begin creating packets 
and sending them to a target network. 
UserVulnerabilities and Errors 
Users who write passwords on sticky notes and put them on their monitor, leave 
their workstations unlocked, or allow other people to watch while they enter user- 
names and passwords, are the easiest victims for hackers. It is the security profes- 
sional's responsibility to educate end users and perform due diligence to ensure 
these types of user errors are at a minimum. For the Security+ exam, you need to 
know that the best way to keep these types of attacks to a minimum is to educate 
users of the consequences. 
Administrator Vulnerabilities and Errors 
One of the biggest mistakes security professionals make is not fixing known secu- 
rity issues with remote access methods. Keeping up with security patches, hard- 
ening RASes, and being aware of flaws in different remote access methods is vital. 
Most vendors have Web sites where they post patches for their products. Larger 
companies such as Microsoft, Sun, Oracle, and Cisco also have e-mail notification 
systems that notify users when new problems are discovered, and what actions to 
take to remedy them. There are also several white papers in existence that explain 
the steps used to harden OSes. Hardening an OS simply means that all of the appli- 
cations, services, and protocols not required for the operation of a host will be dis- 
abled or completely removed. Any host that is accessible to the Internet (or any 
public access) should be hardened prior to introduction to the network. 
Since users will not likely be able to track and fix vulnerabilities daily, they 
should make sure to review their core applications (Windows, Linux, Microsoft 
Office, SQL, Oracle, and so forth) monthly to see if there are new patches being 
released. 
The top ten items to remember about RAS" 
1. 802.1x uses EAP for passing messages between the supplicant 
and the authenticator. 
2. VPN tunneling requires a carrier protocol, an encapsulation pro- 
tocol, and a passenger protocol. 
www.syngress.com 

136 
Chapter 3 * Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
10. 
3. There are two types of VPNs: site-to-site and remote access. 
4. Know your ports (PPTP, L2TP, SSH). 
5. Know your transport protocols (RADIUS and TACACS use UDP, 
TACACS+ uses TCP, and so forth). 
6. TACACS+ was the first revision to offer secure communications 
between the TACACS+ client and the TACACS+ server. 
7. SSH is a cryptographically secure replacement for standard 
Telnet, rlogin, RSH, and RCP commands. 
8. Know the steps SSH uses to establish secure connections. 
9. IPSec uses IKE and IKEv2 to manage keys. A SA can be estab- 
lished either manually or through the use of ISAKMR 
Understand what types of vulnerabilities apply to all items 
(802.1x, VPN, RADIUS, and so forth) as well as remote access as a 
whole. 
E-mail Security 
Before continuing, let's look at how e-mail is sent and where it goes.The term e- 
mail is short for electronic mail and is, quite simply, an electronic letter that is sent over 
a network. Mail clients are programs used to create, send, receive, and view e-mails. 
Most current mail clients allow messages to be formatted in plain text or Hypertext 
Markup Language (HTML). This means that e-mails can be simple text or they can 
include formatted text, images, sounds, backgrounds, and other elements. 
When sending e-mail messages, many stops occur along the way to its destina- 
tion. The first stop is an e-mail server, which, in Figure 3.10, belongs to a ficticous 
company, sending, company.com. Corporate e-mail servers typically run e-mail applica- 
tions such as Microsoft Exchange, Lotus Notes, or Sendmail. Mail clients, however, 
can be configured to use public mail servers like those provided by an ISP. These 
are typically used by home users who are simply looking for POP mail hosting. 
The clients used at home or in smaller businesses are typically free. Among these 
applications are Outlook Express, Mozilla Thunderbird, Eudora, and now Windows 
Live Mail. 
The e-mail address is in the form of mailbox@domain (for example, 
johndoe@mydomain.com). Note that it ends by denoting the top-level domain (such 
as .corn, .net, .org, .ca, and so on). For example, if an e-mail address is mybuddy@receiv- 
ingcompany.com, the e-mail server sees that the top-level domain is.com. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
137 
E-mail servers use a number of different servers to locate the IP address of a 
recipient's domain. An IP address is a unique number that identifies computers on 
the Internet, to ensure messages get to the correct destination. Because 
mybuddy@receivingcompany.com is a .corn domain, the ISP's server contacts a Domain 
Name System (DNS) server authorized to find IP addresses of name servers in the 
.corn domain. The e-mail server then sends out several requests to the name servers 
to find the IP address of the recipient's domain (receivingcompany.com).The DNS 
server looks up the mail exchange (MX) record for receivingcornpany.com, and 
responds to the e-mail server with the IP address. After the e-mail server has the IP 
address, it sends the message.When the e-mail server at receivingdomain.com gets the 
e-mail message, it will be placed in the recipient's mailbox, based on the mailbox 
account name. 
Figure 3.13 How E-mail Gets from Sender to Recipient 
To make the e-mail process clearer, think of e-mailing in terms of sending 
physical interoffice mail from one department to another. Mail is given to a 
delivery person who looks at the envelope's destination. From the address, the 
delivery person knows that the recipient is on the third floor. The delivery person 
goes to the third floor and asks someone where the specific department is. When 
www.syngress.com 

138 
Chapter 3 ~ Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
the department is found, the delivery person contacts the department to find where 
the department's mailroom is. Once in the mailroom, the delivery person places the 
message in the recipient's mailbox. To deliver the mail, several steps had to be taken 
to locate the recipient. 
In terms of e-mail, the process is more complicated. E-mail is broken into 
smaller pieces of data called packets, and the packets are routed through numerous 
devices called touters. Routers connect networks (or subnets) together and are used 
to find the fastest route between two networks. Individual packets making up one 
e-mail message may travel along different routes before reaching their destination, 
where an e-mail server puts the packets back together in their original form using 
sequencing information in the packet headers. 
While this may seem like a long and arduous process, it actually takes very little 
time. 
It is extremely important to encrypt your e-mail. Services like Hotmail, 
Yahoo!, Gmail, and others reserve the right to view e-mail messages 
stored in any accounts on which they are providing services at no 
charge. Courts have upheld the rights of employers to monitor 
employee e-mails, and public employees' e-mail can be accessed by the 
press under the Freedom of Information Act. 
To protect yourself and your data, use encryption. Encryption scrambles the con- 
tents of a message and its attachments, and then puts the contents back together on 
the recipient's end.Anyone attempting to view the data in between will be unable 
to decipher the content. Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) 
and PGP are two excellent ways to protect e-mail. For the Security+ exam, you 
need to understand both S/MIME and PGR However, there are other e-mail 
encryption products including HushMail (www.hushmail.com) and ShyFile (www.shy- 
file.net) available. There are also companies who offer secure e-mail services, such as 
SecureNym. 
MIME 
Before discussing S/MIME, its parent product, Multi-Purpose Internet Mail 
Extensions (MIME) should be discussed. MIME is an extension of Simple Mail 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
139 
Transfer Protocol (SMTP) that provides the ability to pass different kinds of data 
files on the Internet, including audio, video, images, and other files as attachments. 
The MIME header is inserted at the beginning of the e-mail, and then the e-mail 
client (such as Microsoft Outlook) uses the header to determine which program 
will be used on the attached data. For example, if an audio file is attached to an e- 
mail, Outlook will look at the file associations for audio files and use an audio 
player, such as MediaPlayer, to open the file. 
RFC 1847 and RFC 2634 offer additional information about multi- 
part/signed MIME and the specifications for S/MIME. 
S/MIME 
Since MIME does not offer any security features, developers at RSA Security cre- 
ated S/MIME. S/MIME, like MIME, is concerned with the headers inserted at the 
beginning of an e-mail. However, instead of determining the type of program to 
use on a data file, S/MIME looks to the headers to determine how data encryption 
and digital certificates must be handled. Messages are encrypted using a symmetric 
cipher (method of encrypting text), and a public-key algorithm is used for key 
exchange and digital signatures. S/MIME can be used with three different sym- 
metric encryption algorithms DES, 3DES, and Ron's Code 2 (RC2).Windows 
Mail (Vista), Outlook Express, and the new version of Thunderbird from Mozilla 
all come with S/MIME installed. 
www.syngress.com 

140 
Chapter 3 ~ Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
PGP 
Like S/MIME, POP is encryption software used to encrypt e-mail messages and 
files. Commercial and trial versions of the latest version of POP (9.5) can be down- 
loaded from the POP Corporation at www.pgp.com.When the software is 
installed, plug-ins for Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, and other programs can 
be installed, allowing users to encrypt, decrypt, and sign messages sent through 
these e-mail packages.The latest versions of the POP product now comes as part of 
a full application that manage the use of POP functionality at the desktop level for 
the encrypting hard disks, mail, and even IM traffic. Freeware vendors like Mozilla, 
who provides the Thunderbird mail client, have also designed and released clients 
specifically designed to enable the support for inline-PGP (R.FC 2440) and 
POP/MIME (RFC 3156). 
How POP Works 
POP uses a combination of public and private keys to secure e-mail. It uses public 
key cryptography, which uses a "secret key" to encrypt and decrypt a message. The 
sender uses a public key to encrypt the message, while the recipient deciphers it 
using another version of the key. POP encryption and key exchange is designed in 
the "Web of trust" model, meaning that the reliability of POP is directly related to 
how much you trust the other users whom you hold keys for. 
When POP is run on Microsoft Outlook, for example, Outlook compares a 
digital signature with public keys that are stored on a key ring. This is a collection of 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
141 
public keys located locally on a desktop or laptop that is already installed on 
Outlook and used to decrypt the e-mail received. 
For the Security+ exam, remember that a key ring is always held locally. 
Think of your own personal key ring with the keys to your home or car, 
since you normally keep your keys with you. 
If Outlook cannot find the proper public key to decrypt a message, users will 
be prompted to acquire the public key from a key authority. If Outlook already has 
the public key, it will decrypt the message so that it can be read. Users should 
realize, however, that once decrypted, an e-mail message will remain decrypted 
while stored on a machine. 
When the e-mail is encrypted, it will change in appearance to anyone viewing 
the message. Similar to the following example, the e-mail becomes kasked (trans- 
forming a string of characters into a fixed-length value that represents the original 
string), so that no one can understand it until it is decrypted: 
..... BEGIN PGP MESSAGE ..... 
Version: PGPfreeware 7.0.3 for non-commercial 
use <http://www.pgp.com> 
qANQR 1 DBwU4 D 4 CaG 0 CS beWc QB / 9 u I e s xSM 0 NZw71 D 9 f NArA3 W4 Rc dR 1 wdYe n / nwt 
M9 IKTo3 SuSnogNEJ911 iGt ePDFQ6 zBGW6 9 6 SVOE8 fUuMhlmnKf OMaTuQuhMnP+ j J 
/c 0TKk3 Wn3 cKz 8 6 G/Dok IpdHpAXxLJXWAmBDKLB zGc j eDWJP4Yo3 nJ3vWE 0OwMc j 
Wq5 S iNWy2 xQJs odT+ j KMkf j qxa 8 zwt QZxF IpnmAIDQ4UxJV0 LC7 4 WOegGkBMAUFr 
3DI fDMI PgBaJyb 7 +YZkLVI / 13 weW7put ZQkqfp / 0 FE 7Qq7Y8wAMf 5 YGOUpN6bcb 7 
ki i i 2 e eecpyiyWuVl hck I I s +vb IpJYT 1 ZRBKmrYz s 6AL/TQnB/9 JeOVEahqdl ri r 
5T6yWScE3QLNOGDqXRqiOSuxar7J7 
5w/O9ngIq9YayYIwPj 7BeH4umTiAbXpsOw2 
3 kIAw+ 9AsC31 eGlb0 IWD4AOXgPLkH5pxFDxxZt 1 KnMbLrTAJI rgeD0 7 zpk/nTO 0M 
g7 2 tARUY3 CqSO 0 0 YkomAEb z 9 +mkcgCV2 f GDWnK0 2 nqFM+ I dZTuY/PBO IXH2 Qe f FD 
9r9 8 rKqUJoCdu 0At I qObo z 5u+nOubEXoCk i qwM7AyxRDPDM4 sRm3 hB+ c 14xj ead0 
U1 aoKt 8 CRSuj BOrE 0 3 z 13 FO2 gDRKKDi CSuWI hVBT/I aQbpQOk3 HzvmMaFe ZGY4 f F 
v/Zrguc 9yTaZ Z +YbwlxunBKq0uLn6pWi 5 fwLOEViMmvj/N5 Z 5eSF0 / 4Bhkt 7UspK 
guXj VwXBpb7/vS f I j CE= 
=X7eE 
..... END PGP MESSAGE ..... 
www.syngress.com 

142 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
When a person receives a message encrypted with PGR they need to decrypt it 
before it can be read. Upon opening the message and clicking on the Deerypt 
PGP Message button, a dialog box appears asking for a password. This is the pass- 
word that the user chose when setting up PGP on their machine. The user needs 
to have the public key from the person who sent the e-mail or the message cannot 
be deciphered. This protects the e-mail from being read by an unauthorized person. 
After the correct password is entered, the message and any file attachments are 
restored to their original format. 
PGP is a well-respected method of encrypting e-mail, allowing users to send, 
encrypt, decrypt, and digitally sign any messages sent or received, regardless of 
whether they pass through an ISP or corporate mail server. A drawback to the 
technology has always been usability and consistent support from mail client ven- 
dors who do not always incorporate the features into their latest versions of soft- 
ware (particularly among the free-ware vendors). To this end, a free PGP-like 
command-line tool based on the RFC 2440 standard was developed by the Free 
Software Foundation: GnuPG. This freeware PGP replacement is fully supported by 
Mozilla's Enigmail, while PGP is currently not. For many other mail clients, like 
the latest version of Outlook and Windows Mail, encryption of mail is supported 
by using a public key certificate. Many such certificates are already pre-loaded on 
an OS's local Certificate store and can be used "out of the box" with these mail 
clients for encryption. Optionally, a digital certificate can be purchased from a 
vendor and imported into the clients with very little effort. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
143 
Vulnerabilities 
E-mail has become one of the most popular (and faster) means of communication 
used today. Users that need to get information and ideas to others quickly use e- 
mail rather than the postal service, telephones, and other methods. Since e-mail is 
so popular, there are vulnerabilities within the e-mail delivery system. Some are 
technical, such as Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) relay abuse and e-mail 
client vulnerabilities (like Microsoft Outlook), and some are non-technical, such as 
spam, e-mail hoaxes, and phishing attempts. 
The solution to most of these issues is being proactive regarding the vulnerabil- 
ities. Cracking down on open SMTP relay servers, implementing fixes for client 
software, keeping anti-virus signature files up to date, and being aware of the 
newest threats to the user community constitute the best defense. 
SMTP Relay 
One feature of SMTP is SMTP relay. Relay simply means that any SMTP message 
accepted by one SMTP server will automatically be forwarded to that server's des- 
tination domain. Often, an organization will configure a single SMTP host (such as 
a firewall) to relay all inbound and outbound e-mail. 
This feature must be carefully configured and tightly controlled. Most e-mail 
server programs (Microsoft Exchange, Sendmail, and so forth) have the ability to 
limit the addresses that SMTP e-mail can be relayed from. 
An improperly configured e-mail server may end up being used to forward 
spam to a recipient (or group of recipients) throughout the Internet. Using an open 
SMTP relay gives "spammers" free reliable delivery of their messages (Figure 3.17). 
What then happens is the recipient(s) of the spam messages will see a company's 
domain name and assume it came from that e-mail server. Eventually, the domain 
name will be placed into a DNS-based Blackhole List (DNSBL) to block e-mail 
from those sources. Once the domain name has been placed into one of these lists, 
companies subscribing to the lists will no longer accept e-mail from that domain. 
This can immediately hinder a company's ability to communicate with clients and 
partners. Insufficiently addressing this can cause a domain to be listed more than 
once, lengthening the time and process required for removal from the list. If a 
request to have a domain removed from the DNSBL is accepted by the holder of 
the DNSBL, an uncertain interval of time is still required for changes to propagate 
throughout the Internet and to subscribers before a listed domain is truly no- 
longer "black listed." 
www.syngress.com 

144 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Figure 3.14 How SMTP Relay Works 
Protecting Yoursel Against Relaying 
There are fixes for open SMTP relay issues. If there were not, every e-mail server 
would eventually end up on the DNSBL. Implementing these fixes vary from e- 
mail server to e-mail server, based on the e-mail application that is running. 
However, the underlying fix is always the same~limiting the domains a server is 
allowed to relay. 
Microsoft Exchange 2003 makes restricting SMTP relay easy. By default, 
Exchange 2003 does not allow unauthorized relaying, so to allow an Exchange 
2003 server to relay messages, a user must provide a valid username and password 
or be from a trusted and specified machine. Hackers can sniff network traffic to 
capture user credentials and generate attacks. This can be easily resolved by 
removing the ability to relay messages even if a user is authenticated. Unfortunately, 
this also limits the ability to send and receive messages remotely, as users will not be 
able to access their e-mail via POP3 services. 
Sendmail, which is the more popular e-mail server application for UNIX, can 
also fall victim to SMTP relay attacks.Version 8.9 of sendmail was the first to dis- 
able SMTP relaying. For example, in version 8.8, changes can be made to sendmail 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
145 
configuration files to restrict e-mail so that it has to originate or terminate at the 
local server. The file /etc/sendmail.cfwould be reconfigured to look like this: 
Scheck rcpt 
# anything terminating locally is ok 
R< $+ e $=w > 
$| 
OK 
R< $+ | 
$=R > 
$| 
OK 
# anything originating locally is ok 
R$* 
$- $(dequote .... $&{client_name} $) 
R$=w 
Se OK 
R$=R 
$@ OK 
R$@ 
$@ OK 
# anything else is bogus 
R$* 
$#error $- "550 Relaying Denied" 
The easiest way to prevent SMTP relay is to properly configure and test the 
server during the build process. If you are not sure if your server is configured 
properly, there is an easy way to test it. 
Do not try this from your internal network, since your server will allow 
you to relay from the trusted internal domain. 
. 
~ 
. 
. 
Open a command prompt window (assuming you are using a Windows 
OS running against Exchange). 
At the command prompt, type Telnet <servername> 25. This will open 
up a Telnet session with the SMTP server using SMTP port 25. 
You will receive a response from the e-mail server giving the name of the 
server, the e-mail software being used, and the date and time usually in the 
format of 220 mail.fakeserver.com Micros@ ESMTP Mail Service/Sendmail 
8.11.6/SuSE Linux Mon, Oct 7, 2002 08:50:00. 
Type HELO test.test.com.You will get a response from the e-mail 
server, saying "Hello" back to you. 
www.syngress.com 

146 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
5. Type in a fake "from" address in the format of mail from: 
spam@spamguy.com. The e-mail server will respond with the "Sender 
OK" response. 
6. Type rcpt to: fakeuser@myserver.com. The server should respond with 
"unable to relay for fakeuser@myserver.com." If not, your server can be 
used for SMTP relay. 
If your e-mail server does not respond with the "unable to relay" notification, 
go back through the configurations to make sure the necessary steps were taken to 
prevent relaying. 
Spoofing 
Spoofing is the forging of attributes within an e-mail, particularly the "From" field 
in the message header. This type of attack, typically from spammers but also can be 
generated by a virus, is particularly offensive because rules set in very basic spam- 
filtering appliances and mail servers can block mail from everyone but "trusted" 
users, or users on the same domain.When a message is spoofed, users can simply 
think the message is valid, but then become a victim of an attack. 
Behind the scenes, a spoofing attack really is a matter of getting around DNS 
and mail server security. Messages are either sent with inaccurate IP or DNS infor- 
mation. Recursive checks at the firewall/DNS server can assist in lowering the 
number of successful spoofing attempts by validating that the sending domain and 
IP given are representative of the true source. 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
147 
Most mail and DNS servers can be configured to perform a verification of the 
domain name given via a simple process detailed in RFC 1912. 
1. A reverse DNS lookup is performed against the domain or IR 
2. The returned information (domains) are searched via a regular DNS 
lookup for any A or CNAME records 
3. The A records are compared against the original IP of the sending server 
to validate if the sending IP is really from the alleged domain. 
A Forward Confirmed reverse DNS (FCrDNS) verification is, by itself, a weak 
form of authentication, but is in fact effective because both spammers and phishers 
cannot usually pass this simple test from ~'faked" or "zombie" machines. 
In addition to the FCrDNS check, messaging servers can be made to require a 
valid Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) in the SMTP HELO/EHLO state- 
ment coming from the sending server. If a FQDN name is not given and transmis- 
sion is attempted, the connection can be refused. 
Lastly, some of the best defense against spoofing is an intelligent message filter 
that will examine the tcp_wrapper, ident, and the URLs in the body text. Often the 
content of spoofed mail is as illegitimate as the sender information, and like 
phishing, the goal may be to entice a user to respond with information that should 
be kept confidential. Network appliances (including some firewalls) and certainly 
spam and most anti-virus programs can detect messages with such content. 
E-mail and Mobility 
A growing arena is the area mobility. As discussed earlier, PDAs can now send and 
receive mail without a deliberate effort made on the part of the user. Rather, mes- 
saging information is "pushed" to the device over the air as long as an Internet 
connection is made available on the device. Typically, these devices are digital. 
Companies like Sprint and Verizon fashion Treo's and other devices to work on 
their digital networks for Internet services as much as telephony. 
There are only a few ways messages are being secured, and much of this has to 
do with what's provided by either the ISP and how access to e-mail servers is con- 
figured by the security or network administrator. ISPs typically provide access to 
wireless devices via a combination of the Wi-Fi Alliance approved protocols WEP 
and WAR In a mobile device network, ISPs provide gateway devices (WAP servers 
or WAP gateways) that enable the encoding/decoding of a version of MTML 
called Wireless Markup Language (WML) that is sent to and from Web servers. 
www.syngress.com 

148 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Mobile devices that utilize the Internet connect via ISP designated frequency to 
the WAP gateways, thereby sending and retrieving secure (encoded) content. 
A device, however secure a connection it communicates over, can still be com- 
promised via theft and loss. To this end, mobile devices now have the ability to 
receive a "forced wipe" (sometimes referred to as issuing a "kill pill"). Certain man- 
ufacturers of enterprise mobility solutions and ISPs will provide this functionality 
so that a device setup with Windows Mobile, for example, can be wiped of all of its 
personal data and documents when the device is reported missing. 
In addition, most devices have the ability to require password access and the 
equivalent of"screensaver" locks that require the user to authenticate themselves 
either by pin or domain credentials. This extra step, though certainly a nuisance to 
users, does protect documents and communications stored on the device. 
E-mail server access is typically a major feature of any mobile device. OSes like 
the Palm Treo OS and Windows Mobile come ready to accept the addresses and 
names of e-mail servers and will utilize the PDA's Internet access to facilitate com- 
munication to these servers. For this reason, it is recommended to require that 
client certificates be presented to the e-mail servers by the mobile clients for con- 
nectivity. This means limiting traffic not only to SSL, but to users who can provide 
the same certification issued by the company that distributed the device. The pro- 
cess of importing of digital certificates to mobile messaging devices varies by OS. 
E-mail and Viruses 
Viruses are often spread as e-mail attachments. Attachments might be compressed 
files (such as ZIP files), programs (such as .exe files), or documents. Once the file is 
executed, the virus is released. Executing the file can be done by opening or 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
149 
viewing the file, installing and/or running a program attached to the file, opening 
an attached document, or decompressing a file. 
Many e-mail software programs provide a "Preview" pane that allows users to 
view message contents without actually opening it. This is a problem when viewing 
HTML e-mail, which appears as a Web page and may contain malicious content. 
Viewing HTML documents has the same effect as opening an HTML message. 
Computers can then fall prey to any scripts, applets, or viruses within the message. 
For protection, e-mail software should be set to view plaintext messages or anti- 
virus software that scans e-mail before opening it. 
Antivirus software provides real-time scans of systems regularly. For example, 
Norton AntiVirus, McAfee Viruscan, Microsoft's Forefront for Exchange Server, 
and Trend Micro PC-cillin scan every four seconds for new e-mail messages with 
attachments. If HTML content is part of the message, real-time scans also detect 
viruses embedded in the message. Anti-virus software can be installed at the e-mail 
server level as well, providing~in the case of Exchange~attachment and body 
scanning of all messages in the Information Store, regardless of whether or not the 
message has been delivered. Symantec Mail Security, McAfee Groupshield, and 
TrendMicro ScanMail for Exchange all work on the Microsoft platform. Many 
manufacturers, including McAfee, TrendMicro, and Symantec, have provided hard- 
ware appliances that sit between routers, firewalls, and mail servers to scan mail 
traffic destined for a company mail server, regardless of the OS or mail platform. 
For more information about the Melissa virus and other situations 
where viruses have lead to criminal action, see Scene of the Cybercrime: 
Computer Forensics Handbook (Syngress Publishing, ISBN: 1-931836-65- 
5) by Debra Littlejohn Shinder. 
Even if antivirus software is installed on a system, there is no guarantee that it 
will actually catch the virus. As seen in the case of the Melissa virus, when people 
downloaded the file called list.zip from the alt.sex newsgroup, they were infected 
with the virus. Regardless of whether these people had antivirus software installed, 
the signature files for the software did not have any data on the Melissa virus. Until 
a virus is known and an antivirus solution is created, a virus can infect any com- 
puter using antivirus software. 
www.syngress.com 

150 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Another common reason why a computer with antivirus software can be 
infected with viruses is because the signature files have not been updated.Antivirus 
software manufacturers release new signature files regularly, and it is up to users to 
download and update them. To make this simple, many manufacturers provide fea- 
tures to automatically update the signature files via Internet. 
Spam 
Sparn is unsolicited bulk e-mail (UBE), much like the advertisements and other 
junk e-mail that frequently fills home mailboxes. Spam is junk e-mail that rarely is 
of any interest to users, is never requested, and is sent by people you do not know. 
The origin of the name is ambiguous at best and goes back to the early days of 
the Internet and Bulletin Board Systems (BBSes) run on individual computers to 
which people dialed in directly. Some believe it came from computer users at the 
University of California who made a derogatory comparison between the pro- 
cessed lunchmeat product made by Hormel and e-mail that nobody wants. Others 
believe the term comes from the song by British comedy group Monty Python, 
which was about the ubiquity of spam.Whatever the exact source, spam is some- 
thing that is not likely to disappear from the Internet anytime soon. 
Spam often comes from lists of e-mail addresses or software that sends thou- 
sands or millions of messages. Many legitimate businesses avoid soliciting customers 
this way, because people do not like receiving spam. Also, many ISPs specify that 
bulk e-mail is a violation of the contract between themselves and their customers, 
so they can shut down sites or disable the accounts of customers who send spam. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
151 
Furthermore, the FTC warns that many states have laws regulating the sending of 
unsolicited commercial e-mail, making "spamming" illegal. Spam is considered to 
be a Denial of Service (DOS) attack since it has the ability to disable e-mail servers 
by overloading e-mail storage with junk messages. 
E-mail users can deal with spam in a number of ways. One method is to read 
the spam message to see if there is a method of removing addresses from the 
mailing list. Legitimate companies will remove users from their mailing lists; how- 
ever, many spam mailers use these links to verify that the e-mail addresses the mes- 
sage was sent to are "live" addresses. Users may be removed from the list, but their 
e-mail is almost always sold again as it has been confirmed as a "live" address. 
Another method of avoiding spam is by disabling cookies. Cookies are small text 
files sent by some Web sites that contain information about the user, and are stored 
in a folder on the user's computer. Cookies are commonly associated with Internet 
browsers that access Web pages, but, because many e-mail programs allow users to 
accept messages in HTML format, HTML e-mails may contain cookies as well. 
Plaintext messages are safer than HTML messages because they are not capable of 
storing cookies and other damaging content. 
Users can also contact companies they routinely deal with and ask them not to 
share or sell their information. Generally, privacy policies outline whether compa- 
nies share or sell client information. If they do share or sell information, the user 
has to decide whether or not to use those sites. 
Spare/filters are programs that analyze the contents of messages to see if they 
have the common elements of spam. If a message does contain some of those ele- 
ments, the spam filter deals with the message in a specific way. For example, users 
can configure the filter to add the word spare to the subject line, so they know that 
the message is spam. Many antivirus vendors and hardware vendors (e.g., firewall 
and appliance like Barracuda) manufacture solutions that sit in the flow of traffic 
and filter this type of threat before it ever reaches the mail server. However, before 
investing in such software, users should visit the Web site of their ISR Many ISPs 
offer spam detection and elimination services, in which spam-like e-mail is deleted 
on the server. This saves the ISP the cost of using bandwidth to send users e-mail 
they do not want. In addition, more and more clients are "spam aware." Outlook 
2003, 2007, and Windows Mail (the replacement for Outlook Express in Windows 
Vista) all utilize the Intelligent Message Filter spam detection software that is built 
into Exchange servers. These filters update their "knowledge" of what may or may 
not be spam not by what a user does, but by what Microsoft learns from its 
Hotmail and MSN mail communities, providing a nearly enterprise-level solution 
for desktop users. 
www.syngress.com 

152 
Chapter 3 ,, Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Hoaxes 
E-mail hoaxes are those e-mails sent around the Internet about concerned parents 
desperately searching for their lost children, gift certificates being offered from retail 
stores for distributing e-mails for them, and dangerous viruses that have probably 
already infected the user's computer. 
There are a lot of different ways to separate hoaxes from real information. Most 
of the time, it comes down to common sense. If users receive e-mail that says it 
originated from Bill Gates who is promising to give $100 to everyone who for- 
wards the e-mail, it is probably a hoax. The best rule of thumb is timeless~ifsome- 
thing seems too good to be true, it probably is. If a user is still not sure of the validity of 
an e-mail message, there are plenty of sites on the Internet that specialize in hoaxes. 
One of the more popular sites is www.snopes.com. 
Virus hoaxes are a little different.Virus hoaxes are warnings about viruses that do 
not exist. In these cases, the hoax itself becomes the virus because well-meaning 
people forward it to everyone they know. Some virus hoaxes are dangerous, advising 
users to delete certain files from their computer to "remove the virus," when those 
files are actually very important OS files. In other cases, users are told to e-mail 
information such as their password (or password file) to a specified address so the 
sender can "clean" the system of the virus. Instead, the sender will use the informa- 
tion to hack into the user's system and may "clean" it of its valuable data. 
How do users know whether a virus warning is a hoax? Since users should 
never take a chance with viruses, the best place to go is to the experts~the anti- 
virus companies. Most anti-virus companies have information on their Web sites 
that list popular e-mail hoaxes. The most important thing to remember about e- 
mail hoaxes is to never follow any instructions within the e-mail that instructs users 
to delete a certain file or send information to an unknown party. 
Phishing 
Phishing is a fairly new threat to the e-mail community. The basis of phishing is that 
there is a "lure" provided in the malicious e-mail, but not actually a virus.Where 
viruses can easily be detected because of their typically executable or "zipped" state, 
Phishing attempts are e-mails that are more or less completely benign. 
Typically, the e-mail is drafted in such a way as to convey a sense of safety and 
security. Where some viruses fed on human curiosity with promises of attachments 
filled with pornographic images, phishing attempts often assert that they are the 
"Customer Service" department of your bank or the "Security Council" for a 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
153 
partner organization. They often address the reality of Internet security threats 
within their e-mails! 
It is what happens next that should alert the unsavvy user. A phishing e-mail 
often has a link to a site. Either within the e-mail or at the site, the victim is asked 
to simply provide two or three pieces of information to "update" their files, secu- 
rity setting, and so forth. Often, there is the indication that non-compliance will 
result in a loss of service to the individual (e.g. their ATM card will no longer 
work). The site, while designed very professionally and modestly, is simply an entry 
point for personal data that is sent all around the globe for the purposes of identity 
theft and fraud. 
The nature of phishing has required a new approach to protecting and edu- 
cating the user community, and that has been in the combining of those two ele- 
ments. Microsoft's latest release of Internet Explorer, IE7, includes a Phishing Filter 
that is updated by black lists maintained by Microsoft (Figure 3.15). This filter will 
block access, alert, and provide information on what threat may be on the Web site 
that the unsuspecting user is attempting to access. The filter will alert if the site is 
already flagged in its cache, or a user may choose to check the site before pro- 
ceeding. 
Figure 3.15 Internet Explorer 7's New Phishing Filter 
www.syngress.com 

154 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
The Phishing Filter is integrated into Windows Mail, the free mail client on 
Windows Vista, enabling mail client service that will prompt and block anything 
flagged as a phishing attempt, regardless of whether or not the message is clean 
from a virus point of view (Figure 3.16). 
Figure 3.16 Phishing Filter Integrated Into Free Mail Client in Windows Vista 
Alerts Users 
The top ten items about e-mail security to remember for the Security+ 
exam are: 
1. S/MIME looks to the headers to determine how data encryption 
and digital certificates are to be handled. 
2. S/MIME messages are encrypted using a symmetric cipher 
(method of encrypting text), and a public-key algorithm is used 
for key exchange and digital signatures. 
3. PGP uses a combination of public and private keys to secure e- 
mail. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
155 
4. PGP uses public key cryptography, which uses a "secret" or "pri- 
vate" key to encrypt and decrypt messages. 
5. Using an open SMTP relay server gives a spammer free reliable 
delivery of their messages. 
6. Fixes for SMTP relay are available for Microsoft and UNIX e-mail 
servers. 
7. New e-mail servers that come with SMTP relay are disabled by 
default. 
8. Spam is unsolicited e-mail messages, much like the advertise- 
ments and other junk e-mail that frequently fills home mail- 
boxes. 
9. Users must know the methods for reducing the amount of spam 
they receive. 
10. Virus hoaxes are warnings about viruses that do not exist; in 
these cases, the hoax itself becomes the virus because well- 
meaning people forward it to everyone they know. 
www.syngress.com 

156 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Summary of Security+ Exam Objectives 
Secure communications are a necessity in today's world, and there are many tools 
available to users to protect information and networks from being compromised. 
Knowing how these tools work and how certain tools differ from other tools 
should be your goal when studying for the Security+ exam. 
Remote Access Security 
Although technology has made huge strides in remote access security, there are still 
many problems. Technologies such as RAS servers, NAS,VPN, authentication 
servers like RADIUS, TACACS, and TACACS+, and others were designed to 
address these problems. 
It is the security professional's responsibility to ensure that everything possible 
has been done to secure their networks. Security professionals have to find the bal- 
ance between offering users the ability to work from remote locations, and 
ensuring that the network is protected. The 802. l x standard is used for securing the 
transfer of messages between a user and an access point.When a wireless user (or 
supplicant) wants to access a wireless network, 802.1x forces them to authenticate 
to a centralized authority called an authenticator. 802.1x uses the Extensible 
Authentication Protocol (EAP) for passing messages between the supplicant and 
the authenticator.The authenticator sends a request to the user requesting their 
identity. The client returns their identity to the authenticator, which is forwarded to 
an authentication server for verification. 
VPNs use secure tunnels to allow remote users to connect to a network.VPNs 
can be configured in two forms: site-to-siteVPNs or remote access VPNs.VPNs 
use IPSec, PPTR or L2TP as the tunneling protocol. A tunnel is created by wrap- 
ping (or encapsulating) a data packet inside another packet and transmitting it over 
a public medium. PPTP is a Layer 2 (Data Link Layer) encapsulation (tunneling) 
protocol using port 1723 and TCP for its transport protocol. L2TP is also a Layer 2 
encapsulation protocol, but uses port 1701 and UDP. IPSec utilizes one of two pro- 
tocols: AH or ESP in one of two modes~transport mode or tunnel mode. IPSec is 
"a framework of open standards for ensuring private, secure communications over 
IP networks, through the use of cryptographic security services." 
IPSec can be implemented in either tunnel mode or transport mode. IPSec uses 
IKE to manage keys and authenticate the two ends of a secure tunnel before IPSec 
transmissions begin. IPSec is made up of two separate security protocols: the (AH) 
and the ESE IPSec offers nonrepudiation through the use of digital signatures. A 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
157 
RAS authenticates a user, which means they determine who a user is. A RAS also 
authorizes the functions the authenticated user may perform. A RAS logs the 
actions of the user for the duration of the connection. RADIUS was designed to 
handle the authentication and authorization of dial-in users. 
RADIUS is the most popular of all the AAA servers, which include RADIUS, 
TACACS, TACACS+, and DIAMETER. TACACS is another RAS developed 
during the days of ARPANET. Although TACACS offers authentication and autho- 
rization, it does not offer any accounting tools. TACACS+ is a proprietary version 
of TACACS that was developed by Cisco. TACACS+ is considered proprietary 
because the packet formats are completely different from those in either TACACS 
or XTACACS, making it incompatible with previous versions. TACACS+ is cred- 
ited with separating the AAA functions. Unlike previous versions (as well as 
RADIUS) that used one database for AAA, TACACS+ uses individual databases for 
AAA. TACACS+ was the first revision to offer secure communications between the 
TACACS+ client and the TACACS+ server. Another difference between RADIUS 
and TACACS is that TACACS+ uses TCP as its transport instead of UDP. 
Another tool that can be used to secure remote communications is SSH. SSH is 
a cryptographically secure replacement for standard Telnet, rlogin, RSH, and RCP 
commands. It consists of both a client and server that use public-key cryptography 
to provide session encryption. It also provides the ability to forward arbitrary ports 
over an encrypted connection. SSH is concerned with the confidentiality and 
integrity of the information being passed between the client and the host. Using 
SSH helps protect against many different types of attack, including packet sniffing, 
IP spoofing, and the manipulation of data by unauthorized users. 
There are several vulnerabilities that can be exploited in RAS. Eavesdropping 
occurs when an attacker simply attaches themselves to a network in a manner that 
allows users to "hear" all of the traffic being passed over the wire. In data modifica- 
tion, data is intercepted by a third party (one that is not part of the initial commu- 
nication), modified, and sent through to the originally intended recipient. In an IP 
spoof attack, a hacker will listen on a public network (such as the Internet) and 
examine packets until they believe they have found a trusted host that is allowed to 
pass data through the firewall. Once the hacker finds this address, they can begin 
creating packets and sending them to the target network as if from a trusted 
address. Users who write passwords on sticky notes and put them on their monitor, 
leave their workstation without locking it with a screensaver, or allow other people 
to watch while they are entering their usernames or passwords, are often the easiest 
victims of these attacks. 
v-- 
9 
www.syngress.com 

158 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Keeping up with security patches, hardening remote access systems, and being 
aware of flaws in different remote access methods must be part of the security pro- 
fessional's daily routine. 
E-mail is one of the most common means of communications used in many 
parts of the world. Because e-mail travels across multiple routers, servers, and 
mediums, more parties than just the recipient might be able to access the messages 
or data attached to an e-mail. To protect yourself and your data, you should con- 
sider using encryption. Encryption scrambles the contents of a message and attach- 
ments, and then puts the contents back together on the recipient's end.Anyone 
attempting to view the data in between will generally be unable to decipher the 
content. S/MIME was developed from MIME. MIME is an extension of SMTP 
that provides the ability to pass different kinds of data files over the Internet 
including audio, video, images, and other types of files MIME does not offer any 
security features by itself. Developers at RSA Security created S/MIME to address 
the security flaws of regular SMTP e-mail transfers. S/MIME deals with deter- 
mining how data encryption and digital certificates are to be handled. 
Messages are encrypted using a symmetric cipher (method of encrypting text), 
and a public-key algorithm is used for key exchange as well as digital signatures. 
S/MIME can be used with the DES, 3DES, and RC2 encryption algorithms. 
Philip R. Zimmermann is the creator of PGP. PGP is a third-party application 
that can be installed to interact with e-mail client software. When PGP is installed, 
plug-ins for Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, ICQ, Netscape, and other pro- 
grams can also be installed, allowing users to encrypt, decrypt, and sign messages 
sent through these e-mail packages. PGP uses a combination of public and private 
keys to secure e-mail. PGP encryption and key exchange is designed in the "Web 
of trust" model. When PGP is run, the digital signature is compared with public 
keys that are stored on a local key ring. 
As with RAS, e-mail security is susceptible to its own types of vulnerabilities. 
SMTP relay is one of the most commonly exploited vulnerabilities. SMTP relay is 
a feature of e-mail servers that allows a message to be accepted by one SMTP 
server and automatically forwarded to its destination domain by that server. SMTP 
relay must be tightly controlled, otherwise the SMTP server may be forwarding e- 
mail for another organization. Most e-mail server programs (Microsoft Exchange, 
sendmail, and so forth) have the ability to limit the addresses that SMTP e-mail can 
be relayed from. 
E-mail has become the most popular means of transferring viruses.Viruses are 
generally spread through e-mail as attachments. Executing these viruses can be 
done by opening or viewing the file, by installing and/or running an attached pro- 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
159 
gram, by opening an attached document, or by decompressing a file.Viewing 
HTML documents in the Preview pane has the same effect as opening the HTML 
message itself. Antivirus software should provide real-time scans of user's systems, 
and should check e-mail attachments on a regular basis. 
Spam is UBE, much like the advertisements and other junk mail that that fre- 
quently fills home mailboxes. Spam filters are programs that analyze the contents of 
messages to see if they have the common elements of spam. Spam is considered to 
be a DoS attack, because it has the ability to disable e-mail servers by overloading 
the e-mail storage with junk messages. 
Regarding hoaxes, if something seems too good to be true, it probably is. If 
users are not sure of the validity of an e-mail message, they should check their anti- 
virus provider's Web site to see if it is a hoax or a real threat. Users should never 
follow any instructions within an e-mail that tells users to delete certain files or 
send information to an unknown party. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
The Need for Communication Security 
gl Potentially sensitive data is being transmitted over public networks. 
gl Users want the ability to work from home. 
V----d Hackers have tools readily available on the Internet. 
gl Hacking is such a popular pastime that underground networks for passing 
information and techniques now exist. 
RAS 
gl 802.1x uses EAP for passing messages between the supplicant and the 
authenticator. 
gl RADIUS and TACACS use UDP, and TACACS+ uses TCP 
gl PPTP uses TCP and port 1723, and L2TP uses UDP and port 1701 
IPSec uses two protocols: AH and ESP 
www.syngress.com 

160 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
gl 
gl 
In data modification, data is intercepted by a third party (one that is not 
part of the initial communication), modified, and sent through to the party 
it was originally intended for. 
Using SSH helps protect against many different types of attacks, including 
packet sniffing, IP spoofing, and the manipulation of data by unauthorized 
users. 
E-mail Security 
g------d PGP and S/MIME are used for encrypting e-mail. 
Spam is unsolicited advertisements sent via e-mail. 
gl When PGP is installed, plug-ins for Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, 
ICQ, Netscape, and other programs can then be installed, allowing users to 
encrypt, decrypt, and sign messages sent through these e-mail packages. 
Users should never follow any instructions within an e-mail that tells them 
to delete a certain file or send information to an unknown party. 
Administrators of e-mail systems should invoke spam-whacking solutions, 
recursive DNS tests, and hardened SMTP relay settings to ensure their e- 
mail systems are less subject to exploitation. 


162 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
ones (Windows 2000/XP, Windows Vista and Server2003) can use both. There 
are PPTP and L2TP client implementations for Linux and Macintosh, as well. 
On the server side, if users have the option of using both PPTP and L2TP, it's 
always safer to go with both because of the OS limitations. 
Q: 
A: 
Which is better, S/MIME or PGP? 
Functionally, they are about the same. However, PGP seems to get more "press" 
and has become more popular because of it. It is not always a matter of"which 
is better" as much as it is "which one is more widely used."This is because both 
the sender and the recipient of an encrypted message must have compatible 
software in order for the recipient to be able to decrypt the encrypted mes- 
sages. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
1. The use of VPNs and 
have enabled users to be able to 
telecommute. 
. 
A. PGP 
B. S/MIME 
C. Wireless NICs 
D. RASs 
PDAs, cell phones, and certain network cards have the ability to use 
networks. Choose the BEST answer. 
A. Wired 
B. Private 
C. Wireless 
D. Antique 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging ,, Chapter 3 
163 
. 
~ 
o 
. 
There are three recognized levels of hacking ability in the Internet commu- 
nity. The first is the skilled hacker, who writes the programs and scripts that 
script kiddies use for their attacks. Next comes the script kiddie, who knows 
how to run the scripts written by the skilled hackers. After the script kiddies 
come the 
, who lack the basic knowledge of networks and 
security to launch an attack themselves. 
A. Web kiddies 
B. Clickers 
C. Click kiddies 
D. Dunce Kiddies 
Choose the correct set of terms:When a wireless user, also known as the 
wants to access a wireless network, 802.1x forces them to 
authenticate to a centralized authority called the 
A. Authenticator; supplicant 
B. Supplicant; authenticator 
C. Supplicant; negotiator 
D. Contact; authenticator 
IPSec implemented in 
encrypted during the transfer. 
A. Tunnel mode 
B. Unauthorized state mode 
C. Transfer mode 
D. Transport mode 
specifies that only the data will be 
One of the biggest differences between TACACS and TACACS+ is that 
TACACS uses 
as its transport protocol and TACACS+ uses 
as its transport protocol. 
A. TCP; UDP 
B. UDP; TCP 
C. IP; TCP 
D. IP; UDP 
www.syngress.com 

164 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
7. The 
PPTP and L2E 
protocol was created from by combining the features of 
A. IPSec 
B. XTACACS 
C. PPP 
D. L2TP 
8. SSH is concerned with the confidentiality and 
of the informa- 
tion being passed between the client and the host. 
A. Integrity 
B. Availability 
C. Accountability 
D. Speed 
. 
IPSec is made up of two basic security protocols" The AH protocol and the 
protocol. 
A. SPA 
B. IKE 
C. ESP 
D. EAP 
10. You are a consultant working with a high-profile client. They are concerned 
about the possibility of sensitive e-mail being read by unauthorized persons. 
After listening to their issues, you recommend that they implement either 
S/MIME or PGP to 
their messages. Select the BEST answer. 
A. Encapsulate 
B. Encrypt 
C. Authorize 
D. Identify 

Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 9 Chapter 3 
165 
11. Most ISPs offer their customers a service to 
A. Hoaxes 
B. SMTP relay 
C. Viruses 
D. Spam 
block 
12. S/MIME uses a/an 
signatures. 
A. Symmetric cipher 
B. Asymmetric cipher 
C. Public-key algorithm 
D. Mimic algorithm 
for key exchange as well as digital 
13. PGP can fall victim to a 
attack, which occurs when a 
hacker creates a message and sends it to a targeted userid with the expectation 
that this user will then send the message out to other users.When a targeted 
user distributes a message to others in an encrypted form, a hacker can listen 
to the transmitted messages and figure out the key from the newly created 
ciphertext. 
A. Birthday 
B. Ciphertext 
C. Sniffer 
D. Brute-force 
www.syngress.com 

166 
Chapter 3 9 Communication Security: Remote Access and Messaging 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. D 
8. A 
2. 
C 
9. C 
3. 
C 
10. B 
4. B 
11. D 
5. D 
12. C 
6. B 
13. B 
7. D 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Chapter 4 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
Wireless Concepts 
9 
Wireless Vulnerabilities 
9 
Site Surveys 
Exam Objectives Review" 
I-r 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
I-r 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
I-r 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
I-r 
Self Test 
I-r 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
167 

168 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Introduction 
This chapter thoroughly discusses what you need to know about wireless technolo- 
gies for the Security+ exam as well as to be an efficient security analyst. The 
widespread popularity and use of wireless networks and technologies has grown 
tremendously over the last few years. Providing secure wireless networking envi- 
ronments has become paramount in both public and private sectors.Wireless net- 
works can be very insecure if specific measures are not taken to properly manage 
them; however, securing them is not impossible. 
Although the concepts of wireless in this chapter go above and beyond 
what is covered on the Security+ exam, it is our belief that as a security 
analyst you will need to know this information as you progress forward. 
Therefore, we have highlighted areas you will definitely be expected to 
know for the Security+ exam. Be sure you have a good grasp of wireless 
technologies for the exam specifically concerning wireless security proto- 
cols and vulnerabilities. 
Wireless Concepts 
This section covers some of the most popular wireless technologies used today for 
wireless networking. In the past five years, two wireless network technologies have 
seen considerable deployment: Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) networks and 
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) networks based on the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) 802.11 specification.While these are 
not the only wireless networking technologies available, they are the most popular 
and must be understood to pass the wireless objectives on the Security+ certifica- 
tion exam. 
Understanding Wireless Networks 
Connecting to a wireless network is often transparent to users; from their perspec- 
tive it is no different than connecting to a copper-based or fiber-based Ethernet 
network, with the exception that no wires are involved.Windows XP supports 
automatic configuration and seamless roaming from one wireless network to 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
169 
another through its Wireless Zero Configuration service (seen in Figure 4.1). The 
ease with which users can connect to wireless networks contradicts the complexity 
of the technology and the differences between the two kinds of networks. 
Figure 4.1 Viewing the Wireless Zero Configuration Service 
Furthermore, because the experience of using a wireless network is identical to 
that of using an Ethernet network, there is a tendency to treat both kinds of net- 
works the same. They are, in fact, quite different from one another, and an under- 
standing of those differences is critical to providing an informed and effective 
implementation of a secure wireless network. 
Overview of Wireless 
Communication in a Wireless Network 
Wireless networks, like their wired counterparts, rely on the manipulation of elec- 
trical charge to enable communication between devices. Changes or oscillations in 
signal strength from 0 to some maximum value (amplitude) and the rate of those 
oscillations (frequency) are used singularly or in combination with each other to 
encode and decode information. 
Two devices can communicate with each other when they understand the 
method(s) used to encode and decode information contained in the changes to the 

170 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
electrical properties of the communications medium being used. A network adapter 
can decode changes in the electric current it senses on a wire and convert them to 
meaningful information (bits) that can subsequently be sent to higher levels for 
processing. Likewise, a network adapter can encode information (bits) by manipu- 
lating the properties of the electric current for transmission on the communications 
medium (in the case of wired networks, this would be the cable). 
Radio Frequency Communications 
The primary difference between wired and wireless networks is that wireless net- 
works use a special type of electric current known as radio frequency (RF), which 
is created by applying alternating current (AC) to an antenna to produce an elec- 
tromagnetic field (EM). Devices for broadcasting and reception use the resulting 
RF field. In the case of wireless networks, the medium for communications is the 
EMfield, the region of space that is influenced by electromagnetic radiation. 
(Unlike audio waves, radio waves do not require a medium such as air or water to 
propagate.) As with wired networks, amplitude decreases with distance, resulting in 
the degradation of signal strength and the ability to communicate. However, the 
EM field is also dispersed according to the properties of the transmitting antenna, 
and not tightly bound as is the case with communication over a wire. The area over 
which the radio waves propagate from an electromagnetic source is known as the 
fresnel zone. 
A fresnel zone calculator is available at www.firstmilewireless.com/ 
calc fresnel.html. 
Like the waves created by throwing a rock into a pool of water, radio waves are 
affected by the presence of obstructions and can be reflected, refracted, diffracted, or 
scattered, depending on the properties of the obstruction and its interaction with the 
radio waves. Reflected radio waves can be a source of interference on wireless net- 
works. The interference created by bounced radio waves is called multipath 
interference. 
When radio waves are reflected, additional wave fronts are created. These dif- 
ferent wave fronts may arrive at the receiver at different times and be in phase or 
out of phase with the main signal.When the peak of a wave is added to another 

Communication Security: Wireless ~ Chapter 4 
171 
wave (in phase), the wave is amplified.When the peak of a wave meets a trough (out 
of phase), the wave is effectively cancelled. Multipath interference can be the source 
of hard-to-troubleshoot problems. In planning for a wireless network, administrators 
should consider the presence of common sources of multipath interference. These 
include metal doors, metal roofs, water, metal vertical blinds, and any other source 
that is highly reflective to radio waves. Antennas may help to compensate for the 
effects of multipath interference, but must be carefully chosen. Many wireless access 
points (APs) have two antennas for precisely this purpose. However, a single omnidi- 
rectional antenna may be of no use at all for this kind of interference. 
Another source of signal loss is the presence of obstacles. While radio waves can 
travel through physical objects, they are degraded according to the properties of the 
object they travel through. For example, a window, is fairly transparent to radio 
waves, but may reduce the effective range of a wireless network by between 50 
percent and 70 percent, depending on the presence and nature of the coatings on 
the glass. A solid core wall can reduce the effective range of a wireless network by 
up to 90 percent or greater. 
EM fields are also prone to interference and signal degradation by the presence 
of other EM fields. In particular, 802.11 wireless networks are prone to interference 
produced by cordless phones, microwave ovens, and a wide range of devices that 
use the same unlicensed Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) or Unlicensed 
National Information Infrastructure (UNII) bands. To mitigate the effects of inter- 
ference from these devices and other sources of electromagnetic interference, RF- 
based wireless networks employ spread spectrum technologies. Spread spectrum 
provides a way to "share" bandwidth with other devices that may be operating in 
the same frequency range. Rather than operating on a single, dedicated frequency 
such as is the case with radio and television broadcasts, wireless networks use a 
"spectrum" of frequencies for communication. 
Spread Spectrum Technology 
Conceived of by Hedy Lamarr and George Antheil in 1940 as a method of 
securing military communications from jamming and for eavesdropping during 
WWII, spread spectrum defines methods for wireless devices to use to send a 
number of narrowband frequencies over a range of frequencies simultaneously for 
communication. The narrowband frequencies used between devices change 
according to a random-appearing, but defined pattern, allowing individual frequen- 
cies to contain parts of the transmission. Someone listening to a transmission using 
spread spectrum would hear only noise, unless their device understood in advance 
what frequencies were used for the transmission and could synchronize with them. 
www.syngress.com 

172 
Chapter 4 ~ Communication Security: Wireless 
Two methods of synchronizing wireless devices are: 
9 
Frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) 
9 Direct sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) 
Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum 
As the name implies, FHSS works by quickly moving from one frequency to 
another according to a psuedorandom pattern. The frequency range used by the fre- 
quency hop is relatively large (83.5 MHz), providing excellent protection from 
interference. The amount of time spent on any given frequency is known as dwell 
time and the amount of time it takes to move from one frequency to another is 
known as kop time. FHSS devices begin their transmission on one frequency and 
move to other frequencies according to a pre-defined psuedorandom sequence and 
then repeat the sequence after reaching the final frequency in the pattern. Hop time 
is usually very short (200 to 300 is) and not significant relative to the dwell time 
(100 to 200 ms). In general, the longer the dwell time, the greater the throughput 
and the more susceptible the transmission is to narrowband interference. 
The frequency hopping sequence creates a channel, allowing multiple channels 
to coexist in the same frequency range without interfering with each other. As 
many as 79 FCC-compliant FHSS devices using the 2.4 GHz ISM band can be 
co-located together. However, the expense of implementing such a large number of 
systems limits the practical number of co-located devices to well below this 
number.Wireless networks that use FHSS include HomeRF and Bluetooth, which 
both operate in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz ISM band. FHSS is less subject to EM 
interference than DSSS, but usually operates at lower rates of data transmission 
(usually 1.6 Mbps, but can be as high as 10 Mbps) than networks that use DSSS. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
173 
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum 
DSSS works somewhat differently. With DSSS, the data is divided and simultane- 
ously transmitted on as many frequencies as possible within a particular frequency 
band (the channel). DSSS adds redundant bits of data known as chips to the data to 
represent binary 0s or ls. The ratio of chips to data is known as the spreading, ratio: 
the higher the ratio, the more immune to interference the signal is, because if part 
of the transmission is corrupted, the data can still be recovered from the remaining 
part of the chipping code. This method provides greater rates of transmission than 
FHSS, which uses a limited number of frequencies, but fewer channels in a given 
frequency range. And, DSSS also protects against data loss through the redundant, 
simultaneous transmission of data. However, because DSSS floods the channel it is 
using, it is also more vulnerable to interference from EM devices operating in the 
same range. In the 2.4 to 2.4835 GHz frequency range employed by 802.11b, 
DSSS transmissions can be broadcast in any one of 14 22 MHz-wide channels. The 
number of center-channel frequencies used by 802.11 DSSS devices depends on 
the country. For example, North America allows 11 channels operating in the 2.4 
to 2.4835 GHz range, Europe allows 13, and Japan allows 1. Because each channel 
is 22-MHz-wide, they may overlap each other. Of the 11 available channels in 
North America, only a maximum of three (1, 6, and 11) may be used concurrently 
without the use of overlapping frequencies. 
When comparing FHSS and DSSS technologies, it should be noted that 
FHSS networks are not inherently more secure than DSSS networks, con- 
trary to popular belief. Even if the relatively few manufacturers of FHSS 
devices were not to publish the hopping sequence used by their devices, 
a sophisticated hacker armed with a spectrum analyzer and a computer 
could easily determine this information and eavesdrop on the communi- 
cations. 
Wireless Network Architecture 
The seven-layer open systems interconnect (OSI) networking model defines the 
framework for implementing network protocols.Wireless networks operate at the 
physical and data link layers of the OSI model. The PHY layer is concerned with the 
www.syngress.com 

174 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
physical connections between devices, such as how the medium and low bits (0s 
and ls) are encoded and decoded. Both FHSS and DSSS are implemented at the 
PHY layer. The data link layer is divided into two sublayers, the Media Access 
Control (MAC) and Logical Link Control (LLC) layers. 
The MAC layer is responsible for such things as: 
9 
Framing data 
9 Error control 
9 
Synchronization 
9 
Collision detection and avoidance 
The Ethernet 802.3 standard, which defines the Carrier Sense Multiple Access 
with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) method for protecting against data loss as 
result of data collisions on the cable, is defined at this layer. 
CSMA/CD and CSMA/CA 
In contrast to Ethernet 802.3 networks, wireless networks defined by the 802.11 
standard do not use CSMA/CD as a method to protect against data loss resulting 
from collisions. Instead, 802.11 networks use a method known as Carrier Sense 
Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA). CSMA/CD works by 
detecting whether a collision has occurred on the network and then retransmitting 
the data in the event of such an occurrence. However, this method is not practical 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
175 
for wireless networks because it relies on the fact that every workstation can hear 
all the other workstations on a cable segment to determine if there is a collision. 
In wireless networks, usually only the AP can hear every workstation that is 
communicating with it (for example, workstations A and B may be able to commu- 
nicate with the same AR but may be too far apart from each other to hear their 
respective transmissions). Additionally, wireless networks do not use full-duplex 
communication, which is another way of protecting data against corruption and 
loss as a result of collisions. 
APs are also referred to as wireless access points. This is a more precise 
term that differentiates them from other network access points (such as 
dial-in remote access points) but in this chapter, we will use the acronym 
AP to avoid confusion with the Wireless Application Protocol (also 
known as WAP). 
CSMA/CA solves the problem of potential collisions on the wireless network 
by taking a more active approach than CSMA/CD, which kicks in only after a col- 
lision has been detected. Using CSMA/CA, a wireless workstation first trys to 
detect if any other device is communicating on the network. If it senses it is clear 
to send, it initiates communication. The receiving device sends an acknowledgment 
(ACK) packet to the transmitting device indicating successful reception. If the 
transmitting device does not receive an ACK, it assumes a collision has occurred 
and retransmits the data. However, it should be noted that many collisions can 
occur and that these collisions can be used to compromise the confidentiality of 
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) encrypted data. 
CSMA/CA is only one way in which wireless networks differ from wired net- 
works in their implementation at the MAC layer. For example, the IEEE standard 
for 802.11 at the MAC layer defines additional functionality, such as virtual colli- 
sion detection (VCD), roaming, power saving, asynchronous data transfer, and 
encryption. 
The fact that the WEP protocol is defined at the MAC layer is particularly 
noteworthy and has significant consequences for the security of wireless networks. 
This means that data at the higher levels of the OSI model, particularly 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) data, is also encrypted. 
Because much of the TCP/IP communications that occur between hosts contain a 
www.syngress.com 

176 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
large amount of frequently repeating and well-knowri patterns,WEP may be vul- 
nerable to known plaintext attacks, although it does include safeguards against this 
kind of attack. 
Make sure you completely understand WEP and its vulnerabilities. WEP 
is discussed in more detail later in this chapter. 
Wireless Local Area Networks 
Wireless local area networks (WLANs) are covered by the IEEE 802.11 standards. 
The purpose of these standards is to provide a wireless equivalent to IEEE 802.3 
Ethernet-based networks. The IEEE 802.3 standard defines a method for dealing 
with collisions (CSMA/CD), speeds of operation (10 Mbps, 100 Mbps, and faster), 
and cabling types (Category 5 twisted pair and fiber). The standard ensures the 
interoperability of various devices despite different speeds and cabling types. 
As with the 802.3 standard, the 802.11 standard defines methods for dealing 
with collision and speeds of operation. However, because of the differences in the 
media (air as opposed to wires), the devices being used, the potential mobility of 
users connected to the network, and the possible wireless network topologies, the 
802.11 standard differs significantly from the 802.3 standard. As mentioned earlier, 
802.11 networks use CSMA/CA as the method to deal with potential collisions, 
instead of the CSMA/CD used by Ethernet networks, because not all stations on a 
wireless network can hear collisions that occur on a network. 
In addition to providing a solution to the problems created by collisions that 
occur on a wireless network, the 802.11 standard must deal with other issues spe- 
cific to the nature of wireless devices and wireless communications in general. For 
example, wireless devices need to be able to locate other wireless devices, such as 
APs, and communicate with them.Wireless users are mobile and therefore should 
be able to move seamlessly from one wireless zone to another. Many wireless- 
enabled devices such as laptops and hand-held computers, use battery power and 
should be able to conserve power when not actively communicating with the net- 
work.Wireless communication over the air needs to be secure to mitigate both pas- 
sive and active attacks. 

Communication Security: Wireless ~ Chapter 4 
177 
WAP 
The WAP is an open specification designed to enable mobile wireless users to 
easily access and interact with information and services. WAP is designed for hand- 
held digital wireless devices such as mobile phones, pagers, two-way radios, smart- 
phones and other communicators. It works over most wireless networks and can be 
built on many operating systems (OSs) including PalmOS, Windows CE, JavaOS, 
and others. The WAP operational model is built on the World Wide Web (WWW) 
programming model with a few enhancements and is shown in Figure 4.2. 
Figure 4.2 WAP 2.0 Architecture Programming Model 
WAP browsers in a wireless client are analogous to the standard WWW 
browsers on computers.WAP URLs are the same as those defined for traditional 
networks and are also used to identify local resources in the WAP-enabled client. 
The WAP specification added two significant enhancements to the above pro- 
gramming model: push and telephony support (Wireless Telephony Application 
[WTA]).WAP also provides for the use of proxy servers, as well as supporting 
servers that provide functions such as PKI support, user profile support, and provi- 
sioning support. 
www.syngress.com 

178 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
For the Security+ exam it is important to remember that the three main 
elements of the WAP programming model are the Client, the Gateway 
and the Original Server. 
WTLS 
The wireless transport layer security (WTLS) is an attempt by the WAP Forum to 
introduce a measure of security into the WAR The WTLS protocol is based on the 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol that is itself a derivative of the Secure 
Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol. However, several changes were made to these proto- 
cols to adapt them to work within WAR These changes include: 
9 Support for both datagram- and connection-oriented protocols 
9 Support for long round-trip times 
9 Low-bandwidth, limited memory, and processor capabilities 
WTLS is designed to provide privacy as well as reliability for both the client 
and the server over an insecure network and is specific to applications that utilize 
WAR These applications tend to be limited by memory, processor capabilities, and 
low bandwidth environments. 
Make sure you fully understand WTLS for the Security+ exam. 
IEEE 802.11 
The original IEEE 802.11 standard was developed in 1989 and defines the opera- 
tion of wireless networks operating in the 2.4 GHz range using either DSSS or 
FHSS at the physical layer of the OSI model. The standard also defines the use of 
infrared for wireless communication. The intent of the standard is to provide a 
wireless equivalent for standards, such as 802.3, that are used for wired networks. 
DSSS devices that follow the 802.11 standard communicate at speeds of 1 Mbps 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
179 
and 2 Mbps and generally have a range of approximately 300 feet. Because of the 
need for higher rates of data transmission and to provide more functionality at the 
MAC layer, the 802.11 Task Group developed other standards. (In some cases the 
802.11 standards were developed from technologies that preceded them.) 
The IEEE 802.11 standard provides for all the necessary definitions and con- 
structs for wireless networks. Everything from the physical transmission specifica- 
tions to the authentication negotiation is defined by this standard. Wireless traffic, 
like its wired counterpart, consists of frames transmitted from one station to 
another. The primary feature that sets wireless networks apart from wired networks 
is that at least one end of the communication pair is either a wireless client or a 
wireless AP. 
IEEE 802.1 lb 
The most common standard used today for wireless networks, the IEEE 802.11b 
standard defines DSSS networks that use the 2.4 GHz ISM band and communicate 
at speeds of 1, 2, 5.5, and 11 Mbps. The 802.11b standard defines the operation of 
only DSSS devices and is backward compatible with 802.11 DSSS devices. The 
standard is also concerned only with the PHY and MAC layers: Layer 3 and higher 
protocols are considered payload. There is only one frame type used by 802.11b 
networks, and it is significantly different from Ethernet frames. The 802.1 l b frame 
type has a maximum length of 2346 bytes, although it is often fragmented at 1518 
bytes as it traverses an AP to communicate with Ethernet networks. The frame type 
provides for three general categories of frames: management, control, and data. In 
general, the frame type provides methods for wireless devices to discover, associate 
(or disassociate), and authenticate with one another; to shift data rates as signals 
become stronger or weaker; to conserve power by going into sleep mode; to handle 
collisions and fragmentation; and to enable encryption through WEE Regarding 
WEE it should be noted that the standard defines the use of only 64-bit (also 
sometimes referred to as 40-bit to add to the confusion) encryption, which may 
cause issues of interoperability between devices from different vendors that use 
128-bit or higher encryption. 
Remember that IEEE 802.11 b functions at 11 Mbps. 
www.syngress.com 

180 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
IEEE 802.11 a 
In spite of its nomenclature, IEEE 802.1 l a is a more recent standard than 802.1 lb. 
This standard defines wireless networks that use the 5 GHz UNII bands. 802.11a 
supports much higher rates of data transmission than 802.11b. These rates are 6, 9, 
12, 16, 18, 24, 36, 48, and 54 Mbps, although higher rates are possible using propri- 
etary technology and a technique known as rate doubling. Unlike 802.1 l b, 802.11a 
does not use spread spectrum and Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) as a 
modulation technique at the physical layer. Instead it uses a modulation technique 
known as Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM).To be 802.11a 
compliant, devices are only required to support data rates of 6, 12, and 24 Mbps~ 
the standard does not require the use of other data rates. Although identical to 
802.1 l b at the MAC layer, 802.11a is not backward compatible with 802.11b 
because of the use of a different frequency band and the use of OFDM at the PHY 
layer, although some vendors are providing solutions to bridge the two standards at 
the AE However, both 802.1 l a and 802.1 l b devices can be easily co-located 
because their frequencies will not interfere with each other, providing a technically 
easy but relatively expensive migration to a pure 802.1 l a network. At the time of 
this writing, 802.11a-compliant devices are becoming more common, and the 
prices for them are falling quickly. However, even if the prices for 802.1 l b and 
802.1 l a devices were identical, 802.1 l a would require more APs and be more 
expensive than an 802.1 l b network to achieve the highest possible rates of data 
transmission, because the higher frequency 5 GHz waves attenuate more quickly 
over distance. 
IEEE 802.1 l g 
To provide both higher data rates (up to 54 Mbps) in the ISM 2.4 GHz bands and 
backward compatibility with 802.1 lb, the IEEE 802.11 g Task Group members 
along with wireless vendors are working on the 802.1 l g standard specifications. 
802.1 l g has been approved as a standard, but the specifications for the standard are 
still in draft form and are due for completion in late 2002. To achieve the higher 
rates of transmission, 802.1 lg devices use OFDM in contrast to QPSK, which is 
used by 802.1 l b devices as a modulation technique. However, 802.1 l g devices are 
able to automatically switch to QPSK to communicate with 802.1 l b devices.At 
the time of this writing, there are no 802.1 l g devices on the market, although 
Cisco has announced that its 802.11g-compliant Aironet 1200 will be available in 
2003.802.1 l g appears to have advantages over 802.1 l a in terms of providing back- 
ward compatibility with 802.1 l b; however, migrating to and co-existence with 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
181 
802.11b may still prove problematic because of interference in the widely used 2.4 
GHz band. Because of this, it is unclear whether 802.11g will be a popular alterna- 
tive to 802.1 l a for achieving higher rates of transmission on wireless networks. 
See Table 4.1 for a comparison of 802.11 standards. 
Table 4.1 Comparison of 802.11 Standards 
802.11 Standard 
Frequency 
Speed 
Modulation 
Range (indoor) 
802.11b 
2.4 GHz. 
11 Mbps. 
802.1 la 
5 GHz. 
54 Mbps. 
802.1 lg 
2.4 GHz. 
54 Mbps. 
DSSS 
100 Feet 
OFDM 
100 Feet 
OFDM and QPSK 100 Feet 
Ad-Hoc and Infrastructure Network Configuration 
The 802.11 standard provides for two modes for ad-hoc and infrastructure wireless 
clients to communicate. The ad-hoc mode is geared for a network of stations 
within communication range of each other. Ad-hoc networks are created sponta- 
neously between the network participants. In infrastructure mode, APs provide 
more permanent structure for the network. An infrastructure consists of one or 
more APs as well as a distribution system (that is, a wired network) behind the APs 
that tie the wireless network to the wired network. Figures 4.3 and 4.4 show an 
ad-hoc network and an infrastructure network, respectively. 
Figure 4.3 Ad-Hoc Network Configuration 
www.syngress.com 

182 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Figure 4.4 Infrastructure Network Configuration 
To distinguish different wireless networks from one another, the 802.11 stan- 
dard defines the Service Set Identifier (SSID).The SSID is considered the identity 
element that "glues" various components of a wireless local area network (LAN) 
together. Traffic from wireless clients that use one SSID can be distinguished from 
other wireless traffic using a different SSID. Using the SSID, an AP can determine 
which traffic is meant for it and which is meant for other wireless networks. 
802.11 traffic can be subdivided into three parts: 
9 
Control frames 
9 
Management frames 
9 
Data flames 
Control flames include such information as Request to Send (RTS), Clear to 
Send (CTS), and ACK messages. Management frames include beacon frames, probe 
request/response, authentication frames, and association frames. Data frames are 
802.11 frames that carry data, which is typically considered network traffic, such as 
Internet Protocol (IP) encapsulated frames. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
183 
WEP 
The IEEE 802.11 standard covers the communication between WLAN compo- 
nents. RF poses challenges to privacy in that it travels through and around physical 
objects. Because of the nature of the 802.11 wireless LANs, the IEEE working 
group implemented a mechanism to protect the privacy of the individual transmis- 
sions, known as the WEP protocol. Because WEP utilizes a cryptographic security 
countermeasure for the fulfillment of its stated goal of privacy, it has the added 
benefit of becoming an authentication mechanism. This benefit is realized through 
a shared-key authentication that allows for encryption and decryption of wireless 
transmissions. Up to four keys can be defined on an AP or a client, and they can be 
rotated to add complexity for a higher security standard in the WLAN policy. 
WEP was never intended to be the absolute authority in wireless security. The 
IEEE 802.11 standard states that WEP provides for protection from "casual eaves- 
dropping." Instead, the driving force behind WEP was privacy. In cases that require 
high degrees of security, other mechanisms should be utilized such as authentica- 
tion, access control, password protection, and virtual private networks (VPNs). 
Despite its ftaws,WEP still offers a level of security provided that all its features 
are used properly. This means taking great care in key management, avoiding default 
options, and ensuring adequate encryption is enabled at every opportunity. 
Proposed improvements in the 802.11 standard should overcome many of the 
limitations of the original security options, and should make WEP more appealing 
as a security solution. Additionally, as WLAN technology gains popularity and users 
clamor for functionality, both the standards committees and the hardware vendors 
will offer improvements. It is critically important to keep abreast of vendor-related 
software fixes and changes that improve the overall security posture of a wireless 
LAN. 
Most APs advertise that they support WEP in 40-bit encryption, but 
often the 128-bit option is also supported. For corporate networks, 128- 
bit encryption-capable devices should be considered as a minimum. 
With data security enabled in a closed network, the settings on the client for 
the SSID and the encryption keys must match the AP when attempting to associate 
with the network or it will fail. The next few paragraphs discuss WEP and its rela- 
www.syngress.com 

184 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
tion to the functionality of the 802.11 standard, including a standard definition of 
WEE the privacy created, and the authentication. 
WEP provides security and privacy in transmissions held between the AP and 
the clients. To gain access, an intruder must be more sophisticated and have specific 
intent to gain access. Some of the other benefits of implementing WEP include the 
following: 
9 All messages are encrypted using a CRC-32 checksum to provide some 
degree of integrity. 
9 Privacy is maintained via the RC4 encryption.Without possession of the 
secret key, the message cannot be easily decrypted. 
9 WEP is extremely easy to implement. All that is required is to set the 
encryption key on the APs and on each client. 
9 WEP provides a basic level of security for WLAN applications. 
9 WEP keys are user-definable and unlimited.WEP keys can, and should, be 
changed often. 
Do not confuse WAP and WER While it may seem that WEP is the pri- 
vacy system for WAP, you should remember that WTLS is the privacy 
mechanism for WAP and WEP is the privacy mechanism for 802.11 
WLANs. 
Creating Privacy with WEP 
WEP provides for three implementations: no encryption, 40-bit encryption, and 
128-bit encryption. Clearly, no encryption means no privacy.When WEP is set to 
no encryption, transmissions are sent in the clear and can be viewed by any wireless 
sniffing application that has access to the ILl = signal propagated in the WLAN 
(unless some other encryption mechanism, such as IPSec, is being used). In the case 
of the 40- and 128-bit varieties (just as with password length), the greater the 
number of characters (bits), the stronger the encryption. The initial configuration of 
the AP includes the setup of the shared key. This shared key can be in the form of 
either alphanumeric or hexadecimal strings, and must be matched on the client. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
185 
WEP uses the RC4 encryption algorithm, a stream cipher developed by Ron 
Rivest (the "R" in RSA). The process by which WEP encrypts a message is shown 
in Figure 4.5. Both the sender and the receiver use the stream cipher to create 
identical psuedorandom strings from a known-shared key. This process entails 
having the sender logically XOR the plaintext transmission with the stream cipher 
to produce ciphertext. The receiver takes the shared key and identical stream and 
reverses the process to gain the plaintext transmission. 
The steps in the process are as follows: 
1. The plaintext message is run through an integrity check algorithm (the 
802.11 standard specifies the use of CRC-32) to produce an integrity 
check value (ICV). 
2. This value is appended to the end of the original plaintext message. 
3. A "random" 24-bit initialization vector (IV) is generated and prepended to 
(added to the beginning of) the secret key (which is distributed through 
an out-of-band method) that is then input to the RC4 Key Scheduling 
Algorithm (KSA) to generate a seed value for the WEP pseudorandom 
number generator (PRNG). 
4. The WEP PRNG outputs the encrypting cipher-stream. 
5. This cipher-stream is then XOR'd with the plaintext/ICV message to 
produce the WEP ciphertext. 
6. The ciphertext is then prepended with the IV (in plaintext), encapsulated, 
and transmitted. 
Figure 4.5 WEP Encryption Process in IEEE 802.11 
/ 
Initialization Vector (IV)-~I,-~ / Key ] 
ISchedulingl 
Secret Key 
,.I Algorithml 
PlaJntext 
T 
~ Integrity Algorithm I 
-1{2}1 
Key Sequence.~ 
~1 PRNG 
"1 
Seed 
.~J IV 
"J Ciphertext 

186 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
A new IV is used for each flame to prevent the reuse of the key from weak- 
ening the encryption. This means that for each string generated, a different value 
will be used for the RC4 key. Although this is a secure policy in itself, its imple- 
mentation in WEP is flawed because of the nature of the 24-bit space. It is so small 
with respect to the potential set of IVs, that in a short period of time all keys are 
reused. When this happens, two different messages are encrypted with the same IV 
and key and the two messages can be XOR'd with each other to cancel out the 
keystream, allowing an attacker who knows the contents of one message to easily 
figure out the contents of the other. Unfortunately, this weakness is the same for 
both the 40- and 128-bit encryption levels, because both use the 24-bit IV. 
To protect against some rudimentary attacks that insert known text into the 
stream to attempt to reveal the key stream, WEP incorporates a checksum into each 
flame. Any flame not found to be valid through the checksum is discarded. 
Authentication 
There are two authentication methods in the 802.11 standard: 
9 
Open authentication 
9 
Shared-key authentication 
Open authentication is more precisely described as device-oriented authentica- 
tion and can be considered a null authentication~all requests are granted.Without 
WEE open authentication leaves the WLAN wide open to any client who knows 
the SSID.With WEP enabled, the WEP secret key becomes the indirect authenti- 
cator.The open authentication exchange, with WEP enabled, is shown in Figure 4.6. 
Figure 4.6 Open Authentication 

communication security: wireless 9 Chapter 4 
187 
Open authentication can also require the use of a WEP key. Do not 
assume that just because the Security+ exam discusses open authentica- 
tion that a WEP key should not be set. 
The shared-key authentication process shown in Figure 4.7 is a four-step pro- 
cess that begins when the AP receives the validated request for association. After the 
AP receives the request, a series of management frames are transmitted between the 
stations to produce the authentication. This includes the use of the cryptographic 
mechanisms employed by WEP as a validation. The four steps break down in the 
following manner: 
1. The requestor (the client) sends a request for association. 
2. The authenticator (the AP) receives the request, and responds by pro- 
ducing a random challenge text and transmitting it back to the requestor. 
3. The requestor receives the transmission, encrypts the challenge with the 
secret key, and transmits the encrypted challenge back to the authenticator. 
4. The authenticator decrypts the challenge text and compares the values 
against the original. If they match, the requestor is authenticated. On the 
other hand, if the requestor does not have the shared key, the cipher 
stream cannot be reproduced, therefore the plaintext cannot be discovered, 
and theoretically the transmission is secured. 
Figure 4.7 Shared-Key Authentications 
One of the greatest weaknesses in shared-key authentication is that it provides 
an attacker with enough information to try and crack the WEP secret key. The 
www.syngress.com 

188 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
challenge, which is sent from authenticator to requestor, is sent in the clear. The 
requesting client then transmits the same challenge, encrypted using the WEP 
secret key, back to the authenticator. An attacker who captures both of these 
packets now has two pieces os a three-piece puzzle: the cleartext challenge and the 
encrypted ciphertext of that challenge. The algorithm RC4 is also known. All that 
is missing is the secret key. To determine the key, the attacker may simply try a 
brute force search of the potential key space using a dictionary attack. At each step, 
the attacker tries to decrypt the encrypted challenge with a dictionary word as the 
secret key. The result is then compared against the authenticator's challenge. It: the 
two match, then the secret key has been determined. In cryptography, this attack is 
termed a known-plaintext attack and is the primary reason why shared-key authenti- 
cation is actually considered slightly weaker than open authentication. 
While the Security+ exam does not cover the authentication process in 
great detail, it is important to remember the two authentication mecha- 
nisms in the 802.11 standard: open and shared-key. 
802. lx Autkentication 
The current IEEE 802.11b standard is severely limited because it is available only 
for the current open and shared-key authentication scheme which is non-exten- 
sible. To address the weaknesses in the authentication mechanisms discussed above, 
several vendors (including Cisco and Microsoft) adopted the IEEE 802. l x authen- 
tication mechanism for wireless networks. The IEEE 802. l x standard was created 
for the purpose of providing a security framework for port-based access control 
that resides in the upper layers os the protocol stack. The most common method 
for port-based access control is to enable new authentication and key management 
methods without changing current network devices. The benefits that are the end 
result of this work include the following: 
9 
There is a significant decrease in hardware cost and complexity. 
9 
There are more options, allowing administrators to pick and choose their 
security solutions. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
189 
The latest and greatest security technology can 
work with the existing infrastructure. 
be installed and should still 
You can respond quickly to security issues as they arise. 
802.1x typically is covered in the access control, authentication, and 
auditing sections of the Security+ exam, but is relevant to wireless net- 
works because of the fact that it is quickly becoming the standard 
method of securely authenticating on a wireless network. Also, do not 
confuse 802. lx with 802.1 lx. 
When a client device connects to a port on an 802.1x-capable AP, the AP port 
determines the authenticity of the devices. Before discussing the workings of the 
802.1x standard, the following terminology must be defined: 
9 
Port A single point of connection to a network. 
9 
Port Access Entity (PAE) Controls the algorithms and protocols that 
are associated with the authentication mechanisms for a port. 
9 Authenticator PAlE Enforces authentication before allowing access to 
resources located off of that port. 
9 
Supplicant PAE Tries to access the services that are allowed by the 
authenticator. 
9 Authentication Server Used to verify the supplicant PAE. It decides 
whether or not the supplicant is authorized to access the authenticator. 
9 Extensible Authentication Protocol Over LAN (EAPoL) 802.1x 
defines a standard for encapsulating EAP messages so that they can be 
handled directly by a LAN MAC service. 802.1x tries to make authentica- 
tion more encompassing, rather than enforcing specific mechanisms on the 
devices. Because of this, 802.1 lx uses Extensible Authentication Protocol 
(EAP) to receive authentication information. 
9 Extensible Authentication Protocol Over Wireless (EAPoW) When 
EAPOL messages are encapsulated over 802.11 wireless flames, they are 
known as EAPoW. 
www, syngress,com 

190 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
The 802. l x standard works in a similar fashion for both EAPoL and EAPoW. 
As shown in Figure 4.8, the EAP supplicant (in this case, the wireless client) com- 
municates with the AP over an "uncontrolled port."The AP sends an EAP 
Request/Identity to the supplicant and a Remote Authentication Dial-In User 
Service (RADIUS)-Access-Request to the RADIUS access server.The supplicant 
then responds with an identity packet and the RADIUS server sends a challenge 
based on the identity packets sent from the supplicant. The supplicant provides its 
credentials in the EAP-Response that the AP forwards to the RADIUS server. If 
the response is valid and the credentials validated, the RADIUS server sends a 
RADIUS-Access-Accept to the AP, which then allows the supplicant to communi- 
cate over a "controlled" port. This is communicated by the AP to the supplicant in 
the EAP-Success packet. 
Figure 4.8 EAP over LAN (EAPoL) Traffic Flow 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
191 
User Identification and Strong Authentication 
With the addition of the 802.1x standard, clients are identified by username, not by 
the MAC addresses of the devices. This design not only enhances security, but also 
streamlines the process of authentication, authorization, and accountability (AAA) 
for the network. 802.1x was designed to support extended forms of authentication 
using password methods (such as one-time passwords, or GSS_API mechanisms like 
Kerberos) and non-password methods (such as biometrics, Internet Key Exchange 
[IKE], and Smart Cards). 
Dynamic Key Derivation 
The IEEE 802. l x standard allows for the creation of per-user session keys.WEP 
keys do not have to be kept at the client device or at the AP when using 802.1x. 
These WEP keys are dynamically created at the client for every session, thus 
making it more secure. The Global key, like a broadcast WEP key, can be encrypted 
using a Unicast session key, and then sent from the AP to the client in a much 
more secure manner. 
Mutual Authentication 
802.1x and EAP provide for a mutual authentication capability. This makes the 
clients and the authentication servers mutually authenticating end points, and assists 
in the mitigation of attacks from man-in-the-middle (MITM) types of devices. Any 
of the following EAP methods provide for mutual authentication: 
www.syngress.com 

192 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
TLS Requires that the server supply a certificate and establish that it has 
possession of the private key. 
IKE Requires that the server show possession of a preshared key or pri- 
vate key (this can be considered certificate authentication). 
GSS_API (Kerberos) Requires that the server can demonstrate knowl- 
edge of the session key. 
Per-Packet Authentication 
EAP can support per-packet authentication and integrity protection, but it is not 
extended to all types of EAP messages. For example, negative acknowledgment 
(NACK) and notification messages cannot use per-packet authentication and 
integrity. Per-packet authentication and integrity protection works for the fol- 
lowing (packet is encrypted unless otherwise noted): 
9 TLS and IKE derive session key 
9 TLS ciphersuite negotiations (not encrypted) 
9 IKE ciphersuite negotiations 
9 Kerberos tickets 
9 Success and failure messages that use a derived session key (through WEP) 
EAP was designed to support extended authentication. When imple- 
menting EAP, dictionary attacks can be avoided by using non-password- 
based schemes such as biometrics, certificates, OTP, Smart Cards, and 
token cards. Using a password-based scheme should require the use of 
some form of mutual authentication so that the authentication process 
is protected against dictionary attacks. 
It is helpful to write out a table showing the various authentication 
methods used in 802.11 networks (for example, open authentication, 
shared-key authentication, and 802.1x authentication) with the various 
properties each of these authentication methods require. This will help 
keep them straight in your mind when taking the test. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
193 
Common Exploits of Wireless Networks 
In general, attacks on wireless networks fall into four basic categories: passive, 
active, MITM, and jamming. 
Passive Attacks on Wireless Networks 
A passive attack occurs when someone eavesdrops on network traffic. Armed with 
a wireless network adapter that supports promiscuous mode, eavesdroppers can cap- 
ture network traffic for analysis using easily available tools such as Network 
Monitor in Microsoft products, TCPDump in Linux-based products, or AirSnort 
(developed for Linux, but Windows drivers can be written).A passive attack on a 
wireless network may not be malicious in nature. In fact, many in the wardriving 
community claim their wardriving activities are benign or "educational" in nature. 
Wireless communication takes place on unlicensed public frequencies~anyone can 
use these frequencies. This makes protecting a wireless network from passive attacks 
more difficult. 
Passive attacks are by their very nature difficult to detect. If an administrator is 
using dynamic host control protocol (DHCP) on a wireless network (this is not 
recommended), they may or may not notice that an authorized MAC address has 
acquired an IP address in the DHCP server logs. Perhaps the administrator notices 
a suspicious-looking car with an antenna sticking out of its window. If the car is 
parked on private property, the driver could be asked to move or possibly be 
charged with trespassing. But, the legal response is severely limited. Only if it can 
be determined that a wardriver was actively attempting to crack encryption on a 
network or otherwise interfere or analyze wireless traffic with malicious intent, 
would they be susceptible to criminal charges. However, this also depends on the 
country or state in which the activity took place. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

194 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Continued 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
195 
Passive attacks on wireless networks are extremely common, almost to the point 
of being ubiquitous. Detecting and reporting on wireless networks has become a 
popular hobby for many wireless wardriving enthusiasts. In fact, this activity is so 
popular that a new term, "war plugging," has emerged to describe the behavior of 
people who wish to advertise the availability of an AP and the services they offer, 
by configuring their SSIDs with text such as "Get_food_here." 
l/Vardrivin S Software 
Most wardriving enthusiasts use a popular freeware program called NetStumbler, 
which is available from www.netstumbler.com. The NeStumbler program works 
www.syngress.com 

196 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
primarily with wireless network adapters that use the Hermes chipset because of its 
ability to detect multiple APs that are within range and WEP. (A list of supported 
adapters is available at the NetStumbler Web site.) The most common card that uses 
the Hermes chipset for use with NetStumbler is the ORINOCO gold card. 
Another advantage of the ORINOCO card is that it supports the addition of an 
external antenna, which can greatly extend the range of a wireless network. 
Wardrivers often make their own Yagi-type (tubular or cylindrical) 
antennas. Instructions for doing so are easy to find on the Internet, and 
effective antennas have been made out of such items as Pringles potato 
chip cans. Another type of antenna that can be easily made is a dipole, 
which is basically a piece of wire of a length that is a multiple of the 
wavelength, cut in the center, and attached to a piece of cable that is 
connected to the wireless network interface card (NIC). 
One disadvantage of the Hermes chipset is it does not support promiscuous 
mode, so it cannot be used to sniff network traffic. For that purpose, a wireless net- 
work adapter is needed that supports the P1KISM2 chipset. The majority of wireless 
network adapters targeted to the consumer market use this chipset (for example, 
the Linksys WPC network adapters). Sophisticated wardrivers arm themselves with 
both types of cards, one for discovering wireless networks and another for cap- 
turing the traffic. 
In spite of the fact that NetStumbler is free, it is a sophisticated and feature-rich 
product that is excellent for performing wireless site surveys. Not only can it pro- 
vide detailed information on the wireless networks it detects, but it can also be 
used in combination with a global positioning system (GPS) to provide exact 
details on the latitude and longitude of the detected wireless networks. Figure 4.9 
shows the interface of a typical NetStumbler session. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
197 
Figure 4.9 Discovering Wireless LANs Using NetStumbler 
As can be seen in Figure 4.9, NetStumbler displays information on the SSID, 
the channel, and the manufacturer of the wireless AP. There are a few noteworthy 
things about this session. The first is that some of the APs are still configured with 
the default SSID supplied by the manufacturer, which should always be changed to 
a non-default value upon setup and configuration. Another is that at least one net- 
work uses a SSID that may provide a clue about the entity that implemented it. 
Again, this is not a good practice when configuring SSIDs. Finally, you can see 
which of these networks implemented WEE 
If the network administrator was kind enough to provide a clue about the 
company in the SSID or is not encrypting traffic with WEE the potential eaves- 
dropper's job is made a lot easier. Using a tool such as NetStumbler is only a pre- 
liminary step for an attacker. After discovering the SSID and other information, an 
attacker can connect to a wireless network and sniff and capture network traffic. 
This network traffic can reveal a lot of information about the network and the 
company that uses it. For example, looking at network traffic, an attacker can deter- 
mine what domain name system (DNS) servers are being used, the default home 
pages configured on browsers, network names, logon traffic, and so on. The attacker 
can use this information to determine if a network is of sufficient interest to pro- 
www.syngress.com 

198 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
ceed further with other attacks. Furthermore, if a network is using WEE given 
enough time the attacker can capture a sufficient amount of traffic to crack the 
encryption. 
NetStumbler works on networks that are configured as open systems. This means 
that the wireless network indicates that it exists and will respond with the value of 
its SSID to other wireless devices when they send out a radio beacon with an 
"empty set" SSID. However, this does not mean that a wireless network can be 
easily compromised if other security measures have been implemented. 
To defend against the use of NetStumbler and other programs that detect a 
wireless network easily, administrators should configure the wireless network as a 
closed system. This means that the AP will not respond to "empty set" SSID beacons 
and will consequently be "invisible" to programs such as NetStumbler, which rely 
on this technique to discover wireless networks. However, it is still possible to cap- 
ture the "raw" 802.11b flames and decode them using programs such as Wireshark 
(formerly Ethereal) and Wild Packet's AiroPeek to determine the information. RF 
spectrum analyzers can also be used to discover the presence of wireless networks. 
Notwithstanding this weakness of closed systems, administrators should choose wire- 
less APs that support this feature. 
Active Attacks on Wireless Networks 
Once an attacker has gained sufficient information from a passive attack, they can 
launch an active attack against the network. There are a potentially large number of 
active attacks that can be launched against a wireless network. For the most part, 
these attacks are identical to the kinds of active attacks encountered on wired net- 
works. These include, but are not limited to, unauthorized access, spoofing, Denial 
of Service (DOS), and flooding attacks, as well as the introduction of malware (mali- 
cious software) and the theft of devices.With the rise in popularity of wireless net- 
works, new variations of traditional attacks specific to wireless networks have 
emerged along with specific terms to describe them, such as "drive-by spamming" 
in which a spammer sends out hundreds of thousands of spam messages using a 
compromised wireless network. 
Because of the nature of wireless networks and the weaknesses of WER unau- 
thorized access and spoofing are the most common threats to wireless networks. 
Spoofing occurs when an attacker is able to use an unauthorized station to imper- 
sonate an authorized station on a wireless network. A common way to protect a 
wireless network against unauthorized access is to use MAC filtering to allow only 
clients that possess valid MAC addresses access to the wireless network. The list of 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
199 
allowable MAC addresses can be configured on the AR or it can be configured on 
a RADIUS server with which the AP communicates. However, regardless of the 
technique used to implement MAC filtering, it is relatively easy to change the 
MAC address of a wireless device through software. In Windows, this is accom- 
plished with a simple edit of the registry; in UNIX it is accomplished through a 
root shell command. MAC addresses are sent in the clear on wireless networks, so it 
is also relatively easy to discover authorized addresses. 
WEP can be implemented to provide more protection against authentication 
spoofing through the use of shared-key authentication. However, as discussed ear- 
lier, shared-key authentication creates an additional vulnerability. Because shared- 
key authentication makes visible both a plaintext challenge and the resulting 
ciphertext version of it, it is possible to use this information to spoof authentication 
to a closed network. 
Once an attacker has authenticated and associated with a wireless network, they 
can run port scans, use special tools to dump user lists and passwords, impersonate 
users, connect to shares, and, in general, create havoc on the network through DoS 
and flooding attacks. DoS attacks can be traditional in nature, such as a ping, flood, 
SYN, fragment, or Distributed DoS (DDoS), or they can be specific to a wireless net- 
work through the placement and use of rogue access points that prevent wireless traffic 
from being forwarded properly (similar to router spoofing on wired networks). 
MITM Attacks on Wireless Networks 
Placing a rogue AP within range of a wireless station is a wireless-specific variation 
of a MITM attack. If the attacker knows the SSID in use by the network and the 
rogue AP has enough strength, wireless users will have no way of knowing that 
they are connecting to an unauthorized AP. Using a rogue AR an attacker can gain 
valuable information about a wireless network, such as authentication requests, the 
secret key being used, and so on. Often, an attacker will set up a laptop with two 
wireless adapters, in which one card is used by the rogue AP and the other is used 
to forward requests through a wireless bridge to the legitimate AP. With a suffi- 
ciently strong antenna, the rogue AP does not have to be located in close proximity 
to the legitimate AP. For example, an attacker can run a rogue AP from a car or van 
parked some distance away from a building. However, it is also common to set up 
hidden rogue APs (under desks, in closets, and so on.) close to and within the same 
physical area as the legitimate AP. Because of their undetectable nature, the only 
defense against rogue APs is vigilance through frequent site surveys (using tools 
such as NetStumbler and AiroPeek,) and physical security. 
www.syngress.com 

200 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Frequent site surveys also have the advantage of uncovering unauthorized APs 
that company staff members may have set up in their own work areas, thereby 
compromising the entire network. This is usually done with no malicious intent, 
but for the convenience of the user, who may want to be able to connect to the 
network via their laptop in areas that do not have wired outlets. Even if a company 
does not use or plan to use a wireless network, they should consider conducting 
regular wireless site surveys to see if anyone has violated company security policy 
by placing an unauthorized AP on the network. 
Wireless Vulnerabilities 
Wireless technologies are inherently more vulnerable to attack because of the 
nature of the network transmissions.Wireless network transmissions are not physi- 
cally constrained within the confines of a building or its surroundings, thus 
allowing attackers ready access to the information in wireless networks. As wireless 
network technologies have emerged, they have become the focus of analysis by 
security researchers and hackers. Security researchers and hackers realize that wire- 
less networks can be insecure and can often be exploited as a gateway into the rela- 
tively secure wired networks beyond them. This section covers the vulnerabilities 
that have been found in the WTLS and WEP security protocols. 
WAP Vulnerabilities 
WTLS has been criticized for many of its weaknesses, which include weak encryp- 
tion algorithms, the susceptibility of the protocol to chosen plaintext attacks, mes- 
sage forgery, and others.Another problem with WTLS is the possibility of the 
compromise of the WAP gateway. This puts all of the data that passes through the 
gateway at risk. 
Markku-Juhani Saarinen published detailed descriptions of these and 
other weaknesses in his paper "Attacks against the WAP WTLS 
Protocol," which is available at www.jyu.fi/~mjos/wtls.pdf 
The primary weaknesses associated with WAP stem from problems in the 
WTLS protocol specification. These include such problems as: 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
201 
9 
The use of predictable IVs, leading to chosen-plaintext attacks 
9 
40-bit DES encryption 
9 
Susceptibility to probable plaintext attacks 
9 
Unauthenticated alert messages 
The WAP Forum is currently working on a new version of WAP that may 
address these and other weaknesses in WTLS. The draft titled "The H/AP Transport 
Layer E2E Security Spec!fication" describes an architecture where the WAP gateway's 
role is minimized. 
The Security+ exam covers WAP and its security mechanism, WTLS. 
WEP Vulnerabilities 
As does any standard or protocol,WEP has some inherent disadvantages.The focus 
of security is to allow a balance of access and control while juggling the advantages 
and disadvantages of each implemented countermeasure for security gaps. Some of 
WEP's disadvantages include: 
9 
The RC4 encryption algorithm is a known stream cipher.This means it 
takes a finite key and attempts to make an infinite psuedorandom key 
stream in order to generate the encryption. 
9 
Altering the secret must be done across the board; all APs and clients must 
be changed at the same time. 
9 
Used on its own, WEP does not provide adequateWLAN security. 
9 
WEP has to be implemented on every client and every AP, to be effective. 
WEP is part of the IEEE 802.11 standard defined for wireless networks in 
1999.WEP differs from many other kinds of encryption employed to secure net- 
work communication, in that it is implemented at the MAC sublayer of the data 
link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model. Security can be implemented at many dif- 
ferent layers of the model. For example, Secure Internet Protocol (IPSec) is imple- 
mented at the network layer (layer 3) of the OSI model. Point-to-Point Tunneling 
Protocol (PPTP) creates a secure end-to-end tunnel by using the network layer 
www.syngress.com 

202 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
(GRE) and transport layer protocols to encapsulate and transport data. HTTP-S 
and Secure Shell (SSH) are application layer (layer 7) protocols for encrypting data. 
Because of the complexity of the 802.11 MAC and the amount of processing 
power it requires, the 802.11 standard made 40-bit WEP an optional implementa- 
tion only. 
Vulnerability to Plaintext Attacks 
From the outset, knowledgeable people warned that WEP was vulnerable because 
of the way it was implemented. In October 2000, Jesse Walker, a member of the 
IEEE 802.11 working group, published his now famous paper, "Unsafe at Any Key 
Size:An Analysis ofWEP Encapsulation." The paper points out a number of serious 
shortcomings of WEP and recommends that WEP be redesigned. For example, 
WEP is vulnerable to plaintext attacks because it is implemented at the data link 
layer, meaning that it encrypts IP datagrams. Each encrypted flame on a wireless 
network contains a high proportion of well-known TCP/IP information, which 
can be revealed fairly accurately through traffic analysis, even if the traffic is 
encrypted. If a hacker can compare the ciphertext (the WEP-encrypted data) to the 
plaintext equivalent (the raw TCP/IP data), they have a powerful clue for cracking 
the encryption used on the network. All they would have to do is plug the two 
values (plaintext and ciphertext) into the RC4 algorithm used by WEP to uncover 
the keystream used to encrypt the data. 
Vulnerability of RC4 Algorithm 
As discussed in the previous paragraph, another vulnerability of WEP is that it uses 
RC4, a stream cipher developed by RSA to encrypt data. In 1994, an anonymous 
user posted the RC4 algorithm to a cipherpunk mailing list, which was subse- 
quently re-posted to a number of Usenet newsgroups with the title "RC4 
Algorithm Revealed." Until August 2001, it was thought that the underlying algo- 
rithm used by RC4 was well designed and robust, so even though the algorithm 
was no longer a trade secret, it was still thought to be an acceptable cipher to use. 
However, Scott Fluhrer, Itsik Mantin, and Adi Shamir published a paper entitled, 
"Weaknesses in the Key Scheduling Algorithm of RC4" that demonstrated that a 
number of keys used in RC4 were weak and vulnerable to compromise. The paper 
designed a theoretical attack that could take advantage of these weak keys. Because 
the algorithm for RC4 is no longer a secret and because there were a number of 
weak keys used in RC4, it is possible to construct software that is designed to break 
RC4 encryption relatively quickly using the weak keys in RC4. Not surprisingly, a 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
203 
number of open-source tools have appeared, which do precisely this. Two such 
popular tools for cracking WEP are Airsnort and WepCrack. 
Some vendors, such as Agere (which produces the ORINOCO product line), 
responded to the weakness in key scheduling by modifying the key scheduling in 
their products to avoid the use of weak keys, making them resistant to attacks based 
on weak key scheduling. This feature is known as WEPplus. 
Stream Cipher Vulnerability 
WEP uses an RC4 stream cipher, which differs from block ciphers such as DES or 
AES, which perform mathematical functions on blocks of data, in that the data or 
the message is treated as a stream of bits. To encrypt the data, the stream cipher per- 
forms an Exclusive OR (XOR) of the plaintext data against the keystream to 
create the ciphertext stream. (An XOR is a mathematical function used with 
binary numbers. If the bits are the same the result of the XOR is "0"; it" different, 
the result of the XOR is "1.") 
If a keystream were always the same, it would be relatively easy to crack the 
encryption if an attacker had both the plaintext and the ciphertext version of the 
message (known as a plaintext attack). To create keystreams that are statistically 
random, a key and a PRNG are used to create a keystream that is XOR'd against 
the plaintext message to generate the ciphertext. 
In the case oFWER a number of other elements are involved to encrypt and 
decrypt messages. To encrypt an 802.11 flame, the following process occurs: 
1. A cyclic redundancy check (CRC), known as an ICV, is calculated for the 
message and appended to the message to produce the plaintext message. 
2. RC4 is used to create a pseudorandom keystream as a function of a 24-bit 
IV and the shared secret WEP key. The IV and the shared secret WEP key 
are used to create the RC4 key schedule. A new IV is used for every 
flame to be transmitted. 
3. The resulting keystream is XOR'd with the plaintext message to create a 
ciphertext. 
4. The IV is concatenated with the ciphertext in the appropriate field and 
bit set to indicate a WEP-encrypted flame. 
To decrypt the ciphertext, the receiving station does the following: 
1. Checks the bit-denoting encryption. 
www.syngress.com 

204 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
2. Extracts the IV from the flame to concatenate it with the shared secret 
WEP key. 
3. Creates the keystream using the P.C4 key schedule. 
4. XOR's the ciphertext with the keystream to create the plaintext. 
5. Performs an integrity check on the data using the ICV appended to the 
end of the data. 
A central problem with WEP is the potential for reuse of the IV. A well-known 
vulnerability of stream ciphers is the reuse of an IV and key to encrypt two dif- 
ferent messages.When this occurs, the two cipherte.xt messages can be XOP,'d with 
each other to cancel out the keystream, resulting in the XOR of the two original 
plaintexts. If the attacker knows the contents of one of these plaintext messages, 
they can easily obtain the plaintext of the other message. 
Although there are 16,777,216 possible combinations for the IV, this is actually 
a relatively small number. On a busy wireless network, the range of possible combi- 
nations for the IV can be exhausted in a number of hours (remember, each frame 
or packet uses a different IV). Once an attacker has collected enough frames that 
use duplicate IVs, they can use the information to derive the shared secret key. In 
the absence of other solutions for automatic key management and out-of-band or 
encrypted dynamic key distribution, shared secret WEP keys have to be manually 
configured on the APs and wireless client workstations. Because of the administra- 
tive burden of changing the shared secret key, administrators often do not change it 
frequently enough. 
To make matters worse, hackers do not have to wait until the 24-bit IV key 
space is exhausted to find duplicate IVs (remember, these are transmitted in the 
frame of the message). In fact, it is almost certain that hackers will encounter a 
duplicate IV in far fewer frames or discover a number of weak keys. The reason is 
that upon reinitialization, wireless PC cards reset the IV to "0."When the wireless 
client begins transmitting encrypted frames, it increments the IV by "1" for each 
subsequent frame. On a busy network, there are likely to be many instances of 
wireless PC cards being reinitialized, thereby making the reuse of the low-order IVs 
a common occurrence. Even if the IVs were randomized rather than being used in 
sequence, this would not be an adequate solution because of the birthday paradox. 
The birthday paradox predicts the counterintuitive fact that within a group as small 
as 23 people, there is a 50 percent chance that two people will share the same 
birthday. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
205 
It does not really matter whether a wireless network is using 64- or 128-bit 
encryption (in reality, these constitute 40- and 104-bit encryption once the 24 bits 
for the IV is subtracted). Both use a 24-bit long IV. Given the amount of traffic on 
a wireless network and the probability of IV collisions within a relatively short 
period of time, a 24-bit IV is far too short to provide meaningful protection against 
a determined attacker. 
Should You Use WEP? 
The existence of these vulnerabilities does not mean WEP should not be used. One 
of the most serious problems with wireless security is not that it is insecure, but 
that a high percentage of wireless networks discovered by wardrivers are not using 
WER All wireless networks should be configured to use WER which is available for 
free with wireless devices. At the very least, WEP prevents casual wardrivers from 
compromising a network and slows down knowledgeable and determined attackers. 
The following section looks at how to configure APs and Windows XP wireless 
clients to use static WEP keys. 
www.syngress.com 

206 
Chapter 4 ~ Communication Security: Wireless 
The level of knowledge about WEP presented in this chapter is crucial to 
functioning in a wireless environment, and should be something you 
know well if you plan to work in such an environment. However, for the 
Security+ exam, focus on what WEP is, its basic definition, and its basic 
weaknesses. 
Security of 64-Bit vs. 128-Bit Keys 
To a nontechnical person it may seem that a message protected with a 128-bit 
encryption scheme would be twice as secure as a message protected with a 64-bit 
encryption scheme. However, this is not the case with WEP. Since the same IV vul- 
nerability exists with both encryption levels, they can be compromised within sim- 
ilar time limits. 
With 64-bit WEE the network administrator specifies a 40-bit key~typically 
10 hexadecimal digits (0 through 9, a through s or A through F).A 24-bit IV is 
appended to the 40-bit key, and the 1KC4 key scheme is built from these 64 bits of 
data. This same process is followed in the 128-bit scheme. The administrator speci- 
fies a 104-bit key~this time 26 hexadecimal digits (0 through 9, a through s or A 
through F). The 24-bit IV is added to the beginning of the key, and the 1KC4 key 
schedule is built. 
Because the vulnerability stems from capturing predictably weak IVs, the size of 
the original key does not make a significant difference in the security of the 
encryption. This is due to the relatively small number of total IVs possible under 
the current WEP specification. Currently, there are a total of 16,777,216 possible 
IV keys. Because every frame or packet uses an IV, this number can be exhausted 
within hours on a busy network. If the WEP key is not changed within a strictly 
defined period of time, all possible IV combinations can be intercepted off of an 
802.1 l b connection, captured, and made available for cracking within a short 
period of time. This is a design flaw of WEE and bears no correlation to whether 
the wireless client is using 64-bit WEP or 128-bit WEP. 
Acquiring a WEP Key 
As mentioned previously, programs exist that allow an authenticated and/or unasso- 
ciated device within the listening area of the AP to capture and recover the WEP 
key. Depending on the speed of the machine listening to the wireless conversations, 

N 
i 
>-, 
'~" 
0 
L 
~ 
4~ 
,,~ 
c~ 
" 
-7s 
o 
_.~ 
r..q 
. 
b~ 
9 
~ 
~ 
.,.-~ 
~ 
0 
9 - 
~ 
.~ 
~ 
..~ 
._ 
~= 
2 
.,~ 
.s 
~ 
= 
" 
~ 
"- 
"~ 
o 
.~ 
~ 
> 
9 
ct 
.~_~ 
~
~
o
 
,-, 
b 
o 04 
._=o 
= 
o 
= ~ ~ 
~ 
o 
~ 
" 
G 
c E ~~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
0 
-4-, ~ 
t~ 
r~ 
Lt~ 
C 
C 
+00 
8=.,,.~ 
,,,~ 
~ 
o 
~_Q 
o.- 
~, o 
~,,_ 
..~ 
~ 
,~'- 
-- 
"- 
"- 
"~ 
'+- 
~_ 
0 
0,- 0 
c~ 
~-- 
_ 
~ 
0 
C 
r~ 
~ 
I~_ 
w- 
0 
c- 
Z 
~ 
o 
o 
,.', ~ 
,.,., 
-- 
~- 
>, 
c- 
+~c 
o>, 
>,,,, ~= 
,., ~ 
&z, 
o 
>, 
. 
._~,~0o~ 
~ 
.~ 
,,_.-o 
,- 
,T" 
~-~~ 
5o 
-,- 
=" 
o 
~,_ 
~,o>, 
-~~~ 
~,,, 
c- 
~j 
-- 
c~ 
~-- 
c- I-- 
Q; 
Q; 
~: 
. 
._~ c_~~ S_~o ~ o E_c: 
~ ~  
~o 
"-' 
c 
~-0 o 9 ~ a_~-~ 
9 ~ ~,,, 
._ 
-- 
0 
n 
ru 
o 
re 
c- 
O 
E:: -u ~s~ 
~""5 '' o 
. 
u 
~_~ o ~. ~ 
9 
0 
z 
= 
%;O 
~. 

208 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
A number of wireless devices, such as the Linksys WAP11 shown 
above, allow the use of a passphrase to generate the WEP keys. This 
helps simplify the process of generating new keys. However, potential 
attackers may know the algorithm for generating the keys from a 
passphrase, so it is necessary to choose hard-to-guess passphrases if 
using this method to generate keys. 
The Linksys WAP11 allows administrators to create WEP keys using 
hexadecimal digits only. Other APs give the choice of creating WEP keys 
using either ASCII characters or HEX digits. The advantage of using ASCII 
characters is that there are fewer of them to type in: 13 characters 
versus 26 hexadecimal digits to create a 104-bit key length. The conve- 
nience of using ASCII characters is even more apparent when the wire- 
less client is Windows XP with Service Pack 1 (SP1) installed. SP1 changes 
the wireless interface so that the WEP keys have to be configured using 
ASCII characters. If an AP only supports the use of hexadecimal digits for 
the WEP key, the hexadecimal digits have to be converted to ASCII char- 
acters to configure the Windows XP SP1 clients. 
Once the AP is configured with the WEP keys, the wireless interface is 
configured with the WEP key corresponding to the one WEP key currently 
being used by the AR (Remember, both the wireless client and the AP 
have to use the same WEP key as a kind of shared secret. If there is no 
available mechanism to automate the distribution and configuration of 
dynamic WEP keys, they must be manually configured.) Windows XP 
allows for the configuration of only one WEP key per SSID profile. Figure 
4.11 shows the property page for configuring WEP keys on Windows XR 
Figure 4.11 Configuring a Static WEP Key on Windows XP 

c" 
,-- 
c" 
c" 
c- 
c" 
I~.. " 
- 
. 
-o~o6~ 
"- 
m ~ r'J 
~ 
,,~ 
0 "-' < 
9 
.- 
,.,, 
9 
~ 
E,-o 
._ 
~ 
= 
o,_ =~_ 
=. 
,_ 
=~ 
=,., 
~ 
00= 
,., 
~._~. 
~~ 
~ 
,-- 
,= 
+- -o _~ 
,.- 
= 
,,, 
o- 
.~o 
E- = 
,_ 
C 
-- 
-- 
~ 
r 
~" 
0 
"~ 
c~ 
,+c 
- ~ 
o 
0 
~ 
~ 
(]j 
~ 
.~, 
"-~ 
~ 
-- 
__ 
,- 
X 
"-- 
~ 
03~n" 
._ 
~ 
~ 
,.~ 
~ 
u 
9 - 
,-.,,, 
9 
8>,, 
..: 
~ 
.- 
~ 
~ 
"-- 
v~ 
~ 
>~ 
~ 
-- 
v~ 
9 
0 
m 
6~ 
Z 
~i 
~_ 
w 
0 
~ 
n 
.,-, 
~ 
= 
x 
,,, 
~"E 
,,,~ 
4- 
~ 
.,_,~ 
"- 
,i, 
,,1 
,l~ 
9 - 
~ 
~ 
8~ 
= 
~ 
C 
LI~ 
~ 
~ 
.-- 
,.~ 
U 
E 
. -  
~
~
 
~ 
9 = 
.= 
~ 
9 
c ~ 
9 
~ 
o 
9 
'-' 
= 
,~ "5 ~"~ 
s ~ 
"5o 
-& 9 
~ 
~ 
o 
0 
'- 
~ 
~ -  
a- 
I- 
IE 
c 
&-- 
~ 
=~,~,, 
._,,.., ~oo< 
~ ~_ ~ 
s_~-o 
o~&= 
9 
- 
.~ 
~ 
~_~ 
o 
= 
o~ 
x~ 
~, 
~_._ 
,..o 
,~ 
~._,.. 
~ 
.,., 
u-o 
~ 
o 
z 
" 
"---o 
9 
'-"- 
S 
9 ~ 
,- 
~ 
-. 
~'d 
~._--,,..,,~ 
9 
~>, 
~_ 
.-- 
~ 
--- 
~j I-- 
~ 
~ 
c- 
~. ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
,,, 
.,_, 
.- 
~ 
,- 
o 
m-o 
L; 
9 
- 
r4 
r4 
~F 
u4 
u5 
~ 
u--o 
~- c 
0 
~ 
.-- 
E 
0 
U 
v; 
I,/'I 
e,, 

210 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Figure 4.12 Configuring Shared-Key Authentication on WAP11 AP 
Armed with a valid WEP key, an intruder can successfully negotiate association 
with an AP and gain entry to the target network. Unless other mechanisms like 
MAC filtering are in place, this intruder can roam across the network and poten- 
tially break into servers or other systems. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
211 
Addressing Common Risks and Threats 
The advent of wireless networks has not created new legions of attackers. Many 
attackers utilize the same attacks for the same objectives they used in wired net- 
works. Unless administrators protect their wireless infrastructure with proven tools 
and techniques, and establish standards and policies that identify proper deployment 
and security methodology, the integrity of wireless networks will be threatened. 
Finding a Target 
Utilizing new tools created for wireless networks and the existing identification 
and attack techniques and utilities originally designed for wired networks, attackers 
have many avenues into a wireless network. The first step in attacking a wireless 
network involves finding a network to attack. The most popular software developed 
to identify wireless networks was NetStumbler (www.netstumbler.org). 
NetStumbler is a Windows application that listens for information, such as the 
SSID, being broadcast from APs that have not disabled the broadcast feature.When 
it finds a network, it notifies the person running the scan and adds it to the list of 
found networks. 
As people began to drive around their towns and cities looking for wireless 
networks, NetStumbler added features such as pulling coordinates from Global 
Positioning System (GPS) satellites and plotting the information on mapping soft- 
ware. This method of finding networks is reminiscent of the method hackers used 
to find computers when they had only modems to communicate. They ran pro- 
grams designed to search through all possible phone numbers and call each one, 
looking for a modem to answer. This type of scan was typically referred to as war 
dialing; driving around looking for wireless networks is known as war driving. War 
driving is the most commonly used method used by attackers to detect 802.11 
wireless networks. 
NetStumbler.org has a Web site where people can upload the output of their 
war drives for inclusion into a database that graphs the location of wireless net- 
works (www.netstumbler.org/nation.php). See Figure 4.13 for the output of dis- 
covered and uploaded wireless networks as of October 2002. 
Similar tools are available for Linux and other UNIX-based operating systems. 
These tools contain additional utilities that hackers use to attack hosts and net- 
works once access is found. A quick search on www.freshmeat.net or www.packet- 
stormsecurity.com for "802.11" reveals several network identification tools, as well 
as tools used to configure and monitor wireless network connections. 

212 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Figure 4.13 Networks Discovered with NetStumbler 
USING NETSTUMBLER 
Installing NetStumbler is simple: you just go to www.netstumbler.org, 
select the downloads link in the main menu, and click on the Network 
Stumbler link on the downloads page. Once the installer has been 
downloaded, double-click on it and follow the instructions to install 
NetStumbler. 
With NetStumbler installed, double-click on the icon to start it up. If 
you do not have a wireless card inserted in your machine you will get 
the screen shown in Figure 4.14. 

I,N 
!.._ 
t,- 
I,J 
Ill 
Ill 
,,i 
i.._ 
. i  
Y, 
, I  
!._.. 
I,,,# 
Ill 
0 
, i  
. i  
E 
I= 
o 
t,j 
c- 
o"- 
I,-- 
i 
E 
l,f'l 
z 
'1"" 
!..... 
,,i u_ 
~ ~ - ~ c  
+,~ 
s~ 
9 
~. 
~ 
>~ 
~ 
r- 
m o 
"- ~o"o'-.E--c.E 
I,,.. 
I, fl 
E 
, ~  
0 
c" 
.!_,1 
, i  
i 
I 
~ 
O> ~ 
.~, 
,~ 
0 
0 
O_ 
9 -- 
~ 
.-- 
rO .
.
.
.
 
~.,! I 
0 
~.. 
~ 
O_ 
..~.~ I~_ 
~ 
-~ 
-
-
 
E ~ ~ 
= 
< 
m.- 
c 
c-" 
- 0 
0 
9 
0 
.~ 
~ 
~ 
0 ~ 
~ 
~; 
~ 
c- 
,-, 
i._ 
c- 
c- c- -~ 
~-I:~ 
0-- 
~ 
~L~ 
"-0"~ 
~ 
~ 
" 
o 
,, 
~ 
~. ,., ~ 
~ 
>,~ 
.,-,c 
.2. _~ 
~._ 
E'~ 
+" 
..,=._ 
_c 
. o."- 
E 
~_ 
-I 
~ 
o 
m o r 
E c r 
~-~,,.. 
~ r 
,._~~ 
~o 
--&~ 
o 
~.,.-, 
~, ~ 
8 
E< 
~ 
"r__,, ~ 
._~ = 
~ 
o E P~Z: ~- 
_ 
z 
~ 
c 
~-_c 
"-- 
~ 
I~ ,_ 
~ 
4-' I~ 
r 
I~ 
~ 
~.-- 
~-~ 
z-o 
~ o  
-~'- 

214 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Figure 4.15 Wireless Networks and Clients Detected by NetStumbler 
Figure 4.16 NetStumbler with Filtering for Wireless Networks without 
Encryption 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
215 
Additional information about an individual AP or client can be 
found by selecting its MAC address either under the Channels or the 
SSIDs menu in NetStumbler, as shown in Figure 4.17. 
Figure 4.17 Additional Information from NetStumbler 
This information shows the strength of the device's signal. The black 
lines in the field indicate when the signal was lost. The closer the green 
area gets to zero, the stronger the signal. By using NetStumbler, an 
attacker can determine where an AP or a client is located, as well as 
what characteristics have been enabled on the wireless network. This 
same tool can be used by network administrators for site surveys of 
their networks. 
Finding Weaknesses in a Target 
Reports show that more than half of the wireless networks found to date do not 
have encryption enabled.When an attacker finds such a network they have com- 
plete access to any resources the wireless network is connected to. The attacker can 
www.syngress.com 

216 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
scan and attack any machines local to the network, or use those machines as agents 
to launch attacks on remote hosts. 
If an attacker finds a network with WEP enabled, they will need to identify 
several items to reduce the time it takes to get onto the wireless network. First, uti- 
lizing the output of NetStumbler or another network discovery tool, the attacker 
will identify the SSID, network, MAC address, and any other packets that might be 
transmitted in cleartext. Generally, NetStumbler results include vendor information, 
which an attacker can use to determine which default keys to attempt on the wire- 
less network. 
If the vendor information has been changed or is unavailable, the attacker 
might still be able to use the SSID and network name and address to identify the 
vendor or owner of the equipment. (Many people use the same network name as 
the password, or use the company initials or street address as their password.) If the 
SSID and network name and address have been changed from the default setting, a 
final network-based attempt could be to use the MAC address to identify the man- 
ufacturer. 
If none of these options work, there is still the possibility of a physical review. 
Many public areas are participating in the wireless revolution. An observant attacker 
might be able to use physical and wireless identification techniques such as finding 
antennas, APs, and other wireless devices that are easily identified by the manufac- 
turer's casing and logo. 
Exploiting Those Weaknesses 
A well-configured wireless AP will not stop a determined attacker. Even if the net- 
work name and SSID are changed and the secret key is manually reconfigured on 
all workstations on a regular basis, the attacker can still take other avenues to com- 
promise the network. 
If easy physical access is available near the wireless network (for example, a 
parking lot or garage next to the building being attacked), the only thing an 
attacker needs is patience and AirSnort or WEPCrack.When these applications 
have captured enough "weak" packets (IV collisions, for example), the attacker is 
able to determine the secret key currently in use on the network. Quick tests have 
shown that an average home network can be cracked in an overnight session. To 
ensure network protection, the WEP key would have to be changed at least two 
times per day? 
If none of these network tools help determine which default configurations to 
try, the next step is to scan the traffic for any cleartext information that may be 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
217 
available. Some brands of wireless equipment, such as those made by Lucent, have 
been known to broadcast the SSID in cleartext even when WEP and closed net- 
work options are enabled. Using tools such as Wireshark (www.wireshark.org) and 
TCPDump (www.tcpdump.org) allows attackers to sniff traffic and analyze it for 
any cleartext hints they may find. 
As a last option, attackers might go directly after the equipment or install their 
own. The number of laptops or accessories stolen from travelers is rising each year. 
Criminals simply looking to sell the equipment perpetrated these thefts at one 
time, but as criminals become more savvy, they also go after the information con- 
tained within the machines. Access to the equipment allows for the determination 
of valid MAC addresses that can access the network, the network SSID, and the 
secret keys to be used. 
An attacker does not need to become a burglar in order to acquire this infor- 
mation. A skilled attacker can utilize new and specially designed malware and net- 
work tricks to determine the information needed to access the wireless network. A 
well-scriptedVisual Basic script, which could arrive in e-mail (targeted spare) or 
through an infected Web site, can extract the information from the user's machine 
and upload it to the attacker's. 
With the size of computers so small today, it would not take much for an 
attacker to create a small AP of their own that could be attached to a building or 
office, and which looks just like another telephone box. Such a device, if placed 
properly, will attract much less attention than someone camping in a car in the 
parking lot will. 
Sniffing 
Originally conceived as a legitimate network and traffic analysis tool, sniffing remains 
one of the most effective techniques in attacking a wireless network, whether it is to 
map the network as part of a target reconnaissance, to grab passwords, or to capture 
unencrypted data. 
Snif.fino~ is the electronic form of eavesdropping on the communications that 
computers transmit across networks. In early networks, the equipment that con- 
nected machines allowed every machine on the network to see the traffic of all 
others. These devices, repeaters and hubs, were very successful in connecting 
machines, but allowed an attacker easy access to all traffic on the network because 
the attacker only needed to connect to one point to see the entire network's traffic. 
Wireless networks function similarly to the original repeaters and hubs. Every 
communication across a wireless network is viewable to anyone who happens to be 
r 
www.syngress.com 

218 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
listening to the network. In fact, a person who is listening does not even need to 
be associated with the network in order to sniff. 
Hackers have many tools available for attacking and monitoring wireless net- 
works, such as AiroPeek (www.wildpackets.com/products/airopeek) for Windows, 
Wireshark for Windows, and UNIX or Linux and TCPDump or ngrep 
(http://ngrep.sourceforg.net) for a UNIX or Linux environment.These tools work 
well for sniffing both wired and wireless networks. 
All of these software packages function by putting the network card in promis- 
cuous mode. When the NIC is in this mode, every packet that goes past the interface 
is captured and displayed within the application window. If an attacker acquires a 
WEP key, they can utilize features within AiroPeek and Wireshark to decrypt either 
live or post-capture data. 
By running NetStumbler, hackers are able to find possible targets. Figure 4.18 
shows the output from NetStumbler with several networks that could be attacked. 
Figure 4.18 Discovering Wireless LANs with NetStumbler 
Once a hacker has found possible networks to attack, one of their first tasks is 
to identify the target. Many organizations are "nice" enough to include their names 
or addresses in the network name. 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
219 
Even if the network administrator has configured his equipment in such a way 
as to hide this information, there are tools available that can determine this infor- 
mation. Utilizing any of the mentioned network sniffing tools, an attacker can 
easily monitor the unencrypted network. Figure 4.19 shows a network sniff of the 
traffic on a wireless network. From this session, it is simple to determine the source 
and destination IPs as well as the Protocol.With this information, an attacker can 
easily identify a target and determine if it is worth attacking. 
Figure 4.19 Sniffing with Wireshark (formerly Ethereal) 
If the network is encrypted, the hacker will start by determining the physical 
location of the target. NetStumbler has the ability to display the signal strength of 
the discovered networks (see Figure 4.20). Utilizing this information, the attacker 
only needs to drive around and look for a location where the signal strength 
increases and decreases to determine the home of the wireless network. 
www.syngress.com 

220 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Figure 4.20 Using Signal Strength to Find Wireless Networks 
To enhance their ability to locate the positions of a wireless network, an 
attacker can use directional antennas to focus the wireless interface in a specific 
direction. An excellent source for wireless information, including information on 
the design of directional antennas, is the Bay Area Wireless Users Group 
(www.bawug.org). 
Keep in mind that the most popular wireless network security scanning 
tools are Wireshark, NetStumbler, AiroPeek, and Kismet. This will help 
you analyze wireless networks in the field. Each tool has its benefits, so 
you may want to try them all if you have access to them. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
221 
Protecting Against Sniffing and Eavesdropping 
As networking technology matured, wired networks were able to upgrade from 
repeaters and hubs to a switched environment. These switches would send only the 
traffic intended for a specific host over each individual port, making it difficult 
(although not impossible) to sniff the entire network's traffic. Unfortunately, this is 
not an option for wireless networks due to the nature of wireless communications. 
The only way to protect wireless users from attackers who might be sniffing is 
to utilize encrypted sessions wherever possible: SSL for e-mail connections, SSH 
instead of Telnet, and Secure Copy (SCP) instead of File Transfer Protocol (FTP). 
To protect a network from being discovered with NetStumbler, it is important 
to turn off any network identification broadcasts and, if possible, close down the 
network to any unauthorized users. This prevents tools such as NetStumbler from 
finding the network. However, the knowledgeable attacker will know that just 
because the network is not broadcasting information, does not mean that the net- 
work cannot be found. 
All an attacker needs to do is utilize one of the network sniffers to monitor for 
network activity. Although not as efficient as NetStumbler, it is still a functional 
way to discover and monitor networks. Even encrypted networks show traffic to 
the sniffer. Once they have identified traffic, the attacker can then utilize the same 
identification techniques to begin an attack on the network. 
Spoofing (Interception) 
and Unauthorized Access 
The combination of weaknesses in WEP and the nature of wireless transmission has 
revealed spoofin2 to be a real threat to wireless network security. Some well-publi- 
cized weaknesses in user authentication using WEP have made authentication 
spoofing just one of an equally well-tested number of exploits by attackers. 
One definition of spoofing is the ability of an attacker to trick network equip- 
ment into thinking that the address from which a connection is coming is a valid 
machine from its network. Attackers can accomplish this in several ways, the easiest 
of which is to simply redefine the MAC address of the attacker's wireless or net- 
work card to be a valid MAC address. This can be accomplished in Windows 
through a simple Registry edit. Several wireless providers also have options available 
to define the MAC address for each wireless connection from within the client 
manager application that is provided with the interface. 
www.syngress.com 

222 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
There are several reasons that an attacker would spoof. If a network allows only 
valid interfaces through MAC or IP address filtering, an attacker would need to 
determine a valid MAC or IP address to be able to communicate on the network. 
Once that is accomplished, the attacker could then reprogram their interface with 
that information, allowing them to connect to the network by impersonating a 
valid machine. 
IEEE 802.11 networks introduce a new form of spoofing: authentication 
spoofing.As described in their paper "Intercepting Mobile Communications: The 
Insecurities of 802.11," Borisov, Goldberg, and Wagner identified a way to utilize 
weaknesses within WEP and the authentication process to spoof authentication into 
a closed network. The process of authentication, as defined by IEEE 802.11, is very 
simple. In a shared-key configuration, the AP sends out a 128-byte random string 
in a cleartext message to the workstation that is attempting to authenticate. The 
workstation then encrypts the message with the shared key and returns the 
encrypted message to the AP. If the message matches what the AP is expecting, the 
workstation is authenticated onto the network and access is allowed. 
As described in the paper, if an attacker has knowledge of both the original 
plaintext and ciphertext messages, it is possible to create a forged encrypted mes- 
sage. By sniffing the wireless network, an attacker is able to accumulate many 
authentication requests, each including the original plaintext message and the 
returned ciphertext-encrypted reply. From this, the attacker can easily identify the 
keystream used to encrypt the response message. The attacker could then use it to 
forge an authentication message that the AP accepts as a proper authentication. 
The wireless hacker does not need many complex tools to succeed in spoofing 
a MAC address. In many cases, these changes are either features of the wireless 
manufacturers or can be easily changed through a Windows Registry modification 
or through Linux system utilities. Once a valid MAC address is identified, the 
attacker needs only to reconfigure his device to trick the AP into thinking he is a 
valid user. 
The ability to forge authentication onto a wireless network is a complex pro- 
cess. There are no known "off-the-shelf" packages available that provide these ser- 
vices. Attackers need to either create their own tool or take the time to decrypt the 
secret key by using AirSnort or WEPCrack. 
If an attacker is using Windows 2000, and their network card supports reconfig- 
uring the MAC address, there is another way to reconfigure this information. A 
card supporting this feature can be changed through the System Control Panel. 
Once an attacker is utilizing a valid MAC address, they are able to access any 
resource available from the wireless network. IfWEP is enabled, the attacker will 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
223 
have to either identify the WEP secret key or capture the key through malware or 
stealing the user's notebook. 
Protecting Against Spoofing and Unauthorized Attacks 
Protecting against these attacks involves adding several additional components to 
the wireless network. The following are examples of measures that can be taken: 
9 Using an external authentication source such as RADIUS or SecurlD, will 
prevent an unauthorized user from accessing the wireless network and the 
resources with which it connects. 
9 Requiring wireless users to use aVPN to access the wired network also 
provides a significant stumbling block to an attacker. 
9 Another possibility is to allow only SSH access or SSL-encrypted traffic 
into the network. 
9 Many of WEP's weaknesses can be mitigated by isolating the wireless net- 
work through a firewall and requiring that wireless clients use a VPN to 
access the wired network. 
Network Hijacking and Modification 
Numerous techniques are available for an attacker to "hijack" a wireless network or 
session. And unlike some attacks, network and security administrators may be 
unable to tell the difference between the hijacker and a legitimate "passenger." 
Many tools are available to the network hijacker. These tools are based on basic 
implementation issues within almost every network device available today. As 
TCP/IP packets go through switches, routers, and APs, each device looks at the 
destination IP address and compares it with the IP addresses it knows to be local. If 
the address is not in the table, the device hands the packet off to its default gateway. 
This table is used to coordinate the IP address with the MAC addresses that are 
known to be local to the device. In many situations, this is a dynamic list that is 
compiled from traffic passing through the device and through Address Resolution 
Protocol (AP,.P) notifications from new devices joining the network. There is no 
authentication or verification that the request received by the device is valid. Thus, 
a malicious user is able to send messages to routing devices and APs stating that his 
MAC address is associated with a known IP address. From then on, all traffic that 
goes through that router destined for the hijacked IP address will be handed off to 
the hacker's machine. 
www.syngress.com 

224 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
If the attacker spoofs as the default gateway or a specific host on the network, 
all machines trying to get to the network or the spoofed machine will connect to 
the attacker's machine instead of to the gateway or host to which they intended to 
connect. If the attacker is clever, they will only use this to identify passwords and 
other necessary information and route the rest of the traffic to the intended recip- 
ients. If they do this, the end users will have no idea that this "man-in-the- 
middle" has intercepted their communications and compromised their passwords 
and information. 
Another clever attack can be accomplished using rogue APs. If an attacker can 
put together an AP with enough strength, end users may not be able to tell which 
AP is the authorized one that they should be using. In fact, most will not even 
know that another is available. Using this technique, an attacker is able to receive 
authentication requests and information from the end workstation regarding the 
secret key and where they are attempting to connect. 
Rogue APs can also be used to attempt to break into more tightly configured 
wireless APs. Utilizing tools such as AirSnort and WEPCrack requires a large 
amount of data to be able to decrypt the secret key. A hacker sitting in a car in 
front of a house or office is noticeable, and thus will generally not have enough 
time to finish acquiring enough information to break the key. However, if an 
attacker installs a tiny, easily hidden machine in an inconspicuous location, it could 
sit there long enough to break the key and possibly act as an external AP into the 
wireless network it has hacked. 
Attackers who wish to spoof more than their MAC addresses have several tools 
available. Most of the tools available are for use in a UNIX environment and can 
be found through a simple search for "ARP Spoof" at 
http://packetstormsecurity.com.With these tools, hackers can easily trick all 
machines on a wireless network into thinking that the hacker's machine is another 
valid machine. Through simple sniffing on the network, an attacker can determine 
which machines are in high use by the workstations on the network. If the attacker 
then spoofs the address of one of these machines, they might be able to intercept 
much of the legitimate traffic on the network. 
AirSnort and WEPCrack are freely available. While it would take additional 
resources to build a rogue AP, these tools run from any Linux machine. 
Once an attacker has identified a network for attack and spoofed their MAC 
address to become a valid member of the network, they can gain further informa- 
tion that is not available through simple sniffing. If the network being attacked is 
using SSH to access the hosts, stealing a password might be easier than attempting 
to break into the host using an available exploit. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
225 
By ARP spoofing the connection with the AP to be that of the host from 
which the attacker wants to steal the passwords, an attacker can cause all wireless 
users who are attempting to SSH into the host to connect to the rogue machine 
instead.When these users attempt to sign on with their passwords, the attacker is 
able to, first, receive their passwords, and second, pass on the connection to the real 
end destination. If an attacker does not perform the second step, it increases the 
likelihood that the attack will be noticed, because users will begin to complain that 
they are unable to connect to the host. 
P ro t e c ti o n agains t 
Network Hijacking and Modification 
There are several different tools that can be used to protect a network from IP 
spoofing with invalid ARP requests. These tools, such as ArpWatch, notify an 
administrator when ARP requests are detected, allowing the administrator to take 
the appropriate action to determine whether someone is attempting to hack into 
the network. 
Another option is to statically define the MAC/IP address definitions.This pre- 
vents attackers from being able to redefine this information. However, due to the 
management overhead in statically defining all network adapters' MAC addresses 
on every router and AP, this solution is rarely implemented. There is no way to 
identify or prevent attackers from using passive attacks, such as from AirSnort or 
WEPCrack, to determine the secret keys used in an encrypted wireless network. 
The best protection available is to change the secret key on a regular basis and add 
additional authentication mechanisms such as RADIUS or dynamic firewalls to 
restrict access to the wired network. However, unless every wireless workstation is 
secure, an attacker only needs to go after one of the other wireless clients to be 
able to access the resources available to it. 
Denial of Service and Flooding Attacks 
The nature of wireless transmission, and especially the use of spread spectrum tech- 
nology, makes wireless networks especially vulnerable to denial of service (DOS) 
attacks. The equipment needed to launch such an attack is freely available and very 
affordable. In fact, many homes and offices contain the equipment that is necessary 
to deny service to their wireless networks. 
A DoS attack occurs when an attacker has engaged most of the resources a host 
or network has available, rendering it unavailable to legitimate users. One of the 
original DoS attacks is known as a ping flood. A ping flood utilizes misconfigured 
www.syngress.com 

226 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
equipment along with bad "features" within TCP/IP to cause a large number of 
hosts or devices to send an ICMP echo (ping) to a specified target.When the 
attack occurs, it uses a large portion of the resources of both the network connec- 
tion and the host being attacked. This makes it very difficult for valid end users to 
access the host for normal business purposes. 
In a wireless network, several items can cause a similar disruption of service. 
Probably the easiest way to do this is through a conflict within the wireless spec- 
trum, caused by different devices attempting to use the same frequency. Many new 
wireless telephones use the same frequency as 802.11 networks. Through either 
intentional or unintentional uses of another device that uses the 2.4 GHz frequency, 
a simple telephone call can prevent all wireless users from accessing the network. 
Another possible attack is through a massive number of invalid (or valid) 
authentication requests. If the AP is tied up with thousands of spoofed authentica- 
tion attempts, authorized users attempting to authenticate would have major diffi- 
culties in acquiring a valid session. 
As demonstrated earlier, an attacker has many tools available to hijack network 
connections. If a hacker is able to spoof the machines of a wireless network into 
thinking that the attacker's machine is their default gateway, not only will the 
attacker be able to intercept all traffic destined for the wired network, but they will 
also be able to prevent any of the wireless network machines from accessing the 
wired network. To do this, a hacker needs only to spoof the AP and not forward 
connections on to the end destination, preventing all wireless users from doing 
valid wireless activities. 
Not much effort is needed to create a wireless DoS attack. In fact, many users 
create these situations with the equipment found in their homes and offices. In a 
small apartment building, you could find several APs as well as many wireless tele- 
phones, all of which transmit on the same frequency. These users could easily 
inadvertently create DoS attacks on their own networks as well as on those of 
their neighbors. 
A hacker who wants to launch a DoS attack against a network with a flood of 
authentication strings also needs to be a well-skilled programmer. There are not 
many tools available for creating this type of attack, but (as discussed earlier 
regarding attempts to crack WEP) much of the programming required does not 
take much effort or time. In fact, a skilled hacker should be able to create such a 
tool within a few hours. Then this simple application, when used with standard 
wireless equipment, could render a wireless network unusable for the duration of 
the attack. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
227 
Creating a hijacked AP DoS attack requires additional tools that can be found 
on many security Web sites. See the earlier section "Sample Hijacking Tools" for a 
starting point to acquiring some of the ARP spoofing tools needed. These tools are 
not very complex and are available for almost every computing platform available. 
Many apartments and older office buildings do not come prewired for the 
high-tech networks used today. To add to the problem, if many individuals are set- 
ting up their own wireless networks without coordinating the installations, prob- 
lems can occur that will be difficult to detect. 
Only a limited number of frequencies are available to 802.11 networks. In fact, 
once the frequency is chosen, it does not change until manually reconfigured. 
Considering these problems, it is not hard to imagine the following situation 
occurring: 
A man goes out and purchases a wireless AP and several network cards for his 
home network.When he gets home and configures his network, he is extremely 
happy with how well wireless networking works. Suddenly, none of the machines 
on the wireless network are able to communicate.After waiting on hold for 45 min- 
utes to get through to the tech support line of the vendor who made the device, he 
finds that the network has magically started working again, and hangs up. 
Later that week, the same problem occurs, except this time he decides to wait 
on hold.While waiting, he goes outside and begins discussing his frustration with 
his neighbor. During the conversation, his neighbor's kids come out and say that 
their wireless network is not working. 
So, they begin to do a few tests (while still waiting on hold). First, the man's 
neighbor turns off his AP (which is usually off to "protect" their network). When 
this is done, the original person's wireless network starts working again. Then they 
turn on the neighbor's AP again and his network stops working again. 
At this point, a tech support representative finally answers and the caller 
describes what has happened. The tech-support representative informs the user that 
he needs to change the frequency used in the device to another channel. He 
explains that the neighbor's network is utilizing the same channel, causing the two 
networks to conflict. Once the caller changes the frequency, everything starts 
working properly. 
Protecting Against DoS and Flooding Attacks 
There is little that can be done to protect against DoS attacks. In a wireless envi- 
ronment, an attacker does not have to even be in the same building or neighbor- 
hood.With a good enough antenna, an attacker is able to send these attacks from a 
great distance away. 
www.syngress.com 

228 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
This is one of those times when it is valid to use NetStumbler in a nonhacking 
context. Using NetStumbler, administrators can identify other networks that may 
be in conflict. However, NetStumbler will not identify other DoS attacks or other 
non-networking equipment that is causing conflicts (such as wireless telephones, 
wireless security cameras, amateur TV (ATV) systems, 1KF-based remote controls, 
wireless headsets, microphones and audio speakers, and other devices that use the 
2.4 GHz frequency). 
For more information regarding wireless security attack methods, visit 
Searchsecurity.com. They list the most current wireless attack methods 
from A-Z. This is a great refresher list to take a look at before 
attempting the Security+ exam. See: http://searchsecurity.techtarget. 
comlgenericlO,295582,sid14_gci 1167611,00.html 
IEEE 802.1x Vulnerabilities 
The IEEE 802.1x standard is still relatively new in relation to the IEEE 802.11 
standard, and the security research community is only recently beginning to seri- 
ously evaluate the security of this standard. One of the first groups to investigate 
the security of the 802.1x standard was the Maryland Information Systems Security 
Lab (MISSL) at the University of Maryland at College Park. This group, led by Dr. 
William Arbaugh, was the first to release a paper 
(www.missl.cs.umd.edu/Projects/wireless/ix.pdf) documenting flaws in the IEEE 
802.1x standard. In this paper, the group noted that 802.1x is susceptible to several 
attacks, due to the following vulnerabilities: 
9 The lack of the requirement of strong mutual authentication.While EAP- 
TLS does provide strong mutual authentication it is not required and can 
be overridden. 
9 
The vulnerability of the EAP Success message to a MITM attack. 
9 
The lack of integrity protection for 802.1x management frames. 
These flaws provide for avenues of attack against wireless networks.While the 
networks are not as vulnerable as they would be without EAP and 802.1x, the 
"silver-bullet" fix which designers had hoped for was not provided in the form of 
802.1x. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
229 
Site Surveys 
A site survey is part of an audit done on wireless networks. Site surveys allow 
system and network administrators to determine the extent to which their wireless 
networks extend beyond the physical boundaries of their buildings. Typically, a site 
survey uses the same tools an attacker uses, such as a sniffer and a WEP cracking 
tool (for 802.11 network site surveys). The sniffer can be either Windows-based 
such as NetStumbler or UNIX/Linux-based such as Kismet. For WEP cracking, 
AirSnort is recommended. 
Other tools that can be useful are a directional antenna such as aYagi antenna 
or a parabolic dish antenna. Directional and parabolic dish antennae allow for the 
reception of weak signals from greater distances by providing better amplification 
and gain on the signal. These antennae allow wireless network auditors the ability 
to determine how far an attacker can realistically be from the source of the wireless 
network transmissions in order to receive from and transmit to the network. 
Finally, another tool that is useful for site surveys is a GPS locator. This provides 
for the determination of the geographical latitude and longitude of areas where 
wireless signal measurements are taken. Using GPS, auditors can create a physical 
map of the boundaries of the wireless network. 
Site surveys are not covered extensively in the Security+ exam. However, 
there may be a question about some of the tools used to conduct these 
surveys. Remember that the tools used to conduct site surveys and 
audits are essentially the same tools an attacker uses to gain access to a 
wireless network. Be prepared in case a Security+ exam question asks 
whether a particular tool is used in wireless network site surveys. 
Additional Security 
Measures for Wireless Networks 
Although 802. l x authentication provides good security through the use of dynami- 
cally generated WEP keys, security administrators may wish to add more layers of 
security. Additional security for wireless networks can be introduced through the 
design of the network itself. As stated previously, a wireless network should always 
www.syngress.com 

230 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
be treated as an untrusted network. This has implications for the design and 
topology of the wireless network. 
Using a Separate Subnet for Wireless Networks 
Many wireless networks are set up on the same subnets as the wired network. Also, 
to make life easier for administrators and users alike, both wired and wireless clients 
are often configured as DHCP clients and receive IP address configurations from 
the same DHCP servers.There is an obvious security problem with this approach 
as this configuration makes it easy for hackers to acquire valid IP address configura- 
tions that are on the same subnet as the corporate networks, which can pose a sig- 
nificant threat to the security of the network. 
The solution is to place wireless APs on their own separate subnets, in effect 
creating a kind of Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) for the wireless network. The wire- 
less subnet could be separated from the wired network by either a router or a full- 
featured firewall, such as an ISA server. There are a number of advantages to this 
approach.When a wireless network is placed on a separate subnet, the router can 
be configured with filters to provide additional security for the wireless network. 
Furthermore, through the use of an extended subnet mask on the wireless net- 
work, the number of valid IP addresses can be limited to approximately the number 
of valid wireless clients. Finally, in the case of potential attack on the wireless net- 
work, the router can be quickly shut down to prevent any further access to the 
wired network until the threat has been removed. 
If you have to support automatic roaming between wireless zones, you will still 
want to use DHCP on the wireless subnets. However, if you do not need to sup- 
port automatic roaming, you may want to consider not using DHCP and manually 
configuring IP addresses on the wireless clients. This will not prevent a hacker from 
sniffing the air for valid IP addresses to use on the wireless subnet, but it will pro- 
vide another barrier for entry and consume time.Additionally, if a hacker manually 
configures an IP address that is in use by another wireless client, the valid user will 
receive an IP address conflict message, providing a crude method for detecting 
unauthorized access attempts. 
Using VPNs for Wireless Access to Wired Network 
In high security networks, administrators may wish to leverage the separate subnet 
by only allowing access to the wired network through a VPN configured on the 
router or firewall. For wireless users to gain access to a wired network, they would 
first have to successfully authenticate and associate with the AP and then create a 

Communication Security: Wireless ~ Chapter 4 
231 
VPN tunnel for access to the wired network. Some vendors, such as Colubris, offer 
VPN solutions built into wireless devices. These devices act as VPN-aware clients 
that forward only VPN traffic from the wireless network to the wired network, or 
they can provide their own VPN server for wireless clients. However, it is not nec- 
essary to use a proprietary hardware-based solution. One solution is to use freeware 
known as Dolphin from www.reefedge.com that will turn a PC into an appliance 
that encrypts wireless traffic with IPSec. Figure 4.21 below shows a network 
topology for this level of security. 
For more information on this technology, see www.colubris.com/en/sup- 
port/whitepapers. 
Figure 4.21 Using a VPN for Wireless Access to Wired Network 
www.syngress.com 

232 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
When aVPN is required for access to a corporate network from a wireless net- 
work subnet, all traffic between the two networks is encrypted within the VPN 
tunnel. If using static WEE a VPN ensures a higher degree of confidentiality for 
traffic. Even if the WEP encryption is cracked, the hacker would still have to crack 
the VPN encryption to see the corporate traffic, which is much more difficult. If a 
wireless laptop is stolen and the theft unreported, the thief would have to know the 
user credentials to gain access to the VPN. 
It is important to ensure that the user does not configure the VPN con- 
nection to save the username and password. Although this makes it 
more convenient for the user, who does not have to type the account 
name and password each time they use the VPN connection, it provides 
a thief with the credentials needed to access the VPN. 
Of course, this kind of configuration is still vulnerable to attack. If, for example, 
an attacker has somehow acquired user names and passwords (or the user has saved 
them in the VPN connection configuration), they can still access the wired net- 
work through the VPN. Another consideration is the additional overhead of 
encryption used in the VPN tunnel. If also using WEE the combined loss of band- 
width as a result of the encryption could easily be noticeable. Again, administrators 
have to compare the benefits of implementing a VPN for wireless clients in a DMZ 
against the cost of deployment in terms of hardware, software, management, loss of 
bandwidth, and other factors. 
Setting up this kind of configuration can be a relatively complex undertaking, 
depending on a number of factors. If, for example, 802. Ix authentication is being 
used, it is important to ensure that 802. ix-related traffic can pass between the 
wireless and wired network without a VPN tunnel. If using ISA server to separate 
networks, you would have to publish the RADIUS server on the corporate net- 
work to the wireless network. 
Temporal Key Integrity Protocol 
As noted earlier, the use of WEP in combination with 802.1x authentication and 
EAP-TLS, while providing a much higher standard of security, does not mitigate all 
the potential threats to the confidentiality and integrity of the data. As an interim 
solution until the IEEE 802.11i standard is implemented and finalized, many ven- 

Communication Security: Wireless * Chapter 4 
233 
dors are using or considering using a temporary solution called Temporal Key 
Integrity Protocol (TKIP) to enhance the security of wireless networks. The TKIP 
standard was not finalized at the time of this writing, but some vendors are already 
implementing it (for example, Cisco, which initially developed TKIP as a propri- 
etary technology for use in its products). 
TKIP can be used with or as an alternative to 802.1x authentication.TKIP 
comprises a set of algorithms that enhance WEP. It provides more security than 
WEP through the use of key mixing, an extended IV, a message integrity check 
(MIC), and rekeying. A primary advantage of TKIP is that it can be implemented 
through firmware updates of current devices (another reason to only purchase 
devices capable of firmware updates). TKIP addresses the problem of static WEP 
keys by changing the temporal key used for the encryption process every 10,000 
packets. Additionally, the use of TKIP addresses another vulnerability of static WEP" 
the use of the same shared key by all the wireless devices. TKIP ensures that each 
wireless station uses a different key for the encryption process. TKIP accomplishes 
this by using a 128-bit temporal key that is shared between the wireless workstations 
and the AP. The temporal key is then combined with the MAC address of each of 
the wireless devices to provide the encryption key used for RC4 encryption on the 
wireless network by that device. This also reduces the vulnerability to attacks based 
on the fact that the IV is sent in the clear in standard WEP implementations, by 
adding another layer of encryption. 
Message Integrity Code (MIC) 
Another vulnerability of WEP is that it is relatively easy for a knowledgeable and 
determined attacker to modify (flip) bits in an intercepted message, recalculate the 
appropriate CRC (also known as the Integrity Checksum value or I CV), and then 
send the altered message to the AP. Because the CRC is spoofed, the AP will 
accept the altered message and reply to it, providing information that the attacker 
can use to crack the WEP encryption. This form of attack is described in a paper 
entitled "Intercepting Mobile Communications" The Insecurity of 802.11" by 
Nikita Borisov, Ian Goldberg, and David Wagner." 
MIC, which is also part of the TKIP algorithms, provides a much stronger 
mechanism for checking messages for evidence of tampering by adding a MIC 
value that is encrypted and sent with the message. Upon receipt, the MIC value is 
decrypted and compared with the expected value. MIC is, in reality, a form of 
Message Authentication Code, often referred to as MAC, which is a standard cryp- 
tographic term. However, because "MAC" is used quite frequently with regard to 
Media Access Control addresses, "MIC" is used to differentiate the two. 

234 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
To add to the confusion, MIC is variously referred to as Message 
Integrity Code or Message Integrity Check. As with TKIP, MIC is a tech- 
nology originally developed by Cisco (which uses the term "Check") for 
use in its products, and is not widely available at the time of this 
writing. 
IEEE 802.1 li Standard 
The negative response to the weaknesses of WEP has been vociferous and strong. 
To address the criticisms leveled at WEP and to provide a stronger standards-based 
security mechanism that vendors can implement in their products, the IEEE 
802.11i task group is working on the upcoming 802.11i standard.Although the 
standard is not finalized, some things about its final form are fairly certain. The 
standard will take the best of the technology available today for securing wireless 
networks and combine them into a single, coherent standard. The following are 
expected to be included in the standard: 
9 
The 802.11i standard will require the use of 802.1X authentication based 
on EAP. 
9 The 802.11i standard will also likely require the use of TKIP and MIC. 
9 
For new devices, the 802.11i standard will also require the use of 
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) as a replacement for the compro- 
mised P,.C4 algorithm. 
AES provides much stronger encryption than P,.C4. However, because of the 
additional processing power required for AES encryption, the addition of a co-pro- 
cessor will likely be necessary in wireless device hardware.When this technology 
becomes available in the marketplace, replacing legacy wireless devices could result 
in a significant expenditure. As with all other security measures, administrators and 
managers will have to compare the costs of implementation against the threats the 
implementation will mitigate. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
235 
Implementing Wireless 
Security: Common Best Practices 
As seen from the above, wireless security is a large, complex topic. Administrators 
wishing to implement wireless networks should exercise due care and due diligence 
by becoming as familiar as possible with the operation and vulnerabilities of wire- 
less networks and the available countermeasures for defending them. Installing a 
wireless network opens up the current wired network to new threats. The security 
risks created by wireless networks can be mitigated, however, to provide an accept- 
ably safe level of security in most situations. In some cases, the security require- 
ments are high enough that the wireless devices will require proprietary security 
features. This might include, for example, the ability to use TKIP and MIC, which 
is currently only available on some Cisco wireless products, but may be available on 
other products in the near future. In many cases, however, standards-based security 
mechanisms that are available on wireless products from a wide range of vendors 
will be sufficient. 
Even though many currently implemented wireless networks support a wide 
range of features that can be potentially enabled, the sad fact is that most adminis- 
trators do not use them. The media is full of reports of the informal results of site 
surveys conducted by wardrivers. These reports provide worrisome information, for 
example, that most wireless networks are not using WEP and that many wireless 
networks are using default SSIDs. There is no excuse for not minimizing the secu- 
rity threats created by wireless networks through the implementation of security, 
features that are available on most wireless networks. The following is a summary of 
common best practices that can be employed on many current and future wireless 
networks. 
9 Carefully review the available security features of wireless devices to see if 
they fulfill your security requirements. The 802.11 and WiFi standards 
specify only a subset of features that are available on a wide range of 
devices. Over and above these standards, there is a great deal of divergence 
of supported features. 
9 At a minimum, wireless APs and adapters should support firmware 
updates, 128-bit WEE MAC filtering, and the disabling of SSID broad- 
casts. 
9 Wireless vendors are continually addressing the security weaknesses of 
wireless networks. Check the wireless vendors'Web sites frequently for 
www.syngress.com 

236 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
firmware updates and apply them to all wireless devices.You can leave 
your network exposed if you fail to update even one device with the most 
recent firmware. 
9 
In medium- to high-security environments, wireless devices should sup- 
port EAP-based 802.1x authentication and, possibly, TKIE Another desir- 
able feature is the ability to remotely administer a wireless AP over a 
secure, encrypted channel. Being able to use IPSec for communications 
between the AP and the RADIUS server is also desirable. 
9 Always use WEE While it is true that WEP can be cracked, doing so 
requires knowledge and time. Even 40-bit WEP is better than no WEP. 
9 
Rotate static WEP keys frequently. If this is too much of an administrative 
burden, consider purchasing devices that support dynamic WEP keys. 
9 
Change the default administrative password used to manage the AP fre- 
quently. The default passwords for wireless APs are well known. If possible, 
use a password generator to create a difficult and sufficiently complex 
password. 
9 
Change the default SSID of the AE The default SSIDs for APs from dif- 
ferent vendors are well known, such as "tsunami" and "Linksys" for Cisco 
and Linksys APs, respectively. 
9 
Do not put any kind of identifying information in the SSID, such as com- 
pany name, address, products, divisions, and so on. Doing so provides too 
much information to potential hackers and lets them know whether your 
network is of sufficient interest to warrant further effort. 
9 
If possible, disable SSID broadcasts. This will make your network invisible 
to site survey tools such as NetStumbler. However, this will cause an 
administrative burden if you are heavily dependent on Windows XP 
clients being able to automatically discover and associate with the wireless 
network. 
9 
If possible, avoid the use of DHCP for your wireless clients, especially if 
SSID broadcasts are not disabled. By using DHCP, casual wardrivers can 
potentially acquire IP address configurations automatically. 
9 
Do not use shared-key authentication. Although it can protect your net- 
work against specific types of DoS attacks, other kinds of DoS attacks are 
still possible. Shared-key authentication exposes your WEP keys to com- 
promise. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
237 
9 Enable MAC filtering. It is true that MAC addresses can be easily spoofed, 
but your goal is to slow down potential attackers. If MAC filtering is too 
much of an administrative burden, consider using port-based authentica- 
tion available through 802.1X. 
9 
Consider placing your wireless network in a Wireless Demilitarized Zone 
(WDMZ), separated from the corporate network by a router or a firewall. 
9 
In aWDMZ, restrict the number of hosts on the subnet through an 
extended subnet mask, and do not use DHCP. 
9 Learn how to use site survey tools such as NetStumbler, and conduct fre- 
quent site surveys to detect the presence of rogue APs and vulnerabilities 
in your own network. 
9 Do not place the AP near windows.Try to place it in the center of the 
building so that interference will hamper the efforts of wardrivers and 
others trying to detect your traffic. Ideally, your wireless signal would 
radiate only to the outside walls of the building and not beyond. Try to 
come as close to that ideal as possible. 
9 
If possible, purchase an AP that allows you to reduce the size of the wire- 
less zone (cell sizing) by changing the power output. 
9 Educate yourself as to the operation and security of wireless networks. 
9 Educate users about safe computing practices in the context of the use of 
both wired and wireless networks. 
9 
Perform a risk analysis of your network. 
9 Develop relevant and comprehensive security policies and implement 
them throughout your network. 
www.syngress.com 

238 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Summary 
Wireless LANs are attractive to many companies and home users because of the 
increased productivity that results from the convenience and flexibility of being 
able to connect to the network without using wires.WLANs are especially attrac- 
tive as they can reduce the cost of having to install cabling to support users on the 
network. For these and other reasons, WLANs have become very popular in the 
past few years. However, WLAN technology has often been implemented poorly 
and without due consideration being given to the security of the network. For the 
most part, these poor implementations result from a lack of understanding of the 
nature of wireless networks and the measures that can be taken to secure them. 
WLANs are inherently insecure because of their very nature: they radiate radio 
signals containing network traffic that can be viewed and potentially compromised 
by anyone within range of the signal.With the proper antennas, the range of 
WLANs is much greater than is commonly assumed. Many administrators wrongly 
believe that their networks are secure because the interference created by walls and 
other physical obstructions combined with the relative low power of wireless 
devices will contain the wireless signal sufficiently. Often, this is not the case. 
There are a number of different types of wireless networks that can be poten- 
tially deployed including HomeRE Bluetooth, 802.1 l b, and 802.1 l a. The most 
common type of WLAN used today is based on the IEEE 802.11b standard. 
The 802.11b standard defines the operation of WLANs in the 2.4 to 2.4835 
GHz unlicensed ISM band. 802.11b devices use direct sequence spread spectrum 
(DSSS) to achieve transmission rates of up to 11 Mbps. All 802.11b devices are 
half-duplex devices, which means that a device cannot send and receive at the same 
time. In this, they are like hubs and therefore require mechanisms for contending 
with collisions when multiple stations are transmitting at the same time. To contend 
with collisions, wireless networks use CSMA/CA. 
The 802.1 l a and forthcoming 802.11g standards define the operation of wire- 
less networks with higher transmission rates. 802.11a devices are not compatible 
with 802.1 l b because they use frequencies in the 5 GHz band. Furthermore, unlike 
802.11b networks, they do not use DSSS. 802.11g uses the same ISM frequencies 
as 802.11b and is backward-compatible with 802.11b devices. 
The 802.11 standard defines the 40-bit WEP protocol as an optional compo- 
nent to protect wireless networks from eavesdropping. WEP is implemented in the 
MAC sublayer of the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model. 
WEP is insecure for a number of reasons. The first is that, because it encrypts 
well-known and deterministic IP traffic in layer 3, it is vulnerable to plaintext 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
239 
attacks. That is, it is relatively easy for an attacker to figure out what the plaintext 
traffic is (for example a DHCP exchange) and compare that with the ciphertext, 
providing a powerful clue for cracking the encryption. 
Another problem with WEP is that it uses a relatively short (24-bit) IV to 
encrypt the traffic. Because each transmitted frame requires a new IV, it is possible 
to exhaust the entire IV keyspace in a few hours on a busy network, resulting in 
the reuse of IVs. This is known as IV collisions. IV collisions can also be used to 
crack the encryption. Furthermore, IVs are sent in the clear with each frame, intro- 
ducing another vulnerability. 
The final stake in the heart of WEP is the fact that it uses P,.C4 as the encryp- 
tion algorithm. The RC4 algorithm is well known and recently it was discovered 
that it uses a number of weak keys. Airsnort and Wepcrack are two well-known 
open-source tools that exploit the weak key vulnerability of WEE 
Although WEP is insecure, it does potentially provide a good barrier, and its 
use will slow down determined and knowledgeable attackers.WEP should always 
be implemented. The security of WEP is also dependent on how it is implemented. 
Because the IV keyspace can be exhausted in a relatively short amount of time, 
static WEP keys should be changed on a frequent basis. 
The best defense for a wireless network involves the use of multiple security 
mechanisms to provide multiple barriers that will slow down attackers, making it 
easier to detect and respond to attacks. This strategy is known as defense-in-depth. 
Securing a wireless network should begin with changing the default configura- 
tions of the wireless network devices. These configurations include the default 
administrative password and the default SSID on the AP. 
The SSID is a kind of network name, analogous to a Simple Network 
Management Protocol (SNMP) community name or a VLAN ID. For wireless 
clients to authenticate and associate with an AP, they must use the same SSID as 
the one in use on the AP. It should be changed to a unique value that does not 
contain any information that could potentially be used to identify the company or 
the kind of traffic on the network. 
By default, SSIDs are broadcast in response to beacon probes and can be easily 
discovered by site survey tools such as NetStumbler and Windows XE It is possible 
to turn off SSID on some APs. Disabling SSID broadcasts creates a "closed net- 
work." If possible, SSID broadcasts should be disabled, although this will interfere 
with the ability of Windows XP to automatically discover wireless networks and 
associate with them. However, even if SSID broadcasts are turned off, it is still pos- 
sible to sniff the network traffic and see the SSID in the frames. 
www.syngress.com 

240 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Wireless clients can connect to APs using either open system or shared-key 
authentication.While shared-key authentication provides protection against some 
DoS attacks, it creates a significant vulnerability for the WEP keys in use on the 
network and should not be used. 
MAC filtering is another defensive tactic that can be employed to protect wire- 
less networks from unwanted intrusion. Only the wireless station that possess 
adapters that have valid MAC addresses are allowed to communicate with the AP. 
However, MAC addresses can be easily spoofed and maintaining a list of valid 
MAC addresses may be impractical in a large environment. 
A much better way of securing WLANs is to use 802.1x. 802.1x was originally 
developed to provide a method for port-based authentication on wired networks. 
However, it was found to have significant application in wireless networks.With 
802.1x authentication, a supplicant (a wireless workstation) needs to be authenti- 
cated by an authenticator (usually a RADIUS server) before access is granted to the 
network itself. The authentication process takes place over a logical uncontrolled 
port that is used only for the authentication process. If the authentication process is 
successful, access is granted to the network on the logical controlled port. 
802.1x relies on EAP to perform authentication. The preferred EAP type for 
802.1x is EAP-TLS. EAP-TLS provides the ability to use dynamic per-user, ses- 
sion-based WEP keys, eliminating some of the more significant vulnerabilities asso- 
ciated with WEP. However, to use EAP-TLS, you must deploy a PKI to issue 
digital X.509 certificates to the wireless clients and the RADIUS server. 
Other methods that can be used to secure wireless networks include placing 
wireless APs on their own subnets in WDMZs. The WDMZ can be protected from 
the corporate network by a firewall or router. Access to the corporate network can 
be limited to VPN connections that use either PPTP or L2TP. 
New security measures continue to be developed for wireless networks. Future 
security measures include TKIP and MIC. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Wireless Concepts 
The most predominant wireless technologies consist of WAP and IEEE 
802.11 WLAN. 
WEP is the security method used in IEEE 802.11.WLANs and WTLS 
provide security in WAP networks. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
241 
gl WEP provides for two key sizes: 40-bit and 104-bit. These keys are 
concatenated to a 24-bit IV to provide either a 64- or 128-bit key for 
encryption. 
V--d WEP uses the RC4 stream algorithm to encrypt its data. 
802.11 networks use two types of authentication: open system and shared- 
key. 
V------d There are two types of 802.11 network modes: ad hoc and infrastructure. 
Ad hoc 802.11 networks are peer-to-peer in design and can be 
implemented by two clients with wireless network cards. The 
infrastructure mode of 802.11 uses APs to provide wireless connectivity to 
a wired network beyond the AP. 
Vr To protect against some rudimentary attacks that insert known text into 
the stream to attempt to reveal the key stream, WEP incorporates a 
checksum in each frame. Any frame not found to be valid through the 
checksum is discarded. 
gl Used on its own, WEP does not provide adequate WLAN security. 
WEP must be implemented on every client as well as every AP to be 
effective. 
V----d WEP keys are user definable and unlimited. They do not have to be 
predefined and can and should be changed often. 
gl Despite its drawbacks, you should implement the strongest version of WEP 
available and keep abreast of the latest upgrades to the standards. 
V------d Wireless communication relies on radio frequencies that are susceptible to 
electromagnetic and radio frequency interferences (EMI and RFI). Spread 
Spectrum technologies reduce the effects of EMI and RFI. 
r-d An Ad-hoc Wireless Network is created when two or more wireless 
devices are connected. In an Ad-hoc network there is no AP. 
Vr Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS) is used in Bluetooth and 
Home RF wireless networks. It transmits RF signals by using rapid 
frequency switching. It has a frequency range of 2.4 GHz and has limited 
transmission speeds from 1.6 Mbps to 10 Mbps. 
www.syngress.com 

242 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS) uses a wide band of frequency. 
DSSS is faster and more secure than FHSS. It uses a frequency range from 
2.4 GHz. to 2.4835 GHz. and is used in most 802.1 lb networks. 
WAP is a protocol for most handheld wireless devices. Operating systems 
such as Microsoft Windows CE, JavaOS and PalmOS use WAR 
In a wireless network the AP is known as the authenticator and the client 
is known as the supplicant. 
The IEEE 802.1x specification uses the EAP to provide for client 
authentication 
Wireless Vulnerabilities 
Examining the common threats to both wired and wireless networks 
provides a solid understanding in the basics of security principles and 
allows the network administrator to fully assess the risks associated with 
using wireless and other technologies. 
Threats can come from simple design issues, where multiple devices utilize 
the same setup, or intentional DoS attacks, which can result in the 
corruption or loss of data. 
Malicious users are not the source of all threats. They can also be caused 
by a conflict of similar resources, such as with 802.1 l b networks and 
cordless telephones. 
With wireless networks going beyond the border of the office or home, 
chances are greater that users' actions may be monitored by a third party. 
Electronic eavesdropping, or sniffing, is passive and undetectable to 
intrusion detection devices. 
Tools that can be used to sniff networks are available for Windows (such as 
Wireshark and AiroPeek) and UNIX (such as TCPDump and ngrep). 
Sniffing traffic allows attackers to identify additional resources that can be 
compromised. 
Even encrypted networks have been shown to disclose vital information in 
cleartext, such as the network name, that can be received by attackers 
sniffing the WLAN. 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
243 
V------d Any authentication information that is broadcast can often be replayed to 
services requiring authentication (NT Domain, WEP authentication, and 
so on) to access resources. 
The use ofVPNs, SSL, and SSH helps protect against wireless interception. 
gl Due to the design of TCP/IR there is little that you can do to prevent 
MAC/IP address spoofing. Static definition of MAC address tables can 
prevent this type of attack. However, due to significant overhead in 
management, this is rarely implemented. 
El Wireless network authentication can be easily spoofed by simply replaying 
another node's authentication back to the AP when attempting to connect 
to the network. 
[El Many wireless equipment providers allow for end users to redefine the 
MAC address for their cards through the configuration utilities that come 
with the equipment. 
V------d External two-factor authentication such as RADIUS or SecurlD should 
be implemented to additionally restrict access requiring strong 
authentication to access the wireless resources. 
Due to the design of TCP/IE some spoof attacks allow for attackers to 
hijack or take over network connections established for other resources on 
the wireless network. 
F-r If an attacker hijacks the AP, all traffic from the wireless network gets 
routed through the attacker, so the attacker can then identify passwords 
and other information that other users are attempting to use on valid 
network hosts. 
V,-r Many users are susceptible to these MITM attacks, often entering their 
authentication information even after receiving many notifications that 
SSL or other keys are not what they should be. 
El Rogue APs can assist the attacker by allowing remote access from wired or 
wireless networks. These attacks are often overlooked as just faults in the 
user's machine, allowing attackers to continue hijacking connections with 
little fear of being noticed. 
gl Many wireless networks that use the same frequency within a small space 
can easily cause network disruptions and even DoS for valid network 
users. 
www.syngress.com 

244 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
[-----d If an attacker hijacks the AP and does not pass traffic on to the proper 
destination, all users of the network will be unable to use the network. 
gl Flooding the wireless network with transmissions can prevent other 
devices from utilizing the resources, making the wireless network 
inaccessible to valid network users. 
Wireless attackers can utilize strong and directional antennas to attack the 
wireless network from a great distance. 
IEI An attacker who has access to the wired network can flood the wireless 
AP with more traffic than it can handle, preventing wireless users from 
accessing the wired network. 
[-----d When installing and configuring a new AP, you should change the default 
settings such as the SSID. 
El Wireless networks should be placed in a separate network segment. 
V------d Site surveys should be conducted regularly to detect and remove of rogue 
APs. 
[-4I Updates, service packs, patches and hot fixes should be applied to all 
operating systems and software. 
Many new wireless products utilize the same wireless frequencies as 
802.11 networks. A simple cordless telephone can create a DoS situation 
for the network. 
Site Surveys 
Tools used in site surveys include wireless Sniffers, directional or parabolic 
dish antennae, and GPS receivers. 
Wireless sniffers that can be used in a site survey include the Windows- 
based NetStumbler and the UNIX/Linux-based Kismet or Wireshark. 
Site surveys are used to map out the extent to which wireless networks are 
visible outside the physical boundaries of the buildings in which their 
components are installed. 


246 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
A" Because wireless devices are half-duplex devices, you cannot wholly prevent 
your wireless traffic from being listened to by unauthorized individuals. The 
only defense against eavesdropping is to encrypt layer 2 and higher traffic 
whenever possible. 
Q: Are wireless networks secure? 
A: By their very nature and by definition, wireless networks are not secure. They 
can, however, be made relatively safe from the point of view of security 
through administrative effort to encrypt traffic, to implement restrictive 
methods for authenticating and associating with wireless networks, and so on. 
Q 
= 
A: 
Why should I do frequent site surveys? 
A site survey will reveal the presence of unauthorized APs. Some of these APs 
could be placed to facilitate a MITM attack or to gain access to the physical 
network from a safe location. On the other hand, the unauthorized APs could 
have been purchased and implemented by departmental staff without your 
knowledge but with no malicious intent. Wireless networks are relatively inex- 
pensive and easy to set up. It is natural for people to desire to implement tech- 
nology they think will make their lives easier without waiting for 
knowledgeable staff in the IT department to implement it for them. Even if 
your company does not have a wireless network, it may be a good idea to con- 
duct wireless site surveys to protect your wired network if you suspect there is 
a likelihood of employees installing their own APs to increase their productivity. 
Q 
II 
A: 
My AP does not support the disabling of SSID broadcasts. Should I purchase a 
new one? 
Disabling SSID broadcasts adds only one barrier for the potential hacker. 
Wireless networks can still be made relatively safe even if the AP does respond 
with its SSID to a beacon probe. Disabling SSID broadcasts is a desirable fea- 
ture. However, before you go out and purchase new hardware, check to see if 
you can update the firmware of your AP. The AP vendor may have released a 
more recent firmware version that supports the disabling of SSID broadcasts. If 
your AP does not support firmware updates, consider replacing it with one that 
does. 
www.syngress.com 
- 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
247 
Q 
m 
A: 
Q: 
A: 
Why is WEP insecure? 
WEP is insecure for a number of reasons. The first is that 24-bit IV is too 
short. Because a new IV is generated for each frame and not for each session, 
the entire IV key space can be exhausted on a busy network in a matter of 
hours, resulting in the reuse of IVs. Second, the P, C4 algorithm used by WEP 
has been shown to use a number of weak keys that can be exploited to crack 
the encryption. Third, because WEP is implemented at layer 2, it encrypts 
TCP/IP traffic, which contains a high percentage of well-known and pre- 
dictable information, making it vulnerable to plaintext attacks. 
How can I prevent unauthorized users from authenticating and associating with 
my AP? 
There are a number of ways to accomplish this.You can configure your AP as a 
closed system by disabling SSID broadcasts and choosing a hard-to-guess SSID. 
You can configure MAC filtering to allow only those clients that use valid MAC 
addresses access to the AEYou can enable WEP and shared-key authentication. 
However, all of these methods do not provide acceptable levels of assurance for 
corporate networks that have more restrictive security requirements than are usu- 
ally found in SOHO environments. For corporate environments that require a 
higher degree of assurance, you should configure 802.1X authentication. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
. 
You have created a wireless network segment for your corporate network and 
are using WEP for security. Which of the following terms best describes the 
APs and the clients who want to connect to this wireless network? 
www.syngress.com 

248 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
A. Key Sharer and Key Requester 
B. Applicants and Supplicants 
C. Servers and Clients 
D. Authenticators and Supplicants 
E. All of the above 
, 
What can be implemented in a wireless network to provide authentication, 
data and privacy protection? 
A. WTLS 
B. WEP 
C. WAP 
D. WSET 
~ 
You are tasked with creating a new wireless network for corporate users. 
However, your CEO is very concerned about security and the integrity of the 
rest of the company's network.You assure your CEO that the new wireless 
network will be secure by suggesting you will place the wireless network APs 
in a special area.Where will you place the wireless APs? 
A. Your office 
B. The CEO's office 
C. ADMZ 
D. A secured server room 
E. A fresnel zone 
o 
Your wireless network uses WEP to authorize users, but you also use MAC 
filtering to ensure that only preauthorized clients can associate with your APs. 
On Monday morning, you reviewed the AP association table logs for the pre- 
vious weekend and noticed that the MAC address assigned to the network 
adapter in your portable computer had associated with your APs several times 
over the weekend.Your portable computer spent the weekend on your dining 
room table and was not connected to your corporate wireless network during 
this period of time.What type of wireless network attack are you most likely 
being subjected to? 

Communication Security: Wireless ~ Chapter 4 
249 
A. Spoofing 
B. Jamming 
C. Sniffing 
D. Man in the middle 
o The biggest weakness in WEP stems from which vulnerability? 
A. The reuse of IV values. 
B~ 
Co 
The ability to crack WEP by statistically determining the WEP key 
through the Fluhrer-Mantin-Shamir attack. 
The ability to spoof MAC addresses thereby bypassing MAC address fil- 
ters. 
D. All of the above. 
6. The tool NetStumbler detects wireless networks 
A. SSID 
B. WEP key 
C. MAC address 
D. CRC-32 checksum 
based on what feature? 
, 
Some DoS attacks are unintentional.Your wireless network at home has been 
having sporadic problems. The wireless network is particularly susceptible in 
the afternoon and the evenings. This is most likely due to which of the fol- 
lowing possible problems? 
A. The AP is flaky and needs to be replaced. 
B. Someone is flooding your AP with traffic in a DoS attack. 
C. The wireless network is misconfigured. 
Do Your cordless phone is using the same frequency as the wireless network 
and whenever someone calls or receives a call the phone jams the wireless 
network. 
www.syngress.com 

250 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
~ The 802.1x standard requires the use of an authentication server to allow 
access to the wireless LAN.You are deploying a wireless network and will use 
EAP-TLS as your authentication method.What is the most likely vulnerability 
in your network? 
A. Unauthorized users accessing the network by spoofing EAP-TLS messages 
B. DoS attacks occurring because 802.11 management frames are not 
authenticated 
C. Attackers cracking the encrypted traffic 
D. None of the above 
~ Concerning wireless network security, WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) was 
originally designed to do which of the following? 
A. Provide wireless collision detection and collision avoidance access methods 
B. Provide the same level of security as a LAN (Local Area Network) 
C. Provide the ability to allow RF signals to penetrate through walls 
D. Provide greater accessibility than a wired LAN 
10. Which of the following is the most common method used by attackers to 
detect and identify the presence of an 802.11 wireless network? 
A. Packet phishing 
B. War dialing 
C. Packet sniffing 
D. War driving 
11. Your company uses WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) for its wireless security. 
Who may authenticate to the company's access point? 
ao 
Bo 
C~ 
D~ 
Anyone in the company can authenticate 
Only the administrator can authenticate 
Only users with the valid WEP key 
None of the above 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Wireless 9 Chapter 4 
251 
12. What is the purpose of conducting a wireless network site survey? 
A. To identify other wireless networks in the area. 
B. To determine the extent to which your wireless network extends beyond 
the physical boundary of the building. 
C. To hack into other companies' wireless networks. 
D. All of the above 
13. This tool is used during site surveys to detect possible interference in 1KF 
bands. It can also be used by an attacker to eaves drop on communications ses- 
sion.What is it? 
No 
go 
C~ 
D~ 
Spectrum Analyzer 
Spectrum Packet Sniffer 
Spectrum Monitor 
Spectrum War Driver 
14. You have just started your new job as security technician for a company.Your 
director informs you that several developers and the network administrator 
have left the company as disgruntled employees. No one has been keeping 
track of security and your director believes the former employees have been 
violating company policy by accessing company information through the 
wireless network.You conduct a site survey and expect to find what as the 
number one culprit? 
A. Compromised company data 
B. Wireless security breaches 
C. Unauthorized APs on the network 
D. None of the above 
www.syngress.com 

252 
Chapter 4 9 Communication Security: Wireless 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test 
questions in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the 
Self Test Appendix. 
1. D 
8. B 
2. A 
9. B 
3. 
C 
10. D 
4. A 
11. C 
5. B 
12. B 
6. A 
13. A 
7. D 
14. C 

Chapter 5 
Objectives 
in this Chapter" 
9 Web Security 
9 FTP Security 
9 Directory Services and LDAP Security 
Exam Objectives 
Review" 
I-r 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
I-r 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
I-r 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
I-r 
Self Test 
I-r 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
253 

254 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Introduction 
Security+ technicians must know how to configure, manage, and service security 
on a Web platform. As discussed in the previous chapters,Web-based services and e- 
mail rank highly when identifying possible threats, risks, and exploitation. 
The problems associated with Web-based exploitation can affect a wide array of 
users, including end users surfing Web sites, using Instant Messaging (IM), and 
shopping online. End users can also have many problems with their Web browsers. 
This chapter covers many of these issues, including: 
9 How to recognize possible vulnerabilities 
9 How to securely surf the Web 
9 How to shop and conduct financial transactions online safely 
Security+ technicians also need to know how to secure Web-based services and 
servers. Earlier chapters covered securing e-mail services because they "need" to be 
exposed to the Internet. The same precautions hold true for Web-based services; 
they also need to be exposed (unless they are intranet-only Web services), thus 
increasing risk. 
This chapter looks at File Transfer Protocol (FTP)-based services. FTP has long 
been a standard to transfer files across the Internet, using either a Web browser or 
an FTP client. Because of the highly exploitable nature of FTP, this chapter looks 
at why it is insecure, how it can be exploited, and how to secure it. We will also 
look at a number of other methods for transferring files, such as Secure FTP 
(S/FTP) and H SCP. While FTP remains a common method of transferring files 
on the Internet, SCP has superseded it as a preferred method among security pro- 
fessionals for transferring files securely. 
The last section deals with Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), its 
inherent security vulnerabilities, and how it can be secured. In this section we 
address many of the issues with LDAR and look at how it is used in Active 
Directory, eDirectory, and other directory services. By exploring these issues, you 
will have a good understanding of the services and Internet technologies that are 
utilized in network environments. 
Web Security 
When considering Web-based security for a network, knowledge of the entire 
Internet and the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) pro- 
~www.syngress.com 
TM 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
255 
tocol stack is a must. So far, this book has exposed you to the inner workings of 
TCP/IP and Internet communications. This chapter looks at Web-based security 
and topics including server and browser security, exploits,Web technologies such as 
ActiveX, JavaScript, and CGI, and much more. 
Web Server Lockdown 
Web server(s) store all of the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Dynamic 
Hypertext Markup Language (DHTML),ASR and eXtensible Markup Language 
(XML) documents, graphics, sounds, and other files that make up Web pages. In 
some cases, it may also contain other data that a business does not want to share 
over the Internet. For example, small businesses often have a single physical server 
that performs all server functions for the organization, including Web services. A 
dedicated Web server, however, can serve as a pathway into the internal network 
unless security is properly configured. Thus, it is vital that Web servers be secure. 
The most popular types of Web server software include Apache (which 
can be run on Linux/Unix machines, Windows, and Apple computers), 
and Microsoft's Internet Information Services (IIS) (which is built into 
Windows server products as well as Windows XP and Vista operating sys- 
tems [OSes]), Zeus Web Server, and Sun Java Web Server. According to 
Netcraft's Web Server Survey for December 2006 
(www.news.netcraft.comlarchiveslweb_server_survey.html), Apache ran 
on 60.32 percent of Web Servers, IIS ran on 31.04 percent, Sun ran on 
1.68 percent and Zeus ran on 0.51 percent. 
Locking down a Web server follows a path that begins in a way that should 
already be familiar: applying the latest patches and updates from the vendor. Once 
this task is accomplished, the network administrator should follow the vendor's rec- 
ommendations for configuring Web services securely. The following sections discuss 
typical recommendations made by Web server vendors and security professionals, 
including: 
9 Managing access control 
9 Handling directory and data structures 
9 Eliminating scripting vulnerabilities 
www.syngress.com 

256 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
9 
Logging activity 
9 
Performing backups 
9 
Maintaining integrity 
9 
Finding rogue Web servers 
9 
Stopping browser exploits 
For the Security+ exam, you will not need to know the step-by-step pro- 
cess of how to make a Web server secure, but you will be expected to 
know the technical details of how a Web server can be exploited and 
the details on how to fix the exploits. For example: making sure that 
your Web servers are completely patched with updates and hot fixes. 
Managing Access Control 
Many Web servers, such as IIS on Windows OSes, use a named user account to 
authenticate anonymous Web visitors (by default, this account on IIS servers is 
called IUSER_<computername >). When a Web visitor accesses a Web site using this 
methodology, the Web server automatically logs that user on as the IIS user 
account. The visiting user remains anonymous, but the host server platform uses the 
IIS user account to control access.This account grants system administrators gran- 
ular access control on a Web server so that all anonymous users have the same level 
of access, whereas users accessing the services through their own user accounts can 
have different levels of access. 
These specialized Web user accounts (for anonymous users) must have their 
access restricted so they cannot log on locally nor access anything outside the Web 
root. Additionally, administrators should be very careful about granting these 
accounts the ability to write to files or execute programs; this should be done only 
when absolutely necessary. If other named user accounts are allowed to log on over 
the Web (to give certain users a higher level of access than the anonymous account 
has), it is essential that these accounts not be the same user accounts employed to 
log onto the internal network. In other words, if employees log on via the Web 
using their own credentials instead of the anonymous Web user account, adminis- 
trators should create special accounts for those employees to use just for Web 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
257 
logon. Authorizations over the Internet should always be considered insecure unless 
strong encryption mechanisms are in place to protect them. Secure Sockets Layer 
(SSL) can be used to protect Web traffic; however, the protection it offers is not sig- 
nificant enough to protect internal accounts that are exposed on the Internet. 
Handling Directory and Data Structures 
Planning the hierarchy or structure of the Web root is an important part of 
securing a Web server. The root is the highest level Web in the hierarchy that con- 
sists of Webs nested within Webs.Whenever possible, Web server administrators 
should place all Web content within the Web root. All the Web information (the 
Web pages written in HTML, graphics files, sound files, and so on) is normally 
stored in folders and directories on the Web server. Administrators can create virtual 
directories, which are folders that are not contained within the Web server hierarchy 
(they can even be on a completely different computer), but appear to the user to 
be part of that hierarchy. Another way os providing access to data that is on another 
computer is mapping drives or folders. These methods allow administrators to store 
files where they are most easily updated or take advantage of extra drive space on 
other computers. However, mapping drives, mapping folders, or creating virtual 
directories can result in easier access for intruders if the Web server's security is 
compromised. It is especially important not to map drives from other systems on 
the internal network. 
If users accessing these Webs must have access to materials on another system, 
such as a database, it is best to deploy a duplicate database server within the Web 
server's Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) or domain. The duplicate server should con- 
tain only a backup, not the primary working copy of the database. The duplicate 
server should also be configured so that no Web user or Web process can alter or 
write to its data store. Database updates should come only From the original pro- 
tected server within the internal network. If data from Web sessions must be 
recorded into the database, it is best to configure a sideband connection from the 
Web zone back to the primary server system for data transfers. Administrators 
should also spend considerable effort verifying the validity of input data before 
adding it to the database server. 
Director), Properties 
An important part of the security that can be set on a Web server is done through 
the permissions set on directories making up the Web site. The permissions control 
what a user or script can do within a specific directory, and allow Web administra- 
tors to control security on a granular level. Although the procedures for setting 
www.syngress.com 

258 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
permissions on directories will vary between Web servers, the permissions them- 
selves are largely the same. For example, in IIS, Web sites are managed through the 
IIS Microsoft Management Console (MMC), which is found in the Administrative 
Tools folder in the Control Panel. Using this snap-in for the MMC, you will be 
able to access the sites running on that server, and be able to view the directories 
making up a particular site. By right-clicking on a directory of a site and clicking 
on Properties in the context menu that appears, a dialog box similar to the one 
shown in Figure 5.1 will appear. Configuring the settings on the Directory tab of 
this dialog box allows you to set the following permissions: 
9 
Script source access, which (if the Read andWrite permissions are also 
set) allows users to view source code. 
9 Read, which allows users to read and download files 
9 Write, which allows users to upload files and modify files. 
9 
Directory browsing, which allows users to see a listing of the files .and 
directories in the directory. If this is enabled, it is possible for a visitor to 
the site to navigate through a hypertext listing of your site, view its direc- 
tory structure, and see the files within its directories. 
9 
Log visits, which records visits to the directory in a 10g file if logging is 
enabled for the site. 
9 
Index this resource, which allows Microsoft Indexing Service to include 
the directory in a full-text index of the site. 
Another type of permission that can be set on the Directory tab is the execute 
permission that determines whether scripts and executables can be executed in a 
particular directory. In the Execute Permissions dropdown list, there are three pos- 
sible options: 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
259 
None, which prevents any programs from running in the directory. When 
this is set, only static files like Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) can 
be run from the directory. 
Scripts only, which only allows scripts (such as those written in Visual 
Basic for Scripting Edition (VBScript), JavaScript, and so forth) to run 
from the directory. 
Scripts and executables, which allows any program to run. Not only 
can scripts run from a directory with this permission, but executables 
placed in the directory can also be run. 
Figure 5.1 Directory Properties 
As with any permissions that are given to users, you should never apply more 
permissions to a directory than are absolutely necessary for a person to use the Web 
content stored there. For example, a directory containing scripts would have Read 
and Scripts Only access, so that someone accessing an Active Server Page could run 
the script and view the page. If you had Microsoft Access databases stored in a 
database directory, you would only give Read access if people were only retrieving 
data, but would give Read and Write access if people were providing data that was 
being stored in these databases.You would never give more access than users 
required, because this could create situations where someone could cause signifi- 
cant damage to your site. Just imagine a hacker browsing the directory structure, 
uploading malicious software and executing it, and you see the point. 
www.syngress.com 

260 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Eliminating Scripting Vulnerabilities 
Maintaining a secure Web server means ensuring that all scripts and Web applica- 
tions deployed on the Web server are free from Trojans, backdoors, or other mali- 
cious code. Many scripts are available on the Internet for the use of Web 
developers. However, scripts downloaded from external sources are more suscep- 
tible to coding problems (both intentional and unintentional) than those developed 
in-house. If it is necessary to use external programming code sources, developers 
and administrators should employ quality assurance tests to search for out-of-place 
system calls, extra code, and unnecessary functions. These hidden segments of 
malevolent code are called logic bombs when they are written to execute in response 
to a specified trigger or variable (such as a particular date, lapse of time, or some- 
thing that the user does or does not do). 
To learn more about secure programming of Web applications, there are 
numerous resources in print and on the Internet that you can refer to. A 
comprehensive resource is the Syngress publication, "Hack Proofing Your 
Web Applications," which provides detailed information on how to 
develop secure applications for intranets and the Internet. 
Often, it is useful to use sources that focus on the language the 
application is programmed in, as they will also provide examples and 
source code that will suit your needs. For example, if you are program- 
ming applications in Visual Basic, C#, C++, ASP, ASRNET, or other lan- 
guages developed and supported by Microsoft, the Microsoft Developer 
Network (http://msdn.microsoft.com) is a valuable site with significant 
information. Similarly, information on Java programming can be found 
at Sun's Web site (http:lljava.sun.com), or IBM Developerworks site 
(www.ibm.com/developerworks), which also provides information on 
XML. 
Using these sites, you can obtain an overview and detailed informa- 
tion on many aspects of secure programming. Some of the sites with 
articles and items dealing with specific topics that are worth investi- 
gating include: 
9 
Understanding 
Security, http://msdn2.microsoft.com/en-us/ 
security/aa 570420.aspx 
9 Writing Secure Code, http:llmsdn2.microsoft.comlen-uslsecurityl 
aa570401 .aspx 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
261 
Threat Modeling, http://msdn2.microsoft.com/en-us/ 
security/aa570411 .aspx 
One scripting vulnerability to watch out for occurs within Internet Server 
Application Programming Interface (ISAPI) scripts. The command RevertToSelfO 
allows the script to execute any following commands at a system-level security 
context. The RevertToSelffunction is properly used when an application has been 
running in the context of a client, to end that impersonation. However, in a prop- 
erly designed ISAPI script, this command should never be used. If this command is 
present, the code has been altered or was designed by a malicious or inexperienced 
coder. The presence of such a command enables attacks on a Web server through 
the submission of certain Uniform Resource Locator (URL) syntax constructions. 
We mentioned logic bombs in Chapter 2 in a very simplified manner. 
Here, we look at logic bombs in a practical sense, as written into the 
code itself. Remember that for the Security+ exam, a logic bomb is an 
attack that is set off or begins to run when a certain variable is met 
within the code. Using the RevertToSelfO function is a practical example 
of such an attack in action. 
It is important that any scripts used on a Web site are fully understood. Not 
only does this refer to code that is taken from the Internet, but also those that have 
been developed by other people within the organization. This is particularly impor- 
tant if there has been a change in personnel who have administrative access to the 
Web server, such as developers whose employment has been terminated or who are 
disgruntled for other reasons. Periodic reviews of code can help identify potential 
problems, as can auditing permissions on the Web server. By checking permissions 
and scripts, you may find potential backdoors. As mentioned in the previous sec- 
tion, no directories should have any more permissions than are absolutely needed. 
If access is too high, then it should be lowered to an appropriate level to avoid any 
issues that could occur at a later time. 
www.syngress.com 

262 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Logging Activity 
Logging, auditing, or monitoring the activity on a Web server becomes more 
important as the value of the data stored on the server increases. The monitoring 
process should focus on attempts to perform actions that are atypical for a Web 
user. These actions include, among others: 
9 Attempting to execute scripts 
9 
Trying to write files 
9 Attempting to access files outside the Web root 
The more traffic a Web server supports, the more difficult it becomes to review 
the audit trails. An automated solution is needed when the time required to review 
log files exceeds the time administrators have available for that task. Intrusion 
detection systems (IDSes) are automated monitoring tools that look for abnormal 
or malicious activity on a system. An IDS can simply scan for problems and notify 
administrators or can actively repel attacks once they are detected. IDSes and 
Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPSes) are covered in depth in Chapter 7, 
"Infrastructure Security: Topologies and IDS." 
Performing Backups 
Unfortunately, every administrator should assume that the Web server will be com- 
promised at some point and that the data hosted on it will be destroyed, copied, or 
corrupted. This assumption will not become a reality in all cases, but planning for 
the worst is always the best security practice. A reliable backup mechanism must be 
in place to protect the Web server from failure. This mechanism can be as complex 
as maintaining a hot spare (to which Web services will automatically failover if the 
primary Web server goes down), or as simple as a daily backup to tape. Either way, 
a backup is the only insurance available that allows a return to normal operations 
within a reasonable amount of time. If security is as much maintaining availability 
as it is maintaining confidentiality, backups should be part of any organization's 
security policy and backups of critical information (such as Web sites) should be 
stored offsite. Backups, disaster recovery planning, and how to continue on with 
business after an attack are covered in depth in Chapter 12, "Operational and 
Organizational Security: Security Policies and Disaster Recovery." 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
263 
Maintaining Integrity 
Locking down the Web server is only one step in the security process. It is also 
necessary to maintain that security over time. Sustaining a secure environment 
requires that the administrator perform a number of tasks on a regular basis such as: 
9 
Continuously monitor the system for anomalies 
9 Apply new patches, updates, and upgrades when available 
9 Adjust security configurations to match the ever-changing needs of the 
internal and external Web community. 
If a security breach occurs, an organization should review previous security 
decisions and implementations. Administrators might have overlooked a security 
hole because of ignorance, or they might have simply misconfigured some security 
control. In any case, it is important for the cause of the security breach to be iden- 
tified and fixed to prevent the same person from repeatedly accessing systems and 
resources, or for other attackers to get in the same way. It is vital that the integrity 
of systems be restored as quickly as possible and as effectively as possible. 
Finding Rogue Web Servers 
For a network administrator, the only thing worse than having a Web server and 
knowing that it is not 1 O0 percent secure even after locking it down, is having a 
Web server on the network that they are not aware exists. These are sometimes 
called rogue Web servers, and they can come about in two ways. It is possible that a 
user on the network has intentionally configured Web services on their machine. 
While this used to require a user to be technologically savvy in the past, Windows 
OSes provide Internet Information Services (IISes) as a component that is relatively 
easy to set up and configure on a machine that's not properly locked down. More 
often, however, rogue Web servers are deployed unintentionally. If administrators are 
not careful, when they install Windows (especially a member of the Server family) 
on a network computer, they can create a new Web server without even realizing 
it.When a Web server is present on a network without the knowledge of network 
administrators, the precautions necessary to secure that system are not taken, thus 
making the system (and through it, the entire network) vulnerable to every out-of- 
the-box exploit and attack for that Web server. 

264 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
In Exercise 5.01, you will learn how to find a rogue Web server running on 
your system and disable it. In the exercise, you will learn how to run a few tests to 
see if you have rogue Web servers on your network and how to find them. 
EXERCISE 5.01 
FINDING AND DISABLING ROGUE WEB SERVERS 
1. At any workstation or server type http://Iocalhost. This is the 
Ioopback address found in your HOSTS file that maps to 127.0.0.1 
(the Ioopback Internet Protocol (IP) address). After entering this 
URL, you should see a default Web page like the one shown in 
Figure 5.2. This indicates you have a Web server running. 
www.syngress.com 

N 
u'~ 
> 
-o 
0o 
.o 
5k 
-- 
c 
o 
~o 
._~ 
_(3 
c 
o 
t.; 
co 
c~ 
> 
N 
s_ 
O~ 
b~ 
c 
-o 
 
o 
o.~-~ 
> 
9 
- ~ =  
~ u  
~_~~~~'~o 
. 
~
-
~
~
 
O_ O_ 
~- ~_ o 
"E 
~ 
~ - "  
~ 
~ 
- 
-0 i~_ ~ 
~ 
.
.
.
.
 
" 
"~ 
" ~  
x 
= ~o O~o 
~o 
~ ~-~ 
o=~ 
~ 
~ 
~~~ 
~ ~~ 
.... 
c 
~.,., 
..~ (~ 
~E-~ 
~E o "~ +" 
9 -- 
0 
. 
c- 
l,#'l 
I,-- 
._~ -~ _ 
~_ ~, ~ ~..--' 
.~.~ 
,_ 
> 
= 
o~ 
c o_~ 
~ 
~.~ 
"~ ~ 
> 
~_ 
,,+_ ,,.~_ 
~ 
:~ 
0 
. _  
O. } 
v 
~ 
~ 
(~ 
9 
-~ 
.... 
-8~ 
9 
-~- 
~=~ 
~o~ 
~ 
= 
0 ,_ 
u,'~ .~ -0 
O_ 
LJ 
~ 
+0-, 
0 
~ 
c) 
~~o=~< 
~ 
<~~~ 
.__ 
(-- 
=~ 
o 
o~ 
~ ~ ~ o  
o~ 
o=~~ 
4-, 
-~ 
0~-~ 
~ 
c n~ o~'- 
c 
9 
.--- 
~ 
~~=~~ 
~" ~~-~.- 
9 
0 
I" ~ 
~ 
~ 
c" 
_
_
 
u~ 
c- 
:~ 
c- ~+.. tO 
~ 
-0 
0 
-~ 
0 
~ 
0 
~~~--~~~~ 
.~~ 
.- 
~j 
r6 

266 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
inetinfo.exe process. You can change the Startup type from 
Automatic (or Manual) to Disabled. This will disable the service 
without removing it altogether (in case you should want to run a 
Web server on this machine in the future). 
Figure 5.3 Viewing the Inetinfo.exe Process in Task Manager 
Figure 5.4 Viewing the WWW Publishing Service 
I r~ 
www.syngress.com 

im 
t~ 
,..,, 
iii 
,I 
t., 
o 
,..,. 
t~ 
t-, 
E 
E 
o 
~ c 
J 
9 ~ o c ~. 
.,_, 
"-- 
L,~ 
~. 
~ ~ - ~ . ~ ~ E O o  
~- 
~~ ~o 
o~ 
.- 
~= .~= ~ ~-~ ~-~ o o ~- ~ 
:D "~ 
~.,-- 
._ 
(D ~ 
"~ 
"~ 
-~~ 
o~ 
~~-.-= 
~~~~~~ 
m 
~ 
+~ 
" 
"r" .~_ ~ 
.~_ 
~- ~ ~ ~ ~ o~,~ o~ 
O~ o O 
co~ 
~'- 
4. 
>, 
~ 
,..,~ o~.,,.,,., 
9 
:D 
1"0 
~., 
oE 
~ ~ ~ = ~  
E .- 
~, ~ 
~ 
~ 
4. 
~ 
o 
9 o-- 
o 
o~-5.~_ 
u~= 
,,, 
~ ~ ~ o ~ ~ - ~ -  
,- 
,~ 
~,.- 
"~ 
,.- 
".,= ,.- 
~=; 
~,~-,- 
_,, 
9 -- 
~ 
.~' 
0 
.. 
~ 
+" 
_~ 
>., 
~ 
~ 
0'~ _~ 
9 
C 
i 
0 
OUT 
c 
~ 
c 
~ 
.~-' 0'~ 0 
..~ 
>.,, 
9 
~o~ 
~-uc 
0"1 "-0 
~8~ 
.i 
._~ 
~-- 
>~o~ 
-~.-~ 
~~o~ 
u 
13. 
t~.~.- 
~,_,,. 4-" 
~ 
'-' o 
"(D 
C 
o 
~-~ 
0 
ru 
(P 
ID 
t- 
, i  
0 
oO 
',1--' 
0 
D_ 
(p 
(D 
0 
(... 
E 
E 
0 
U 
-I--' 
-t--' 
(D 
C 
(- 
-!--' 
O~ 
, i  
ID 
, i  
LL 

268 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
~ 
Another way to check for a Web server is to go to the Control 
Panel and open the Add/Remove Programs applet. If you navi- 
gate to Add/Remove Windows Components, you can check to see 
if you have IIS checked off, which would also indicate that the 
Web server software is installed. In Figure 5.6, you can see that 
IIS is checked so that it is installed. To completely remove the 
Web server, make sure it is not checked at all; this means it will 
not be installed (or will be uninstalled if it has already been 
installed). 
Figure 5.6 Viewing IIS on a Windows XP Professional Workstation 
Stopping Browser Exploits 
As we've already seen in this chapter, Web browsers are client software programs 
such as Microsoft Internet Explorer (IE), Netscape, Opera, Mozilla Firefox, Safari, 
and others. These clients connect to servers running Web server software such as IIS 
or Apache and request Web pages via a UP.L, which is a "friendly" address that rep- 
resents an IP address and particular files on the server at that address. It is also pos- 
sible to connect to a Web site by typing the Web server's IP address itself into the 
browser's address box. The browser receives files that are encoded (usually in 
HTML) and must interpret the code or "markup" that determines how the page 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
269 
will be displayed on the user's monitor. This code can be seen by selecting the 
View Source option in your browser, such as by right-clicking on a Web page in 
IE and selecting View Source on the context menu that appears. 
HTML was originally designed as a simple markup language used to format 
text size, style, color, and characteristics such as boldface or italic. However, as Web 
users demanded more sophisticated Web pages,Web designers developed ways to 
create interactive elements in pages.Today's Web pages include XML, DHTML, 
Flash, Java, ActiveX, and scripts that run in the browser and utilize other technolo- 
gies that allow for much more dynamic pages. Unfortunately, these new features 
brought with them new vulnerabilities. Browsers are open to a number of types of 
attack, which are discussed in the following section. 
Exploitable Browser Characteristics 
Early browser programs were fairly simple, but today's browsers are complex; they 
are capable of not only displaying text and graphics, but also playing sound files, 
movies, and running executable code. Support for running code (as "active con- 
tent" such as Java, JavaScript,VBScript, and ActiveX) allows Web designers to create 
pages that interact with users in sophisticated ways. For example, users can com- 
plete and submit forms across the Web, or play complex games online. These char- 
acteristics of modern Web browsers serve useful purposes, but they can also be 
exploited in a variety of ways. Browser software stores and accesses information 
about the computer on which it is installed and about the user, which can be 
uploaded to Web servers either deliberately by the user or in response to code on a 
Web site (often without the user's knowledge). Similarly, a hacker can program a 
Web site to run code that transfers a virus to the client computer through the 
browser, erases key system files, or plants a back door program that then allows the 
hacker to take control of the user's system. Chapter 8, "Implementing System 
Security," discusses active content and other browser security issues and provides 
tips on how to disable these features when they are not needed and make popular 
browsers more secure. 
Cookies 
Cookies are another example of a useful tool used with Web browsers that can be 
exploited in various ways. Cookies are very small text files that a Web server creates 
on your computer to hold data that's used by the site. This information could be 
indicators that you visited the site before, preferred settings, personal information 
(such as your first and last name), username, password, or anything else that the Web 
www.syngress.com 

270 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
site's designer wanted or needed your computer to retain while you visit the site.As 
you use the site, the Web pages can recall the information stored in the cookie on 
your computer, so that it doesn't have to ask for the same information over and 
over. There are two basic types of cookies: 
9 
Temporary 
or session, which are cookies that are created to store infor- 
mation on a temporary basis, such as when you do online shopping and 
store items in a shopping cart.When you visit the Web site and perform 
actions (like adding items to a shopping cart) the information is saved in 
the cookie, but these are removed from your computer when you shut 
down your Web browser. 
9 
Persistent, which are cookies that are created to store information on a 
long-term basis. They are often used on Web sites that have an option for 
users to save login information, so the person doesn't have to login each 
time they visit, or to save other settings like the language you want con- 
tent to be displayed in, your first and last name, or other information. 
Because they are designed to store the information long-term, they will 
remain on your computer for a specified time (which could be days, 
months, or years) or until you delete them. 
Generally these types of cookies are innocuous, and are simply used to make 
the Web site more personalized or easier to use. A more insidious type of cookie is 
the ones often created by banner ads and pop-ups. Tracking, cookies are used to retain 
information on other sites you visit, and are generally used for marketing purposes. 
The cookie is placed on your computer by a Web site you visit or by a third-party 
site that appears in a pop-up or has a banner advertisement on the site. Because the 
cookie can now be used to monitor your activity on the Internet, the third party 
essentially has the ability to spy on your browsing habits. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
271 
As seen in Figure 5.7, you can view and edit the contents of a cookie using any 
text editor. Despite the warning messages that may appear when you try to open a 
cookie, they are simply text files that contain information. Unfortunately, this also 
means that any information in the file can be read and altered by a hacker. In addi- 
tion to this, since the format of a cookies name is username@domain.txt, looking at 
the cookies on a machine allows you to gleam an overall picture of you and your 
habits. For example, by looking at Figure 5.7, you can see that a person using the 
"administrator" account on the computer visited www.experts-exchange.com. By 
opening the cookie, you can also see that this person went to the site through a 
link from Google while searching for "Looking for new job." Even a cursory 
examination of a cookie can provide a significant amount of information about the 
person using this machine, and their browsing habits. 
Figure 5.7 Contents of a Cookie 
Being able to modify cookies is the means of another type of attack called 
cookie poisoning. Because cookies are supposed to be saved to a computer so that the 
site can later read the data, it assumes this data remains unchanged during that time. 
However, if a hacker modified values in the cookie, inaccurate data is returned to 
the Web server. For example, imagine that you were purchasing some items online, 
and added them to a shopping cart. If the server stored a cookie on your computer 
and included the price of each item or a running total, you could change these 
values and potentially be charged less than you were supposed to. 
Another problem with information stored in a cookie is the potential that the 
cookie can be stolen. Since it is expected that a cookie will remain on the com- 
puter it was initially stored on, a server retrieving the data from it assumes its 
coming from the intended computer. A hacker could steal a cookie from your 
machine and put it on another one. Depending on what was in the cookie, the 
cookie theft would then allow them to access a site as if they were you. The Web 
server would look at the cookie information stored on the hacker's computer, and 
if it contained a password, it would give the attacker access to secure areas. For 
example, if the site had a user profile area, the hacker could view your name, 
address, credit card numbers, and any other information stored in the profile. 
www.syngress.com 

272 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Because cookies can be used to store any kind of textual data, it is important 
that they're secure. As a developer, the best way to protect people from having the 
information stored in cookies from being viewed is not to store any personal or 
sensitive information in a cookie. This isn't always an option, but it's always wise to 
never store any more information than is needed in a cookie. 
If sensitive data must be stored, then the information should be encrypted and 
transmitted using the Transport Layer Security (TLS) or SSL protocols, which we 
discuss later in this chapter. By using SSL, the cookie can be sent encrypted, 
meaning that the data in the cookie won't be plain to see if anyone intercepts it. 
Without TLS or SSL, someone using a packet sniffer or other tools to view data 
transmitted across the network will be unable to read the contents of the cookie. 
Web Spoofing 
Web spoofing is a means of tricking users to connect to a different Web server than 
they intended.Web spoofing may be done in a number of ways. It can be done by 
simply providing a link to a fraudulent Web site that looks legitimate, or involve 
more complex attacks in which the user's request or Web pages requested by the 
user are intercepted and altered. 
One of the more complex methods of Web spoofing involves an attacker that is 
able to see and make changes to Web pages that are transmitted to or from another 
computer (the target machine). These pages can include confidential information 
such as credit card numbers entered into online commerce forms and passwords 
that are used to access restricted Web sites. The changes are not made to the actual 
Web pages on their original servers, but to the copies of those pages that the 
spooler returns to the Web client who made the request. 
The term spoofing refers to impersonation, or pretending to be someone or 
something you are not. Web spoofing involves creating a "shadow copy" of a Web 
site or even the entire Web of servers at a specific site. JavaScript can be used to 
route Web pages and information through the attacker's computer, which imper- 
sonates the destination Web server. The attacker can initiate the spoof by sending e- 
mail to the victim that contains a link to the forged page or putting a link into a 
popular search engine. 
SSL does not necessarily prevent this sort of"man-in-the-middle '' (MITM) 
attack; the connection appears to the victim user to be secure because it is secure. 
The problem is that the secure connection is to a different site than the one to 
which the victim thinks they are connecting. Although many modern browsers will 
indicate a problem with the SSL certificate not matching, hyperlink spoofing, exploits 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
273 
the fact that SSL does not verify hyperlinks that the user follows, so if a user gets to 
a site by following a link, they can be sent to a spoofed site that appears to be a 
legitimate site. 
Later versions of browser software have been modified to make Web 
spoofing more difficult. However, many people are still using IE or 
Netscape versions 3, both of which are highly vulnerable to this type of 
attack. For more technical details about Web and hyperlink spoofing, 
see the paper by Frank O'Dwyer at www.brd.ie/papers/sslpaper/ 
sslpaper.html and the paper by Felten, Balfanz, Dean, and Wallach at 
www. cs. pri ncet o n. ed u/s i pip u b/s poofi ng. pdf. 
Web spoofing is a high-tech form of con artistry, and is also often referred to as 
phishing. The point of the scam is to fool users into giving confidential informa- 
tion such as credit card numbers, bank account numbers, or Social Security num- 
bers to an entity that the user thinks is legitimate, and then using that information 
for criminal purposes such as identity theft or credit card fraud. The only difference 
between this and the "real-world" con artist who knocks on a victim's door and 
pretends to be from the bank, requiring account information, is in the technology 
used to pull it off. 
There are clues that will tip off an observant victim that a Web site is not what 
it appears to be, such as the UP, L or status line of the browser. However, an 
attacker can use JavaScript to cover their tracks by modifying these elements. An 
attacker can even go so far as to use JavaScript to replace the browser's menu bar 
with one that looks the same but replaces functions that provide clues to the inva- 
lidity of the page, such as the display of the page's source code. 
Newer versions of Web browsers have been modified to make Web spoofing 
more difficult. For example, prior to version 4 of Netscape and IE, both were 
highly vulnerable to this type of attack. A common method of spoofing URLs 
involved exploiting the ways in which browsers read addresses entered into the 
address field. For example, anything on the left side of an @ sign in a URL would 
be ignored, and the % sign is ignored. Additionally, UR.Ls do not have to be in the 
familiar format of a DNS name (such as www.syngress.com); they are also recog- 
nized when entered as an IP address in decimal format (such as 216.238.8.44), hex- 
adecimal format (such as D8.EE.8.2C), or in Unicode. Thus, a spooler can send an 
www.syngress.com 

274 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
e-mailed link such as www.paypal.com@%77%77%77.%61%7A.%72% 
75/%70%70%64," which to the casual user appears to be a link to the PayPal Web 
site. However, it is really a link (an IP address in hex format) to the spooler's own 
server, which in this case was a site in Russia. The spooler's site was designed to 
look like PayPal's site, with form fields requiring that the user enter their PayPal 
account information. This information was collected by the spooler and could then 
be used to charge purchases to the victim's PayPal account. This site packed a 
double whammy~it also ran a script that attempted to download malicious code 
to the user's computer. Because URLs containing the @ symbol are no longer 
accepted in major browsers today, entering the URL in browsers like IE 7 produces 
an error. Unfortunately, this exploit allowed many people to be fooled by this 
method and fall victim to the site, and there is no reason why someone simply 
couldn't use a link in hexadecimal format today to continue fooling users. 
The best method of combating such types of attacks involves education. It is 
important that administrators educate users to beware of bogus URLs, and to look 
at the URL they are visiting in the Address bar of the browser. Most importantly, 
they should avoid visiting sites that they receive in e-mails, unless it is a site they 
are familiar with. It is always wiser to enter addresses like www.paypal.com directly 
into the address bar of a browser than following a link on an e-mail that is indeci- 
pherable and/or may or may not be legitimate. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
275 
Even though the site appeared to be legitimate at first glance, reading the infor- 
mation made visitors realize that the site was a spoof in its truest form. The features 
of the bogus browser claimed to download pornography up to 10 times faster, 
tabbed browsing that allows a user to switch from one Microsoft site to another, 
and the feature of shutting down unexpectedly when visiting sites like Google, 
iTunes, Apple, and so forth.While the site appears as nothing more than a parody 
of Microsoft, it shows how simple it is to create a site that can fool (no matter how 
briefly) users into thinking they're visiting a site belonging to someone else. 
Web Server Exploits 
Web servers host Web pages that are made available to others across the Internet or 
an intranet. Public Web servers (those accessible from the Internet) always pose an 
inherent security risk because they must be available to the Internet to do what 
they are supposed to do. Clients (Web browser software) must be able to send 
transmissions to the Web server for the purpose of requesting Web pages. However, 
allowing transmissions to come into the network to a Web server makes the 
system~and the entire network--vulnerable to attackers, unless measures are 
undertaken to isolate the Web server from the rest of the internal network. 
Web server applications, like other software, can contain bugs that can be 
exploited. For example, in 2001 a flaw was discovered in Microsoft's IIS software 
that exploited the code used for the indexing feature. The component was installed 
by default. When it was running, hackers could create buffer overflows to take con- 
trol of the Web server and change Web pages or attack the system to bring it down. 
Microsoft quickly released security patches to address the problem, but many com- 
panies do not upgrade their software regularly nor do they update it with available 
fixes as they become available. New and different security holes are being found all 
the time in all major Web server programs. For example, major flaws have also been 
found in Apache Web servers' Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP) scripting language 
that, if exploited by an attacker, can result in the attacker running arbitrary code on 
the system. Security patches are available to address these and other issues, but that 
doesn't mean they are actually applied to the system. 
The issue with vulnerabilities is also common in the platforms on which Web 
servers run, making a Web server vulnerable at its very foundation. For example, in 
2005, the Zotob Worm infected numerous systems (including those of CNN and 
the Department of Homeland Security) days after a patch had been released 
addressing the plug-and-play vulnerability it exploited.While it would be nice to 
think that these were exceptions to the rule, this often isn't the case. Many adminis- 
www.syngress.com 

276 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
trators are remiss in identifying security holes quickly and installing the necessary 
software to fix the problem. Even worse, they may have unpatched older systems 
that still contain vulnerabilities that are several years old, and ripe for a hacker to 
attack. Web server exploits are popular for numerous reasons. One such reason is 
because firewalls are usually configured to block most traffic that comes into an 
internal network from the Internet, but HTTP traffic usually is not blocked. There 
are a large number of HTTP exploits that can be used to access resources that are 
outside the webroot directory. These include the Unicode Directory Transversal 
Exploit and the Double Hex Encoding Exploit. These are used to "sneak" the "../" 
directory transversal strings past the server's security mechanisms, which generally 
block URLs that contain the string. Another reason these exploits are so popular is 
that it's not necessary for hackers to have sophisticated technical skills to exploit 
unprotected Web servers. Scripts to carry out buffer overflow attacks, for example, 
can be downloaded and executed by anyone. 
These are just a few examples of the ways that Web servers can be exploited, 
making it vitally important that these machines be secured. In addition to best con- 
figuration practices, there are software packages that are designed specifically to 
protect Web servers from common attacks. 
Make sure you update your Web servers with all the available updates 
and hot fixes you can get, after testing them first on a non-production 
test system. You need to know that service packs, hot fixes, and updates 
are critical to the security analyst survival when dealing with systems 
and services, especially Web services which are generally exposed to the 
Internet. 
SSL and HTTP/S 
SSL is a public key-based protocol that was developed by Netscape and is sup- 
ported by all popular Web browsers. SSL 3.0 has been used for over a decade along 
with its predecessor, SSL 2.0, in all the major Web browsers. In systems where SSL 
or some other method of system-to-system authentication and data encryption is 
not employed, data is transmitted in cleartext, just as it was entered. This data could 
take the form of e-mail, file transfer of documents, or confidential information 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
277 
such as social security numbers or credit cards numbers. In a public domain such as 
the Internet, and even within private networks, this data can be easily intercepted 
and copied, thereby violating the privacy of the sender and recipient of the data. 
We all have an idea of how costly the result of information piracy is. Companies go 
bankrupt; individuals lose their livelihoods or are robbed of their life savings as a 
result of some hacker capturing their information and using it to present a new 
technology first, to access bank accounts, or to destroy property. At the risk of 
causing paranoia, if you purchased something via the Web and used a credit card on 
a site that was not using SSL or some other strong security method, you are 
opening yourself up to having your credit card information stolen by a hacker. 
Thankfully, nowadays most, if not all, e-commerce Web sites use some form of 
strong security like SSL or TLS to encrypt data during the transaction and prevent 
stealing by capturing packets between the customer and the vendor. 
While SSL is widely used on the Internet for Web transactions, it can be uti- 
lized f-or other protocols as well, such as Telnet, FTP, LDAR Internet Message Access 
Protocol (IMAP), and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), but these are not 
commonly used. The successor to SSL is TLS, which is an open, Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF)-proposed standard based on SSL 3.0. RFC's 2246, 
2712, 2817, and 2818. The name is misleading, since TLS happens well above the 
Transport layer. The two protocols are not interoperable, but TLS has the capability 
to drop down into SSL 3.0 mode for backward compatibility, and both can provide 
security for a single TCP session. 
SSL and TLS 
SSL and TLS provide a connection between a client and a server, over which any 
amount of data can be sent securely. Both the server and the browser generally 
must be SSL- or TLS-enabled to facilitate secure Web connections, while applica- 
tions generally must be SSL- or TLS-enabled to allow their use of the secure con- 
nection. However, another trend is to use dedicated SSL accelerators as virtual 
private network (VPN) terminators, passing the content on to an end server. 
SSL works between the Application Layer and the Network Layer just above 
TCP/IP in the Department of Defense (DoD)TCP/IP model. SSL running over 
TCP/IP allows computers enabled with the protocol to create, maintain, and 
transfer data securely, over encrypted connections. SSL makes it possible for SSL- 
enabled clients and servers to authenticate themselves to each other and to encrypt 
and decrypt all data passed between them, as well as to detect tampering of data, 
after a secure encrypted connection has been established. 

278 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
SSL is made up of two protocols, the SSL record protocol and the SSL handshake 
protocol. SSL record protocol is used to define the format used to transmit data, 
while the SSL handshake protocol uses the record protocol to exchange messages 
between the SSL-enabled server and the client when they establish a connection. 
Together, these protocols facilitate the definition of the data format that is used in 
the transaction and to negotiate the level of encryption and authentication used. 
SSL supports a broad range of encryption algorithms, the most common of which 
include the t<SA key exchange algorithms and the Fortezza algorithms. The 
Fortezza encryption suite is used more by U.S. government agencies. SSL 2.0 does 
not support the Fortezza algorithms. Its lack of backward compatibility may be 
another reason why it is less popular. 
The SSL handshake uses both public-key and symmetric-key encryption to set 
up the connection between a client and a server. The server authenticates itself to 
the client (and optionally the client authenticates itself to the server) using Public 
Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS). Then the client and the server together create 
symmetric keys, which they use for faster encryption, decryption, and tamper detec- 
tion of data within the secure connection. The steps are illustrated in Figure 5.8. 
Figure 5.8 SSL Handshake 
As seen in this illustration, when the client connects to a server, a stateful con- 
nection between the two is negotiated through the handshake procedure. The 
client connects to the SSL-enabled server and requests that the server sends back 
information in the form of a digital certificate. The certificate contains information 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
279 
used for authentication, containing such data as the server's name, public encryp- 
tion key, and the trusted Certificate Authority (CA). As we'll discuss later in this 
chapter, when we cover code signing, the CA is a server or entity that issues digital 
certificates, such as an internal certificate server on a network or a trusted third 
party like VeriSign (www.verisign.com). Once the client has the certificate, they 
may proceed further by contacting the CA to ensure that the certificate is 
authentic, and will present the server with a list of encryption algorithms that the 
server can use to choose the strongest algorithm that the client and server can sup- 
port. Data exchanged between the client and server is then used with hashing 
functions to generate session keys that are used for encryption and decryption 
throughout the SSL session. 
HTTP/S 
HTTP/S or HTTPS is simply HTTP over SSL.What is important to remember 
about HTTP/S is that it isn't a new type of protocol, but is two protocols" HTTP 
and SSL. Because of this, the same individual components of each protocol apply. 
As we saw previously with SSL, the data transmitted is encrypted between the 
client and the server. 
HTTP/S is the protocol responsible for encryption of traffic from a client 
browser to a Web server. HTTP/S uses port 443 instead of HTTP port 80.When a 
URL begins with "https://," you know you are using HTTP/S. Both HTTP/S 
and SSL use a X.509 digital certificate for authentication purposes from the client 
to the server. 
HTTP/S is often used for secure transmissions over the Internet, such as during 
online transactions where banking or credit card information is exchanged between 
a client and server. Because the data is encrypted, it provides protection from eaves- 
droppers or MITM attacks, which could result in unwanted parties accessing the 
data. It may also be used on intranets, where secure transmission across an internal 
network is vital. 
SSL must be known and understood for the Security+ exam. Remember 
key items like the port it uses (443) and its basic functionality, as well as 
aspects related to its successor, TLS. You will also need to remember that 
HTTP/S is HTTP over SSL and is used for secure Internet transmissions 
between an SSL enabled server and client. For additional information on 
www.syngress.com 

280 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
SSL, a good resource is the section of VeriSign's Web site that addresses 
many aspects of SSL at www.verisign.com/ssl/index.html. 
TLS 
As mentioned, TLS is the successor to SSL, and is a newer version that has minor 
differences to its predecessor. Like SSL, it provides authentication between clients 
and servers that require privacy and security during communications. The clients 
and servers that use SSL are able to authenticate to one another, and then 
encrypt\decrypt the data that's passed between them. This ensures that any data 
isn't subject to eavesdropping, tampered with, or forged during transmission 
between the two parties. 
As you might expect, it is often used in situations where sensitive data is being 
sent between clients and servers. A common example would be online purchases, 
where credit card numbers and other personal information (such as the person's 
name, address, and other shipping information) are sent to an e-commerce site. As 
seen in Figure 11.5,TLS and SSL is enabled in IE through the Advanced tab of 
Internet Options (which is accessed by clicking Start ] Settings I Control 
Panel [ Internet Options). By scrolling to the Security section in the Settings 
pane, you will see checkboxes for enabling SSL 2.0, SSL 3.0 and TLS 1.0). If they 
are checked, they are enabled, but if they aren't checked, they are disabled. Because 
SSL 3.0 and TLS 1.0 have succeeded SSL 2.0, you will generally find that this older 
version is disabled. 
S-HTTP 
It is important not to confuse HTTP/S with Secure HTTP (S-HTTP).Although 
they sound alike, they are two separate protocols, used for different purposes. S- 
HTTP is not widely used, but it was developed by Enterprise Integration 
Technologies (ETI) to provide security for Web-based applications. S-HTTP is an 
extension to the HTTP protocol. It is a secure message-oriented communications 
protocol that can transmit individual messages securely (whereas SSL establishes a 
secure connection over which any amount of data can be sent). S-HTTP provides 
transaction confidentiality, authentication, and message integrity, and extends 
HTTP to include tags for encrypted and secure transactions. S-HTTP is imple- 
mented in some commercial Web servers and most browsers. An S-HTTP server 
negotiates with the client for the type of encryption that will be used, several types 
of which exist. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
281 
Figure 5.9 TLS and SSL Settings in IE 
Unlike SSL, S-HTTP does not require clients to have public key certificates, 
because it can use symmetric keys to provide private transactions. The symmetric 
keys are provided in advance using out-of-band communication. 
S-HTTP is easily confused with HTTP/S. Do not make the mistake of con- 
fusing the two on the Security+ exam. S-HTTP is a security-enhanced ver- 
sion of HTTP developed and proposed as a standard by EIT. You can find 
more information in RFC 2660 (www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2660.txt). 
Instant Messaging 
As more and more people go online and more businesses and their employees rely 
on communicating in real time, IM has grown by leaps and bounds. IM involves 
using tools such as ICQ, AOL Instant Messenger (AIM),Yahoo! Messenger, Google 
Talk, Windows Live Messenger (aka MSN Messenger or .NET Messenger), or 
Windows Messenger that comes with Windows XR This technology allows you to 
www.syngress.com 

282 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
communicate with other members of your staff when used at work, or with friends 
and family when used at home. Generally, each of these IM clients tie into a ser- 
vice that transfers messages between other users with the same client software. 
However, there are programs like Trillian that allow users to consolidate their 
accounts on different IM networks and connect to AIM,Yahoo Messenger, 
Windows Live Messenger, I SeekYou (ICQ), and Internet Relay Chat (IRC) all 
within a single interface. In recent years, such features have also been folded into 
other IM software, such as Windows Live Messenger supporting messages 
exchanged with Yahoo? Messenger clients. Despite the popularity of IM clients, 
many businesses prohibit the use of IM programs on network computers. One 
reason is practical: incessant "chatting" can become a bigger time waster than gos- 
siping at the water fountain (and one that is less obvious for management to 
detect). But an even more important reason is that IM technologies pose significant 
security risks. Each of the messenger programs has been exploited and most of 
them require a patch. The hacker community has discovered exploits, which range 
from Denial of Service (DOS) attacks all the way to executing remote commands 
on a system. For the Security+ exam, the following security issues that are related 
to using IM technology must be acknowledged: 
9 
IM technology is constantly exploited via buffer overflow attacks. Since 
the technology was made for ease of use and convenience, not for secure 
communications, there are many ways to exploit IM technology. 
9 
IP address exposure is prominent and, because an attacker can get this 
information from IM technology, provides a way that an attacker can iso- 
late a user's home machine, crack into it, and then exploit it. 
9 
IM technology includes a file transfer capability, with some providing the 
ability to share folders (containing groups of files) with other users. In 
addition to the potential security issues of users making files available, 
there is the possibility that massive exploits can occur in that arena if the 
firewall technology is not configured to block it. All kinds of worms and 
viruses can be downloaded (circumventing the firewall), which could 
cause huge problems on an internal network. 
9 
Companies' Human Resources (HR) policies need to be addressed 
because there is no way to really track IM communication out of the box. 
Thus, if an employee is communicating in an improper way, it might be 
more difficult to prove as compared with improper use of e-mail or Web 
sites visited. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
283 
Make sure you fully understand the implications of using IM technology 
on your network. Many exploits, attacks, and hoaxes can be performed 
using Instant Messaging. 
For companies that want to allow IM for business purposes but prevent abuse, 
there are software products available, such as Akonix's security gateway for public 
instant messaging, Zantaz's Digital Safe, and IMlogic's IM Manager, that allow com- 
panies to better control IM traffic and log and archive IM communications. Such 
products (combined with anti-virus software and security solutions already on a 
server running the IM service, and the client computer running the IM client soft- 
ware), add to the security of Instant Messaging. 
Packet Sniffers and Instant Messaging 
Packet sniffers are tools that can capture packets of data off of a network, allowing 
you to view its contents. As we saw in chapter 2, and will discuss further in this 
chapter (when we discuss packet sniffers used with FTP), a considerable amount of 
data can be obtained by viewing the contents of captured packets, inclusive to user- 
names and passwords. By using a packet sniffer to monitor IM on a network, you 
can view what people are chatting about and other sensitive information. 
The reason packet sniffers can view IM information so easily is because the 
messages are passed between IM users as cleartext. Cleartext messages are trans- 
mitted without any encryption, meaning the messages being carried across a net- 
work can be easily viewed by anyone with the proper tools. Being sent as cleartext 
makes them as easy to view in a packet sniffer as a text message would be on your 
computer. 
In addition to packet sniffers, there are also a number of tools specifically 
designed to capture IMs. For example, a program called MSN Sniffer 2 is available 
at EffeTech's Web site (www.effetech.com). This tool will capture any MSN chats 
on a local network and store them so they can be analyzed at a later time. If there 
is concern that information is being leaked, or policies are being broken through 
IM software on the network, you could use this tool to view the chats and use 
them as evidence for disciplinary actions or to provide to police when pressing 
criminal charges. 
www.syngress.com 

284 
Chapter 5 * Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Text Messaging and Short Message Service (SMS) 
In addition to the IM software available for computers, text messaging also provides 
the capability of sending electronic messages using software that's bundled on many 
different handheld technologies. These include wireless handheld devices like the 
Blackberry, Palm Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), two-way pagers, and cell 
phones that support text messaging. Text messaging services may use protocols like 
SMTR but more often the Short Message Service (SMS) is used. 
Text messaging and SMSes are not on the Security+ exam. The exam 
only focuses on IM technologies used on computers, such as Windows 
Live Messenger (i.e., MSN Messenger), AIM, Yahoo! Messenger, Google 
Talk, and other IM software that's available. The information is provided 
here for your personal reference, and to understand how the two tech- 
nologies vary. 
The SMS allows users of the service to send small electronic messages to one 
another through a Short Message Service Center (SMSC).When a client sends a 
text message, it is received by the SMSC, which attempts to send it on to the 
intended recipient. If the recipient is unavailable (such as when their cell phone or 
other device is turned off), the SMSC will do one of two things: it will either store 
the message in a queue until the recipient goes online and then reattempt sending 
it, or it will simply discard the message. 
The messages sent using SMS are limited to 140 bytes, meaning that you can 
send a message that contains 160 7-bit characters. However, despite the limitation, 
longer messages can be sent using SMS in which each message is segmented over 
multiple text messages. Information in the user data header identifies each message 
as a segment of a longer message, so it can be reassembled by the recipient's device 
and displayed as a complete, longer message. 
SMS also has the capability of sending binary data, and is commonly used to 
distribute ring tones and logos to cell phone customers. Because of this capability, 
programming code and configuration data can also be transmitted to a user's device 
using SMS, causing potential security problems. As we'll see in the next section, 
Java programs downloaded and installed on devices could contain malicious code, 
as could other messages with attached files. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services ~ Chapter 5 
285 
Text messaging is widely used in companies, with businesses often providing a 
BlackBerry or other device with SMS capabilities to management, IT staff, and 
other select personnel.While it allows these individuals to be contacted at any time, 
it also presents security issues that are similar to Instant Messages. This includes the 
ability to transmit sensitive information over an external (and possibly insecure) 
system. Also, unlike IM for a computer, most devices that can download files or 
have text messaging capabilities don't have any kind of anti-virus protection. As 
such, you must trust that the SMSC server or other servers providing data are 
secure. The same applies to other services accessed through these devices. For 
example, devices like the BlackBerry can access e-mail from Novell GroupWise, 
providing a connection to an internal network's e-mail system.While viruses 
designed to attack cell phones and other devices that support text messaging are 
almost non-existent, more can be expected as the technology improves and more 
software is supported. 
www.syngress.com 

286 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Web-based Vulnerabilities 
Java, ActiveX components, and scripts written in languages like VBScript and 
JavaScript are often overlooked as potential threats to a Web site. These are client- 
side scripts and components, which run on the computer of a visitor to your site. 
Because they are downloaded to and run on the user's computer, any problems will 
generally affect the user rather than the Web site itself. However, the effect of an 
erroneous or malicious script, applet, or component can be just as devastating to a 
site. If a client's computer locks up when one of these loads on their computer~ 
every time they visit a site~it ultimately will have the same effect as the Web 
server going down: no one will be able to use the site. 
As shown in the sections that follow, a number of problems may result from 
Java applets, ActiveX components, or client-side scripts such as JavaScript. Not all of 
these problems affect the client, and they may provide a means of attacking a site. 
Ultimately, however, the way to avoid such problems involves controlling which 
programs are made available on a site and being careful about what is included in 
the content. 
Understanding Java-, 
JavaScript-, and ActiveX-based Problems 
Some Web designers use public domain applets and scripts for their Web pages, 
even though they do not fully understand what the applet or script does. Java 
applets are generally digitally signed or of a standalone format, but when they are 
embedded in a Web page, it is possible to get around this requirement. Hackers can 
program an applet to execute code on a machine, so that information is retrieved 
or files are destroyed or modified. Remember that an applet is an executable pro- 
gram and has the capability of performing malicious activities on a system. 
/a/2a 
Java is a programming language, developed by Sun Microsystems, which is used to 
make small applications (applets) for the Internet as well as standalone programs. 
Applets are embedded into the Web page and are run when the user's browser 
loads the HTML document into memory. In programming such applets, Java pro- 
vides a number of features related to security. At the time the applet is compiled, 
the compiler provides type and byte-code verification to check whether any errors 
exist in the code. In this way, Java keeps certain areas of memory from being 
accessed by the code.When the code is loaded, the JavaVirtual Machine 0VM) is 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
287 
used in executing it. The JVM uses a built-in Security Manager, which controls 
access by way of policies. 
As is the case with most of the other Internet programming methods discussed 
in this section, Java runs on the client side. Generally, this means that the client, 
rather than the Web server, will experience any problems or security threats posed 
by the applets. However, if the client machine is damaged in any way by a malicious 
applet, the user will only know that they visited the site and experienced a problem 
and is likely to blame the administrator for the problem. This will have an impact on 
the public perception of the site's reliability and the image of the company. 
An important part of Java's security is the JVM. The JVM is essentially an emu- 
lator that translates the Java byte-code and allows it to run on a PC, Macintosh, or 
various platforms. This byte-code does not have direct contact with the OS. It must 
be filtered through the VM before it can do any operations directly to the OS. 
Since the code is run through a virtual machine, restrictions can be placed on what 
the code is allowed to do under different circumstances. Normally, when a Java 
program is run off a local machine, it has the ability to read and write to the hard 
drive at will, and send and receive information to any computer that it can contact 
on a network. However, if the code is programmed as an applet that is downloaded 
from the Internet, it becomes more restricted in what it can do. Applets cannot 
normally read or write data to a local hard drive, meaning that in theory a user is 
perfectly safe from having data compromised by running an applet on his or her 
system. Applets may also not communicate with any other network resource except 
for the server from which the applet came. This protects the applet from contacting 
anything on an internal network and trying to do malicious things. 
Major issues with Java can occur when there are problems with the Virtual 
Machine used by browsers on different OSes. Such problems have occurred on sev- 
eral occasions, and are easily remedied by applying the latest patches and upgrades. 
For example, installations of Microsoft Virtual Machine prior to version 3810 had a 
vulnerability that could be used by a hacker to execute code on a person's 
machine. The vulnerability involved the ByteCode Verifier, which didn't check for 
certain malicious code when applets were being loaded. This allowed hackers to 
create malicious code in their applets that could be downloaded from a Web site or 
opened through an e-mail message, allowing the hacker to execute code using the 
same privileges as the user. In other words, if the person running the applet had 
administrator privileges on the machine, they would have the same access to run- 
ning code and causing damage as an administrator. 
Despite several holes in the implementation of the JVM by Microsoft and 
Netscape, as the products mature, they become more solid. For the most part, Java 
www.syngress.com 

288 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
applets cannot do any serious damage to system data, or do very much snooping. 
However, if you think there aren't any bugs in Java, you'd be wrong. Sun's Java Web 
site provides several methods of viewing the bugs that have been found, including a 
chronology of security-related issues and bugs at wwwjava.sun.com/security/ 
chronology.html. This list only provides known bugs and issues until November 19, 
2002, so you'll have to use the link for Sun Alert Notifications on this page to have 
the search engine list all the ones after this date. They also provide an online 
database of bugs at www.bugs.sun.com.Although this may not give one an over- 
whelming sense of security, you need to realize that as bugs and security issues 
become known, patches and upgrades are released to solve the problem. Even 
though such bugs are mostly killed off after being discovered, there are still some 
malicious things that can be done. 
A common problem with badly written applets is that they are capable of cre- 
ating threads that run constantly in the background. A thread is a block of code that 
can execute simultaneously with other blocks of code. Even after the user closes 
the e-mail or one browser window and moves on, the threads can keep running. 
This can be annoying, depending on what the thread is doing. Some annoying 
threads .just play sounds repeatedly, and closing the offending piece of e-mail will 
not stop it. The only way to kill a rogue thread is to completely close all your 
browser windows or exit your e-mail program. Applets also exist that, either inten- 
tionally or through bad programming, will use a lot of memory and CPU power. 
Usually, they do this by creating many threads that all do some sort of computation 
or employ a memory leak. If they use too much, they can slow a system or even 
crash it. This type of applet is very easy to write, and very effective at shutting 
down a system. 
As we have learned, an applet may not contact other servers on the Internet 
except for the server on which the applet originated. If you send out spam mail, 
you could use an applet to verify that the recipient's e-mail address is still active.As 
soon as the recipient opens the e-mail, the applet can contact its own originating 
server on the Internet and report that he or she has read the e-mail. It can even 
report the time it was opened, and possibly how long the recipient read it. This is 
not directly damaging to a system, but it's an invasion of privacy. 
The only pieces of information an applet can obtain are the user's locale (the 
country setting for the OS), the size of the applet, and the IP address information. 
The security model for applets is quite well done, and generally, there is no serious 
damage that can be caused by an applet, as long as the user retains default settings 
for Internet security. There is not much a user can do to prevent minor attacks. The 
first thing security-conscious users would want to do is use the latest versions of 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
289 
their Web browser of choice (i.e. IE, Firefox, Opera, Netscape, and so forth). If they 
suspect something unusual is going on in the background of their system, they can 
delete any e-mail they don't trust, and exit the mail program. This will stop any 
Java threads from running in the background. If users are very security conscious, 
they might take the safest course and deactivate Java completely. However, with Java 
disabled, a user's Internet experience will probably not be as rich as many Web sites 
intended it to be. 
ActiveX 
ActiveX is Microsoft's implementation of applets.An ActiveX control is a compo- 
nent that functions as a self-sufficient program object that can be downloaded as a 
small program or used by other application programs. ActiveX controls are apparent 
throughout the modern Windows platform and add many of the new interactive 
features of Windows-based applications, and especially Web applications. They also 
fit nicely into HTML documents and are therefore portable to many systems, and 
can be used in applications to perform repetitive tasks or invoke other ActiveX 
controls that perform special functions. 
ActiveX controls run in "container" applications, such as the IE Web browser 
application or aVisual Basic or Access database application. Once an ActiveX con- 
trol is installed, it does not need to be installed again. As a matter of fact, an 
ActiveX control can be downloaded from a distant location via a URL link and 
run on a local machine over and over without having to be downloaded again. If a 
user accesses an HTML document with an ActiveX control, it will check whether 
the control is already on the user's computer. If it is not, it will be downloaded, the 
Web page will be displayed, and the ActiveX code will be loaded into memory and 
executed. While Java applets are also loaded in the same manner, they are not 
installed on a user's system. Once the user leaves the Web page, a Java applet will 
disappear from the system (although it might stay in the cache directory for a lim- 
ited time). ActiveX components, however, can be installed temporarily or, more fre- 
quently, permanently. One of the most popular ActiveX components is the 
Shockwave player by Macromedia. Once installed, it will remain on the user's hard 
drive until you elect to remove it. 
Just as programs installed on a Windows platform can be viewed through 
add/remove programs in the Control Panel, you can determine what ActiveX con- 
trois are installed on your computer through IE. To view, enabled, disable, or delete 
ActiveX controls that have been added to IE 7, you can click on the Tools menu, 
select Manage Add-ons, and then click the Enable or Disable Add-ons menu 
www.syngress.com 

290 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
item. In doing so, you will see a dialog box similar to that shown in Figure 5.10, 
which lists the ActiveX controls loaded and used by IE, downloaded from the 
Internet, and ones that can run without permission. 
Figure 5.10 Manage Add-ons Dialog Box 
In comparing ActiveX to Java, you will find a number of differences. One 
major difference is where each can run. Java works on virtually any OS, because 
the applets run through a virtual machine, which, as we mentioned, is essentially an 
emulator that processes the code separately from the OS. This allows Java to run on 
many platforms, including Windows, Linux, and Macintosh. ActiveX components 
are distributed as compiled binaries, meaning they will only work on the OS for 
which they were programmed. In practical terms, this means that they are only 
guaranteed to run under Microsoft Windows. 
As with Java and JavaScript, ActiveX runs on the client side, thus many of the 
issues encountered will impact the user's machine and not the server. However, 
while ActiveX controls can look similar to Java applets from a user point of view, 
the security model is quite different. ActiveX relies on authentication certificates in its 
security implementation, which means that the security model relies on human 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
291 
judgment. By attaching digital certificates to the files, a user can be nearly 100-per- 
cent sure that an ActiveX control is coming from the entity that is stated on the 
certificate. To prevent digital forgery, a signing authority is used in conjunction 
with the Authenticode process to ensure that the person or company on the cer- 
tificate is legitimate. 
With this type of security, a user knows that the control is reasonably authentic, 
and not just someone claiming to be Adobe or IBM. He or she can also be rela- 
tively sure that it is not some modification of your code (unless your Web site was 
broken into and your private key was somehow compromised) . While all possibili- 
ties of forgery can't be avoided, the combination is pretty effective; enough to 
inspire the same level of confidence a customer gets from buying "shrink wrapped" 
software from a store. This also acts as a mechanism for checking the integrity of 
the download, making sure that the transfer didn't get corrupted along the way. 
IE will check the digital signatures to make sure they are valid, and then display 
the authentication certificate asking the user if he or she wants to install the 
ActiveX control. At this point, the user is presented with two choices: accept the 
program and let it have complete access to the user's PC, or reject it completely. 
There are also unsigned ActiveX controls. Authors who create these have not 
bothered to include a digital signature verifying that they are who they say they 
are. The downside for a user accepting unsigned controls is that if the control does 
something bad to the user's computer, he or she will not know who was respon- 
sible. By not signing your code, your program is likely to be rejected by customers 
who assume that you are avoiding responsibility for some reason. 
Since ActiveX relies on users to make correct decisions about which programs 
to accept and which to reject, it comes down to whether the users trust the 
person or company whose signature is on the authentication certificate. Do they 
know enough about you to make that decision? It really becomes dangerous for 
them when there is some flashy program they just have to see. It is human nature 
to think that if the last five ActiveX controls were all fine, then the sixth one will 
also be fine. 
Perhaps the biggest weakness of the ActiveX security model is that any control 
can do subtle actions on a computer, and the user would have no way of knowing. 
It would be very easy to get away with a control that silently transmitted confiden- 
tial configuration information on a computer to a server on the Internet. These 
types of transgressions, while legally questionable, could be used by companies in 
the name of marketing research. 
Technically, there have been no reported security holes in the ActiveX security 
implementation. In other words, no one has ever found a way to install an ActiveX 
www.syngress.com 

292 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
control without first asking the user's permission. However, security holes can 
appear if you improperly create or implement an ActiveX control. Controls with 
security holes are called accidental Trojan horses. To this date, there have been many 
accidental Trojan horses detected that allow exploits by hackers. 
The default setting for Microsoft IE is actually to completely reject any 
ActiveX controls that are unsigned. This means that if an ActiveX control is 
unsigned, it will not even ask the user if he or she wants to install it. This is a good 
default setting, because many people click on dialog boxes without reading them. If 
someone sent you an e-mail with an unsigned ActiveX control, Outlook Express 
will also ignore it by default. 
Remember that an applet is a program that has the capability of per- 
forming malicious activities on your system. The known security vulnera- 
bilities in Java and ActiveX can be fixed by downloading security-based 
hot fixes from the browser creators' Web site. 
Dangers Associated with Using ActiveX 
The primary dangers associated with using ActiveX controls stem from the way 
Microsoft approaches security. By using their Authenticode technology to digitally 
sign an ActiveX control, Microsoft attempts to guarantee the user of the origin of 
the control and that it has not been tampered with since it was created. In most 
cases this works, but there are several things that Microsos 
authentication system 
does not do, which can pose a serious threat to the security of an individual 
machine and a network. 
The first and most obvious danger is that Microsoft does not limit the access 
that the control has after it is installed on a local machine. This is one of the key 
differences between ActiveX and Java. Java uses a method known as sandboxing. 
Sandboxing a Java applet ensures that the application is running in its own pro- 
tected memory area, which isolates it from things like the file system and other 
applications. The restrictions put on Java applets prevent malicious code from 
gaining access to an OS or network, and thwarts untrusted sources from harming 
the system. 
ActiveX controls, on the other hand, have the same rights as the user who is 
running them after they are installed on a computer. Microsoft does not guarantee 

Communication Security: Web Based Services * Chapter 5 
293 
that the author is the one using the control, or that it is being used in the way it 
was intended, or on the site or pages f'or which it was intended. Microsoft also 
cannot guarantee that the owner of the site or someone else has not modified the 
pages since the control was put in place. It is the exploitation of these vulnerabili- 
ties that poses the greatest dangers associated with using ActiveX controls. 
Symantec's Web site reports that the number ofActiveX vulnerabilities over the 
last few years have increased dramatically, with those affecting ActiveX controls 
shipped by vendors increasing upwards of 300 percent. From 2002 to 2005, there 
was a range of 12 to 15 vulnerabilities affecting ActiveX controls found each year, 
but in 2006, this number jumped to 50. While it would be nice to think that all of 
these are due to inexperienced programmers who aren't observing best practices in 
coding, even Microsoft has shipped a number of vulnerable controls over the years. 
The vulnerabilities that have occurred over the years include major issues that 
could be exploited by hackers. For example, in 2006, vulnerabilities were found in 
Microsoft's XML Core Services that provided hackers with the abilit T to run 
remote code on affected systems. If a hacker wrote code on a Web page to exploit 
this vulnerability, he or she could gain access to a visiting computer. The hacker 
would be able to run code remotely on the user's computer, and have the security 
associated with that user. In other words, if the user was logged in as an adminis- 
trator to the computer, the hacker could add, delete, and modify files, create new 
accounts, and so on. Although a security update was released in October 2006 that 
remedied the problem, anyone without the security update applied to his or her 
system could still be affected. It just goes to show that every time a door is closed 
to a system, a hacker will find a way to kick in a window. 
Continued 
o 
www.syngress.com 

294 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Avoiding Common ActiveX Vulnerabilities 
One of the most common vulnerabilities with ActiveX controls has to do with the 
programmer's perception, or lack thereof, of the capabilities of the control. Every 
programmer that works for a company or consulting firm and writes a control for 
a legitimate business use wants his controls to be as easy to use as possible. He takes 
into consideration the intended use of the control, and if it seems OK, he marks it 
"safe-for-scripting." Programmers set the Safe for Scripting flag so their ActiveX 
controls aren't checked for an Authenticode signature before being run. By 
enabling Safe for Scripting, code checking is bypassed, and the control can be run 
without the user being aware of a problem. As you can see, this is a double-edged 
sword. If it is not marked "safe," users will be inundated with warnings and mes- 
sages on the potential risk os using a control that is not signed or not marked as 
safe. Depending on the security settings in the browser, they may not be allowed to 
run it at all. However, after it is marked as safe, other applications and controls have 
the ability to execute the control without requesting the user's approval.You can 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
295 
see how this situation could be dangerous. A good example of the potential effects 
of ActiveX is the infamous Windows Exploder control. This was a neat little 
ActiveX control written by Fred McLain (www.halcyon.com/mclain/ActiveX) that 
demonstrates what he calls "dangerous" technology. His control only performs a 
clean shutdown and power-off of the affected Windows system. This might not 
seem so bad, but it was written that way to get the point across that the control 
could be used to perform much more destructive acts. Programmers have to be 
careful with ActiveX controls, and be sure that they know everything their control 
is capable of before releasing it. 
Another problem that arises as a result of lack of programmer consideration is 
the possibility that a control will be misused and at the same time take advantage of 
the users' privileges. Just because the administrator has a specific use in mind for a 
control does not mean that someone else cannot find a different use for the con- 
trol. There are many people who are not trustworthy and will try to exploit 
another's creativity. 
Another common cause of vulnerabilities in ActiveX controls is the release of 
versions that have not been thoroughly tested and contain bugs. One specific bug 
that is often encountered in programs is the buffer overflow bug. As we'll discuss 
more fully later in this chapter, buffer overflows occur when a string is copied into 
a fixed-length array and the string is larger than the array. The result is a buffer 
overflow and a potential application crash.With this type of error, the key is that 
the results are unpredictable. The buffer overflow may print unwanted characters on 
the screen, or it may kill the browser and in turn lock up the system. This problem 
has plagued the UNIX/Linux world for years, and in recent years has become 
more noticeable on the Windows platform. If you browse the top IT security 
topics at Microsoft TechNet (www.microsoft.com/technet/security/current.asp), 
you will notice numerous buffer overflow vulnerabilities. In fact, at times, one or 
more issues involving this type of error were found monthly on the site. As men- 
tioned, this is not exclusively a Microsoft problem, but it affects almost every 
vendor that writes code for the Windows platform. 
To illustrate how far-reaching this type of problem has been, in a report found 
on the secureroot Web site (www.secureroot.com), Neal Krawetz reported that he 
had identified a buffer overflow condition in the Shockwave Flash plug-in for Web 
browsers. He states, "Macromedia's Web page claims that 90 percent of all Web 
browsers have the plug-ins installed. Because this overflow can be used to run arbi- 
trary code, it impacts 90 percent of all Web-enabled systems." Now that is a scary 
thought! While this report was originally written in 2001, a similar error was 
reported on Adobe's Web site in 2006 regarding Shockwave Player when it is 
www.syngress.com 

296 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
installed. This vulnerability also allowed malicious code to exploit a buffer overflow 
effort and allowed the execution of arbitrary code. Although buffer overflows are a 
widespread type of error, the solution is simple: Programmers must take the extra 
time required to do thorough testing and ensure that their code contains proper 
bounds checking on all values that accept variable length input. 
Another vulnerability occurs when using older, retired versions of ActiveX con- 
trols. Some may have had errors, some not. Some may have been changed com- 
pletely or replaced for some reason. After someone else has a copy of a control, it 
cannot be guaranteed that the current version will be used, especially if it can be 
exploited in some way. Although users will get an error message when they use a 
control that has an expired signature, a lot of people will install it anyway. 
Unfortunately, there is no way to prevent someone from using a control after it has 
been retired from service. After a control that can perform a potentially harmful 
task is signed and released, it becomes fair game for every hacker on the Internet. 
In this case, the best defense is a good offense. Thorough testing before releasing a 
control will save much grief later. 
Lessening the Impact of ActiveX Vulnerabilities 
An ActiveX vulnerability is serious business for network administrators, end users, 
and developers alike. For some, the results of misused or mismanaged ActiveX con- 
trols can be devastating; for others, it is never taken into consideration. There can 
be policies in place that disallow the use of all controls and scripts, but it has to be 
done at the individual machine level, and takes a lot of time and effort to imple- 
ment and maintain. This is especially true in an environment where users are more 
knowledgeable on how to change browser settings. Even when policy application 
can be automated throughout the network, this might not be a feasible solution if 
users need to be able to use some controls and scripts. Other options can limit the 
access of ActiveX controls, such as using firewalls and virus protection software, but 
the effectiveness is limited to the obvious and known.Although complete protec- 
tion from the exploitation ofActiveX vulnerabilities is difficult~if not impos- 
sible-to achieve, users from every level can take steps to help minimize the risk. 
Protection at the Network Level 
For network administrators, the place to start is by addressing the different security 
settings available through the network OS such as. 
Options such as security zones and SSL protocols to place limits on 
controls. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
297 
9 Access to the CodeBaseSearchPatk in the system Registry, which controls 
where the system will look when it attempts to download ActiveX con- 
trols. 
9 
The Internet Explorer Administration Kit (lEAK), which can be used to 
define and dynamically manage ActiveX controls, lEAK can be down- 
loaded from Microsoft's Web site at www.microsoft.com/technet/ 
pro dte chnol/ie / ieak/de fault, mspx. 
Although all of these are great, administrators should also consider imple- 
menting a firewall if they have not already done so. Some firewalls have the capa- 
bility of monitoring and selectively filtering the invocation and downloading of 
ActiveX controls and some do not, so administrators must be aware of the capabili- 
ties of the firewall they choose. 
Protection at the Client Level 
One of the most important things to do as an end user is to keep the OS with all 
its components and the virus detection software current. Download and install the 
most current security patches and virus updates on a regular basis. Another option 
for end users, as well as administrators, is the availability of security zone settings in 
IE, Outlook, and Outlook Express. These are valuable security tools that should be 
used to their fullest potential. 
CONFIGURING SECURITY ZONES 
Properly set security zones can dramatically reduce the potential vulner- 
ability to ActiveX controls. There are five security zones: 
9 Local Intranet zone 
9 Trusted Sites zone 
9 Restricted Sites zone 
9 Internet zone 
9 My Computer zone 
The last zone, My Computer, is only available through the lEAK and 
not through the browser interface. If you do not have access to the 
lEAK, you can also access the security zone settings through the 
[HKEY_CURRENT_USER~So ftwa re~Microso ft\Windows\Curren tVersion\ 
www.syngress.com 

298 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Internet Settings~Zones] Registry key. The appropriate settings for this 
key are shown in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1 Security Zone Settings in IE, Outlook, and Outlook Express 
Registry Key Setting 
Security Zone 
My Computer zone 
Local Intranet zone 
Trusted Sites zone 
3 
Internet zone 
Restricted Sites zone 
Complete the following steps to modify the security zone settings 
through IE 7: 
~ 
From the Tools menu, select Internet Options. The Internet 
Options dialog box appears (Figure 5.11). 
Figure 5.11 The Internet Options Dialog Box 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
299 
, 
Select the Security tab. The Security Options panel appears 
(Figure 5.12). 
Figure 5.12 The Security Tab of the Internet Options Dialog Box 
3. Select the zone you wish to change. For most users, this is the 
Internet zone, but depending on your circumstances, you may 
need to repeat these steps for the Local Intranet zone as well. 
4. Click the Custom Level button. The Security Settings panel 
appears (Figure 5.13). 
5. Change one or more of the following settings for your desired 
level of security: 
9 Set Run ActiveX controls and plug-ins to administrator 
approved, disable, or prompt. 
9 Set Script ActiveX controls marked safe for scripting to dis- 
able or prompt. 
www.syngress.com 

300 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Figure 5.13 Security Settings Panel 
, 
Click OK to accept these changes. A dialog box appears asking if 
you are sure you want to make these changes (Figure 5.14). 
Figure 5.14 Viewing a Warning about Zone Settings 
7. 
Click Yes. 
8. Click OK to close the Internet Options dialog box and save your 
settings. 
End users should exercise extreme caution when prompted to download or run 
an ActiveX control. They should also make sure that they disable ActiveX controls 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
301 
and other scripting languages in their e-mail applications, which is a measure that is 
often overlooked. A lot of people think that if they do not use a Microsoft e-mail 
application, they are safe. But if an e-mail client is capable of displaying HTML 
pages (for example, Eudora), chances are they are just as vulnerable using it as they 
would be using Outlook Express. 
Developers have the most important responsibility. They control the first line of 
defense against ActiveX vulnerability. They must stay current on the tools available 
to assist in securing the software. They must always consider the risks involved in 
writing mobile code and follow good software engineering practices and be extra 
careful to avoid common coding problems and easily exploited coding mistakes. 
But most importantly, they must use good judgment and common sense and test, 
test, test before releasing the code to the public. Remember, after signing it and 
releasing it, it is fair game. 
Hackers can usually create some creative way to trick a user into clicking 
on a seemingly safe link or opening e-mail with a title like, "In response 
to your comments." Once a Web page is loaded in the browser, or an e- 
mail is opened or previewed in the e-mail software, scripts, components 
and applets in the HTML document can be downloaded, loaded into 
memory, and run. If the code is malicious, and designed to exploit a vul- 
nerability, any number of issues (inclusive to running remote code) may 
occur. It is important to be wary of e-mail from unknown users or Web 
pages that seem to be legitimate, have the latest service patches 
installed to resolve vulnerability issues, and make sure that security soft- 
ware on the computer (inclusive to anti-virus software) is up-to-date. 
JavaScript 
JavaScript is different from ActiveX and Java, in that it is not compiled into a pro- 
gram. Despite this, JavaScript uses some of the same syntax and functions as Java. 
JavaScript is not a full-fledged programming language (as Java is). It cannot create 
standalone applications; instead, the script typically is part of an HTML document, 
using the <SCRIPT> tag to indicate where the code begins and to indicate where 
it ends.When a user accesses an HTML document with JavaScript in it, the code is 
run through an interpreter. This is slower than if the program were already corn- 

302 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
piled into a language that the machine can understand. For this reason, JavaScript is 
slower than Java applets. There are both client-side and server-side versions of 
JavaScript. 
Mthough JavaScript is different from ActiveX and Java in that it is a scripting 
language, it is still possible that a hacker may use a script to acquire information 
about a site or use code to attack a site or client computer. However, JavaScript is 
generally less likely to cause crashes than Java applets. An important part of 
scripting languages like JavaScript andVBScript is that they can run on the client- 
side (i.e., on a browser visiting a site) or the server-side (i.e., the Web site itself). 
Server-side scripting allows Web pages to provide enhanced features and function- 
ality, such as reading and writing to databases, running other programs on the 
server, or other operations that couldn't be performed using client-side scripting. 
Running scripts on the server as opposed to the client also has other benefits. 
Because the script is executed on the server before any content is provided to the 
browser, the script is processed and the results are provided faster than if they ran 
on the client-side. 
Because server-side scripts are executed on the Web server, it is important that 
the code doesn't have errors that would keep the page from displaying properly, or 
not displaying at all. If the script lacked code to handle errors, the Web site may 
respond to the error by not displaying the contents of the page. This could occur 
when the script tries to access variables or a database that didn't exist, or any 
number of other errors. Similarly, a perpetual loop in the code (where the same 
code is run over and over again without exiting) would prevent the script from 
running as expected, and prevent the page from loading until the Web server timed 
out and ceased execution of the script. By failing to include error handling, scripts 
can prevent a user from accessing Web pages, and in the case of a site's default page, 
may prevent users from accessing the site at all. 
As we've mentioned in this chapter, another embedded scripting lan- 
guage that you can use in HTML documents is VBScript. As the name 
suggests, the syntax of the language looks very similar to Visual Basic, 
much like JavaScript resembles Java. It offers approximately the same 
functionality as JavaScript in terms of interaction with a Web page, but 
a major difference is that VBScript can interact with ActiveX controls 
that a user has installed. VBScript is often seen in Active Server Pages 
(ASP), as well as in client-side scripts. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
303 
Preventing Problems with Java, JavaScript, and ActiveX 
Preventing problems with scripts, applets, and other components that are included 
on a site is not impossible if precautions are taken beforehand. First, network 
administrators should not include components that they do not fully understand or 
trust. If they are not certain what a particular script is doing in a line of code, they 
should not add it to a page. Similarly, they should use applets and ActiveX compo- 
nents that make their source code available. If an administrator has a particular 
applet or component that they want to use but do not have the code available, they 
must ensure that it was created by a trusted source. For example, a number of com- 
panies such as Microsoft provide code samples on their site, which can be used 
safely and successfully on a site. 
The code for a Java applet resides in a separate file, whereas the script 
for a JavaScript is embedded in the HMTL document, and anyone can 
see it (or copy it) by using the View Source function in the browser. 
Code should be checked for any flaws, because administrators do not want end 
users to be the first to identify them. A common method for testing code is to 
upload the Web page and component to the site, but do not link the page to any 
other pages. This will keep users who are not aware of the page from accessing it. 
Then you can test it live on the Web, with minimal risk that end users will access it 
before you're sure the code is good. However, when using this method, you should 
be aware that there are tools such as Sam Spade (www.samspade.org) that can be 
used to crawl your Web site to look for unlinked pages. In addition to this, spiders 
may make the orphan Web page containing your test code available in a search 
engine. A spider (also known as a crawler) is a program that searches sites for Web 
pages, adding the UP, L and other information on pages to a database used by 
search engines like Google.Without ever knowing it, an orphan Web page used to 
test code could be returned in the results of a search engine, allowing anyone to 
access it. If you test a Web page in this manner, you should remove it from the site 
as soon as you've finished testing. 
The best (and significantly more expensive) method is to use a test server, 
which is a computer that is configured the same as the Web server but separated 
from the rest of the network. With a test server, if damage is done to a site, the real 
www.syngress.com 

304 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
site will be unaffected. After this is done, it is wise to access the site using the user 
account that will normally be used to view the applet, component, or script. For 
example, if the site is to be used by everyone, view it using the anonymous user 
account. This will allow the administrator to effectively test for problems. 
An exploit that hackers can use to their advantage involves scripts and programs 
that trust user input. For example, a guest book or other online program that takes 
user input could be used to have a Server Side Include (SSI) command run and 
possibly damage a site. As we'll see later in this chapter, CGI programs written in 
Perl can be used to run batch files, while scripting languages can also be used to 
run shell functions.With a properly written and executed script, the cmd.exe func- 
tion could be used to run other programs on a Windows system. 
For best security, administrators should write programs and scripts so that input 
passed from a client is not trusted. Tools such as Telnet or other programs available 
on the Internet can be used to simulate requests from Web browsers. If input is 
trusted, a hacker can pass various commands to the server through the applet or 
component. 
As discussed in a previous section, considerable information may be found in 
Web pages. Because scripts can be embedded directly into the Web page, the script 
can be displayed along with the HTML by viewing the source code. This option is 
available through most browsers, and may be used to reveal information that the 
administrator did not want made public. Comments in the code may identify who 
wrote the code and contact information, while lines of code may reveal the hier- 
archy of the server (including paths to specific directories), or any number of tidbits 
that can be collected and used by hackers. In some cases, passwords and usernames 
may even be found in the code of an HTML document. If the wrong person were 
to view this information, it might open the system up to attack. 
To protect a system and network, the administrator should ensure that permis- 
sions are correctly set and use other security methods available through the OS on 
which the Web server is running. For example, the NTFS file system on Windows 
OSes support access control lists (ACLs), which can be configured to control who 
is allowed to execute a script. By controlling access to pages using scripts, the net- 
work is better protected from hackers attempting to access this information. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
305 
Because of the possible damage a Java applet, JavaScript, or ActiveX component 
can do to a network in terms of threatening security or attacking machines, many 
companies filter out applets completely. Firewalls can be configured to filter out 
applets, scripts, and components so that they are removed from an HTML docu- 
www.syngress.com 

306 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
ment that is returned to a computer on the internal network. Preventing such ele- 
ments from ever being displayed will cause the Web page to appear differently from 
the way its author intended, but any content that is passed through the firewall will 
be more secure. 
On the client side, many browsers can also be configured to filter content. 
Changing the settings on a Web browser can prevent applets and other programs 
from being loaded into memory on a client computer. The user accessing the 
Internet using the browser is provided with the HTML content, but is not pre- 
sented with any of these programmed features. Remember that although 
JavaScripts are not compiled programs, they can still be used to attack a user's 
machine. Because JavaScript provides similar functionality to Java, it can be used to 
gather information or perform unwanted actions on a user's machine. For this 
reason, administrators should take care in the scripts used on their site. 
When studying for this section of the Security+ exam, focus on the basic 
aspects of scripting exploits. You will not be expected to analyze a script 
for errors, or to create any type of exploit; they are listed here to 
enhance your understanding of the exploits. However, make sure that 
you know the fundamentals of scripting exploits and that languages 
such as JavaScript are constantly used to exploit systems on the Internet. 
Programming Secure Scripts 
The previous section primarily looked at client-side programs and scripts, which 
run on the user's machine. This section looks at server-side programs and scripts, 
which run on the Web server rather than on the machine being used to browse a 
site. Server-side programs and scripts provide a variety of functions, including 
working with databases, searching a site for documents based on keywords, and 
providing other methods of exchanging information with users. 
A benefit of server-side scripts is that the source code is hidden from the user. 
With client-side scripts, all scripts are visible to the user, who only has to view the 
source code through the browser. Although this is not an issue with some scripts, 
server-side scripts should be used when the script contains confidential informa- 
tion. For example, if a Web application retrieves data from a SQL Server or an 
Access database, it is common for code to include the username and password 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
307 
required to connect to the database and access its data. The last thing the adminis- 
trator wants to do is reveal to the world how information in a corporate database 
can be accessed. 
The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) allows communication links between 
Internet applications and a Web server, allowing users to access programs over the 
Web. The process begins when a user requests a CGI script or program using their 
browser. For example, the user might fill out a form on a Web page and then 
submit it. The request for processing of the form is made to the Web server, which 
executes the script or application on the server. After the application has processed 
the input, the Web server returns output from the script or application to the 
browser. 
PERL is another scripting language that uses an interpreter to execute various 
functions and commands. It is similar to the C programming language in its syntax. 
It is popular for Web-based applications, and is widely supported. Apache Web 
Server is a good example of this support, as it has plug-ins that will load PERL 
permanently into memory. By loading it into memory, the PERL scripts are exe- 
cuted faster. 
As we've mentioned, Microsoft has offered an alternative to CGI and PERL in 
Active Server Pages (ASP)~HTML documents with scripts embedded into them. 
These scripts can be written in a number of languages, including JScript and 
VBScript, and may also include ActiveX Data Object program statements. A benefit 
of using ASP is that it can return output through HTML documents extremely 
quickly. It can provide a return of information faster than using CGI and PERL. 
For more information about PERL, see the PERL FAQ on the 
www.perl.com Web site. For more information about CGI, see 
www.w3.org/CGI/. For more information about ASP, see 
www.w3schools.com/asp/default.asp. 
Common to all of these methods is that the scripts and programs run on the 
server. This means attacks using these methods will often affect the server rather 
than the end user. Weaknesses and flaws can be used to exploit the script or pro- 
gram and access private information or damage the server. 
Testing and auditing programs before going live with them is very important. 
In doing so, administrators may reveal a number of vulnerabilities or find problems, 

308 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
such as buffer overflows, which might have been missed if the code had been made 
available on the site. It is best to use a server dedicated to testing only. This server 
should have the same applications and configurations as the actual Web server and 
should not be connected to the production network. 
Any programs and scripts available on your site should be thoroughly 
tested before they are made available for use on the Web. Determine 
whether the script or program works properly by using it numerous 
times. If you are using a database, enter and retrieve multiple records. 
You should also consider having one or more members of your IT staff 
try the script or program themselves, because this will allow you to ana- 
lyze the effectiveness of the program with fresh eyes. They may enter 
data in a different order or perform a task differently, causing 
unwanted results. 
Code Signing" Solution or More Problems? 
As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, code signing addresses the need for users 
to trust the code they download and then load into their computer's memory. After 
all, without knowing who provided the software, or whether it was altered after 
being distributed, malicious code could be added to a component and used to 
attack a user's computer. 
Digital certificates can be used to sign the code and to authenticate that the 
code has not been tampered with, and that it is indeed the identical file distributed 
by its creator. The digital certificate consists of a set of credentials for verifying 
identity and integrity. The certificate is issued by a certification authority and con- 
tains a name, serial number, expiration date, copy of the certificate holder's public 
key, and a digital signature belonging to the CA. The elements of the certificate are 
used to guarantee that the file is valid. 
For more information about how digital certificates work, see Chapter 
10, "Public Key Infrastructure." 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
309 
As with any process that depends on trust, code signing has its positive and 
negative aspects. The following sections discuss these issues and show how the pro- 
cess of code signing works. 
Understanding Code Signing 
Digital certificates are assigned through CAs. A CA is a vendor that associates a 
public key with the person applying for the certificate. One of the largest organiza- 
tions to provide such code signing certificates is VeriSign (www.verisign.com). An 
Authenticode certificate is used for software publishing and timestamp services. It 
can be attached to the file a programmer is distributing and allows users to identify 
that it is a valid, unadulterated file. 
Digital certificates can be applied to a number of different file types. For 
example, using such tools as Microsoft Visual Studio's CryptoAPI tools and VeriSign 
code signing certificates, developers can sign such files as the following: 
9 
.EXE 
An executable program 
9 
. CAB 
Cabinet files commonly used for the installation and setup of 
applications; contain numerous files that are compressed in the cabinet file 
9 
.CAT 
Digital thumbprints used to guarantee the integrity of files 
9 
. OCX 
ActiveX controls 
9 
.DLL 
Dynamic link library files, containing executable functions 
9 
.STL 
Contains a certificate trust list 
When a person downloads a file with a digital certificate, the status of that cer- 
tificate is checked through the CA. If the certificate is not valid, the user will be 
warned. If it is found to be valid, a message will appear stating that the file has a 
valid certificate. The message will contain additional information and will show to 
whom the certificate belongs.When the user agrees to install the software, it will 
begin the installation. 
The Benefits of Code Signing 
Digital signatures can be used to guarantee the integrity of files and that the 
package being installed is authentic and unmodified. This signature is attached to 
the file being downloaded, and identifies who is distributing the files and shows 
that they have not been modified since being created. The certificate helps to keep 
malicious users from impersonating someone else. 
www.syngress.com 

310 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
This is the primary benefit of code signing. It provides users with the identity 
of the software's creator. It allows them to know who manufactured the program 
and provides them with the option of deciding whether to trust that person or 
company. When the browser is about to download the component, a warning mes- 
sage is displayed, allowing them to choose whether it is to be installed or loaded 
into memory. This puts the option of running it in the user's hands. 
Problems with the Code Signing Process 
A major problem with code signing is that you must rely on a third party for 
checking authenticity. If a programmer provided fake information to a CA or stole 
the identity of another individual or company, they could then effectively distribute 
a malicious program over the Internet. The deciding factor here would be the CA's 
ability to check the information provided when the programmer applied for the 
certificate. 
Another problem occurs when valid information is provided to the CA, but the 
certificate is attached to software that contains bad or malicious code. An example 
of such a problem with code signing is seen in the example of Internet Exploder, 
an ActiveX control that was programmed by Fred McLain. This programmer 
obtained an Authenticode certificate through VeriSign. When users running 
Windows 95 with Advanced Power Management ran the code for Internet 
Exploder, it would perform a clean shutdown of their systems. The certificate for 
this control was later revoked. 
Certificate Revocation Lists (C1KLs), which store a listing of revoked certificates, 
can also be problematic.Web browsers and Internet applications rarely check certifi- 
cate revocation lists, so it is possible for a program to be used even though its certifi- 
cate has been revoked. If a certificate was revoked, but its status was not checked, the 
software could appear to be okay even though it has been compromised. 
These problems with code signing do not necessarily apply to any given CA. 
Certificates can also be issued within an intranet using software such as Microsoft 
Certificate Server. Using this server software, users can create a CA to issue their 
own digital certificates for use on a network. This allows technically savvy individ- 
uals to self-sign their code with their own CA and gives the appearance that the 
code is valid and secure. Therefore, users should always verify the validity of the CA 
before accepting any files. The value of any digital certificate depends entirely on 
how much trust there is in the CA that issued it. By ensuring that the CA is a valid 
and reputable one, administrators can avoid installing a hacker's code onto their 
system. 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
311 
An additional drawback to code signing for applications distributed over the 
Internet is that users must guess and choose whom they trust and whom they do 
not. The browser displays a message informing them of who the creator is, a brief 
message about the dangers of downloading any kind of data, and then leave it up to 
the user whether to install it or not. The browser is unable to verify code. 
As a whole, code signing is a secure and beneficial process, but as with anything 
dealing with computers, there are vulnerabilities that may be exploited by hackers. 
An example of this was seen in 2003, when a vulnerability was identified in 
Authenticode verification that could result in a hacker installing malicious software 
or executing code remotely. The vulnerability affected a wide number of-Windows 
OSes, including Windows NT, Windows 2000, Windows XP, and Windows 2003 
Server. Under certain low memory conditions on the computer, a user could open 
HTML e-mail or visit a Web site that downloads and installs an ActiveX control 
without prompting the user for permission. Because a dialog box isn't displayed, the 
user isn't asked whether they want to install the control, and has no way of veri- 
fying its publisher or whether it's been tampered with. As such, a malicious pro- 
gram could be installed that allows a hacker to run code remotely with the same 
privileges as the user who's logged in. Although a security patch is available that 
fixes this problem, it shows that Authenticode isn't immune to vulnerabilities that 
could be exploited. 

312 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
You do not need to know the code signing-based problems and resolu- 
tions for the Security+ exam. You do need to know that code is prob- 
lematic, that it can cause problems in the form of scripting and applets, 
and that it must be dealt with in a specific way to make your systems, 
network, and infrastructure safer and more secure. 
Buffer Overflows 
A buffer is a holding area for data. To speed processing, many software programs use 
a memory buffer to store changes to data, then the information in the buffer is 
copied to the disk.When more information is put into the buffer than it is able to 
handle, a b@r over_flow occurs. Overflows can be caused deliberately by hackers and 
then exploited to run malicious code. 
There are two types of overflows: stack and heap. The stack and the heap are two 
areas of the memory structure that are allocated when a program is run. Function 
calls are stored in the stack, and dynamically allocated variables are stored in the 
heap. A particular amount of memory is allocated to the buffer. Static variable 
storage (variables defined within a function) is referred to as stack, because they are 
actually stored on the stack in memory. Heap data is the memory that is dynami- 
cally allocated at runtime, such as by C's mallocO function. This data is not actually 
stored on the stack, but somewhere amidst a giant "heap" of temporary, disposable 
memory used specifically for this purpose. Actually exploiting a heap buffer over- 
flow is a lot more involved, because there are no convenient frame pointers (as are 
on the stack) to overwrite. 
Attackers can use buffer overflows in the heap to overwrite a password, a file- 
name, or other data. If the filename is overwritten, a different file will be opened. If 
this is an executable file, code will be run that was not intended to be run. On 
UNIX systems, the substituted program code is usually the command interpreter, 
which allows the attacker to execute commands with the privileges of the process's 
owner, which (if the setuid bit is set and the program has ownership of the root) 
could result in the attacker having Superuser privileges. On Windows systems, the 
overflow code could be sent using an HTTP requests to download malicious code 
of the attacker's choice. In either case, under the right circumstances, the result 
could be devastating. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services ~ Chapter 5 
313 
Buffer overflows are based on the way the C or C++ programming languages 
work. Many function calls do not check to ensure that the buffer will be big 
enough to hold the data copied to it. Programmers can use calls that do this check 
to prevent overflows, but many do not. 
Creating a buffer overflow attack requires that the hacker understand assembly 
language as well as technical details about the OS to be able to write the replace- 
ment code to the stack. However, the code for these attacks is often published so 
that others, who have less technical knowledge, can use it. Some types of firewalls, 
called stateful inspection firewalls, allow buffer overflow attacks through, whereas 
application gateways (if properly configured) can filter out most overflow attacks. 
Buffer overflows constitute one of the top flaws for exploitation on the 
Internet today. A buffer overflow occurs when a particular operation/function 
writes more data into a variable (which is actually just a place in memory) than 
the variable was designed to hold. The result is that the data starts overwriting 
other memory locations without the computer knowing those locations have been 
tampered with. To make matters worse, most hardware architectures (such as Intel 
and Sparc) use the stack (a place in memory for variable storage) to store function 
return addresses. Thus, the problem is that a buffer overflow will overwrite these 
return addresses, and the computer~not knowing any better~will still attempt to 
use them. If the attacker is skilled enough to precisely control what values are used 
to overwrite the return pointers, the attacker can control the computer's next 
operation(s). 
Making Browsers and 
E-mail Clients More Secure 
There are several steps network administrators and users can take to make Web 
browsers and e-mail clients more secure and protect against malicious code or 
unauthorized use of information. These steps include the following: 
9 Restricting the use of programming languages 
9 
Keeping security patches current 
9 Becoming aware of the function of cookies 
r 
www.syngress.com 

314 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
The process of adding patches and making changes to make systems 
more secure is called hardening, as performing such actions makes the 
system less vulnerable and harder for intruders to access and exploit. By 
taking actions to secure systems before an actual problem occurs, you 
can avoid many of the security issues discussed in this chapter. This 
mindset not only applies to browsers and e-mail clients, but any systems 
in your organization. 
Restricting Programming Languages 
Most Web browsers have options settings that allow users to restrict or deny the use 
of Web-based programming languages. For example, IE can be set to do one of 
three things when a JavaScript, Java, or ActiveX element appears on a Web page: 
9 
Always allow 
9 
Always deny 
9 
Prompt for user input 
Restricting all executable code from Web sites, or at least forcing the user to 
make choices each time code is downloaded, reduces security breaches caused by 
malicious downloaded components. 
A side benefit of restricting the Web browser's use of these programming lan- 
guages is that the restrictions set in the browser often apply to the e-mail client as 
well. This is true when the browser is IE and the e-mail client is Outlook or 
Outlook Express, and Netscape and Eudora also depend on the Web browser set- 
tings for HTML handling. The same malicious code that can be downloaded from 
a Web site could just as easily be sent to a person's e-mail account. If administrators 
do not have such restrictions in place, their e-mail client can automatically execute 
downloaded code. 
Keep Security Patches Current 
New exploits for Web browsers and e-mail clients seem to appear daily, with secu- 
rity flaws providing the ability for hackers with the proper skills and conditions 
being able to remote control, overwhelm, or otherwise negatively effect systems. In 
addition to this, there are bugs that can cause any number of" issues when using the 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
315 
program. In some cases, developers of the program may know the bugs exist, but 
the software was shipped anyway to meet a certain release date or other reasons. 
After all, it is better for the company (although not necessarily the consumer) to 
have the software on shelves, bugs and all, and then release patches later to fix the 
problems. 
Depending on the number of changes necessary to fix problems or provide 
new features, the software to repair vulnerabilities and make other modifications to 
code may be released in one of two forms: 
9 
Patch, which is also known as a hotfix, bugfix, or update.These are 
released as problems are identified, and as soon as developers can write 
code to eliminate or work around recognized issues. Generally, patches will 
only address a single security issue or bug, and are released because the 
problem should be fixed immediately (as opposed to waiting for the next 
upgrade). 
9 Upgrade, which is also known as a service release, version upgrade, or 
service pack. Upgrades contain significant changes to the code, and may 
also provide new tools, graphics, and other features. Generally, they contain 
all of the previous patches that still apply to the code written in the new 
version, and may contain new fixes to bugs that weren't problematic 
enough to require a patch to be released. 
Product vendors usually address significant threats promptly by releasing a patch 
for their products, while releasing upgrades intermittently. To maintain a secure 
system, administrators nmst remain informed about their software and apply 
patches for vulnerabilities when they become available. 
However, they must consider a few caveats when working with software 
patches: 
9 
Patches are often released quickly, in response to an immediate problem, so 
they may not have been thoroughly tested. Although rare, this can result in 
failed installations, crashed systems, inoperable programs, or additional 
security vulnerabilities. 
9 
It is extremely important to test new patches on non-production systems 
before deploying them throughout a network. 
9 
Ira patch cannot be deemed safe for deployment, the administrator should 
weigh the consequences of not deploying it and remaining vulnerable to 
the threat against the possibility that the patch might itself cause system 
www.syngress.com 

316 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
damage. If the threat from the vulnerability is minimal, it is often safer to 
wait and experience the problem that a patch is designed to address before 
deploying a questionable patch. 
Secu ri ng Web B rowser Softwa re 
Although the same general principles apply, each of the popular Web browser pro- 
grams has a slightly different method to configure its security options. To illustrate 
some of the settings available in a browser, we'll look at how to make changes in IE 
7, and see how to turn off features that allow security holes to be exploited. To find 
information on how to secure other browsers available on the Internet, you can 
visit their individual Web sites and refer to the browser documentation to deter- 
mine which options are available and how to properly configure them. The Web 
sites for other popular browsers include: 
9 Konqueror www.konqueror.org 
9 
Mozilla Firefox www.mozilla.com/en-US/firefox/ 
9 
Mozilla Suite www.mozilla.org/products/mozillal.x 
9 
Netscape 
http://browser.netscape.com 
9 Opera www.opera.com/support/tutorials/security 
For the Security+ exam, you will not be expected to know how to set 
specific settings on your Web browser, but you will be expected to know 
what will be exploited if you do not set such settings. 
Securing Microsoft IE 
Securing Microsoft IE involves applying the latest updates and patches, modifying a 
few settings, and practicing intelligent surfing. Microsoft routinely releases IE-spe- 
cific security patches, so it is important to visit the Windows Update site regularly. 
You can visit this site at http://windowsupdate.microsoft.com, or by clicking the 
Windows Update menu item on IE's Tools menu. As we mentioned earlier in 
this chapter, this constant flow of patches is due to both the oversights of the pro- 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
317 
grammers who wrote the code and to the focused attacks on Microsoft products by 
the malevolent cracker community. In spite of this negative attention, IE can still be 
employed as a relatively secure Web browser~when it is configured correctly. 
The second step is to configure IE for secure surfing. Users can do this through 
the Internet Options, which is available to access through the Windows Control 
Panel or through the Internet Options menu item found under IE's Tools 
menu of IE. If the default settings are properly altered on the Security, Privacy, 
Content, and Advanced tabs, IE security is improved significantly. 
Zones are defined on the Security tab, which we saw earlier in Figure 5.12. A 
zone is nothing more than a named collection of Web sites (from the Internet or a 
local intranet) that can be assigned a specific security level. IE uses zones to define 
the threat level a specific Web site poses to the system. IE offers four security zone 
options: 
9 
Internet Contains all sites not assigned to other zones. 
9 
Local Intranet Contains all sites within the local intranet or on the local 
system. The OS maintains this zone automatically. 
9 
Trusted Sites Contains only sites manually added to this zone. Users 
should add only fully trusted sites to this zone. 
9 
Restricted Sites Contains only sites manually added to this zone. Users 
should add any sites that are specifically not trusted or that are known to 
be malicious to this zone. 
Each zone is assigned a predefined security level or a custom level can be cre- 
ated. The predefined security levels are offered on a slide controller with up to five 
settings with a description of the content that will be downloaded under particular 
conditions. The possible available settings are: 
9 
Low, which provides the least security, and allows all active content to 
run, and most content to be downloaded and run without prompts. With 
this setting, there is minimal security for users, so it should only be used 
with sites that are explicitly trusted. 
9 
Medium-Low, which is the default setting for the Local intranet zone, 
and provides the same security as the Medium level except that users 
aren't prompted. 
9 
Medium, which is the default level for Trusted Sites, and the lowest set- 
ting available for the Internet zone. Unsigned ActiveX content isn't down- 
www.syngress.com 

318 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
loaded, and the user is prompted before downloading potentially unsafe 
content. 
9 
Medium-High, which is the default setting for the Internet zone, as it is 
suitable for most Web sites. Unsigned ActiveX content isn't downloaded, 
and the user is prompted before downloading potentially unsafe content. 
9 High, which is not only the default level for Restricted Sites, it is the only 
level available for that zone. It is the most restrictive setting and has a min- 
imum number of security features disabled. 
Custom security levels can be defined to exactly fit the security restrictions of 
an environment. There are numerous individual security controls related to how 
ActiveX, downloads, Java, data management, data handling, scripting, and logon are 
handled. The most secure configuration is to set all zones to the High security 
level. However, keep in mind that increased security means less functionality and 
capability. 
The Privacy tab defines how IE manages personal information through 
cookies. As seen in Figure 5.15, the Privacy tab offers a slide controller with six set- 
tings ranging from full disclosure to complete isolation. These settings are only 
applicable to the Internet zone, and include the following levels: 
9 Accept All Cookies, which allows cookies from any Web site to be saved 
on the computer, and any cookies already on the computer to be read by 
the sites that created them. 
9 Low, which blocks third-party cookies that don't have a compact privacy 
policy, as well as restricting third-party cookies that don't have your 
implicit consent to store information that contains information that could 
be used to contact you without explicit consent. 
9 Medium, which is the default level. This level blocks third-party cookies 
that don't have a compact privacy policy, as well as blocking third-party 
cookies that don't have your explicit consent and restricting first party 
cookies that don't have your implicit consent to store information that 
contains information that could be used to contact you without explicit 
consent. 
9 
Medium-High, which blocks third-party cookies that don't have a com- 
pact privacy policy, and first- and third-party cookies that store informa- 
tion that contains information that could be used to contact you without 
explicit consent. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
319 
9 
High, which blocks cookies that don't have a compact privacy policy and 
store information that contains information that could be used to contact 
you without explicit consent. 
9 
Block All Cookies, in which all cookies are blocked, and any cookies 
already on the computer can't be read by Web sites. 
Figure 5.15 Cookie Options Can Be Set in IE via the Privacy Tab in Internet 
Options 
In addition to the slide controller's settings, IE 7 also has an Advanced button 
that can be used to open the Advanced Privacy Settings dialog box, allowing 
you to configure custom settings that will override cookie handling. These custom 
cookie settings only apply to the Internet zone, allowing you to specify whether 
first-party and third-party cookies are allowed or denied, or whether a prompt will 
be initiated, as well as whether session cookies are allowed. Individual Web sites can 
be defined whose cookies are either always allowed or always blocked. Preventing 
all use of cookies is the most secure configuration, but it is also the least functional. 
Many Web sites will not function properly under this setting, and some will not 
even allow users to visit them when cookies are disabled. 
www.syngress.com 

320 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
The Content tab, shown in Figure 5.16, gives access to the certificates that are 
trusted and accepted by IE. If a certificate has been accepted that the administrator 
no longer trusts, they can peruse this storehouse and remove it. 
Figure 5.16 You Can Configure Certificate Options in IE Using the Content 
Tab in Internet Options 
The Content tab also gives access to IE's AutoComplete capability. This fea- 
ture is useful in many circumstances, but when it is used to remember usernames 
and passwords to Internet sites, it becomes a security risk. The most secure configu- 
ration requires that AutoComplete be turned off for usernames and passwords, that 
prompting to save passwords is disabled, and that the current password cache is 
cleared. 
On the Advanced tab shown in Figure 5.17, several security-specific controls 
are included at the bottom of a lengthy list of functional controls. These security 
controls include the following (and more): 
9 
Check for certificate revocation 
9 Do not save encrypted pages to disk 
9 Empty Temporary Internet Files folder when browser is closed 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
321 
9 
Use SSL 2.0, SSL 3.0, andTLS 1.0 settings 
Figure 5.17 The Advanced Tab in IE's Internet Options Allows You to 
Configure Security Settings 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

322 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
CGI 
Programmers working on a Web application already know that if they want their 
site to do something such as gather information through forms or customize itself 
to their users, they will have to go beyond HTML. They will have to do Web pro- 
gramming, and one of the most common methods used to make Web applications 
is the CGI, which applies rules for running external programs in a Web HTTP 
server. External programs are called gateways because they open outside information 
to the server. 
There are other ways to customize or add client activity to a Web site. For 
example, JavaScript can be used, which is a client-side scripting language. If a 
developer is looking for quick and easy interactive changes to their Web site, CGI is 
the way to go.A common example of CGI is a "visitor counter" on a Web site. 
CGI can do just about anything to make a Web site more interactive. CGI can grab 
records from a database, use incoming forms, save data to a file, or return informa- 
tion to the client side, to name a few features. Developer's have numerous choices 
as to which language to use to write their CGI scripts; perl, Java, and C++ are a 
just a few of the choices. 
Of course, security must be considered when working with CGI.Vulnerable 
CGI programs are attractive to hackers because they are simple to locate, and they 
operate using the privileges and power of the Web server software itself. A poorly 
written CGI script can open a server to hackers.With the assistance of Nikto or 
other Web vulnerability scanners, a hacker could potentially exploit CGI vulnera- 
bilities. Scanners like Nikto are designed specifically to scan Web servers for known 
CGI vulnerabilities. Poorly coded CGI scripts have been among the primary 
methods used for obtaining access to firewall-protected Web servers. However, 
developers and Webmasters can also use hacker tools to identify and address the 
vulnerabilities on their networks and servers. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
323 
CGI is commonly exploited from the server side. 
What is a C GI Script and What Does It Do? 
Web servers use CGI to connect to external applications. It provides a way for data 
to be passed back and forth between the visitor to a site and a program residing on 
the Web server. In other words, CGI acts as a middleman, providing a communica- 
tion link between the Web server and an Internet application.With CGI, a Web 
server can accept user input, and pass that input to a program or script on the 
server. In the same way, CGI allows a program or script to pass data to the Web 
server, so that this output can then be passed on to the user. 
Figure 5.18 illustrates how CGI works. This graphic shows that there are a 
number of steps that take place in a common CGI transaction. Each of these steps 
is labeled numerically, and is explained in the paragraphs that follow. 
Figure 5.18 Steps Involved in a Common CGI Program 
In Step 1, the user visits the Web site and submits a request to the Web server. 
For example, say the user has subscribed to a magazine and wants to change their 
subscription information. The user enters an account number, name, and address 
into a form on a Web page, and clicks Submit. This information is sent to the Web 
server for processing. 
www.syngress.com 

324 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
In Step 2, CGI is used to process the data. Upon receiving the updated data, 
the Web server identifies the submitted data as a CGI request. Using CGI, the form 
data is passed to an external application. Because CGI communicates over the 
HTML, which is part of the TCP/IP protocol suite, the Web server's CGI support 
uses this protocol to pass the information on to the next step. 
Once CGI has been used to pass the data to a separate program, the application 
program processes it. The program may save it to the database, overwriting the 
existing data, or compare the data to existing information before it is saved.What 
happens at this point (Steps 3 and 4) depends on the Internet application. If the 
CGI application accepts input but does not return output, it may not work.While 
many CGI programs will accept input and return output, some may only do one 
or the other. There are no hard-and-fast rules regarding the behavior of programs 
or scripts, as they perform the tasks they are designed to perform, which is no dif- 
ferent from non-Internet applications that are bought or programmed for use on a 
network. 
If the application returns data, Step 5 takes place. For this example, assume that 
it has read the data that was saved to the database, and returns this to the Web 
server in the form of a Web page. In doing so, the CGI is again used to return data 
to the Web server. 
Step 6 finalizes the process, and has the Web server returning the Web page to 
the user. The HTML document will be displayed in the user's browser window. 
This allows the user to see that the process was successful, and will allow the user 
to review the saved information for any errors. 
In looking at how CGI works, almost all of the work is done on the Web 
server. Except for submitting the request and receiving the output Web page, the 
Web browser is left out of the CGI process. This is because CGI uses server-side 
scripting and programs. Code is executed on the server, so it does not matter what 
type of browser the user is using when visiting the site. Because of this, the user's 
Internet browser does not need to support CGI, or need special software for the 
program or script to execute. From the user's point of view, what has occurred is 
no different from clicking on a hyperlink to move from one Web page to another. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
325 
Typical Uses of CGI Scripts 
CGI programs and scripts allow users to have a Web site that provides functionality 
that is similar to a desktop application. By itself, HTML can only be used to create 
Web pages. It will show the text that was typed in when the page was created, and 
various graphics that you specified. CGI allows you to go beyond this, and takes 
your site from providing static information to being dynamic and interactive. 
CGI can be used in a number of ways. For example, CGI is used to process 
information submitted by users, such as in the case of online auction houses like 
eBay. CGI is used to process bids and process user logons to display a personal 
Web page of purchases and items being watched during the bidding process. This 
is similar to other sites that use CGI programs to provide shoppin 2 carts, CGI pro- 
grams that keep track of items a user has selected to buy. Once the users decide to 
stop shopping, these customers use another CGI script to "check out" and pur- 
chase the items. 
While e-commerce sites may use more complex CGI scripts and programs for 
making transactions, there are also a number of other common uses for CGI on the 
Web, including hit counters, which show the number of users who have visited a 
particular site. Each time a Web page is accessed, a CGI script is run that incre- 
ments the counter number by one. This allows Webmasters (and visitors) to view 
how often a particular page is viewed, and the type of content that is being 
accessed most often. 
www.syngress.com 

326 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Guest books and chat rooms are other common uses for CGI programs. Chat 
rooms allow users to post messages and chat with one another online in real time. 
This also allows users to exchange information without exchanging personal infor- 
mation such as IP addresses, e-mail addresses, or other connection information. This 
provides autonomy to the users, while allowing them to discuss topics in a public 
forum. Guest books allow users to post their comments about the site to a Web 
page. Users enter their comments and personal information (such as their name 
and/or e-mail address). Upon clicking Submit, the information is appended to a 
Web page and can usually be viewed by anyone who wishes to view the contents 
of the guest book. 
Another popular use for CGI is comment or feedback forms, which allow users 
to voice their concerns, praise, or criticisms about a site or a company's product. In 
many cases, companies use these for customer service so that customers have an 
easy way to contact a company representative. Users enter their name, e-mail 
address, and comments on this page. When they click Send, the information is sent 
to a specific e-mail address or can be collected in a specified folder on the Web 
server for perusal by the Web master. 
You will not need to be proficient in CGI scripting for the exam. It is 
important to understand how CGI works in order to understand the vul- 
nerabilities of CGI. CGI exploitation is very common and is something 
you may see in the future as a Security+ technician. 
Break-ins Resulting from Weak CGI Scripts 
One of the most common methods of hacking a Web site is to find and use poorly 
written CGI scripts. Using a CGI script, a hacker can acquire information about a 
site, access directories and files they would not normally be able to see or down- 
load, and perform various other unwanted and unexpected actions. 
A common method of exploiting CGI scripts and programs is used when 
scripts allow user input, but the data that users are submitting is not checked. 
Controlling what information users are able to submit will dramatically reduce 
your chances of being hacked through a CGI script. This not only includes limiting 
the methods by which data can be submitted through a form (by using drop-down 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
327 
lists, check boxes and other methods), but also by properly coding your program to 
control the type of data being passed to your application. This would include input 
validation on character fields, such as limiting the number of characters to only 
what is needed. An example would be a zip code field being limited to a small 
series of numeric characters. 
When a new script is added to a site, the system should be tested for security 
holes. One tool that can be used to find such holes is a CGI scanner such as Nikto, 
which is discussed later in this section. Another important point to remember is 
that as a Web site becomes more complex, it becomes more likely that a security 
hole will appear. As new folders are created, the administrator might overlook the 
need to set the correct policies; this vulnerability can be used to navigate into other 
directories or access sensitive data.A best practice is to try to keep all CGI scripts 
and programs in a single directory. In addition, with each new CGI script that is 
added, the chances increase that vulnerabilities in a script (or combination of 
scripts) may be used to hack the site. For this reason, the administrator should only 
use the scripts they definitely need to add to the site for functionality, especially for 
a site where security is an issue. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

328 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
CGI Wrappers 
Wrapper programs and scripts can be used to enhance security when using CGI 
scripts. They can provide security checks, control ownership of a CGI process, and 
allow users to run the scripts without compromising the Web server's security. In 
using wrapper scripts, however, it is important to understand what they actually do 
before implementing them on a system. 
CGIWrap is a commonly used wrapper that performs a number of security 
checks. These checks are run on each CGI script before it executes. If any one of 
these fails, the script is prohibited from executing. In addition to these checks, 
CGIWrap runs each script with the permissions of the user who owns it. In other 
words, if a user ran a script wrapped with CGIWrap, which was owned by a user 
named "bobsmith," the script would execute as if bobsmith was running it. If a 
hacker exploited security holes in the script, they would only be able to access the 
files and folders to which bobsmith has access. This makes the owner of the CGI 
program responsible for what it does, but also simplifies administration over the 
script. However, because the CGI script is given access to whatever its owner can 
access, this can become a major security risk if the administrator accidentally leaves 
an administrator account as owner of a script. CGIWrap can be found on 
SourceForge's Web site, http://sourceforge.net/projects/cgiwrap. 
Nikto 
Nihto is a command-line remote-assessment tool that you can use to scan a Web 
site for vulnerabilities in CGI scripts and programs. In performing this audit of 
your site, it can seek out misconfigurations, insecure files and scripts, default files 
and scripts, and outdated software on the site. However, because it can make a sig- 
nificant amount of requests to the remote or local server being checked, you 
should be careful to only analyze the sites you have permission to assess. Some 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
329 
options can generate over 70,000 requests to a server, possibly causing it to crash. 
With this in mind, Nikto is an extremely useful tool in auditing your site, and 
identifying where potential problems may exist in your CGI scripts and programs. 
As seen in Figure 5.19, Nikto is a CGI script itself that is written in Perl, and 
can easily be installed on your site. Once there, you can scan your own network for 
problems, or specify other sites to analyze. It is Open Source, and has a number of 
plug-ins written for it by third parties to perform additional tests. Plug-ins are pro- 
grams that can be added to Nikto's functionality, and like Nikto itself, they are also 
written in Perl (allowing them to be viewed and edited using any Perl editing soft- 
ware). In itself, Nikto performs a variety of comprehensive tests on Web servers, 
using its database to check for over 3,200 files/CGIs that are potentially dangerous, 
versions of these on over 625 servers, and version specific information on over 230 
servers. It provides an excellent resource for auditing security and finding vulnera- 
bilities in Web applications that use CGI, and is available as a free download from 
http: //www. cirt. net/code / nikto, shtml. 
Figure 5.19 Nikto Perl Script 
www.syngress.com 

330 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
FTP Security 
Another part of Internet-based security that should be considered is FTP-based 
traffic. FTP is an application layer protocol within the TCP/IP protocol suite that 
allows transfer of data primarily via ports 20 and 21 and then rolls over past port 
1023 to take available ports for needed communication. This being said, FTP is no 
different from Telnet where credentials and data are sent in cleartext so that, if cap- 
tured via a passive attack such as sniffing, the information could be exploited to 
provide unauthorized access. Although FTP is an extremely popular protocol to use 
for transferring data, the fact that it transmits the authentication information in a 
cleartext format also makes it extremely insecure. This section explores FTP's 
weaknesses and looks at a FTP-based hack in progress with a sniffer. 
Active and Passive FTP 
When FTP is used, it may run in one of two modes: active or passive.Whether 
active or passive FTP is used depends on the client. It is initiated by a client, and 
then acted upon by the FTP server. An FTP server listens and responds through 
port 21 (the command port), and transmits data through port 20 (the data port). 
During the TCP handshake, unless a client requests to use a specific port, the 
machine's IP stack will temporarily designate a port that it will use during the ses- 
sion, which is called an ephemeral port. This is a port that has a number greater 
than 1023, and is used to transfer data during the session. Once the session is com- 
plete, the port is freed, and will generally be reused once other port numbers in a 
range have all been used. 
When active FTP is used, the client will send a PORT command to the server 
saying to use the ephemeral port number + 1. For example, if the FTP client used 
port 1026, it would then listen on port 1027, and the server would use its port 20 
to make a connection to that particular port on the client. This creates a problem 
when the client uses a firewall, because the firewall recognizes this as an external 
system attempting to make a connection and will usually block it. 
With passive FTP, this issue isn't a problem because the client will open con- 
nections to both ports. After the TCP handshake, it will initiate one connection to 
port 21 but include a PASV (passive FTP) command. Because this instructs the 
server that passive FTP is used, the client doesn't then issue a PORT command 
that instructs the server to connect to a specific port. Instead, the server opens its 
own ephemeral port and sends the PORT command back to the client through 
port 21, which instructs the client which port to connect to. The client then uses 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
331 
its ephemeral port to connect to the ephemeral port of the server. Because the 
client has initiated both connections, the firewall on the client machine doesn't 
block the connection, and data can now be transferred between the two machines. 
S/FTP 
S/FTP is a secure method of using FTP. It is similar to Secure Shell (SSH) which is 
a solid replacement for Telnet. S/FTP applies the same concept: added encryption 
to remove the inherent weakness of FTP where everything is sent in cleartext. 
Basically, S/FTP is the FTP used over SSH. S/FTP establishes a tunnel between the 
FTP client and the server, and transmits data between them using encryption and 
authentication that is based on digital certificates. A S/FTP client is available for 
Windows, Macintosh OS X, and most UNIX platforms. A current version can be 
downloaded at www.glub.com/products/secureftp/. 
While FTP uses ports 20 and 21, S/FTP doesn't require these. Instead, it uses 
port 22, which is the same port as SSH. Since port 20 and port 21 aren't required, 
an administrator could actually block these ports and still provide the ability of 
allowing file transfers using S/FTR 
Another consideration when sharing data between partners is the transport 
mechanism. Today, many corporations integrate information collected by a third 
party into their internal applications or those they provide to their customers on 
the Internet. One well-known credit card company partners with application ven- 
dors and client corporations to provide data feeds for employee expense reporting. 
A transport method they support is batch data files sent over the Internet using 
S/FTR S/FTP is equivalent to running regular, unencrypted FTP over SSH. 
Alternatively, regular FTP might be used over a point-to-point VPN. 
Although S/FTP is covered in the Security+ exam, another secure method 
of transferring files that is not mentioned is Secure Copy Protocol (SCP). 
SCP is the secure equivalent of the Remote Copy Protocol (RCP), and 
uses SSH for providing secure file transfers between clients and servers. 
Because of this, a major difference between SCP and RCP is that files are 
encrypted during transfer. Also, S/FTP should not be confused with the 
Simple File Transfer Protocol (SFTP), which was a FTP that provided no 
security, and never gained any popularity. Simple File Transfer Protocol is 
often referred to as SFTP, which is why Secure FTP is named S/FTP to 
indicate it is two different protocols. Unlike S/FTP, which uses port 22, 
SFTP used port 115. 
www.syngress.com 

332 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Secure Copy 
Secure Copy (SCP) has become a preferred method of transferring files by security 
professionals. SCP uses SSH to transfer data between two computers, and in doing 
so provides authentication and encryption. A client connects to a server using SSH, 
and then connects to an SCP program running on the server.The SCP client may 
also need to provide a password to complete the connection, allowing files to be 
transferred between the two machines. 
The function of SCP is only to transfer files between two hosts, and the 
common method of using SCP is by entering commands at the command prompt. 
For example, if you were to upload a file to a server, you would use the following 
syntax: 
scp sourcename 
user@hostname : targetname 
For example, lets say you had an account named bob@nonexist.com, and were 
going to upload a file called myfile.txt to a server, and wanted it saved in a directory 
called PUBLIC under the same name. Using SCR you would enter: 
scp myfile, txt bob@nonexist, com: PUBLIC/myfile. txt 
Similarly, if you were going to download a file from an SCP server, you would 
use the following syntax to download the file: 
scp user@hostname:sourcefile 
targetfile 
Therefore, if you were going to download the file we just uploaded to a direc- 
tory called mydirectory, you would enter: 
scp bob@nonexist, com:/PUBLIC/myfile, txt /mydirectory/myfile. txt 
While users of SCP commonly use the command-line, there are GUI programs 
that also support SCP. One such program is WinSCR which supports FTR S/FTP 
and SCP. This program is open source, and available as a free download from 
www.winscp.net. It provides a means for users who aren't comfortable with 
entering commands from a prompt to use SCP, or those who simply prefer a 
graphical interface to perform actions over the Internet or between intranet hosts 
where security is an issue. 
Blind FTP/Anonymous 
FTP servers that allow anonymous connections do so to allow users who do not 
have an account on the server to download files from it. This is a common method 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
333 
for making files available to the public over the Internet. However, it also presents a 
security threat. Anonymous connections to servers running the FTP process allow 
the attacking station to download a virus, overwrite a file, or abuse trusts that the 
FTP server has in the same domain. 
Blind FTP involves making files available to the public only if they know the 
exact path and file name. By configuring FTP servers so that users are unable to 
browse the directory structure and their contents, the user is only able to download 
a file if they know where it is and what it's called. For example, if a user were 
going to download a file called blinded.zip that's stored in the PUBLIC directory 
on a Web server called ftp.syngress.com, they would use a link to the file that 
points to ftp://ftp.syngress.com/public/blinded.zip. 
FTP attacks are best avoided by preventing anonymous logins, stopping unused 
services on the server, and creating router access lists and firewall rules. If anony- 
mous logons are required, the best course of action is to update the FTP software 
to the latest revision and keep an eye on related advisories. It is a good idea to 
adopt a general policy of regular checks of advisories for all software that you are 
protecting. 
FTP Sharing and Vulnerabilities 
Although FTP is widely used, there are a number of vulnerabilities that should be 
addressed to ensure security. As we'll see in Exercise 5.03, FTP authentication is 
sent as cleartext, making it easy for someone with a packet sniffer to view user- 
names and passwords. Because hackers and malicious software could be used to 
obtain this information quite easily, when traffic doesn't need to cross firewalls or 
touters on a network, it is important to block ports 20 and 21. 
Port 21 is the control port for FTP, while port 20 is the data port. FTP uses 
port 21 to begin a session, accessing the port over TCP to provide a username and 
password. Because FTP doesn't use encryption, this information is sent using clear- 
text, allowing anyone using a packet sniffer to capture the packet and view this 
information. To avoid such attacks, encryption should be used whenever possible to 
prevent protocol analyzers from being used to access this data. 
It is important to be careful with user accounts and their permissions on FTP 
servers. If users will only be downloading files and don't require individual 
accounts, then a server could be configured to allow anonymous access. In doing 
so, anyone could login to the account without a password, or by using their e-mail 
address as a password. Not only does this make it easier to distribute files to users, 
but it also removes the need to worry about authentication information being 
v'- 
9 
www.syngress.com 

334 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
transmitted using cleartext. If certain users also need to upload files, then individual 
user accounts are wise to implement, as this will provide limitations over who can 
put files on your server. In all cases however, it is advisable to limit permissions and 
privileges to the FTP server as much as possible, and never give anyone more access 
than absolutely necessary. 
If FTP servers are going to be accessed by the public, it is important to isolate 
it from the rest of the network, so that if security is compromised the attacker 
won't be able to access servers and workstations on your internal network. By 
placing FTP servers on a perimeter network, the server is separated from the 
internal network, preventing such attacks from occurring. 
When configuring FTP servers, it is also important to design the directory 
structure carefully and ensure that users don't have more access than necessary. The 
root directory of the FTP server is where FTP clients will connect to by default, so 
these should not contain any confidential data or system files. In addition to this, 
you should limit the ability to write to directories, preventing users from uploading 
files to a directory that may be malicious. Regardless of whether you provided 
write access on purpose, you should review the FTP directories on a regular basis 
to ensure that no unexpected files have been added to the server. 
Another aspect of FTP that opens the system up to security problems is the 
third-party mechanism included in the FTP specification known as proxy FTE It is 
used to allow an FTP client to have the server transfer the files to a third com- 
puter, which can expedite file transfers over slow connections. However, it also 
makes the system vulnerable to something called a "bounce attack." 
Bounce attacks are outlined in RFC 2577, and involves attackers scanning 
other computers through an FTP server. Because the scan is run against other 
computers through the FTP server, it appears at face value that the FTP server is 
actually running the scans. This attack is initiated by a hacker who first uploads files 
to the FTP server. Then they send an FTP "PORT" command to the FTP server, 
using the IP address and port number of the victim machine, and instruct the 
server to send the files to the victim machine. This can be used, for example, to 
transfer an upload file containing SMTP commands so as to forge mail on the 
third-party machine without making a direct connection. It will be hard to track 
down the perpetrator because the file was transferred through an intermediary (the 
FTP server). 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
335 
Packet Sniffing FTP Transmissions 
As mentioned earlier in this section, FTP traffic is sent in cleartext so that creden- 
tials, when used for an FTP connection, can easily be captured via MITM attacks, 
eavesdropping, or sniffing. Exercise 5.03 looks at how easy it is to crack FTP with a 
sniffer. Sniffing (covered in Chapter 2) is a type of passive attack that allows hackers 
to eavesdrop on the network, capture passwords, and use them for a possible pass- 
word cracking attack. 
EXERCISE 5.03 
CAPTURING FTP WITH A SNIFFER 
In this exercise, you will use a protocol analyzer to capture FTP traffic on 
the network. You will look at someone logging into an FTP site with 
their credentials, and because the network is being sniffed, you will be 
able to capture the credentials to use later to get into the server. For 
the purposes of this exercise, we will use Wireshark (formerly Ethereal), 
which is available for download from www.wireshark.org. 
, 
First, open your protocol analyzer. Wireshark was used for these 
screenshots, but you can use any protocol analyzer you are com- 
fortable with. 
, 
Build a filter to pick up only FTP-based communications. In 
Wireshark, this is done by clicking the Options menu item found 
under the Capture menu. By doing so, you should see a dialog 
box similar to that shown in Figure 5.20. By typing the following 
into the Capture Filter field, only FTP-based traffic will be cap- 
tured: 
tcp port 20 or tcp port 21 
3. The filter shown in Figure 5.20 was built to capture only FTP- 
based traffic to TCP port 20 and TCP port 21 on the computer on 
which Wireshark is being used (which are the ports used by FTP). 
By setting this filter and clicking the Start button, any other 
packets on the network are ignored and won't be captured. 
Creating your own filter for this exercise is not absolutely neces- 
sary, but makes it much easier to look for FTP traffic when that is 
the only type of traffic that has been captured. 
www.syngress.com 

336 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Figure 5.20 Building a FTP-based Filter in Wireshark 
3. An alternative method to viewing only FTP-based traffic is to use 
a display filter, which is visible in Figure 5.22. The Filter field on 
Wireshark's toolbar allows you to specify what information is dis- 
played from the captured packets. If the Capture Filter in step 2 
isn't set, then all traffic is captured, so using a display filter will 
allow you to only show the information you're interested in. To 
display only FTP-based traffic, you would type FTP into the Filter 
field, and then click Apply. 
4. Now that you have your display filter defined, click on the 
Capture menu and then click Start. To ensure there are FTP 
packets to capture, we will now log on to Novell's FTP site at 
www.ftp.novell.com by performing the following actions: 
9 Click on the Window Start menu, and then click Run. When the 
Run dialog box appears, type cmd in the Open field and then 
click OK. 
When the Command Prompt window appears, type ftp 
ftp.novell.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
337 
9 When asked for a username, type anonymous 
9 When asked for a password, type your e-mail address 
9 Once you have access, type bye to exit. 
Below, you can see in Figure 5.21, everything that we did from log- 
ging on to exiting the server. 
Figure 5.21 Logging Into an FTP Server Using the Command Prompt 
. 
Now that we've passed some data using FTP, we can stop the 
sniffer and examine the traffic it captured. To stop capturing 
packets in Wireshark, click on the Capture menu and then click 
Stop. Figure 5.22 clearly shows that FTP traffic has been captured 
and is being displayed. In reviewing this data, you will find that 
we captured the username and password you provided while log- 
ging into Novell's FTP site. You will see there was a request to 
Iogon as USER anonymous and a request that includes the e-mail 
address you provided as your password. 
www.syngress.com 

338 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Figure 5.22 Viewing Captured Packets in Wireshark 
Directory Services and LDAP Security 
Directory services are used to store and retrieve information about objects, which 
are managed by the service. On a network, these objects can include user accounts, 
computer accounts, mail accounts, and information on resources available on the 
network. Because these objects are organized in a directory structure, you can 
manage them by accessing various properties associated with them. For example, a 
person's account to use the network would be managed through such attributes as 
their username, password, times they're allowed to logon, and other properties of 
their account. By using a directory service to organize and access this information, 
the objects maintained by the service can be effectively managed. 
The concept of a directory service can be somewhat confusing, until you 
realize that you've been using them for most of your life. A type of directory that's 
been around longer than computers is a telephone directory, which organizes the 
account information of telephone company customers. These account objects are 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
339 
organized to allow people to retrieve properties like the customer's name, phone 
number and address. 
Directory services shouldn't be confused with the directory itself. The directory 
is a database that stores data on the objects managed through directory services.To 
use our telephone directory example again, consider that the information on cus- 
tomer accounts can be stored in a phonebook or electronically in a database. 
Regardless of whether the information is accessed through an operator or viewed 
online using a 411 service, the directory service is the process of how the data is 
accessed. The directory service is the interface or process of accessing information, 
while the directory itself is the repository for that data. 
Directory services are used by many different network OSes to organize and 
manage the users, computers, printers, and other objects making up the network. 
Some of the directory services that are produced by vendors include: 
9 Active Directory, which was developed by Microsoft for networks running 
Windows 2000 Server, Windows 2003 Server, or higher 
9 
eDirectory, which was developed by Novell for Novell NetWare networks. 
Previous versions for Novell NetWare 4.x and 5.x were called Novell 
Directory Services (NDS) 
9 NT Directory Services, which was developed by Microsoft for Windows 
NT networks 
9 
Open Directory, which was developed by Apple for networks running 
Mac OS X Servers 
To query and modify the directory on TCP/IP networks, the LDAP can be 
used. LDAP is a protocol that enables clients to access information within a direc- 
tory service, allowing the directory to be searched and objects to be added, modi- 
fied, and deleted. LDAP was created after the X.500 directory specification that 
uses the Directory Access Protocol (DAP). Although DAP is a directory service 
standard protocol, it is slow and somewhat complex. LDAP was developed as an 
alternative protocol for TCP/IP networks because of the high overhead and subse- 
quent slow response of heavy X.500 clients, hence the name lig, htweight. Due to the 
popularity of TCP/IP and the speed of'LDAR the LDAP has become a standard 
protocol used in directory services. 

340 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
X.500 is covered in detail in Chapter 10. 
LDAP 
LDAP services are used to access a wide variety of information that's stored in a 
directory. On a network, consider that the directory catalogs the name and infor- 
mation on every user, computer, printer, and other resource on the network. The 
information on a user alone may include their username, password, first name, last 
name, department, phone number and extension, e-mail address, and a slew of 
other attributes that are related to the person's identity. The sheer volume of this 
data requires that LDAP directories are effectively organized, so that the data can be 
easily located and identified in the directory structure. 
LDAP Directories 
Because LDAP is a lightweight version of DAR the directories used by LDAP are 
based on the same conventions as X.500. LDAP directories follow a hierarchy, 
much in the same way that the directories on your hard drive are organized in a 
hierarchy. Each uses a tree like structure, branching off of a root with containers 
(called organizational units in LDAP; analogous to folders on a hard drive) and 
objects (also called entries in LDAP's directory; analogous to files on a hard drive). 
Each of the objects has attributes or properties that provide additional information. 
Just as a directory structure on a hard disk may be organized in different ways, so 
can the hierarchy of an LDAP directory. On a network, the hierarchy may be orga- 
nized in a numbers of ways, following the organizational structure, geographical 
location, or any other logical structure that makes it easy to manage the objects 
representing users, computers, and other resources. 
Because LDAP directories are organized as tree structures (sometimes called the 
Directory Information Tree [D IT]), the top of the hierarchy is called the root. The 
root server is used to create the structure of the directory, with organizational units 
and objects branching out from the root. Because the directory is a distributed 
database, parts of the directory structure may exist on different servers. Segmenting 
the tree based on organization or division and storing each branch on separate 
directory servers increases the security of the LDAP information. By following this 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
341 
structure, even if one directory server is compromised, only a branch of the tree 
(rather than the entire tree) is compromised. 
Organizational Units 
The hierarchy of an LDAP directory is possible because of the various objects that 
make up its structure. These objects represent elements of the network, which are 
organized using containers called organizational units (OUs). Each OU can be 
nested in other OUs, similar to having subfolders nested in folders on your hard 
disk. In the same way the placement of folders on your hard disk makes a directory 
structure, the same occurs with OUs and objects in an LDAP directory. 
The topmost level of the hierarchy generally uses the domain name system 
(DNS) to identify the tree. For example, a company named Syngress might use 
syngress.com at the topmost level. Below this, organizational units are used to iden- 
tify different branches of the organization or network. For example, you might have 
the tree branch off into geographical locations, like PARIS, LONDON, and 
TORONTO, or use them to mimic the organizational chart of the company, and 
create OUs with names like ADMINISTRATION, RESEARCH, TECH- 
NOLOGY, etc. Many companies will even use a combination of these methods, 
and use the OUs to branch out by geographical location, and then create OUs for 
divisions of the company within the OUs representing locations. 
To identify the OUs, each has a name that must be unique in its place in the 
hierarchy. For example, you can't have two OUs named P1KINTE1KS in a con- 
tainer named SALES. As with many elements of the directory it is analogous to 
the directory structure of a hard disk where you can't have two subfolders with 
the same name in the same folder.You can however have OUs with the same 
name in different areas of the hierarchy, such as having an OU named 
PRINTERS in the SALES container and another OU named P1KINTE1KS in an 
OU named SERVICE. 
The structure of the LDAP directory is not without its own security risks, as it 
can be a great source of information for intruders.Viewing the placement of OUs 
can provide a great deal of information about the network structure, showing 
which resources are located in which areas of the organization. If an administrator 
followed a particular scheme of designing the hierarchy too closely, a hacker could 
determine its structure by using information about the organization. For example, 
companies often provide their organizational charts on the Internet, allowing 
people to see how the company is structured. If an administrator closely followed 
this chart in designing a hierarchy, a hacker could speculate how the LDAP direc- 
www.syngress.com 

342 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
tory is laid out. If the hacker can gain access to the directory using LDAP queries, 
he or she could then use this information to access objects contained in different 
OUs named after departments on the chart. Using naming conventions internal to 
the company (such as calling a London base of operations DIST1KICT1) or using 
some creativity in naming schemes (such as calling an OU containing computer 
accounts WK instead of WO1KKSTATIONS) will make the hierarchy's structure 
less obvious to outsiders.While using the organizational chart of a company and 
geographical locations can be used as a basis for designing the hierarchy, it should 
not be an easy-to-guess blueprint of the directory and network infrastructure. 
Objects, Attributes and the Schema 
As mentioned, entries in the directory are used to represent user accounts, com- 
puters, printers, services, shared resources, and other elements of the network. These 
objects are named, and as we discussed with organizational units, each object must 
have a name that's unique to its place in the namespace of the hierarchy. Just as you 
can't have two files with the same name in a folder on your hard disk, you can't 
have two objects with the same name in an OU. The name given to each of these 
objects is referred to as a common name, which identifies the object but doesn't show 
where it resides in the hierarchy. 
The common name is part of the LDAP naming convention. Just as a filename 
identifies a file, and a full pathname identifies its place in a directory structure, the 
same can be seen in the LDAP naming scheme. The common name identifies the 
object, but a distin2uished name can be used to identify the object's place in the hier- 
archy. An example of a distinguished name is the following, which identifies a com- 
puter named DellDude that resides in an organizational unit called Marketing in 
the tacteam.net domain: 
DN: 
CN=DellDude,OU=Marketing,DC=tacteam,DC=net 
The distinguished name is a unique identifier for the object, and is made up of sev- 
eral attributes of the object. It consists of the relative distinguished name, which is 
constructed from some attribute(s) of the object, followed by the distinguished 
name of the parent object. 
Each of the attributes associated with an object are defined in the schema. The 
schema defines the object classes and attribute types, and allows administrators to 
create new attributes and object classes specific to the needs of their network or 
company. For example, a "supervisor" attribute in a user account might contain the 
name of the user's manager, while a "mail" attribute would contain the user's e-mail 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
343 
address. Object classes define what the object represents (i.e., user, computer, and so 
forth), and a list of what attributes are associated with the object. 
Because LDAP is binary, to view the attributes of an object, the information 
can be represented in LDAP Data Interchange Format (LDIF). LDIF is used to 
show directory entries in an easy-to-follow format, and used when requests are 
made to add, modify, or delete entries in the directory. The following is an LDAP 
directory entry with several attributes represented in LDIF: 
dn- cn=Michael Cross, 
cn- Michael Cross 
dc=syngress, 
dc=com 
givenName- 
Michael 
sn- Cross 
telephoneNumber- 
905 555 1212 
ext- 1234 
employeeID: 
4321 
mail: mcross@nonexist.com 
manager- Andrew Williams 
objectClass- 
organizationalPerson 
As you can see by this entry, the attributes provide a wide degree of informa- 
tion related to the person represented by the object. By looking at this informa- 
tion, we can see contact information, employee identification numbers, the person's 
manager, and other data. Other attributes could include the person's Social Security 
Number or Social Insurance Number, home address, photo, expense account num- 
bers, credit card numbers issued to the person, or anything else the company 
wished to include.While this example reflects a user account, a similar wealth of 
information can be found in objects representing computers and printers (which 
would include IP addresses) and other resources on the network. As stated earlier, 
while useful to authorized users, it is also useful for unauthorized intruders who 
could use the information for identity theft, hacking specific computers, or any 
number of other attacks. 
Securing LDAP 
LDAP is vulnerable to various security threats, including spoofing of directory 
services, attacks against the databases that provide the directory services, and 
many of the other attack types discussed in this book (e.g., viruses, OS and pro- 
tocol exploits, excessive use of resources and denial of service, and so forth.). This 
isn't to say that LDAP is completely vulnerable. LDAP supports a number of dif- 
www.syngress.com 

344 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
ferent security mechanisms, beginning from when clients initially connect to an 
LDAP server. 
LDAP clients must authenticate to the server before being allowed access to the 
directory. Clients (users, computers, or applications) connect to the LDAP server 
using a distinguished name and authentication credentials (usually a password). 
Authentication information is sent from the client to the server as part of a "bind" 
operation, and the connection is later closed using an "unbind" operation. 
Unfortunately, it is possible for users to make the connection with limited or no 
authentication, by using either anonymous or simple authentication. LDAP allows 
for anonymous clients to send LDAP requests to the server without first per- 
forming the bind operation.While anonymous connections don't require a pass- 
word, simple authentication will send a person's password over the network 
unencrypted. To secure LDAR anonymous clients should be limited or not used, 
ensuring that only those with proper credentials are allowed access to the informa- 
tion. Optionally, the connection can use TLS to secure the connection, and protect 
any data transmitted between the client and server. 
LDAP can also be used over SSL, which extends security into the Internet. 
LDAPS is Secure LDAR which encrypts LDAP connections by using SSL or TLS. 
Some of these types of services integrate as objects, such as PKI certificates, in the 
authentication process using Smart Card technologies, and in the extended proper- 
ties of account objects so that they can support extra security requirements. To use 
SSL with LDAR the LDAP server must have an X.509 server certificate. 
Additionally, SSL/TLS must be enabled on the server. 
Another issue that can impact the security of LDAP is packet sniffing. As we 
discussed earlier in this chapter, packet sniffers are software that can capture packets 
of data from a network, and allow a person to view its contents. If the information 
traveling over LDAP is unencrypted, the packets of data could be captured, and 
analysis of the packets could provide considerable information about the network. 
In addition to using encryption, ports can be blocked to prevent access from the 
Internet. LDAP uses TCP/UDP port 389 and LDAPS uses port 636. By blocking 
these ports from the Internet, it will prevent those outside of the internal network 
from listening or making connections to these ports. 
The challenge with using a protocol such as LDAP is that the connectivity 
must be facilitated through a script or program. These types of scripts must indicate 
the location of the objects within the directory service to access them. If the 
administrator wants to write a quick, simple script, this means that the name of the 
directory service and the names and locations of the objects that are being accessed 
must each be placed in the script and known prior to the script being written. If 
www.syngress.com 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
345 
they need to access a different object, they usually need to rewrite the script or 
develop a much more complex program to integrate the directory services. Even 
so, compare scripting to native access with queries and interactive responses, and 
the value of a homogenous network with a single directory service is revealed. In a 
homogenous network, there is no need to logically connect two directory services 
with a script. This greatly reduces the time and effort involved in administering the 
network. 
Homogenous networks are unusual at best.With multiple types of network 
OSes, desktop OSes, and infrastructure OSes available today, it is likely that there 
will be multiple systems around. It follows that they all must be managed in dif- 
ferent ways. 
LDAP-enabled Web servers can handle authentication centrally, using the LDAP 
directory. This means users will only need a single login name and password for 
accessing all resources that use the directory. Users benefit from single sign-on to 
allow access to any Web server using the directory, or any password-protected Web 
page or site that uses the directory. The LDAP server constitutes a security realm, 
which is used to authenticate users. 
Another advantage of LDAP security for Web-based services is that access con- 
trol can be enforced based on rules that are defined in the LDAP directory instead 
of the administrator having to individually configure the OS on each Web server. 
There are security programs available, such as PortalXpert Security, which can 
be used with LDAP to extend enforcement of the security policies that are defined 
by the LDAP directory to Web servers that are not LDAP enabled, and provide 
role-based management of access controls. 
For more detailed information about LDAP security issues, see the white 
paper titled "Introduction to Security of LDAP Directory Services" by 
Wenling Bao at the SANS Institute Web site at 
http ://r r. sa ns. o rg/d i r/LD AR ph p. 
www.syngress.com 

346 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
This chapter looked at the Security+ exam topics in the area of Web-based security 
with an emphasis on Web security, FTP-based security, and LDAP-based security. 
The Security+ technician must know how to configure, manage, and service secu- 
rity on a Web platform. As discussed, Web-based services are commonly vulnerable 
to threats and exploitation. 
The problems associated with Web-based exploitation can affect a wide array of 
users, including end users surfing Web sites, using instant messaging, and shopping 
online. End users can have many security problems associated With their Web 
browsers, as well. This chapter discussed possible vulnerabilities, how to securely surf 
the Web, and how to shop online safely. 
Another issue the Security+ Technician needs to understand is securing Web- 
based services and servers. Since Web-based services are usually exposed to the 
public Internet, thus increasing risk, Security+ Technicians will need to know how 
to deal with issues relating to these services. 
This chapter also looked at FTP and LDAP services relating to the Web and 
examined security issues related to FTP and how exploitable it really is. The last 
section dealt with LDAR its vulnerabilities, and how it provides security benefits 
when properly configured. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Web Security 
r-d 
El 
Web servers on the network that you are not aware exist are sometimes 
called rogue Web servers. If you find such rogue Web servers, you should 
disable the Web-based services to remove these Web servers from the 
network if they are not needed. 
The first task you should undertake to lock down your Web server is 
applying the latest patches and updates from the vendor. After this task is 
accomplished, the network administrator should follow the vendor's 
recommendations for securely configuring Web services. 
Maintaining a secure Web server means ensuring that all scripts and Web 
applications deployed on the Web server are free from Trojans, backdoors, 
or other malicious code. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
347 
gl 
Web browsers are a potential threat to security. Early browser programs 
were fairly simple, but today's browsers are complex; they are capable not 
only of displaying text and graphics but of playing sound files and movies 
and running executable code. The browser software also usually stores 
information about the computer on which it is installed and about the 
user (data stored as cookies on the local hard disk), which can be uploaded 
to Web servers~either deliberately by the user or in response to code on a 
Web site without the user's knowledge. 
ActiveX controls are programs that can run on Web pages or as self- 
standing programs. Essentially, it is Microsoft's implementation of Java. 
ActiveX controls can be used to run attacks on a machine if created by 
malicious programmers. 
A cookie is a kind of token or message that a Web site hands off to a Web 
browser to help track a visitor between clicks. The browser stores the 
message on the visitor's local hard disk in a text file. The file contains 
information that identifies the user and their preferences or previous 
activities at that Web site. 
FTP Security 
V------d Another part of Internet-based security one should consider is FTP-based 
traffic. FTP is an Application Layer protocol within the TCP/IP protocol 
suite that allows transfer of data. 
Active FTP uses port 21 as the control port and port 20 as the data port 
gl Passive FTP is initiated by the client by sending a PASV command to the 
server and uses ephemeral ports (ports above 1023, which are temporarily 
assigned) that are set up using the PORT command to transfer data. 
Anonymous connections to servers running the FTP process allow the 
attacking station to download a virus, overwrite a file, or abuse trusts that 
the FTP server has in the same domain. 
gl FTP is like Telnet in that the credentials and data are sent in cleartext, so if 
captured via a passive attack like sniffing, they can be exploited to provide 
unauthorized access. 
www.syngress.com 

348 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
r-d S/FTP establishes a tunnel between the FTP client and the server, and 
transmits data between them using encryption and authentication that is 
based on digital certificates. It uses port 22. 
LDAP Security 
El 
gl 
gl 
El 
LDAP clients can use anonymous authentication, where they aren't 
required to provide a password, or simple authentication, where passwords 
are sent unencrypted before being allowed access to the directory. 
To ensure security, LDAPS can 
encrypted. 
be used to send authentication information 
Authentication information is sent from the client to the server as part of 
a "bind" operation, while closing the connection is part of an "unbind" 
operation. 
LDAP can be used over SSL/TLS, which extends security. LDAPS 
encrypts connections using SSL/TLS. 
LDAP use TCP/UDP port 389 and LDAPS uses port 636. By blocking 
these ports form the Internet, it will prevent those outside of the internal 
network from listening or making connections to these ports. 
LDAP-enabled Web servers can handle authentication centrally, using the 
LDAP directory. This means users will only need a single login name and 
password for accessing all resources that use the directory. 
LDAP is vulnerable to various security threats, including spoofing of 
directory services, as well as attacks against the databases that provide the 
directory services and many of the other attack types that can be launched 
against other types of services (for example, viruses, OS and protocol 
exploits, excessive use of resources and DoS attacks, and so on). 


350 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
nothing, so there is no reason to risk your data and the integrity of your system 
and network by continuing to run an outdated version of the browser. 
Q: 
A: 
I want to FTP a file to a server. When I logged into the FTP server with my 
credentials and started to transfer the file, I remembered hearing that FTP is 
sent in cleartext. Have I just exposed myself to an attacker? 
Yes.When you use FTP you can potentially expose yourself to hackers that 
may be eavesdropping on the network. Because of this fact, you should always 
consider an alternative if you really want to be secure when using FTP. S/FTP 
is one such alternative. 
Q" Sniffers are used on my network. Is it possible to FTP something securely? 
A: Yes, you can use S/FTR which is a secure form of FTE It is very similar to 
SSH in that it encrypts the traffic sent so that eavesdropping will not pick up 
any usable data. 
Q" i have a Web server that uses CGI scripting to work with a backend database. I 
have learned that there may be problems with code-based exploits. Should I be 
concerned when using CGI? 
A" CGI scripts can definitely be exploited, especially if they are poorly written. 
CGI scripts can be exploited within the browser itself and may open up poten- 
tial holes in your Web server or provide access to the database. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
. 
When performing a security audit on a company's Web servers, you note that 
the Web service is running under the security context of an account that is a 
member of the server's local Administrators group.What is the best recom- 
mendation to make in your audit results? 
A. Use a different account for the Web service that is a member of the 
Domain Administrators group rather than the local Administrators group. 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
351 
, 
. 
o 
B. Use a different account for the Web service that only has access to those 
specific files and directories that will be used by the Web site. 
C. Use a different account for the Web service that is not a member of an 
Administrators group but has access to all files on the system. 
D. Recommend that the company continue with this practice as long as the 
account is just a member of the local Administrators group and not the 
Domain Administrators group. 
While performing a routine port scan of your company's internal network, 
you find several systems that are actively listening on port 80. What does this 
mean and what should you do? 
A. There are rogue FTP servers, and they should be disabled. 
B. There are rogue HTTP servers, and they should be disabled. 
C. These are LDAP servers, and should be left alone. 
D. These are FTP servers, and should be left alone. 
You determine that someone has been using Web spoofing attacks to get your 
users to give out their passwords to an attacker. The users tell you that the site 
at which they have been entering the passwords shows the same address that 
normally shows in the address bar of the browser.What is the most likely 
reason that the users cannot see the URL that they are actually using? 
A~ 
Bo 
C~ 
D~ 
The attacker is using a digital certificate created by a third-party CA. 
The attacker is using HTTP/S to prevent the browser from seeing the real 
URL. 
The attacker is using ActiveX to prevent the Web server from sending its 
URL. 
The attacker is using JavaScript to prevent the browser from displaying the 
real URL. 
You are setting up a new Web server for your company. In setting directory 
properties and permissions through the Web server, you want to ensure that 
hackers are not able to navigate through the directory structure of the site, or 
execute any compiled programs that are on the hard disk. At the same time, 
you want visitors to the site to be able to enjoy the code you've included in 
HTML documents, and in scripts stored in a directory of the Web site.Which 
of the following will be part of the properties and permissions that you set? 

352 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
A. Disable script source access 
B. Set execute permissions in the directory to 
C. Disable directory browsing 
D. Enable log visits 
"None" 
o 
A user contacts you with concerns over cookies found on their hard disk. The 
user visited a banking site several months ago, and when filling out a form on 
the site, provided some personal information that was saved to a cookie. Even 
though this was months ago, when the user returned to the site, it displayed 
his name and other information on the Web page. This led the user to check 
his computer, and find that the cookie created months ago is still on the hard 
disk of his computer.What type of cookie is this? 
A. Temporary 
B. Session 
C. Persistent 
D. Tracking 
o 
When reviewing security on an intranet, an administrator finds that the Web 
server is using port 22. The administrator wants transmission of data on the 
intranet to be secure.Which of the following is true about the data being 
transmitted using this port? 
A. TFTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. 
B. TFTP is being used, so transmission of data is insecure. 
C. FTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. 
D. S/FTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. 
, 
A number of scans are being performed on computers on the network. When 
determining which computer is running the scans on these machines, you 
find that the source of the scans are the FTP server.What type of attack is 
occurring? 
A. Bounce attack 
B. Phishing 
C. DoS 
D. Web site spoofing 

Communication Security: Web Based Services 9 Chapter 5 
353 
~ 
You are attempting to query an object in an LDAP directory using the distin- 
guished name of the object. The object has the following attributes: 
cn: 4321 
givenName: John 
sn: Doe 
telephoneNumber: 905 555 1212 
employeeID: 4321 
mail: jdoe@nonexist.com 
objectClass: organizationalPerson 
Based on this information, which of the following would be the distinguished 
name of the object? 
A. dc=nonexist, dc=com 
B. cn=4321 
C. dn: cn=4321, dc-nonexist, dc=com 
D. jdoe@nonexist.com 
9. You are creating a new LDAP directory, in which you will need to develop a 
hierarchy of organizational units and objects. To perform these tasks, on which 
of the following servers will you create the directory structure? 
A. DIT 
B. Tree server 
C. Root server 
D. Branch server 
www.syngress.com 
h,~ 

354 
Chapter 5 9 Communication Security: Web Based Services 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. 
B 
6. 
D 
2. B 
7. A 
3. D 
8. C 
4. C 
9. C 
5. C 

Chapter 6 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
9 Device-based Security 
9 Media-based Security 
Exam Objectives Review" 
I-Vl Summary of Exam Objectives 
l-Vl Exam Objectives Fast Track 
I-Vl Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
I-Vl Self Test 
l-Vl Self Test Quick Answer Key 
357 

358 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Introduction 
Implementing infrastructure security is one of the biggest parts of being a 
Security+ technician. As such, device and media security is covered extensively in 
the Security+ exam. Security+ technicians must know all of the components of a 
network and all of the potential issues that may occur regarding every piece of 
common infrastructure within a network environment. 
This chapter covers all of the critical network infrastructure including devices 
such as firewalls, routers, switches, servers, workstations, and the cabling that con- 
nects them all together, and looks at how to connect these items with a wireless 
connection. It also looks at Intrusion Detection System (IDS) devices and how 
they fit in the topology, as well as other types of network monitoring equipment. 
Lastly, this chapter looks at how hard disks, Smart Cards, and other forms of 
media are secured. Not only is it important to understand how all of the pieces fit 
together, but it is also important to understand how each media form is vulnerable to 
attack and exploitation and how the Security+ technician needs to view each one. 
According to the CompTIA objectives for the Security+ exam, infrastruc- 
ture security comprises 20 percent of the Security+ exam. Approximately 
one-third of this is related to devices and media. Firewalls, routers, 
switches, IDSes, and all types of media are covered extensively on the 
Security+ exam. 
Device-based Security 
A large component of infrastructure security is based on the proper implementa- 
tion of hardware devices in a network. By implementing and configuring hardware 
devices correctly, Security+ technicians can greatly decrease their vulnerability to 
attack. For example, properly configuring a firewall can help protect networks from 
external attacks. 
The Security+ exam focuses on the situations in which firewalls should be used 
and the appropriate implementation of the devices. In many security implementa- 
tions, the correct devices are located in the correct places on the network but are 
incorrectly configured, therefore leaving the network vulnerable to attack. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
359 
Alternatively, many networks do not have the correct security devices in place due 
to a simple lack of planning, and are therefore vulnerable. 
Knowing what security problems are inherent in a device is critical to knowing 
how to implement the device and the necessary security precautions around that 
device. For example, knowing the insecure nature of wireless transmissions and 
their range can help when planning where to physically locate wireless access 
points. This section looks at a variety of hardware devices found on most networks, 
where in the infrastructure they are located, what purposes they serve, the security 
they add to the network, and the possible exploits that can be performed on them. 
It also covers some "best practices" on how to configure these devices and review 
what their overall impact is on network security. 
Firewalls have evolved a great deal over the years, and the Security+ 
exam expects you to be familiar with the various generations of fire- 
walls as well as when each type should and should not be implemented. 
Part of the exam is testing your knowledge on using the right tool for 
the right job. In some cases, you may be presented with a scenario 
where an older generation of firewall technology would be a better fit 
than the latest and greatest. Keep this in mind when analyzing any situ- 
ation. 
Firewalls 
A firewall is the most common device used to protect an internal network from 
outside intruders.When properly configured, a firewall blocks access to an internal 
network from the outside, and blocks users of the internal network from accessing 
potentially dangerous external networks or ports. 
There are three firewall technologies examined in the Security+ exam: 
9 
Packet filtering 
9 
Application layer gateways 
9 
Stateful inspection 
All of these technologies have advantages and disadvantages, but the Security+ 
exam specifically focuses on their abilities and the configuration of their rules. A 
www.syngress.com 

360 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
packet-filtering firewall works at the network layer of the Open Systems 
Interconnect (OSI) model and is designed to operate rapidly by either allowing or 
dewing packets. The second generation of firewalls is called "circuit level firewalls," 
but this type has been largely disbanded as later generations of firewalls absorbed 
their functions. An application layer gateway operates at the application layer of the 
OSI model, analyzing each packet and verifying that it contains the correct type of 
data for the specific application it is attempting to communicate with. A stateful 
inspection firewall checks each packet to verify that it is an expected response to a 
current communications session. This type of firewall operates at the network layer, 
but is aware of the transport, session, presentation, and application layers and derives 
its state table based on these layers of the OSI model.Another term for this type of 
firewall is a "deep packet inspection" firewall, indicating its use of all layers within 
the packet including examination of the data itself. 
To better understand the function of these different types of firewalls, we must 
first understand what exactly the firewall is doing. The highest level of security 
requires that firewalls be able to access, analyze, and utilize communication infor- 
mation, communication-derived state, and application-derived state, and be able to 
perform information manipulation. Each of these terms is defined below: 
9 
Communication 
Information 
Information from all layers in the 
packet. 
9 
Communication-derived 
State The state as derived from previous 
communications. 
9 
Application-derived 
State That state as derived from other applica- 
tions. 
9 
Information Manipulation The ability to perform logical or arithmetic 
functions on data in any part of the packet. 
Different firewall technologies support these requirements in different ways. 
Again, keep in mind that some circumstances may not require all of these, but only 
a subset. In that case, it is best to go with a firewall technology that fits the situa- 
tion rather than one that is simply the newest technology. Table 6.1 shows the fire- 
wall technologies and their support of these security requirements. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media * Chapter 6 
361 
Table 6.1 Firewall Technologies 
Requirement 
Packet Filtering 
Application 
Layer Gateways 
Stateful Inspection 
Communication 
Partial 
Partial 
Yes 
Information 
Communication- 
derived State 
No 
Partial 
Yes 
Application- 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
derived State 
Information 
Partial 
Yes 
Yes 
Manipulation 
Packet-filtering Firewalls 
A packet-filtering firewall can be configured to deny or allow access to specific 
ports or Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. The two policies that can be followed 
when creating packet-filtering firewall rules are "allow by default" and "deny by 
default." "Allow by default" allows all traffic to pass through the firewall except 
traffic that is specifically denied. "Deny by default" blocks all traffic from passing 
through the firewall except for traffic that is explicitly allowed. 
Deny by default is the best security policy, because it follows the general secu- 
rity concept of restricting all access to the minimum level necessary to support 
business needs. The best practice is to deny access to all ports except those that are 
absolutely necessary. For example, if configuring an externally facing firewall for a 
Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), Security+ technicians may want to deny all ports 
except port 443 (the Secure Sockets Layer [SSL] port) in order to require all con- 
nections coming in to the DMZ to use Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure 
(HTTPS) to connect to the Web servers. Although it is not practical to assume that 
only one port will be needed, the idea is to keep access to a minimum by fol- 
lowing the best practice of dewing by default. 
A firewall works in two directions. It can be used to keep intruders at bay, and 
it can be used to restrict access to an external network from its internal users.Why 
do this? A good example is found in some Trojan horse programs. When Trojan 
horse applications are initially installed, they report back to a centralized location to 
notify the author or distributor that the program has been activated. Some Trojan 
horse applications do this by reporting to an Internet Relay Chat (IP, C) channel or 
www.syngress.com 

362 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
by connecting to a specific port on a remote computer. By denying access to these 
external ports in the firewall configuration, Security+ technicians can prevent these 
malicious programs from compromising their internal network. 
The Security+ exam extensively covers ports and how they should come into 
play in a firewall configuration.The first thing to know is that out of 65,535 ports, 
ports 0 through 1023 are considered well-known ports. These ports are used for spe- 
cific network services and should be considered the only ports allowed to transmit 
traffic through a firewall. Ports outside the range of 0 through 1023 are either regis- 
tered ports or dynamic~private ports. 
9 User ports range from 1024 through 49,151 
9 Dynamic/private ports range from 49,152 through 65,535 
If there are no specialty applications communicating with a network, any con- 
nection attempt to a port outside the well-known ports range should be considered 
suspect.While there are some network applications that work outside of this range 
that may need to go through a firewall, they should be considered the exception 
and not the rule.With this in mind, ports 0 through 1023 still should not be 
enabled. Many of these ports also offer vulnerabilities; therefore, it is best to con- 
tinue with the best practice of denying by default and only opening the ports nec- 
essary for specific needs. 
For a complete list of assigned ports, visit the Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority (IANA) at www.iana.net. The direct link to their list of ports is at 
www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers.The IANA is the centralized organiza- 
tion responsible for assigning IP addresses and ports. They are also the authoritative 
source for which ports applications are authorized to use for the services the appli- 
cations are providing. 
www.syngress.com 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
363 
A port is a connection point into a device. Ports can be physical, such as serial 
ports or parallel ports, or they can be logical. Logical ports are ports used by net- 
working protocols to define a network connection point to a device. Using 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), both TCP and User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) logical ports are used as connection points to a network 
device. Since a network device can have thousands of connections active at any 
given time, these ports are used to differentiate between the connections to the 
device. 
A port is described as well known for a particular service when it is normal 
and common to find that particular software running at that particular port 
number. For example, Web servers run on port 80 by default, and File Transfer 
Protocol (FTP) file transfers use ports 20 and 21 on the server when it is in active 
www.syngress.com 

364 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
mode. In passive mode, the server uses a random port for data connection and port 
21 for the control connection. 
The Security+ exam requires that you understand how the FTP process 
works. There are two modes in which FTP operates: active and passive. 
Active Mode 
1. The FTP client initializes a control connection from a random port 
higher than 1024 to the server's port 21. 
2. The FTP client sends a PORT command instructing the server to 
connect to a port on the client one higher than the client's control port. 
This is the client's data port. 
3. The server sends data to the client from server port 20 to the 
client's data port. 
Passive Mode 
1. The FTP client initializes a random port higher than 1023 as the 
control port, and initializes the port one higher than the control port as 
the data port. 
2. The FTP client sends a PASV command instructing the server to 
open a random data port. 
3. The server sends a PORT command notifying the client of the data 
port number that was just initialized. 
4. 
The FTP client then sends data from the data port it initialized 
to the data port the server instructed it to use. 
To determine what port number to use, technicians need to know what port 
number the given software is using. To make that determination easier, there is a list 
of common services that run on computers along with their respective well-known 
ports. This allows the technician to apply the policy of dewing by default, and only 
open the specific port necessary for the application to work. For example, if they 
want to allow the Siebel Customer Relations Management application from Oracle 
to work through a firewall, they would check against a port list (or the vendor's 
documentation) to determine that they need to allow traffic to port 2320 to go 
through the firewall. A good place to search for port numbers and their associated 
services online is on Wikipedia. This list is fairly up-to-date and can help you find 
information on a very large number of services running on all ports. 
(http: //en.wikipedia. org/wiki/List_of_TCP_and_UDP_port_numbers).You will 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media = Chapter 6 
365 
notice that even Trojan horse applications have well-known port numbers. A few of 
these have been listed in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2 Well-known Ports of Trojan Horses 
Trojan Horse 
Port 
AimSpy 
Back Orifice 
Back Orifice 2000 
OpwinTrojan 
SubSeven 
WinSatan 
777 
31337 and 31338 (modifiable) 
8787, 54320, and 54321 (modifiable) 
10000 a n d 10005 
1243, 1999, 2773, 2774, 6667, 6711, 6712, 6713, 6776, 
7000, 7215, 16959, 27374, 27573, and 54283 (depending 
on the version) 
999 and 6667 
Unfortunately, for nearly every possible port number, there is a virus or Trojan 
horse application that could be running there. For a more comprehensive list of 
Trojans listed by the port they use, go to the SANS Institute Web site at 
www.sans.org/resources/idfaq/oddports.php. 
The Security+ exam puts a great deal of weight on your knowledge of 
specific well-known ports for common network services. The most 
important ports to remember are: 
20 
FTP Active Mode Control Port (see the Security+ exam warning 
on FTP for further information) 
21 
FTP Active Mode Data Port (see the Security+ exam warning on 
FTP for further information) 
22 
Secure Shell (SSH) 
23 
Telnet 
25 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) 
80 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 
110 
Post Office Protocol 3 (POP3) 
119 
Network News Transfer Protocol (NNTP) 
143 
Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) 
443 
SSL (HTTPS) 
Memorizing these ports and the services that run on them will help 
you with firewall and network access questions on the Security+ exam. 
www.syngress.com 

366 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Packet filtering has both benefits and drawbacks. One of the benefits is speed. 
Since only the header of a packet is examined and a simple table of rules is 
checked, this technology is very fast. A second benefit is ease of use. The rules for 
this type of firewall are easy to define and ports can be opened or closed quickly. In 
addition, packet-filtering firewalls are transparent to network devices. Packets can 
pass through a packet-filtering firewall without the sender or receiver of the packet 
being aware of the extra step. A major bonus of using a packet-filtering firewall is 
that most current routers support packet filtering. 
There are two major drawbacks to packet filtering: 
9 A port is either open or closed.With this configuration, there is no way of 
simply opening a port in the firewall when a specific application needs it 
and then closing it when the transaction is complete.When a port is open, 
there is always a hole in the firewall waiting for someone to attack. 
9 
The second major drawback to pack filtering is that it does not under- 
stand the contents of any packet beyond the header. Therefore, if a packet 
has a valid header, it can contain any payload. This is a common failing 
point that is easily exploited. 
To expand on this, since only the header is examined, packets cannot be filtered 
by user name, only IP addresses.With some network services such as Trivial File 
Transfer Protocol (TFTP) or various UNIX "r" commands, this can cause a 
problem. Since the port for these services is either open or closed for all users, the 
options are either to restrict system administrators from using the services, or invite 
the possibility of any user connecting and using these services. The operation of 
this firewall technology is illustrated in Figure 6.1. 
Referring to Figure 6.1 the sequence of events is as follows: 
1. Communication from the client starts by going through the seven layers of 
the OSI model. 
2. The packet is then transmitted over the physical media to the packet-fil- 
tering firewall. 
3. The firewall works at the network layer of the OSI model and examines 
the header of the packet. 
4. If the packet is destined for an allowed port, the packet is sent through the 
firewall, over the physical media, and up through the layers of the OSI 
model to the destination address and port. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
367 
Figure 6.1 Packet Filtering Technology 
Application-layer Gateways 
The second firewall technology is called application filtering or an application-layer 
gateway. This technology is more advanced than packet filtering, as it examines the 
entire packet and determines what should be done with the packet based on spe- 
cific defined rules. For example, with an application-layer gateway, if a Telnet packet 
is sent through the standard FTP port, the firewall can determine this and block 
the packet if a rule is defined disallowing Telnet traffic through the FTP port. It 
should be noted that this technology is used by proxy servers to provide applica- 
tion-layer filtering to clients. 
One of the major benefits of application-layer gateway technology is its appli- 
cation-layer awareness. Since application-layer gateway technology can determine 
more information from a packet than a simple packet filter can, application-layer 
gateway technology uses more complex rules to determine the validity of any 
given packet. These rules take advantage of" the fact that application-layer gateways 
can determine whether data in a packet matches what is expected for data going to 
a specific port. For example, the application-layer gateway can tell if packets con- 
taining controls for a Trojan horse application are being sent to the HTTP port 
(80) and thus, can block them. 
www.syngress.com 

368 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
While application-layer gateway technology is much more advanced than 
packet-filtering technology, it does have its drawbacks. Due to the fact that every 
packet is disassembled completely then checked against a complex set of rules, 
application-layer gateways are much slower than packet filters. In addition, only a 
limited set of application rules are predefined, and any application not included in 
the predefined list must have custom rules defined and loaded into the firewall. 
Finally, application-layer gateways process the packet at the application layer of the 
OSI model. By doing so, the application-layer gateway must then rebuild the 
packet from the top down and send it back out. This breaks the concept behind 
client/server architecture and slows the firewall down even further. 
Client/server architecture is based on the concept of a client system requesting 
the services of a server system. This was developed to increase application perfor- 
mance and cut down on the network traffic created by earlier file sharing or main- 
frame architectures.When using an application-layer gateway, the client/server 
architecture is broken as the packets no longer flow between the client and the 
server. Instead, they are deconstructed and reconstructed at the firewall. The client 
makes a connection to the firewall at which point the packet is analyzed, then the 
firewall creates a connection to the server for the client. By doing this, the firewall 
is acting as a proxy between the client and the server. The operation of this tech- 
nology is illustrated in Figure 6.2. 
Figure 6.2 Application-layer Gateway Technology 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media ~ Chapter 6 
369 
Stateful Inspection Firewalls 
Stateful inspection is a compromise between these two existing technologies. It 
overcomes the drawbacks of both simple packet filtering and application-layer gate- 
ways, while enhancing the security provided by the firewall. Stateful inspection 
technology supplies application-layer awareness without actually breaking the 
client/server architecture by disassembling and rebuilding the packet. Additionally, it 
is much faster than an application-layer gateway due to the way packets are han- 
dled. It is also more secure than a packet-filtering firewall, due to application-layer 
awareness and the introduction of application- and communication-derived state 
awareness. 
The primary feature of stateful inspection is the monitoring of application and 
communication states. This means that the firewall is aware of specific application 
communication requests and knows what should be expected out of any given 
communication session. This information is stored in a dynamically updated state 
table, and any communication not explicitly allowed by a rule in this table is 
denied. This allows the firewall to dynamically conform to the needs of the applica- 
tions and open or close ports as needed. Ports are closed when the requested trans- 
actions are completed, which provides another layer of security. 
A good example of how these different technologies work is the FTP process. 
With FTP, the client has the option of requesting that the server open a back con- 
nection.With a packet-filtering firewall, the only options are either leaving all ports 
beyond port 1023 open thus allowing the back connection to be permitted, or 
closing them, which makes the attempted communication fail. 
With an application-layer gateway, this type of communication can easily be 
permitted, but the performance of the entire session will be degraded due to the 
additional sessions created by the application-layer gateway itself. With stateful 
inspection, the firewall simply examines the packet where the back connection is 
requested, then allows the back connection to go through the tqrewall when the 
server requests it on the port previously specified by the requesting packet. When 
the FTP session is terminated, the tqrewall closes off all ports that were used and 
removes their entries from the state table. Figure 6.3 shows how this technology 
works. 
www.syngress.com 

370 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Figure 6.3 Stateful Inspection Technology 
Firewalls comprise one of the most important aspects of network secu- 
rity as it relates to connections to the Internet. If you understand the 
basic concepts of how the different firewalls work and know the proper 
place to implement them, you will do fine on these Security+ exam 
questions. You do not have to be a firewall specialist to pass the 
Security+ exam; you just have to know what they are, how they work, 
what to do with them, and how the different types of firewalls should 
be configured. 
Keep in mind that while a firewall is important to infrastructure 
security relating to Internet connections, it is not the only aspect of net- 
work security. All of the subjects discussed in this book should be taken 
into consideration as part of your overall security plan. The Security+ 
exam expects you to have a general knowledge of all important security 
concepts, not just specific devices such as firewalls. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
371 
Routers 
1Zouters are a critical part of all networks and can be both a security aid and a 
security vulnerability. A router basically has two or more network interfaces 
through which network traffic is forwarded or blocked. They are often used to seg- 
ment networks into smaller subnets or to link multiple networks together. The 
router decides how and when to forward packets between the networks based on 
an internal routin~ table. This routing table tells the router which packets to forward. 
The routing table can either be static where each route is explicitly defined, or 
dynamic where the router learns new routes by using routing protocols. In addition 
to the routing table, a typical router also supports access control lists (ACLs) that 
specify which packets to allow or explicitly block. Every packet going through a 
router will be checked against the ACL to see if the packet is allowed to be for- 
warded, and also checked against the routing table to determine where to forward 
the packet if allowed. It also tells the router which network(s) exist on which inter- 
faces, and enables the router to put the packet on the appropriate interface. 
Routers are an important part of your network infrastructure and just 
like any other device, they are vulnerable to a variety of attacks. You 
should be aware of some of the basic vulnerabilities of routers and how 
to compensate for those vulnerabilities. Keep this type of information in 
mind for all network devices, and you will be better prepared for the 
exam. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

372 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Most current routers offer security capabilities along with their routing func- 
tionality. Segmenting a network using routers limits the amount of data flowing 
between segments. Typically, this applies to broadcast traffic. Not propagating broad- 
cast traffic between segments limits the amount of data that can be obtained from 
them using a sniffer. The less information made available to a potential attacker the 
better. 
Routers also allow technicians to explicitly deny some packets the ability to be 
forwarded between segments. For example, using just the internal security features 
of some routers can prevent users on the internal network from using Telnet to 
access external systems. Telnet is always a security risk, as the passwords and all 
communications are transmitted in cleartext. Because of this, it is best not to create 
Telnet sessions between the internal network and an external network.Without a 
firewall, a rule can be put in place within the router to drop packets attempting to 
connect to port 23 on any external system.All of this is done by properly config- 
uring the ACLs for the router. An example rule for Cisco routers is as follows: 
access-list I01 deny any any eq 23 
Another useful security feature of routers is their ability to block spoofed 
packets. Spoofed packets are packets that contain an IP address in the header that is 
not the actual IP address of the originating computer. This technique is often used 
by hackers to fool systems into thinking that the packet came from an authorized 
system, when it actually originated at the hacker's system. Routers combat this by 
giving technicians the ability to drop packets coming through an interface from the 
wrong subnet. For example, if a packet comes in from the router's external inter- 
face using an IP address from the network on the router's internal interface, the 
router can be instructed to drop the packet and not forward it. It should be noted 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
373 
that this ability has not always been a feature of routers and some older routers or 
routers using old firmware or operating systems (OSes) may not provide this func- 
tion. This is another reason to keep the router's firmware and OS up-to-date. To 
keep routing tables up-to-date between multiple routers on a network, the routers 
can communicate changes to the routing tables via routing, protocols. These protocols 
are designed to let routers send data to each other with the specific purpose of 
keeping the routing tables current across all routers. There are several different 
routing protocols with each having specific capabilities and packet formats. These 
routing protocols are primarily broken up into two types: link-state and distance- 
vector. An example of a distance-vector routing protocol is Routing Information 
Protocol (RIP), and an example of a distance-vector routing protocol is Open 
Shortest Path First (OSPF). 
These routing protocols are great for keeping routing tables up-to-date, and 
make the administration of routing within a network much easier. They do come 
with a downside, however. Attackers can sometimes add their own entries into 
routing tables using these protocols, and can effectively take control of a network. 
This type of attack is performed by spoofing the address of another router within a 
communication to the target router, and putting the new routing information into 
the packet. This attack is not easy, as most routers provide some level of password 
security within the routing protocols. However, it is important to be aware of this 
potential vulnerability and to make sure that the most secure routing protocols are 
being used. 
A method of avoiding this problem is to use static routes instead of relying on 
routing protocols. Static routes are predefined routes that are manually set in the 
routing table. Using static routes eliminates the possibility of a routing table being 
modified by attacks exploiting routing protocols. 
When taking the Security+ exam, make sure that you understand the 
difference between firewalls, routers, and switches. You may be asked 
questions that make you choose the best device to use in a particular 
situation. Knowing which devices should be implemented separately 
and which can be combined will help in some situations. For example, 
the basic type of firewall technology available in some routers is suffi- 
cient for some environments, and should therefore be considered a valid 
option rather than requiring a separate device for each purpose. 
www.syngress.com 

374 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Switches 
Switches are a type of networking device similar to hubs, which connect network 
equipment together. Switches differ from routers primarily in that routers are used 
to join network segments and Layer 2 switches are used to create that network seg- 
ment. Layer 2 switches operate at the data link layer of the OSI model and use the 
Media Access Control (MAC) addresses of network cards to route packets to the 
correct port. Layer 3 switches are closer in function to routers and operate at the 
network layer of the OSI model. These switches route packets based on the network 
address, rather than using the MAC address. They both offer a great advantage over 
hubs in that they eliminate packet collisions by giving each system a direct connection 
with its destination system.A packet collision occurs when two or more packets are 
sent across the physical network at the same time.When many systems are on a net- 
work attempting to communicate, a large number of collisions can occur and slow 
down the overall network unless they are curbed by the use of a switch. 
Switches offer greater network security by controlling the amount of data that 
can be gathered by sniffing on the network.With a hub, all data going across the 
network is sent to all ports on the hub. This means that any system connected into 
the hub is able to run a sniffer and collect all of the data going to all of the systems 
connected to the hub. This can give an attacker access to passwords, confidential 
data, and further insight into the network configuration.With a switch, each con- 
nection is given a direct path to its destination. This has the side effect of blocking 
communications data from systems passively sniffing on the network. Since they 
can only see data coming from and going to their system, they are not able to 
gather much unauthorized data.When a switch first boots up without any infor- 
mation as to which systems are connected to which port, it broadcasts the traffic 
for individual systems until their location is determined. After the switch knows 
which port each system is connected to, it routes packets directly out that port 
rather than broadcasting. 
However, if an intruder gains administrative access to a switch, they can over- 
come this safety feature by using the switched port analyzer (SPAN) or mirroring 
feature. To use SPAN, the switch is configured to route a copy of all packets going 
to or from one or more ports to a specific port. A sniffer is then placed on the port 
that the copy is being routed to and reads all of the packets going through the 
switch. The SPAN feature is often used by network administrators to perform trou- 
bleshooting on their networks; however, this can also be exploited by an intruder. 
Switches also have the ability to segment networks using virtual local area net- 
works (VLANs), which gives the added capability of segmenting out the network 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media ~ Chapter 6 
375 
and making the overall network more manageable. In addition,VLANs can add 
security to a network. By segmenting a network, administrators can isolate the 
traffic going across each VLAN. This keeps the data flowing across one VLAN from 
being visible to the other. Another vulnerability of switches is that there is a chance 
for an attacker to override the security features provided by the switch. For 
example, a DoS attack can be performed against some older switches similar to the 
type that can be performed against a router. This can result in overloading of the 
buffers in the switch, making it act like a hub and sending all data going through 
the switch to all ports. This would then allow an attacker to sniff out data as if they 
were connected to a hub rather than a switch. Keep in mind, this vulnerability only 
affects older switches and should not be a problem with newer switches. 
In addition, packets can be sent to a switch that can make it think an attacking 
system is a different system on the network and cause it to route packets intended 
for the target over to the attacker instead. This is called ARP spoqfin~ and is done by 
sending an Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) packet to the switch containing 
the machine name of the target and the MAC address of the attacker. By doing an 
ARP spoof, intruders can hijack sessions that a client was previously using. 
This can also be used as a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack between two 
network devices. Figure 6.4 shows an example network of how this works between 
two clients. 
Figure 6.4 Sample Network for ARP Spoofing 
www.syngress.com 

376 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
To perform an attack using ARP spoofing, the intruder would follow this 
procedure: 
1. The intruder (I) sends an ARP packet to a client (C1) using the IP address 
of another client (C2), but the MAC address for the intruder (I). 
2. The intruder (I) sends an ARP packet to a client (C2) using the IP address 
of another client (C1), but the MAC address for the intruder (I). 
3. Now both clients have ARP cache entries for each other's IP address, but 
the MAC address for these entries point to the intruder. The intruder 
routes packets between C1 and C2 so that communications are not inter- 
rupted. 
4. The intruder sniffs all packets it is routing and is able to see all communi- 
cations between the clients. 
This process allows intruders to view all traffic between two clients; however, 
ARP spoofing can potentially be more damaging. By performing a MITM attack 
between a router and the switch, an intruder can see all data coming through the 
router. Additionally, if an intruder replies to every ARP request sent out by the 
switch, it can intercept traffic going to all clients. This gives the intruder the option 
of performing a DoS attack by not allowing any client to communicate with the 
switch, not routing traffic to the intended client, and sniffing the data being com- 
municated via the MITM attack. 
Another vulnerability of most switches is that they can be configured by a stan- 
dard Telnet session. If the network from which the Telnet session originated is 
sniffed, passwords for the switch can be easily obtained, because they are sent in 
cleartext. Some newer switches allow a secure session to be made for configuring 
the switch. This secure session is made by using SSH instead of Telnet to connect to 
the router. All communication between the client and the router is encrypted when 
using SSH. Also, with both older and newer switches, configuration can be per- 
formed via a console connection to the switch so that no configuration data goes 
across the network. This is the most secure method of configuring switches, but 
most network administrators find it inconvenient. SSH provides both security and 
convenience on switches. 
Wireless 
Wireless technology is discussed in detail in Chapter 4 of this guide; however, based 
on the Security+ exam objectives, devices related to wireless technology are also 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
377 
covered in this section.Wireless technology provides a convenient method of 
accessing a network by eliminating the cables that are generally associated with net- 
work connectivity. While this can be a great convenience to laptop users, it intro- 
duces a whole new world of security vulnerabilities to a network. 
The primary devices associated with wireless networking are wireless access points 
and the wireless network cards used to communicate with the access points. There are 
other devices such as signal boosters, but they are not a component of this exami- 
nation.Wireless network cards are designed to communicate with either other 
wireless network cards or to a wireless access point. Card-to-card communication is 
considered an "ad-hoc network" and are commonly used to quickly link two sys- 
tems together without the use of either a hardware or software access point. 
A new attack technique that has risen in the popularity of wireless networks is 
war drivino~. This involves a hacker driving around with a laptop equipped with a 
wireless network card looking for wireless cells to connect to. Usually they will 
have a high-powered antenna to increase the effective range of their scans. In 
recent news, war drivers have been able to easily connect to corporate and govern- 
ment networks using this technique. The vulnerabilities that were exploited on 
these networks could have been negated if the implementation of the wireless net- 
work had included adequate security measures. In some cases, war driving has 
evolved to the point that war drivers mark vulnerable locations by marking the 
sidewalk with chalk (war chalkiny,) or other means just to make it easier on the next 
war driver. 
Wireless access points have a limited range (which differs by model and antenna 
type) within which they can effectively communicate with client systems. Keeping 
this range in mind when planning a wireless implementation significantly improves 
the corresponding security implementation. Planning the placement of the wireless 
access points so that the outer range of their transmission distance corresponds with 
the walls of the building, prevents external access to a wireless network. 
In addition, both incoming and outgoing wireless transmissions can also be 
stopped by the walls of a building.When planning a wireless implementation 
within a new construction, it is important to work with the designers to make sure 
that the external walls contain metal studs that are grounded. Using thin layers of 
aluminum under the drywall creates what is effectively a wireless shield, which will 
block most radio transmissions into and out of the building. This will also interfere 
with pager and cellular phone usage. 
Proper placement of wireless access points and appropriate shielding within the 
building where possible, will substantially decrease the vulnerability of a wireless 
www.syngress.com 

378 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
network. Applying secure transmission protocols and configuring the wireless access 
point to only accept authorized connections will also help in securing a network. 
When taking the Security+ exam and working a wireless-related ques- 
tion, keep in mind that wireless technology by itself is generally consid- 
ered insecure. When a wireless network is set up, you are basically 
handing a cable linked to your network to anyone with an antenna. The 
Security+ exam expects you to know what can and should be done to 
secure wireless connections. Pay close attention to Chapter 4 where 
wireless security is discussed in detail. 
Modems 
With the popularity of broadband access, modems are becoming less necessary for 
the average computer user; however, most systems still have modems installed and 
many corporate systems still have modems in place for remote access. These devices 
often provide a simple and unexpected method for an intruder to access systems. 
Typically, remote access servers (R_AS) and fax servers are common places for 
modems to be located within a corporate network. Properly configured modems 
are fairly secure; however, the users of a corporate network may have modems in 
their PCs that they configure so they can dial in to remotely access their systems. 
This is done when no other remote access solution has been provided or if they 
feel that the existing remote access solution is inconvenient. These types of situa- 
tions can provide an intruder with the perfect entry point to a network. The best 
solution to this problem is to implement a security policy to control the installation 
of modems on corporate systems, and to verify that those systems that need 
modems are properly secure. (Security policies are covered in detail in Chapter 12, 
"Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery.") It is 
also a good idea to audit this by using a war-dialing application (Exercise 6.01) to 
scan corporate phone numbers to verify that no unexpected modems answer. A 
walk-through audit of the corporate systems should also be done to verify that no 
unauthorized modems have been installed. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
379 
EXERCISE 6.01 
USING A WAR 
DIALER 
For this exercise, you will be using a free, publicly available war dialer to 
test a fictitious range of phone numbers. You will be using the Dialing 
Demon vl.05, which can be downloaded from www.twistedinternet. 
com/a rch ive-fi I es/Te I e p h o ny/. 
, 
After extracting the files, run DEIVlON105.exe from within a DoS 
window. After starting the executable, you will be presented 
with the screen shown in Figure 6.5. 
Figure 6.5 The Dialing Demon Splash Screen 
. 
Pressing Enter at this screen walks you through a series of config- 
uration questions to determine the communication port that 
your modem is on, its speed, and a few other options. A basic 
configuration is shown in Figure 6.6. The values used in this con- 
figuration will vary depending on your system's modem configu- 
ration and personal preferences. 
www.syngress.com 
o 

380 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Figure 6.6 The Dialing Demon Configuration Screen 
3. After the application has your basic configuration information, 
you will be prompted for the dialing configuration you wish to 
use. This includes the dialing prefix and range of numbers you 
wish to dial. The range you use here should correlate with the 
phone numbers you wish to scan. Figure 6.7 shows an example 
configuration. 
Figure 6.7 The Dialing Demon Number Range Configuration Screen 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media ~ Chapter 6 
381 
, 
As seen in Figure 6.7, dialing a large range like this can take a 
very long time. Normally it is best to do only a small range at a 
time and span it over a number of days. After answering Y to the 
"Begin dialing sequence" question, the dialer begins dialing 
every number in the range and creates a report showing which 
numbers have modems connected. 
RAS 
RAS is a common method of allowing users of a corporate network to access net- 
work resources either from home or on the road. This is another network feature 
that provides additional functionality while increasing the risk of security breaches 
of the network. A security professional's job is to minimize this risk and still pro- 
vide the necessary services that users need to perform their duties. 
RAS servers typically have an array of modems and dial-in lines available for 
users to connect through. They provide some form of authentication and then con- 
nect the user to the corporate network as if their system was physically located on 
the local area network (LAN). The authentication for RAS servers is typically done 
with Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP), Microsoft Challenge 
Handshake Authentication Protocol (MS-CHAP), Password Authentication 
Protocol (PAP), Secure Password Authentication Protocol (SPAP), or Extensible 
Authentication Protocol (EAP). CHAP and MS-CHAP are more secure than PAP 
or SPAP as they do not send an actual password to the RAS server. EAP offers 
additional features in that it can be configured to accept a plethora of third-party 
authentication methods, which could include Smart Cards, Kerberos, or biometric 
authentication. (Additional information on CHAP can be found in Chapter 3.) 
Most RAS servers offer additional security features such as mandatory callback. 
This feature requires users to connect from a number the administrator has entered 
into the system. After initial connection and authentication, the server disconnects 
and dials the user's callback number. The user's system is then required to answer 
this call to complete the connection process. Some RAS servers use caller ID to 
identify the number the user is connecting from and then to either authorize the 
connection based on the number or log it. 
RAS servers also allow technicians to implement security features that control 
the protocols available to communicate with their corporate network. For example, 
they can block protocols not in use within the network such as Internetwork 
www.syngress.com 

382 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Packet Exchange/Sequenced Packet Exchange (IPX/SPX) or Network Basic 
Input/Output System (NetBIOS). 
Knowing that specific protocols can be filtered through a RAS is very 
important. This feature allows you to implement an additional layer of 
security by keeping unauthorized protocols from being used on your 
network. The Security+ exam expects you to have knowledge of this 
security feature and to understand how it can help protect your net- 
work. Blocking unnecessary traffic of this type functions to both reduce 
your network bandwidth utilization, and prevent potential security 
breaches using the unnecessary protocols. 
When securing a RAS server, it is critical to use the best authentication 
method possible for the environment. Implementing callback verification is also a 
good idea. For example, if remote users always call from home, then callback verifi- 
cation would work well and add another layer of security. However, if dealing with 
a mobile sales force calling in from anywhere, callback verification as a security 
mechanism is severely limited. 
If an intruder detects dial-in numbers either through war dialing or some other 
means, they will try everything possible to access the network through the RAS 
server. Using strong password security for user accounts is critical to making it 
more difficult for intruders to access the network. It is also a good idea to use user 
IDs for the user's RAS account that differ from their e-mail or standard LAN 
access IDs. This makes it more difficult for intruders to access an internal network 
should they manage to get through the RAS security, as they would still need to 
determine the user's normal LAN ID and password to access any network 
resources. 
Overall, R2kS is an important service to provide when remote access is needed 
via dial-up; however, it presents several security vulnerabilities that must be 
addressed. Proper implementation of this service allows administrators to provide 
for the remote access needs of their users while keeping their network as secure as 
possible. Following is a list of industry best practices for keeping a RAS implemen- 
tation secure" 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
383 
9 
Use the most secure authentication method supported by the clients and 
servers. 
9 Encrypt communications between the client and server, where possible. 
9 
Implement mandatory callback verification, if possible. 
9 Block unnecessary network protocols from being used across the RAS 
connection. 
9 Use user IDs for the RAS server, which differ from the users' IDs for 
other servers on the LAN. 
9 Enforce strong passwords for user IDs. 
Telecom/PBX 
One area that is often overlooked in the IT security field is telecommunications. A 
company's business can be just as easily disrupted by having its telecommunications 
disabled as it can by having its computer network disabled. That makes this an 
important area to be aware of when developing an overall security plan. 
Typically, most small companies use a small number of dedicated telephone 
lines for both incoming and outgoing calls, which keeps the responsibility of pro- 
viding telephone service on the service provider. In larger companies, however, 
having dedicated lines for hundreds or thousands of employees is both inefficient 
and expensive. 
The solution to this problem is to install a Private Branch exchange (PBX), 
which is a device that handles routing of internal and external telephone lines. This 
allows a company to have a limited number of external lines and an unlimited 
(depending on the resources of the PBX) number of internal lines. By limiting the 
number of external lines, a company is able to control the cost of telephone service 
while still providing for the communications needs of its employees. For example, a 
company may have 200 internal lines or extensions but only 20 external lines. When 
an employee needs to communicate outside of the company, one of the external 
lines is used, but when two employees communicate via the telephone system, the 
routing is done completely by the PBX and no external lines are used. 
PBX systems offer a great cost benefit to large companies, but they also have 
their own vulnerabilities. Many PBXs are designed to be maintained by an off-site 
vendor, and therefore have some method of remote access available. This can be in 
the form of a modem or, on newer models, a connection to a LAN. The best prac- 
tice is to disable these remote access methods until the vendor has been notified 
www.syngress.com 

384 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
that they need to perform maintenance or prepare an update. This limits the sus- 
ceptibility to direct remote access attacks. 
PBXes are also vulnerable to DoS attacks against their external phone lines. 
There is also the possibility of them being taken over remotely and used to make 
unauthorized phone calls via the company's outgoing lines.Voicemail capability can 
also be abused. Hackers who specialize in telephone systems, called phreakers, like to 
take control over voicemail boxes that use simple passwords, and change the pass- 
words or the outgoing messages. 
Many smaller organizations are now using PBXes for telephony needs. This is 
due to the availability of cheap or free PBX systems running software released 
under the GPL license. An example of this is the Asterisk open source PBX avail- 
able at www.asterisk.org/.With the high availability of this type of software at low 
costs, it is natural for smaller companies to adopt these solutions. Software like this 
suffers from the same types of vulnerabilities as standard PBXes if not properly 
configured; therefore it should be closely examined as a security risk. 
Virtual Private Network 
The most common alternative to running RAS servers for remote access is to pro- 
vide remote access via a virtual private network (VPN).AVPN allows end users to 
create a secure tunnel through an unsecured network to connect to their corporate 
network. Typically, users simply dial into their Internet Service Provider (ISP) and 
then use a software client to create theVPN connection to their corporate net- 
work. At that point, the user's system functions as if it were located on their LAN. 
In large environments,VPNs are generally less expensive to implement and 
maintain than RAS servers, because there is no incoming telephone line or modem 
overhead. In addition, a higher level of security can be implemented as communi- 
cations are encrypted to create a secure tunnel.VPNs can also be used to link mul- 
tiple networks securely. This gives administrators the ability to use existing 
connections to the Internet to build their WAN rather than creating new links 
between networks with additional leased lines. 
VPNs use a variety of protocols to support this encrypted communication, 
including Secure Internet Protocol (IPSec), Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP), 
Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP), and SSH. IPSec is the most popular 
protocol used for dedicated VPN devices followed by L2TP and PPTR SSH is 
available for VPNs running under the Windows platform, but it is typically used 
more frequently in UNIX-basedVPNs. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
385 
The tunneling protocols used in VPNs are covered in detail in Chapter 3. 
Please refer to this chapter for additional information. 
VPNs can be created using either Windows- or UNIX-based servers, or they 
can be implemented using dedicated hardware. There are several firewalls and 
routers on the market that supportVPNs, and there are also dedicated VPN solu- 
tions that are not designed to be run as firewalls or routers. 
These devices allow administrators to easily create a VPN utilizing dedicated 
hardware. This typically gives a large performance increase over a server-based solu- 
tion. Remember that encryption always creates a great deal of overhead on servers 
due to the additional processing required to encrypt the data. 
There are three types of VPNs that can be set up for an organization. The busi- 
ness purpose of the VPN defines what type of VPN should be used. These three 
types are: 
9 
Remote accessVPN 
9 
Site-to-site intranet-basedVPN 
9 
Site-to-site extranet-basedVPN 
A remote accessVPN is used when end users require remote access to the cor- 
porate network. This type of'VPN connects multiple remote clients to the corpo- 
rate LAN. A site-to-site intranet-basedVPN is used to connect two or more 
remote corporate sites to a centralized network using demand-dial routing to cut 
down on cost. Rather than using a full leased line for sending small amounts of 
data, demand-dial routing allows an organization to connect remote sites to the 
centralized site only when needed. A site-to-site extranet-basedVPN allows two 
separate corporations to connect to each other to perform secure data transfers. 
Figure 6.8 shows an example of a remote access VPN, while Figures 6.9 and 6.10 
show site-to-site intranet- and extranet-basedVPNs. 
www.syngress.com 

386 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Figure 6.8 Remote Access VPN 
Whether implementing a server-based or dedicated hardware-basedVPN solu- 
tion, it is important to makesure that theVPN servers or devices are as secure as 
possible. This should always include changing the default passwords to strong pass- 
words, ensuring that the best encryption methods available for the implementation 
are being used, and making sure that the software and devices are up-to-date with 
the latest updates from the vendor. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
387 
Figure 6.9 Site-to-site Intranet-based VPN 
www.syngress.com 

388 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Figure 6.10 Site-to-site Extranet-based VPN 
Understanding some basic concepts about VPNs will help you a great 
deal with the Security+ exam. If you keep in mind that a VPN is not a 
real network, but a virtual network based on tunneling packets through 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
389 
an insecure network, you should not have too much trouble with this 
part of the Security+ exam. Think of an actual tunnel going through a 
mountain. While trying to go through the mountain without the sup- 
ports in the tunnel would be foolish, the use of the supported or secure 
tunnel makes this a secure and safe path to take. Applying the same 
type of symbolism to any difficult concept you wish to understand will 
make the Security+ exam a stress-free experience. 
It is also important to note that when a VPN tunnel is established, it 
is seen by both ends of the tunnel as a single hop. This is true regardless 
of how many hops the tunnel actually goes over. For example, if a VPN 
tunnel is established between a laptop in California and a VPN gateway 
in Florida, there are quite a few hops between these two sites as they 
route their traffic across the United States. However, once the tunnel is 
established, a traceroute performed between the devices will show the 
entire path as a single hop. This is important to remember when ana- 
lyzing traffic presented in scenario questions utilizing VPN tunnels. 
IDS 
An IDS is the high-tech equivalent of a burglar alarm configured to monitor access 
points, hostile activities, and known intruders. These systems typically trigger on 
events by referencing network activity against an attack signature database. If a 
match is made, an alert takes place and the event is logged for future reference. 
Creating and maintaining the attack signature database is the most difficult part of 
working with IDS technology. It is important to always keep the IDS up-to-date 
with the latest signature database provided by the vendor as well as updating the 
database with the signatures found in testing. 
The Security+ exam expects you to understand the different types of 
IDSes, what they are used for, and how they can help protect your net- 
work. 
Attack signatures consist of several components used to uniquely describe an 
attack. An ideal signature is one that is specific to the attack while being as simple 
www.syngress.com 

390 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
as possible to match with the input data stream (large complex signatures may pose 
a serious processing burden). Just as there are varying types of attacks, there must be 
varying types of signatures. Some signatures define the characteristics of a single IP 
option, such as a map portscan, while others are derived from the actual payload of 
an attack. Most signatures are constructed by running a known exploit several 
times, monitoring the data as it appears on the network, and looking for a unique 
pattern that is repeated on every execution. This method works well at ensuring 
that the signature consistently matches an attempt by that particular exploit. 
Remember that the idea is for the unique identification of attacks, not merely the 
detection of attacks. 
There are two types of IDSes that can be used to secure a network: system 
IDSes or network IDSes. A system IDS (referred to as IDS or a Kernel Proxy) runs 
on each individual server on which the administrator wants to perform intrusion 
detection.A network IDS (NIDS) does intrusion detection across the network. 
System IDSes are great for ensuring that the server on which it is installed is 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
391 
capable of detecting attacks. They are also more efficient than NIDS because they 
only analyze the data from one system rather than the entire network. NIDS, how- 
ever, has the ability to detect attacks that may be occurring on multiple systems at 
the same time or to catch someone doing a portscan of an entire network. 
One of the major benefits of IDSes is that they do not necessarily have to pas- 
sively monitor a network. Most IDSes can also perform corrective action when an 
attack is identified. This can range from paging the administrator to working with 
the firewall to block specific IPs from accessing the network. This is very useful in 
blocking attacks and also gathering information about the attackers within the logs. 
One of the vulnerabilities of NIDSes is that they can be overloaded. Since they 
analyze every packet on the network (or specific subnets), if the network is over- 
whelmed with packets the NIDS may not be able to analyze every packet that goes 
across. By overloading the NIDS, intruders sometimes avoid detection. As with any 
security-related device or application, IDSes should be kept up-to-date with the 
most recent updates and signature files from the vendor. 
Whereas a system IDS is installed on a single computer within the network to 
secure that specific system, a NIDS is installed within the network infrastructure so 
that all systems on the network can be protected. The architecture for this is shown 
in Figure 6.11. 
Figure 6.11 NIDS 

392 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
When being installed, a NIDS is typically configured with a base set of rules 
and known attack signatures, which can be expanded on with custom signatures. 
Some NIDSes also support a learning, mode where the NIDS examines traffic on the 
network and learns trends and typical usage of the network. Based on what the 
NIDS learns, it can continue monitoring and determine when unusual traffic pat- 
terns are detected so that an administrator can be notified. 
There are a few best practices to follow when setting up a NIDS: 
1. Ensure that the NIDS used is designed to support the network size it will 
be working with. If it cannot support the size of the network, either use a 
different NIDS or segment the network and use multiple NIDS. 
2. When working with a NIDS, if accessing and controlling the NIDS 
remotely it is best to place the controlling system on another subnet. 
3. It is best to set up the NIDS so that all logs are stored on a remote system 
on a different subnet. These practices help increase the security of the 
NIDS. 
For further information on a device-based NIDS, look at the Cisco Secure 
Intrusion Detection System at www.cisco.com/en/US/products/ 
hw/vpndevc/ps4077/index.html.Also, an excellent and highly regarded software 
solution can be found at www.snort.org. There are many different NIDSes avail- 
able, each with their own benefits. 
Network Monitoring/Diagnostic 
Many large networks employ some form of ongoing monitoring or diagnostic rou- 
tine to continually keep administrators aware of the status of the network and allow 
for proactive corrective actions to potential problems. This can be done with moni- 
toring software or with dedicated devices located on the network. 
In large network configurations, some network administrators may leave a 
remotely accessible sniffer attached to a switch. This allows the administrator to 
span the ports on the switch and remotely sniff the network traffic. This is a great 
tool for network administrators, but if an intruder were to access this system, they 
could potentially gather data from anywhere in the network. If a device like this is 
left accessible on the network, it is best to use a strong password to access the 
device. In addition, using an encrypted session to communicate with the device 
will prevent eavesdropping on the sniffing session. 
Another common device generally left attached to networks is some form of 
diagnostic equipment. This can range from a simple meter for checking cable 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
393 
lengths to more advanced equipment capable of diagnosing network problems. 
Some of the better diagnostic equipment can be remotely accessed and controlled 
via TCP/IR Again, this is an extremely useful tool for network administrators, but 
the data available from this tool can be very dangerous in the hands of an intruder. 
The same security best practices apply to these devices. Strong passwords and 
encrypted sessions should always be the default strategy when dealing with net- 
work monitoring or diagnostic equipment that is remotely accessible. 
The vulnerabilities associated with these devices are generally limited to the 
ability of intruders to gather data.With the data that can be gathered from these 
devices, an intruder can get enough information to cause unlimited damage to a 
network or gather a great deal of confidential information.What is the single best 
security policy for these devices? If possible, do not connect them until they are 
needed. 
Remember that sniffing a network is a passive attack but can provide a 
huge amount of information that can later be used for active attacks. 
Workstations 
The term workstation basically refers to any computer system that the end users of a 
network work on, assuming that the end users do not use servers for their normal 
day-to-day work.Workstations are typically one of the most vulnerable devices 
attached to a network. Flaws or bugs in all workstation OSes provide ample oppor- 
tunity for attackers to gain remote access to systems, to copy data from the work- 
stations, or to monitor the traffic and gather passwords for access to more systems. 
In addition, workstations are more vulnerable simply because there are typically 
more workstations on a network than any other network device. The sheer quan- 
tity of workstations makes it more difficult to ensure that they are all as secure as 
possible. 
The protocols used by workstations present another possible vulnerability. Since 
most networks today operate using TCP/IP as the primary protocol, the TCP/IP 
stack of the workstations is a vulnerability. There are many exploits available that 
cause stack overflows or cause a workstation to be unable to communicate effec- 
tively on the network. A DoS attack using malformed TCP/IP packets can cause a 

394 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
workstation to be unable to communicate and can also overload the system to the 
point that it becomes non-functional. 
In addition, workstations using the Windows OS usually have additional ports 
open for using NetBIOS. This introduces vulnerabilities that can allow attackers to 
remotely access files on the workstation. This is more secure under Windows NT 
or Windows 2000/XP Pro using the New Technology File System (NTFS), but can 
present a real problem under Windows 95/98/Me. Even if the shares on a system 
are password-protected, they can be easily hacked. Administrators should always be 
careful of open shares on the system.Workstations are also vulnerable to MITM 
attacks or hijacked sessions. These attacks allow an attacker to monitor or control 
communications between the workstation and another system. 
Other exploit functions of the operating system are provided through external 
libraries or other software, which is likely to be running on a workstation. For 
example, Windows workstations come with Microsoft Internet Explorer (IE) pre- 
installed. If the user of the workstation uses IE, they are vulnerable to attacks 
against both the Windows OS itself and IE. Some recently exploited vulnerabilities 
focus on the way that the OS or ancillary software handles specific files such as 
images or VML messages. These attacks use vulnerabilities discovered in external 
library files, which cause the OS or application to modify the way they behave due 
to certain data being processed through the library files. An example of this type of 
attack can be seen in Exercise 6.02. 
PERFORMING A SIMPLE M ETASPLOIT ATTACK 
For this exercise, you will be using one of the many freely available 
exploit programs to perform an attack. Metasploit is an excellent pene- 
tration testing application that allows you to very quickly and easily 
generate an attack against a vulnerable host. While Metasploit does 
have the ability to check hosts for specific vulnerabilities, it is generally 
faster to use a separate scanning tool to find vulnerable systems on your 
network and then to use Metasploit to test them. Metasploit can be 
found at www.metasploit.org. For this exercise, we will be using version 
3.0 beta 3. 
The specific exploit used in this example uses a vulnerability found in 
Winamp version 5.12 and uses the IE browser in conjunction with a 
Winamp playlist. More details on this exploit can be found at www.secu- 
rityfocus.co m/bi d/16410. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
395 
, 
After downloading the application, install it and open the 
MSFConsole. You will see the screen shown in Figure 6.12. 
Figure 6.12 Metasploit Main Screen 
2. Run the following Metasploit commands: 
use windows/browser/winamp_playlist unc 
set PAYLOAD windows/shell_bind tcp 
exploit 
3. This will result in the screen shown in Figure 6.13. 
Figure 6.13 Metasploit Ready Screen 
www.syngress.com 

396 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
. 
At this point, your test exploit is ready to test. Assuming that you 
have Winamp 5.12 installed and associated with playlist (.pls) 
files, you should be able to browse to the Uniform Resource 
Locator (URL) shown in the Metasploit console window, and see 
the effects of the exploit using IE. Winamp should start automati- 
cally and show a playlist similar to that seen in Figure 6.14. 
Figure 6.14 Exploited Winamp Playlist 
, 
So how can we tell that the payload was delivered? The win- 
dowslshell_bind_tcp payload by default opens a listening port on 
TCP port 4444 for incoming connections. By telnetting to this 
port, we can open a command shell to the target system. This is 
shown in Figure 6.15. 
Figure 6.15 Open Command Shell on Target System 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
397 
The largest security concern in relation to workstations is the end user. End 
users always have local access (the ability to work at the local console) to their 
workstation, which can cause some big security problems, ranging from changing a 
password to something a hacker can easily guess, to inadvertently opening e-mails 
with viruses or Trojan horse applications running. Java viruses exploit weaknesses 
inherent to the way that Web browsers and Java Virtual Machines (JVMs) allow Java 
code to perform low-level functions on a system with very little security. 
There will never be a foolproof solution to this security problem. The best way 
to help deter issues like this is to train the end user. Having a formal security policy 
(Chapter 12) in place specifying exactly what users can and cannot do with the 
company's workstation is also very important. 
Locking down a user's access to their workstation also helps.Windows work- 
stations can have security policies applied that limit the user's access to critical 
system files. They also have the ability to install or run unauthorized software. 
Using a well written and up-to-date virus protection application will help combat 
the ability of an end user to overload a mail server or infect every system in the 
company with a virus. 
Another very important aspect of workstation security is to make sure that the 
OSes or software applications always have the latest security patches in place. 
Often a vendor will release security patches that address individual vulnerabilities 
so technicians will be able to apply them faster, rather than having to wait for a 
full service pack. 
It is important to understand the differences between workstations and 
servers. You should know that workstations are typically used by a single 
local user and are designed to support fast front-end processing. Servers 
are designed to support a large number of remote users and provide 
fast back-end processing and file sharing. 
Servers 
Large, high-end computer systems with the capability of servicing requests from 
multiple users simultaneously are called servers. These systems are the primary 
sources on a network to which end users connect to receive or send e-mail, store 
www.syngress.com 

398 
Chapter 6 ~ Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
files, or access network applications. As such, they are considered one of the most 
critical aspects of the network infrastructure and it is critical that they be as secure 
as possible. 
Typically, people attacking a network use the information gathered from net- 
work devices, workstations, or data flowing across the LAN to compromise the 
security of the servers. There are other reasons for breaking into a network, such as 
setting up additional sites for performing a DDoS attack, but accessing the servers is 
usually the goal. 
Since this is the primary storage location for data on a network, this is where 
attackers will be able to obtain the most data or cause the most damage. It can be 
said that these systems are the final goal of most attacks upon a network. 
Most servers in a properly secured network are behind one or more firewalls 
and have several layers of protection between them and the outside world. 
Protecting these systems also includes physical security. There can be all the net- 
work security in the world, but it will not help when an attacker walks into a 
building and starts typing at the server's local console. Some systems, such as Web 
servers, will always be more vulnerable due to their accessibility from the outside. 
Systems in a DMZ are less protected than those on a normal LAN. 
Some of the same vulnerabilities that apply to workstations also apply to 
servers. The OS or application software may contain bugs or security vulnerabilities 
that allow the system to be compromised. In addition, some viruses are able to 
infect remote file shares; therefore, it is important to make sure that virus scanning 
is implemented on all of the servers. This especially applies to e-mail servers where 
an e-mail virus can be removed before it makes it to the end user's e-mail box. 
Keeping OS and application software up-to-date with security patches is critical to 
minimizing the vulnerability of servers. Security professionals should always keep 
abreast of new bugs or vulnerabilities in the applications running on their network, 
and be ready to implement workarounds or fixes as soon as they are available. 
It is always a good idea to make sure that the servers are as secure as possible 
from outside attack, but it is not wise to forget the possibility of attack from the 
inside. There are many cases where confidential data has been leaked from compa- 
nies due to poor security on their servers and an irate employee. It is important to 
make sure that the most restrictive access control possible is applied to the user's 
accounts. Users should always have access to the data or services necessary to per- 
form their .job functions, but no more than that. This goes back to the fundamental 
security concept of deny by default. It is always easier to grant a user access to data 
than it is to clean up the mess when a user has access to something that they 
should not have. 
r- 
9 
www.syngress.com 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
399 
If the data on servers is especially confidential, such as file stores with financial 
or litigation data, it may be necessary to encrypt communications from the server as 
well as the data stored on the server itself. This additional layer of protection helps 
preserve the confidentiality of the data stored on the system as well as making it 
more difficult to break into. At a minimum, it will keep the data from being read by 
someone casually sniffing on the network. Again, keep in mind that security threats 
come not only from the outside, but also from employees of the company itself. 
Mobile Devices 
With mobile devices becoming more powerful and functional, they are quickly 
becoming the norm for working on the road rather than a full-size laptop. Since 
mobile phones and Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) are now capable of sending and 
receiving e-mail, connecting to remote network applications, and browsing the Web, 
their use in the corporate world has exploded. They also have the ability to store lim- 
ited amounts of data (with the capacity growing all the time) and some mobile 
devices even have word processor and spreadsheet applications. This gives their users 
the ability to be completely untethered from a full-size workstation or laptop. 
With these mobile devices comes more work for the security professional. 
Workstations are somewhat vulnerable, but at least they are restricted to being 
located at a particular site and can be turned off by an administrator if necessary. 
Laptops, while mobile, are slightly more secure than handheld mobile devices, 
because they are somewhat inconvenient for end users to carry everywhere or acci- 
dentally leave. The areas of vulnerability to focus on with the ultra-compact mobile 
devices are those of communications and local data security. 
Since many of these devices are able to connect to the Internet, they are 
remotely accessible to potential attackers. In addition, as previously mentioned, net- 
work applications can be designed to work with mobile devices over the Internet. 
The security of these network applications should be ensured by requiring that 
communications with mobile devices be encrypted. 
More and more mobile devices are being equipped with the ability to use 
Bluetooth or 802.11x for wireless communications. Similar to all other wireless 
connectivity options, these wireless options provide additional entry points for 
intruders into the wireless device. Bluetooth has been used for successful attacks 
against mobile devices and will likely be used for more attacks in the future. Being 
aware of how a mobile device communicates can help you to ensure that it is as 
secure as possible by disabling unused communication methods or applying security 
to the communication method appropriately. 

400 
Chapter 6 ~ Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
The data stored locally on mobile devices can contain confidential corporate 
information or other information that is best kept out of the hands of attackers. 
With this in mind, it is always a good idea to encrypt data stored locally on these 
mobile devices. Some newer devices have this ability built into their OSes, but for 
those that do not, there may be third-party software available that adds this func- 
tionality. 
Any time a hacker is able to access a device locally, there is the chance that with 
time the hacker can break through any security measure. Therefore, it is a good idea 
to keep hackers away from the device.With the small size and convenience of hand- 
held mobile devices, this is especially difficult. The sheer number of cell phones and 
PDAs left at tables in restaurants, in airports, or in public restrooms is staggering. If a 
company supplies mobile devices to its users, it is critical that they be instructed on 
proper care for the devices, which includes not leaving them behind. The only real 
defenses to this are the passwords protecting the device and encrypting the local 
data, both of which can be bypassed with time and perseverance. 
Media-based Security 
Any system is the sum of all of its parts, and the art and practice of security admin- 
istration is no exception.While network devices may be secure and a network may 
be blocked off from the outside world, it is still important to be concerned with 
the security of the media that interacts with the network or systems. 
This section covers a plethora of different media types ranging from cable types 
to removable media. The Security+ exam puts an emphasis on media and its vul- 
nerabilities.While trying to access a network and its resources remotely is certainly 
convenient to the attacker, sometimes a more reliable method is accessing the data 
directly through the media used on or with the network. 
First we discuss the physical media used for transmitting data to and from net- 
work devices. To form a network, the devices have to be able to move data bits to 
each other. Network cabling is the media used for this purpose. We then go over 
several different types of networking media and their respective advantages and dis- 
advantages. Next, we cover the physical media used for transporting data. This is 
called removable media and comprises everything from floppy disks to Smart Cards. 
Finally, we go over most of the popular removable media and discuss their security 
differences. 
Keep in mind that the media being discussed here is all physical media used for 
transmitting data. There are many other types of media in use within the computer 
industry, such as streaming media or media players, which deal with content rather 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
401 
than data transmissions. This section focuses on the transmission of data and how to 
properly secure these transmissions. 
Coax 
Coaxial (or coax) cable is an older type of cabling that has several different vari- 
eties. These cables are used for cabling televisions, radio sets, and computer net- 
works. The cable is referred to as coaxial because both the center wire and the 
braided metal shield share a common axis, or centerline. There are a large number 
of different types of coax cable in use today, each designed with a specific purpose 
in mind. This said, many types of coax designed for a specific purpose cannot be 
used for something else. 
Coax cabling, which can be either thinner or thicknet, is one of the most vulner- 
able cabling methods in use. Due to its design, it is very unstable, and has no fault 
tolerance.We examine why each of these coax cable types are so vulnerable. 
Thin Coax 
Thinnet (thin coax) looks similar to the cabling used for a television's CATV con- 
nection. Thinnet coax cabling that meets the specifications for computer networking 
is of a higher quality than that used for television connections, so they are not inter- 
changeable. The cable type used for thinner is RG-58 and is specifically designed for 
networking use. RG-58 has a 50-ohm resistance, whereas television cables are of 
type RG-59 and have a 75-ohm resistance. Due to the way thinnet transceivers 
work (as a current source rather than a voltage source), the signal going across RG- 
59 cable is completely different from a signal going across an RG-58 cable. 
Connections between cable segments or to computer systems are accomplished 
using a T-connector on each network interface card (NIC), which allows techni- 
cians to add an extra cable to the segment. In addition to having T-connectors, 
both ends of a thinnet cable segment must have a terminator and one end of the 
segment must be grounded. These connections are shown in Figure 6.16. 
A terminator is basically a 50-ohm resistor with a Bayonet Neill Concelman 
(BNC) connector. BNC connectors are the style of connectors used on the end of 
thinnet cables. These connectors allow the cables to be easily connected to T-con- 
nectors or barrel connectors. T-connectors are used to add a cable to an existing 
segment and connect a device to the segment, whereas barrel connectors are used 
to connect two coax cables together to form one cable. 
www.syngress.com 

402 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Figure 6.16 Sample Coax Segment 
Thick Coax 
Thicknet (thick coax) cabling is about twice as thick in diameter as thinnet and is 
much stiffer and more difficult to work with. This is an older style of cabling (type 
RG-8) that is generally used with IBM hardware. Attaching computers to thicknet 
cable segments is done by using a vampire tap to cut through the plastic sheath and 
make contact with the wires within. A transceiver with a 15-pin adapter unit inter- 
face (AUI) is connected to the vampire tap and the NIC is attached to the 
transceiver with a transceiver cable. Thicknet cables are similar to thinnet cables in 
that they require a 50-ohm terminator on both ends of the segment with one end 
grounded. Figure 6.17 shows a sample network using thicknet. 
Figure 6.17 Example Thicknet Network Diagram 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
403 
Vulnerabilities of Coax Cabling 
Both types of coax cabling share some of the same vulnerabilities. Unfortunately, it 
is relatively easy to perform a DoS attack on this type of network by cutting the 
cable or disconnecting a device. If communication is not able to flow completely 
up and down a coax network, the entire network is brought down. In addition, 
since connections to the network really cannot be controlled with a switch or hub, 
there is no way to prevent unauthorized connections.All an intruder has to do is 
tap into the network with either a T-connector or vampire tap for thinnet or 
thicknet, respectively. 
These vulnerabilities are due to the topology of coax networks. A coax network 
uses a bus topology, which basically means that all of the network devices are con- 
nected in a linear fashion. Each device on the network completes the circuit for 
the network as a whole. Due to this, if any device is removed from the network or 
if there is a break anywhere in the cable, the circuit is broken and the entire net- 
work is brought down. 
The main advantages to coax networks are the price and the ease of implemen- 
tation. Since no expensive hubs or switches are required, cost is kept low. Since all 
that is required to set up the network is to run a coax cable from one computer to 
the next and connect them with T-connectors, this is one of the easiest networks to 
implement. 
Most coax networks have been or are being replaced with unshielded twisted 
pair/shielded twisted pair (UTP/STP) or fiber-optic cabling. Though you may 
never work with a coax network, it is important know how vulnerable it is to dis- 
ruption of service or intrusion. 
While coax is not as commonly used as it used to be, the Security+ exam 
expects you to understand how it works and when it should and should 
not be used. Understanding the issues that can arise with the use of 
coax, such as bringing an entire network down by removing a network 
device, will help you answer these questions correctly. 
www.syngress.com 

404 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
UTP/STP 
UTP or STP is the next step up from coax. UTP and STP cables are basically 
twisted pairs of insulated wires bundled together within a plastic sheath. STP 
includes a layer of shielding material between the wires and the sheath. This type of 
cable is sometimes referred to by a category number that designates how many 
pairs of wires are in the sheath and what the quality and rating of the cable is. 
CAT-3 is similar to telephone wire and has two pairs of wires, but it is still rated 
for data communications. CAT-1 and CAT-2 cable also exist, but CAT-1 is only 
used for voice communication and CAT-2 has a maximum rated data limit of 4 
Mbps.Table 6.3 shows the categories of UPT/STP cable and their description. 
Table 6.3 Categories and Descriptions of UPT/STP Cables 
Category 
Descri ption 
Category 1 
Used for voice transmission; not suitable for data transmis- 
sion. 
Category 2 
Low performance cable; used for voice and low-speed data 
transmission; has capacity of up to 4 Mbps. 
Category 3 
Used for data and voice transmission; rated at 10 MHz; 
voice-grade; can be used for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, and 
Token Ring. 
Category 4 
Used for data and voice transmission; rated at 20 MHz; can 
be used for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, and Token Ring. 
Category 5 
Used for data and voice transmission; rated at 100 MHz; 
suitable for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, 
Token Ring, and 155 Mbps ATM. 
Category 5e 
Same as Category 5 but manufacturing process is refined; 
higher grade cable than Category 5; rated at 200 MHz; suit- 
able for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, Token 
Ring, and 155 Mbps ATM. 
Category 6 
Rated at 250 MHz; suitable for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, 
Gigabit Ethernet, Token Ring, and 155 Mbps ATM. 
Category 6 
(Class E) 
Similar to Category 6 but is a proposed international 
standard to be included in ISO/IEC 11801. 
Category 6 (STP) STP cable; rated at 600 MHz; used for data transmission; 
suitable for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, 
Token Ring, and 155 Mbps ATM. 
Continued 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
405 
Table 6.3 Categories and Descriptions of UPT/STP Cables 
Category 
Descri ption 
Category 7 
Category 7 
(Class F) 
Rated at 600 MHz; suitable for Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, 
Gigabit Ethernet, Token Ring, and 155 Mbps ATM. 
Similar to Category 7 but is a proposed international 
standard to be included in ISO/IEC 11801. 
This type of cable typically uses a RJ-11 connector (like a telephone) to con- 
nect to devices on the network, but can also use a RJ-45 connector. CAT-5 cable 
contains four pairs of wires and uses RJ-45 connectors for its connections. This 
type of cabling is typically used for newer token ring networks and Ethernet net- 
works. Compared to coax, it is easier to run this type of cable and it takes up less 
space in the cable runs. In addition, it allows for centralized connectivity points 
such as hubs and switches. It is important to make sure that the hubs and switches 
are physically secure so that unauthorized connections cannot be made by simply 
plugging in a new cable. 
Due to the ability to use hubs and switches with UTP/STP cable, it is possible 
to support bus topology, star topoloy, y, and toleen-riny, topolog, y. Bus topology is sup- 
ported with hubs, but even the support of a bus topology in a network using 
UTP/STP has an advantage over a coax bus network. If a network device is 
removed or a cable breaks, the hub detects the break and routes the circuit around 
it. This keeps the network up even if these problems occur. 
Star topology looks the same as bus topology using a hub on a network dia- 
gram, but differs in the way the hub routes the circuit internally. A diagram illus- 
trating the star topology is shown in Figure 6.18. In a hub using a star topology, 
data is communicated to all ports simultaneously rather than flowing from one to 
the next. 
In addition, some hubs and switches allow administrators to disable ports that 
are not in use. Using this capability is also a very good idea. 

406 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Figure 6.18 Star Topology 
One downside to UTP cable is that it is vulnerable to electromagnetic interfer- 
ence (EMI) and radio frequency interference (I:LFI). These types of interference are 
caused by everything from microwaves to power cables. This is one reason that 
UTP cable should never be run in the same area as electrical wiring. STP cable is 
shielded to protect it from these forms of interference, but is more expensive and 
not as easy to work with. In addition, both coax cabling and UTP/STP are vulner- 
able to eavesdropping. The simple act of sending electricity down the wires in the 
cables creates a pulse that can be monitored and translated into the actual data 
using specialized devices. 
The Security+ exam expects you to be aware of EMI and RFI. You need 
to be aware of the interference that can cause issues with various media 
types. In addition, a small amount of RF leaks from UTP cables. This leak 
allows for organizations with very sensitive detection equipment to pick 
up on some of the electrical signals going through the cabling. While it 
is highly unlikely that anyone with equipment at this level of sophistica- 
tion will want to monitor your network, it is certainly something to be 
aware of. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
407 
Fiber Optic 
Fiber-optic cable (or fiber) is the latest and greatest in network cabling. Fiber is basi- 
cally a very thin piece of glass or plastic that has been stretched out and encased in a 
sheath. It is used as a transport media, not for electrons like the copper cable used in 
coax or UTP/STP, but for protons. In other words, fiber-optic cables transport light. 
An optical transmitter is located at one end of the cable with a receiver at the other 
end.With this in mind, it takes a pair of fiber-optic lines to create a two-way com- 
munications channel. 
Fiber has many advantages over coax and UTP/STP. It can transfer data over 
longer distances at higher speeds. In addition, it is not vulnerable to EMI/RFI 
interference, because there is nothing metallic in the fiber-optic cable to conduct 
current, which also protects it from lightning strikes. Unlike coax and UTP/STR 
fiber optics cannot succumb to typical eavesdroppers without actually cutting the 
line and tapping in with a highly complex form of optical T-connector, and when 
attempted creating a noticeable outage. 
The complexity of making connections using fiber is one of its two major 
drawbacks. Remember that these cables carry light that makes them rather unfor- 
giving. The connection has to be optically perfect or performance will be down- 
graded or the cable may not work at all. The other major drawback is cost. Fiber is 
much more expensive than coax or UTP/STR not only for the cable, but also for 
the communications equipment.When dealing with optical equipment, costs usu- 
ally at least double or triple. 
The Security+ exam expects you to know about the advantages and disadvan- 
tages of this type of network media.You will also need to know how fiber com- 
pares and contrasts with coax and UTP/STP. Generally, fiber is used in data centers 
or for runs between buildings, and UTP cabling is used for connections to users' 
workstations. 
Choosing the right network media to use in a given situation is part of 
the Security+ exam. There are always situations when one type of cable 
is more appropriate than another type. For example, if you are putting 
cabling into a location with a lot of EMI, you will want to use STP or 
fiber to ensure that the network connection is reliable. 
It is also important to keep safety in mind when installing cabling. 
When the plastic sheath of some cabling catches on fire it releases toxic 
fumes. There is a special type of sheathing material used to prevent this 
www.syngress.com 

408 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
called plenum. Plenum cabling is flame retardant and does not release 
any toxic fumes. It is actually required by some building codes to be 
used in overhead ceilings and in buildings over a certain height. Make 
sure that you check the local building codes to see if this is a require- 
ment in any buildings you are wiring. 
Removable Media 
Dealing with security while data is stored or being communicated on a physical 
network is only one aspect of information security. Another part of security con- 
cerns what happens to the data when it has been removed from the network and 
placed on another media. This media is called removable media and is another area 
that the Security+ exam focuses on. 
In the past, the transmission of data via removable media was called snealeernet, 
referencing the fact that the underlying protocol involved people physically car- 
rying the media from place to place to transfer it from one computer to another. 
This section covers the following removable media types: 
9 Magnetic Tape 
9 Recordable compact disks (CDRs) 
9 Hard drives 
9 Diskettes 
9 Flashcards 
9 Smart Cards 
Magnetic Tape 
Magnetic tape is one of the most commonly used types of removable media for 
backing up data on a network. In the past, this was accomplished with the use of 
large reel-to-reel tape systems. Today, a small cassette tape offers more capacity and 
takes up less space. Typical magnetic tapes hold several gigabytes of data and offer a 
quick and mostly reliable method of backing up critical data. 
Unfortunately, the primary drawback and vulnerability of removable media is 
the fact that it is portable.When not properly secured, a magnetic tape can be 
removed from a site and restored to any system with a similar tape drive. When this 
data is restored, any permissions previously defined on the data from the OS is ren- 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
409 
dered ineffective. This could allow an intruder to gain access to secure data with a 
minimum of effort. 
There are two major ways to secure this vulnerability: 
9 
First, most backup programs offer the ability to encrypt the data being 
backed up. This increases the amount of time necessary to run the backup, 
but from a security perspective, is a very good idea. In addition, an OS or 
third-party software may offer the ability to encrypt the data while it is 
still in use on the drive. This, too, is an excellent idea. Encrypting the data 
makes it more difficult for an intruder to access it. 
9 
The second way of securing data is to protect it from being obtained by 
an intruder. If an intruder cannot take the media out of the secure area, 
they will not be able to restore it on a remote system. Some data centers 
have large electromagnets around the doorway to prevent this. If a piece of 
magnetic media such as a disk or a tape is brought through the electro- 
magnet, it is rendered useless by the magnetic field. 
Aside from securing backup tapes from intruders, they also need to be secured 
from nature. Having the best backup system available will not help if the tapes are 
in the building when a tornado rips through. Using off-site storage is a great solu- 
tion for this problem. Storing the backup tapes in a separate location ensures that 
even if the site is destroyed, the data will be safe. 
CDRs 
CDRs are becoming more commonly used within organizations. Their low cost 
and relatively high capacity make them a perfect solution for physically moving 
data from place to place. There are several different types of CDRs, which have 
longer or shorter life spans or data capacity.Whatever the need, there is a CDR 
media to support them. 
CDRs are not vulnerable to magnets, which makes them more reliable than 
magnetic tape when working in an industrial or manufacturing environment. Their 
capacity is large enough that small systems can be backed up on them and data can 
be saved to them for transfer to another location. 
CDRs are, however, very vulnerable to being scratched. If the plastic disk that 
makes up the media is scratched too much, the laser that is supposed to reflect 
through the plastic will be unable to do so and the data will not be readable. In 
addition, CDRs look just like commercially pressed CDs, and can therefore be 
easily carried out of a building without arousing suspicion. 
www.syngress.com 

410 
Chapter 6 ,, Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
While the Security+ objectives do not specifically address digital versatile disks 
(DVDs), you should be aware that they carry the same vulnerabilities as CDRs, but 
have significantly more storage capacity. Whereas a CDR typically holds 700MB, a 
DVD can hold up to 4.7GB on a single-layer single-sided disk or 8.5GB on a dual- 
layer single-sided disk. This capacity continues to increase with the introduction of 
HD DVDs, HVD, EVD, and Blu-ray disks. 
Hard Drives 
Hard drives are basically a form of magnetic media that consist of platters within a 
metal casing containing a built-in read/write mechanism. The platters contain the 
data and are written to and read from using the read/write mechanism. They typi- 
cally store much more data than tapes and CDRs.While they are not usually con- 
sidered removable media, many newer server systems sport a hot-swap chassis that 
allows for drives to be quickly and easily removed when they need to be replaced. 
It is in this sense, that the Security+ exam considers hard drives to be removable 
media. 
The security of hard drives in the context of removable media involves two 
main aspects: encryption and physical security. Encrypting the contents of a hard 
drive ensures that anyone who manages to get a drive off of the premises will have 
a very hard time accessing the data on the drive. Remember that with enough time 
and resources, any encryption algorithm can be broken, but most intruders will not 
put that level of effort into obtaining data frivolously. 
Physical security is covered extensively in Chapter 12.As it relates to hard 
drives, the servers containing the drives should always be in a secure location. Many 
servers with hot-swap chassis have locks on the chassis to secure the drives, which, 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
411 
though inconvenient, is also a good security measure. In addition, any servers 
mounted in a rack with a lockable door should be secured as well. Every precau- 
tion you take that slows down or stops an intruder helps. 
Since hard drives are magnetic media, the same security measure that applies to 
tapes also applies here. If possible in the overall security design and budget, adding 
electromagnets around the entrances and exits of a data center can help prevent 
confidential data from leaving the premises. Applying appropriate encryption and 
physical security can make it very difficult for intruders to obtain data from the 
hard drives. 
Diskettes 
Diskettes (also called floppy disks) are another form of magnetic media developed 
to transfer data. Prior to CDRs, diskettes were the most common method of physi- 
cally transferring data between systems. Older diskettes hold anywhere from 256K 
on old 8-inch floppy diskettes to 2GB on Iomega's Jaz drive technology. They con- 
sist of a magnet-sensitive disk or platter encased in some form of plastic housing. 
The same security policies that apply to magnetic tape and CDRs should apply 
to diskettes. If possible, users should be kept from removing floppy disks from the 
premises. In addition, it is a good idea to keep users from bringing in diskettes, as 
they could contain viruses or other malicious programs. 
An additional security measure that can be applied to diskettes is simply 
removing the floppy disk drive from users' computers to prevent them from 
bringing in or removing data. As most new systems support booting from a CD- 
ROM or the network, a floppy drive is usually an unnecessary piece of hardware in 
the corporate environment. 
Flashcards 
Flashcards are a chip-based solution to portable data storage.They range tremen- 
dously in capacity, but offer certain advantages over magnetic-based technologies. 
They are not susceptible to damage from magnetic fields, and they are less prone to 
wear out over time. As they use integrated circuit technology to store the data, they 
are more stable than their magnetic counterparts. Following is a list of some types 
of ftashcards: 
9 CompactFlash 
9 SmartMedia 
9 Memory Stick 
www.syngress.com 

412 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
9 
Secure Digital (SD) Cards 
9 
Personal Computer Memory Card InternationalAssociation (??PCMCIA) 
Type I and Type II memory cards (used as solid-state disks in laptops) 
9 Memory cards for video game consoles 
9 
Thumb Drives 
Flashcards have a large variety of uses ranging from a simple data storage solu- 
tion for PC card ports in laptops, to holding backup configuration or boot infor- 
mation for routers. Since they are small and portable, they are a good solution for 
storing limited amounts of data when portability or reliability are key necessities. 
While magnets will not cause damage to flashcards, in some cases they can be 
damaged by static electricity. It is important to take the standard precautions 
needed around most electronic equipment with flashcards. Avoid holding a flash- 
card while walking across plush carpet. Flashcards are also easily damaged when 
dropped. 
Protecting the data stored on a flashcard is another area on which the 
Security+ exam focuses. Most early flashcards offered no data protection capabili- 
ties whatsoever and therefore pose a security risk. Some new flashcards ,offer built- 
in security mechanisms such as encryption and authentication services. These 
require that the user authenticate against the card in order to decrypt the data on 
the card. Using these newer cards is recommended, due to the additional security 
features. Additionally, it never hurts to encrypt data before placing it on the card. 
Smart Cards 
Smart Cards refer to a broad range of devices that either allow you to store a small 
amount of data, or run some processing routines, or both. Smart Cards are typi- 
cally the size of a standard credit card and contain one or more chips embedded in 
the plastic. They are used primarily as a form of identification for devices with the 
capability of reading them. In addition, they can store data related to the owner of 
the card when being used for identification or simply as a small, very portable data 
store. 
Smart Cards are designed to be tamper-proof and most of the designers do a 
good job of this. Some cards are even rendered useless if the card is modified in any 
way. The reason behind this design is not only to keep the owner's data private, but 
also to prevent the data from being changed. 
When using a Smart Card for identification or authentication purposes, the 
goal is to prevent the identification information from being altered. Smart Card 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
413 
designers go a long way towards accomplishing this goal by making them difficult 
to tamper with. In addition, some Smart Cards also encrypt the data on the card in 
order to prevent it from being read by unauthorized entities. 
Due to their physical design (embedded in a piece of plastic), Smart Cards have 
a great deal of defense against normal removable media vulnerabilities. They are 
immune to magnetic fields and static shock, and resistant to physical abuse. Bending 
or cutting a card will, of course, damage it, but carrying it around on a key chain 
or badge holder is usually safe. It is recommended that they not be placed in wallets 
so they will not get bent, but overall, they provide a great deal of resistance to 
physical damage. 
Smart Card technology is becoming more and more common. They are used 
within digital satellite systems, health program identification programs, and some 
credit card programs. They are also used for user authentication on high security 
networks. 
Smart Cards are covered in Chapter 10, "Public Key Infrastructure." 
www.syngress.com 

414 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
For the Security+ exam, it is important to know and understand many different 
aspects of devices and media. In the area of devices, it is necessary to understand 
the three major types of firewalls and how they function. 
9 Packet filtering firewalls block packets based on the IP address and port. 
9 Application-layer gateways allow a greater level of security by examining 
each packet to verify that it has the correct content of the communication 
session that it is attempting to use. 
9 Stateful inspection firewalls are a compromise between these two tech- 
nologies. They have speed close to that of packet filtering, with a higher 
security level. They verify that each packet going through the firewall 
belongs to a valid communications session. 
Routers basically shuttle packets between their interfaces, each of which is 
attached to a different subnet. A router examines the destination of the packet and 
sends the packet out the appropriate interface belonging to the packet's destination 
network. 
A switch is a device that allows for fast, reliable communication within a 
subnet. They can also support packet switching over multiple subnets by using 
VLANs. A switch makes a direct connection between devices communicating to 
each other through its ports. This eliminates collisions that are common with hubs 
and also limits the amount of data that can be obtained by packet sniffing on one 
of the switch's ports. 
Wireless technology allows network communication to take place without any 
wires connecting it to the network. This technology is useful but brings security 
risks with it. Securing a wireless access point is critical to making sure that the 
wireless network is secure. This device also allows administrators to implement 
encryption over their wireless network that will help a great deal with security. 
Modems allow a backdoor into many otherwise secure networks. In many 
environments, either servers or users' systems have modems in them that can allow 
intruders to dial into a computer that is also located on the network. Through this 
medium, they can gain remote access to the network while completely bypassing 
the firewalls. 
R.AS is a method of providing remote access to corporate network users who 
travel or who need to access the network from home. Typically, a bank of modems 
is connected to the RAS system into which users can dial and provide authentica- 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
415 
tion credentials. After the credentials are verified, users are granted access and their 
computers act as if they are physically located on the corporate network. Since this 
is an intentional remote access point to a network, it is wise to secure it as much as 
possible. This includes good password security, encryption, and possibly callback 
verification. 
Since most businesses require telecommunications to work with their cus- 
tomers, telecom and PBXes are critical to business functions. Since many of these 
systems allow for remote access, securing that remote access is one way of pre- 
venting attacks on the telecommunications infrastructure. 
VPNs allow you to create a secure tunnel over an unsecured network such as 
the Internet between either a computer and a network or two networks. This 
allows users to connect to the corporate network from their normal ISPs, saving a 
great deal of cost. Using strong encryption for this link is critical to maintaining a 
secure network. In addition, using good authentication will help keep intruders 
from using the VPN against you. 
IDS, whether implemented passively or actively, goes a long way towards 
helping keep a network secure. If you do not know that an attack is occurring, 
there is not much you can do to stop it. IDS helps solve this problem by making 
technicians aware of a situation before it escalates to a point where it can no longer 
be contained. If your IDS is designed as an active IDS, it can help stop an attack as 
soon as it happens without relying on an administrator to be immediately available. 
Network monitoring and diagnostic equipment should be kept off the network 
whenever possible. Due to the need to monitor and analyze the network, this may 
not always be possible. In this case, it is best to keep these devices as secure as pos- 
sible by encrypting communication between the device and its user, and always 
making sure that the devices do not use default passwords. Good password security 
is critical to keeping these devices safe from intruders. 
Workstations are one of the most insecure devices on a network, because they 
are constantly used locally by users with a huge range of skills and needs. Since users 
have direct local access to the system, it is impossible to keep the system completely 
secure. Use password policies to force users to change their passwords regularly. 
Servers are one place where administrators should focus a great deal of time 
implementing good security practices. One of the most important security policies 
to implement with servers is to make sure that they always have the latest OS and 
application security patches. In addition, it is important to always monitor security- 
related newsgroups and listservs to keep abreast of the latest vulnerabilities in the 
software on the network. 
www.syngress.com 

416 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Mobile devices provide a security leak simply because they allow confidential 
corporate information to be easily transported anywhere. In addition, many mobile 
devices provide methods to allow users to connect to a remote network. If these 
devices are not adequately secured, they can allow anyone who gains possession of 
the device to access the network. Securing communications going in and out of 
mobile devices is one method of combating this, and encrypting data stored on the 
device itself is another. 
Coax cabling is an older style of network media that still has many limitations, 
which includes the fact that it is difficult to work with, is only good for short dis- 
tances, is limited to slower speeds, and is very vulnerable to breakdown. In most 
network designs using coax, a single break in the line can bring down the entire 
network. 
UTP and STP cable are a step up, using multiple pairs of wires to provide net- 
work communication, which allows for greater distance, speed, and ease of use. In 
addition, most network designs using UTP or STP can work around a break in the 
cabling.A major vulnerability of both coax and UTP/STP cabling is that with the 
correct equipment, the network can be eavesdropped upon without having to con- 
nect to it. 
Fiber-optic cable eliminates all of these vulnerabilities by using optical tech- 
nology rather than normal electronic technology. All communication takes place on 
a wave of light, which provides high speed and reliable communication. In addi- 
tion, it is not as vulnerable to eavesdropping and not at all vulnerable to EMI and 
1KFI. The downside of using fiber-optic cable is that it is very expensive. 
As far as removable media is concerned, magnetic tape was one of the earliest 
and most commonly used forms of data storage. It is still used regularly in backup 
systems and provides a low-cost solution to storing large amounts of data. 
Encrypting the data stored on the tapes and keeping the tapes secure are two good 
security practices. It is important to remember that magnetic tape is vulnerable to 
magnetic fields and can easily be erased with a simple magnet. 
CD1Ks allow administrators to store a small amount of data on a sturdy plastic 
disk. They are not vulnerable to magnetic fields and are very portable. Tihis leads to 
the possibility of a security leak of confidential corporate data. It is always wise to 
prevent CD1Ks or DVDs from being brought in to or taken out of a site. 
Hard drives are considered removable media in that many servers have hot- 
swappable hard drives which allow a drive to be removed without having to open 
up the system. This could conceivably allow an intruder to simply walk out with 
data. This should be prevented with physical security for the data center itself, and 
by locking the drive chassis on the server. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
417 
Diskettes are also magnetic-based and allow you to store data in another 
portable format. Most systems have no need for floppy disk drives with the popu- 
larity of CD-ROMs, so it is not a bad idea to remove these drives from users' 
workstations. This helps in preventing viruses from being introduced to the net- 
work from users bringing in infected diskettes. 
Flashcards are based on memory chips and are very reliable. They never wear 
out if well taken care of. Many routers use flashcards for storing configuration 
information, and they are also commonly used for storing pictures from digital 
cameras. Encrypting the data on flashcards is a good idea and allows you to keep 
your data secure. 
Smart Cards are credit card-sized devices that allow administrators to store lim- 
ited amounts of data. They are often used for identification or as a small data store 
due to their size and low cost. Many also offer authentication capabilities by using a 
built-in processor. This helps keep the personal and confidential information stored 
on these cards secure. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Device-based Security 
El Firewalls, routers, IDSes, and switches are devices that can all help secure a 
network as long as they are properly configured. 
Wireless, modems, RAS, PBXs, and VPNs all allow remote access to a 
computer or telecommunications network and should be made as secure 
as possible to prevent intrusion or attacks. 
Network monitoring or diagnostic equipment, workstations, servers, and 
mobile devices are all capable of being abused by intruders when attached 
to a network, and should therefore have their communications encrypted 
when possible, and be protected with strong passwords 
Media-based Security 
Coax, UPT, STP, and fiber are all media used to physically connect devices 
to a network, and each has its own benefits and vulnerabilities. 
www.syngress.com 


Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
419 
Q 
D 
A: 
Is fiber the best networking media to implement in a standard office environ- 
ment? 
Normally, due to cost limitations, offices are wired with UTP or STP and the 
data center is wired with fiber. Fiber is also often used as a backbone to con- 
nect one building to another. This is typically the most cost-efficient manner of 
providing high-speed networking for your servers and providing acceptable 
access speeds to your users. 
Q- What is the best removable media to use for backing up my servers? 
A" Magnetic tape is used for backups, due to its high capacity and low cost. 
Q: Should I implement an IDS on my network? 
A" Think of it like this" would you rather know when you are being attacked, or 
find out when the attack is done? 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
, 
You are working for a company who is updating their network and telecom- 
munications infrastructure. As part of the upgrade, they are in-sourcing their 
voicemail system rather than continue to pay their telecom provider for this 
service. The new voicemail system is connected to the corporate network for 
maintenance purposes.What actions would you recommend be taken? 
A. Change all the default passwords on the new voicemail system. 
B. Disconnect the new voicemail system from the corporate network when 
the connection is not in use for servicing the system. 
C. Store the new voicemail system in a secure location. 
D. All of the above. 
www.syngress.com 

420 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
. 
You have recently installed an IDS on your corporate network.While config- 
uring the NIDS, you decide to enable the monitoring of network traffic for a 
new exploit focused on attacking workstations that go to a malformed URL 
causing the browser to experience a stack dump. To configure the NIDS to 
watch for this, what must it be capable of monitoring? 
A. HTTP Headers 
B. TCP Headers 
C. XML Content 
D. HTTPS Content 
, 
You are performing a routine penetration test for the company you work for. 
As part of this test, you wardial all company extensions searching for modems. 
The test results indicate that one of the company extensions has a modem 
answering when it shouldn't be.You track this down and find that a user has 
installed their own modem so they can connect to an online service.What 
should you do? 
A. Nothing, this is not a threat. 
B. Remove the modem. 
C. Disconnect the extension. 
D. Notify the user's supervisor. 
o Your company has a mobile sales force which uses PDAs for entering orders 
while on the road. The application used for these orders requires an ID and 
password to log in.What else should be done to ensure that these orders are 
kept confidential when being sent to the host server? 
ao 
Bo 
Encrypt the data stored on the mobile device. 
Encrypt the communication channel between the mobile device and the 
host server. 
Co Require an x.509 certificate in addition to the ID and password required to 
authenticate. 
D. Encrypt the data stored on the host server. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media ~ Chapter 6 
421 
~ 
, 
~ 
o 
You have been assigned a ticket from your company's help desk stating that a 
user is unable to access their files over theVPN although they can access the 
same files when connected to the corporate network at their office.While 
troubleshooting the problem, you have the user perform a traceroute between 
their workstation and the VPN gateway while connected to the VPN. The 
traceroute results show that all eight hops respond with acceptable response 
times.What do you suspect the problem is? 
A. Network latency. 
B. The user is not connected to theVPN. 
C. Access permissions for the files are incorrect. 
D. The VPN gateway is behaving abnormally and needs to be examined. 
You are working with a network engineer to diagnose the cause for intermit- 
tent communication issues on the corporate network. The engineer determines 
that the cause is attenuation on the UTP cables used for network traffic.What 
element of STP cable could help with this? 
A. Increased twist rate 
B. Shielding 
C. Higher wire gauge 
D. Optical data transmission 
You are working with a team to prepare outdated workstations for resale. As 
part of this task, you must ensure that no corporate data remains on the system. 
What is the best way to do this? 
A. Destroy the system hard disk drive. 
B. Overwrite the system hard disk drive with random data to clear it. 
C. Format the system hard disk drive. 
D. Overwrite the system hard disk drive with random data multiple times to 
clear it securely. 
One of the employees at your company frequently does presentations. She car- 
ries the slideshow for the presentation on a flash card which she always carries 
with her.What would you recommend to her to keep the data on the flash 
card confidential? 
www.syngress.com 

422 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
A. Encrypt the data on the flash card. 
B. Use a flash card with shielding to prevent loss due to EMI. 
C. Use a flash card with a fingerprint reader to do authentication far her 
laptop. 
D. Put the flash card on a keychain so that it cannot be easily lost or stolen. 
. To help protect corporate data from loss, your company regularly ships backup 
tapes offsite to one of its manufacturing facilities. This facility stores the tapes in 
a locked cabinet in a secure area where some of the automated manufacturing 
equipment operates.What is wrong with this scenario? 
No 
go 
Backup tapes should always be stored in a safe to protect the data. 
Backup tapes should be copied and the copies moved off site rat:her than 
move the master copies. 
C. Backup tapes should not be stored near manufacturing equipment. 
Do Backup tapes should not 
legal liability. 
be stored in a company-owned facility to reduce 
10. You are working with a team to set up a network in a manufacturing facility. 
While drawing up the specifications for their server room network, you must 
decide on the type of cable to use for the fastest speed and the most EMI pro- 
tection.What cable type do you recommend? 
A. Fiber optic 
B. UTP 
C. STP 
D. Thick Coax 
11. You have been asked to help write a security policy regarding the subject of 
protecting confidential data. As part of this policy, you must define the best 
method to destroy the data on CDRs and DVDs.Which method would you 
recommend? 
A. Overwrite the CDR or DVD multiple times with random data to clear it. 
B. Run the CDR or DVD through a demagnetizer to clear it. 
C. Shred the CDR or DVD. 
D. All of the above. 

Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 9 Chapter 6 
423 
12. The company you work for has many workers who take their work home with 
them. They will revise the work at home, and then bring it back to the office. 
To do this, they transport the work on floppy disk. To help prevent a user from 
inadvertently bringing in a virus from their home system, what should you do? 
A. Enact a policy to prevent this practice. 
B. Setup automatic mandatory virus scans on all workstations to scan 
incoming disks. 
C. Do nothing; the risk of infection from floppy disk is low. 
D. Require that the users use CDRs instead of floppy disks to transport their 
data. 
www.syngress.com 

424 
Chapter 6 9 Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and epxlanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. D 
7. A 
2. A 
8. A 
3. D 
9. C 
4. B 
10. A 
5. B 
11. C 
6. B 
12. B 

Chapter 7 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
Security Topologies 
9 
Intrusion Detection 
Exam Objectives Review- 
1-r 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
F-Vl Exam Objectives Fast Track 
!-r 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
l-vl Self Test 
l-Vl Self Test Quick Answer Key 
425 

426 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Introduction 
In today's network infrastructures, it is critical to know the fundamentals of basic 
security infrastructure. Before any computer is connected to the Internet, planning 
must occur to make sure the network is designed in a secure manner. Many of the 
attacks that hackers use are successful because of an insecure network design. That 
is why it is so important for a security professional to use the secure topologies and 
tools like intrusion detection and prevention that are discussed in this chapter. For 
example, if you are working with Cisco technologies (and other switch vendors), 
you might be familiar with virtual local area network (VLAN) technology.VLANs 
are responsible for securing a broadcast domain to a group of switch ports. This 
relates directly to secure topologies, because different Internet Protocol (IP) subnets 
can be put on different port groupings and separated, either by routing or by 
applying an access control list (ACL) (e.g., the Executive group can be isolated 
from the general user population on a network). 
Other items related to topology that we examine in this chapter include demil- 
itarized zones (DMZs). DMZ's can be used in conjunction with network address 
translation (NAT) and extranets to help build a more secure network.~re'll look at 
each of these items and examine how they can be used to build a layered defense. 
An ACL is a list of users that have permission to access a resource or 
modify a file. ACLs are used in nearly all modern-day operating systems 
(OSes) to determine what permissions a user has on a particular resource 
or file. 
The second half of this chapter covers intrusion detection. It is important to 
understand not only the concepts of intrusion detection, but also the use and 
placement of intrusion detection systems (IDSes) within a network infrastructure. 
The placement of an IDS is critical to deployment success. This section :also covers 
intrusion prevention systems (IPS), honeypots, and incident response. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
427 
You do not need to know how to configure an actual IDS system to pass 
the Security+ exam, although it can benefit your security career. You 
only need to master the concepts of IDS and the types of IDS systems 
available. 
Security Topologies 
Not all networks are created the same; thus, not all networks should be physically 
laid out in the same fashion. The judicious usage of differing security topologies in 
a network can offer enhanced protection and performance. For example, suppose 
you have an e-commerce application that uses Internet Information Servers (IISes) 
running a custom Active Server Page (ASP) application, which calls on a second set 
of servers hosting custom COM+ components, which in turn interact with a third 
set of servers that house an Structured Query Language (SQL) 2005 database. 
Figure 7.1 provides an example of this concept. 
Figure 7.1 The Complex N-tier Arrangement 
www.syngress.com 

428 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
This is a fairly complex example, but helps illustrate the need for differing 
security topologies on the same network. Under no circumstances should COM+ 
servers or SQL 2005 servers be exposed to the Internet directly--they should be 
protected by placing them behind a strong security solution. At the same time, you 
do not want to leave IISes exposed to every hacker and script kiddie out there, so 
they should be placed in a DMZ or behind the first firewall or router. The idea 
here is to layer security so that a breach of one set of servers such as the IIS servers 
does not directly expose COM+ or SQL servers. 
While differing topologies can be effectively used together, in some instances 
they need to be used completely separately from each other. The next sections 
examine the concept of security zones, how to employ them on a network, how 
they work, and what they can provide in regards to increased security. 
Make sure you know the definitions of and the differences between a 
firewall and a DMZ. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
429 
Security Zones 
The easiest way to think of security zones is to imagine them as discrete network 
segments holding systems that share common requirements. These common 
requirements can be: 
9 
The types of information they handle 
9 Who uses them 
9 What levels of security they require to protect their data 
A security zone is defined as any portion of a network that has specific 
security concerns or requirements. Intranets, extranets, DMZs, and 
VLANs are all security zones. 
It is possible to have systems in a zone running different OSes, such as 
Windows Vista and NetWare 6.5. The type of computer, whether a PC, server, or 
mainframe, is not as important as the security needs of the computer. For example, 
there is a network that uses Windows 2003 Servers as domain controllers, Domain 
Name System (DNS) servers, and Dynamic Host Control Protocol (DHCP) 
servers. There are also Windows XP Professional clients and NetWare 6.5 file 
servers on the network. Some users may be using Macintosh computers running 
OS X or OS 9, while others may be running one or more types of Linux or 
UNIX. This is an extremely varied network, but it may still only have one or two 
security zones. As stated earlier, the type (or OS) of a computer is not as important 
with regards to security zones and its role. 
In the early days of business Internet connectivity, the concept of security zones 
was developed to separate systems available to the public Internet from private sys- 
tems available for internal use by an organization. A device that acted as a firewall 
separated the zones. Figure 7.2 shows a visual representation of the basic firewall 
concept. 
www.syngress.com 

430 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Figure 7.2 A Basic Firewall Installation 
Many of these early firewalls had only basic abilities and usually functioned only 
as a packet filter. Packet filters rely on ACL's. ACL's allow the packet filter to be con- 
figured to block or allow traffic based on attributes such as IP address and[ source 
and destination port. Packet filters are considered stateless, while more a&eanced 
modern firewalls like Microsoft's ISA server is considered stateful. Regardless of 
what type of firewall you are working with, most provide the ability to" 
9 Block traffic based on certain rules. The rules can block unwanted, unso- 
licited, spurious, or malicious traffic. (See Figure 7.3) 
9 
Mask the presence of networks or hosts to the outside world. Firewalls can 
also ensure that unnecessary information about the makeup of the internal 
network is not available to the outside world. 
9 
Log and maintain audit trails of incoming and outgoing traffic. 
9 
Provide additional authentication methods. 
Some newer firewalls include more advanced features, such as integrated virtual 
private networking (VPN) applications that allow remote users to access local sys- 
tems through a secure, encrypted tunnel. Some firewalls have integrated IDSes in 
their product and can make firewall rule changes based on the detection of suspi- 
cious events happening at the network gateway. (IDS products and their use are 
covered later in this chapter.) These new technologies have much promise and 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
431 
make great choices for creating a "defense in depth" strategy, but remember that 
the more work the firewall is doing to support these other functions, the more 
chance there is that these additional tools may impact the throughput of the fire- 
wall device. 
Figure 7.3 A Sample Firewall Rule Set 
www.syngress.com 

432 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
In addition, when a number of these features are implemented on any single 
device (especially a firewall), it creates a wide opportunity for a successfi~l attacker if 
that device is ever compromised. If one of these new hybrid information security 
devices are chosen, it is important to stay extra vigilant about applying patches and 
to include in the risk mitigation planning how to deal with a situation in which 
this device falls under the control of an attacker. 
Risk mitigation, according to the Project Management Institute (PMI), 
seeks to reduce the probability and/or impact of a specific risk below an 
acceptable threshold. For more information on risk and project manage- 
ment, see the PMI online at www.pmi.org. 
Although the installation of a firewall or hybrid device protects the internal sys- 
tems of an organization, it does nothing to protect the systems that are made avail- 
able to the public Internet. A different type of implementation is needed to add 
basic protection for those systems that are offered for public use. Thus enters the 
concept of the DMZ. 
A DMZ is a special section of the network, usually closest to the 
Internet, which uses switches, routers, and firewalls to allow access to 
public resources without allowing this traffic to reach the resources and 
computers in the private network. 
Introducing the Demilitarized Zone 
In computer security, the DMZ is a "neutral" network segment where systems 
accessible to the public Internet are housed, which offers some basic levels of pro- 
tection against attacks. The term "DMZ" is derived from the military and is used to 
describe a "safe" or buffer area between two countries where, by mutual agree- 
ment, no troops or war-making activities are allowed. There are usually strict rules 
regarding what is allowed within the zone.When applying this term to the IT 
security realm, it can be used to create DMZ segments in usually one of two ways: 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
433 
9 Layered DMZ implementation 
9 Multiple interface firewall implementation 
In the first method, the systems are placed between two firewall devices with 
different rule sets, which allows systems on the Internet to connect to the offered 
services on the DMZ systems, but prevents them from connecting to the com- 
puters on the internal segments of the organization's network (often called the pro- 
tected network). Figure 7.5 shows a common installation using this layered approach. 
Figure 7.5 A Layered DMZ Implementation 
The second method is to add a third interface to the firewall and place the 
DMZ systems on that network segment. (See Figure 7.6) As an example, this is the 
way Cisco PIX firewalls are designed. This design allows the same firewall to 
manage the traffic between the Internet, the DMZ, and the protected network. 
Using one firewall instead of two lowers the costs of the hardware and centralizes 
the rule sets for the network, making it easier to manage and troubleshoot prob- 
lems. Currently, this multiple interface design is the preferred method for creating a 
DMZ segment. 
In either case, the DMZ systems are offered some level of protection from the 
public Internet while they remain accessible for the specific services they provide 
to external users. In addition, the internal network is protected by a firewall from 
both the external network and the systems in the DMZ. Because the DMZ systems 
still offer public access, they are more prone to compromise and thus they are not 

434 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
trusted by the systems in the protected network. A good first step in building a 
strong defense is to harden the DMZ systems by removing all unnecessary services 
and unneeded components. The result is a bastion host. This scenario allows for 
public services while still maintaining a degree of protection against attack. 
Hosts located in a DMZ are generally accessed from both internal net- 
work clients and public (external) Internet clients. Examples of DMZ bas- 
tion hosts are DNS servers, Web servers, and File Transfer Protocol (FTP) 
servers. A bastion host is a system on the public side of the firewall, 
which is exposed to attack. The word bastion comes from sixteenth cen- 
tury French word, meaning the projecting part of a fortress wall that 
faces the outside and is exposed to attackers. 
Figure 7.6 A Multiple Interface Firewall DMZ Implementation 
The role of the firewall in all of these scenarios is to manage the trafific 
between the network segments.The basic idea is that other systems on the Internet 
are allowed to access only the services of the DMZ systems that have been made 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
435 
public. If an Internet system attempts to connect to a service not made public, the 
firewall drops the traffic and logs the information about the attempt (if configured 
to do so). Systems on a protected network are allowed to access the Internet as 
they require, and they may also access the DMZ systems for managing the com- 
puters, gathering data, or updating content. In this way, systems are exposed only to 
attacks against the services that they offer, and not to underlying processes that may 
be running on them. 
The systems in the DMZ can host any or all of the following services: 
9 Internet Web Site Access IIS or Apache servers that provideWeb sites 
for public and private usage. Examples would be www.microsoft.com or 
www.netserverworld.com. Both of these Web sites have both publicly and 
privately available contents. 
9 
FTP Services FTP file servers that provide public and private down- 
loading and uploading of files. Examples would be the FTP servers used 
by popular download providers at www.downloads.comor 
www.tucows.com. FTP is designed for faster file transfer with less over- 
head, but does not have all of the special features that are available in 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the protocol used for Web page 
transfer. 
Remember that FTP has some security issues in that username and pass- 
word information is passed in clear text and can easily be sniffed. 
E-mail Relaying A special e-mail server that acts as a middleman of 
sorts. Instead of e-mail passing directly from the source server to the desti- 
nation server (or the next hop in the path), it passes through an e-mail 
relay that then forwards it. E-mail relays are a double-edged sword and 
most security professionals prefer to have this function disabled on all pub- 
licly accessible e-mail servers. On the other hand, some companies have 
started offering e-mail relaying services to organizations as a means of pro- 
viding e-mail security. 
www.syngress.com 

436 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
9 
DNS Services A DNS server might be placed in the DMZ in order to 
point incoming access requests to the appropriate server with the DMZ. 
This can alternatively be provided by the Internet Service Provider (ISP), 
usually for a nominal extra service charge. If DNS servers are placed in the 
DMZ, it is important to be careful and ensure that they cannot: be made 
to conduct a zone transfer (a complete transfer of all DNS zone informa- 
tion from one server to another) to any server. This is a common security 
hole found in many publicly accessible DNS servers.Attackers typically 
look for this vulnerability by scanning to see if port TCP 53 is open. 
9 
Intrusion Detection The placement of an IDS system (discussed later in 
this chapter) in the DMZ is difficult and depends on the network require- 
ments. IDSes placed in the DMZ will tend to give more false positive 
results than those inside the private internal network, due to the nature of 
Internet traffic and the large number of script kiddies out there. Still, 
placing an IDS on the DMZ can give administrators early warning of 
attacks taking place on their network resources. 
The rise of e-commerce and the increased demand of online transactions has 
increased the need for secure architectures and well-designed DMZ's. E-commerce 
requires more attention to be paid to securing transaction information tlhat flows 
between consumers and the sites they use, as well as between e-commerce busi- 
nesses themselves. Customer names, addresses, order information, and especially 
financial data need greater care and handling to prevent unauthorized access. This 
greater care is accomplished through the creation of the specialized segments men- 
tioned earlier (which are similar to the DMZ) called security zones. Other items 
such as the use of encryption and the use of secure protocols like secure sockets 
layer (SSL) and transport layer security (TLS), are also important when designing a 
more secure architecture. 
Multiple Needs Equals Multiple Zones 
Security requirements for storing customer information and financial data are dif- 
ferent from the requirements for storing routine, less sensitive information that 
businesses handle. Because this data requires processing and much of the processing 
is done over the Internet, more complicated network structures must be created. 
Many organizations choose to implement a multiple segment structure to better 
manage and secure their different types of business information. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
437 
This multi-segment approach allows flexibility, because new segments with spe- 
cific purposes and security requirements can be easily added to the model. In gen- 
eral, the two segments that are widely accepted are: 
9 
A segment dedicated to information storage 
9 
A segment specifically for the processing of business information 
Each of these two new segments has special security and operability concerns 
above and beyond those of the rest of the organizational Intranet. In reality, every- 
thing comes down to dollars--what is it going to cost to implement a security 
solution versus what will it cost if the system is breached by attackers. Thus the 
value of raw data is different than the value of the financial processing system. Each 
possible solution has its pluses and minuses, but in the end a balance is struck 
between cost versus expected results. Thus, the creation of different zones (seg- 
ments) for different purposes. Note that the Web and e-mail servers would likely 
receive the least amount of spending and security measures, which is not to say that 
they will be completely ignored, they just would not receive as much as the finan- 
cial servers might. 
Creation of multiple segments changes a network structure to look like the 
drawing in Figure 7.7. 
Figure 7.7 A Modern E-commerce Implementation 
www.syngress.com 

438 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
The diagram shown in Figure 7.7 includes the following two new zones: 
9 The data storage network 
9 The financial processing network 
The data stora2e zone is used to hold information that the e-commerce applica- 
tion requires, such as inventory databases, pricing information, ordering details, and 
other non-financial data. The Web servers in the DMZ segment serve as. the inter- 
face to the customers; they access the servers in the other two segments to gather 
the required information and to process the users' requests. 
When an order is placed, the business information in these databases is updated 
to reflect the real-time sales and orders of the public. These business-sensitive 
database systems are protected from the Internet by the firewall, and they are 
restricted from general access by most of the systems in the protected network. This 
helps protect the database information from unauthorized access by an insider or 
from accidental modification by an inexperienced user. 
You will not need to know how an e-commerce DMZ is set up to pass 
the Security+ exam; however, it is important to know this information 
for real-world security work. 
The financial information from an order is transferred to the financial processing 
segment. Here, the systems validate the customer's information and then process the 
payment requests to a credit card company, a bank, or a transaction clearinghouse. 
After the information has been processed, it is stored in the database for batch 
transfer into the protected network, or it is transferred in real time, depending on 
the setup. The financial segment is also protected from the Internet by the firewall, 
as well as from all other segments in the setup. This system of processing the data in 
a location separate from the user interface creates another layer that an attacker 
must penetrate to gather financial information about customers. In addition, the 
firewall protects the financial systems from access by all but specifically authorized 
users inside a company. 
Access controls also regulate the way network communications are initiated. 
For example, if a financial network system can process credit information in a 
store-and-forward mode, it can batch those details for retrieval by a system from 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
439 
the protected network. To manage this situation, the firewall permits only systems 
from the protected network to initiate connections with the financial segment. This 
prevents an attacker from being able to directly access the protected network in the 
event of a compromise. On the other hand, if the financial system must use real- 
time transmissions or data from the computers on the protected network, the 
financial systems have to be able to initiate those communications. In this event, if a 
compromise occurs, the attacker can use the financial systems to attack the pro- 
tected network through those same channels. It is always preferable that DMZ sys- 
tems not initiate connections into more secure areas, but that systems with higher 
security requirements initiate those network connections. Keep this in mind as you 
design your network segments and the processes that drive your site. 
The phrase store-and-forward refers to a method of delivering transmis- 
sions in which the messages are temporarily held by an intermediary 
before being sent on to their final destination. Some switches and many 
e-mail servers use the store-and-forward method for data transfer. 
DMZ design is covered on the Security+ exam. You must know the basics 
of DMZ placement and what components the DMZ divides. 
In large installations, these segments may vary in placement, number, and/or 
implementation, but this serves to generally illustrate the ideas behind the process. 
An actual implementation may vary from this design. For example, an administrator 
may wish to place all the financial processing systems on the protected network. 
This is acceptable as long as the requisite security tools are in place to adequately 
secure the information. I have also seen implementation of the business informa- 
tion off an extension of the DMZ, as well as discrete DMZ segments for develop- 
ment and testing. Specific technical requirements will impact actual deployment, so 
administrators may find that what they currently have in place on a network (or 
the need for a future solution) may deviate from the diagrams shown earlier. The 
bottom line is to ensure that systems are protected. 
www.syngress.com 

440 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Problems with Multi-zone Networks 
Some common problems do exist with multiple-zone networks. By their very 
nature they are complex to implement, protect, and manage. Firewall rule sets are 
often large, dynamic, and confusing, and the implementation can be arduous and 
resource intensive. 
Creating and managing security controls such as firewall rules, IDS signatures, 
and user access regulations is a large task. These processes should be kept as simple 
as possible without compromising security or usability. It is best to start with de W - 
all strategies and permit only the services and network transactions required to 
make the site function, and then carefully manage the site's performance making 
small changes to the access controls to more easily manage the rule sets. Using 
these guidelines, administrators should be able to quickly get the site up and run- 
ning without creating obvious security holes in the systems. 
The concept of a denial all strategy will be covered on the Security+ 
exam. A denial all strategy means that all services and ports are disabled 
by default, and then only the minimum level of service is activated as a 
valid business case is made for each service. 
As a site grows and offers new features, new zones may have to be created. The 
above process should be repeated for creating the rule sets governing these new 
segments. As always, it is important to audit and inspect any changes and keep 
backups of the old rule sets in case they are needed again. 
Intranet 
Thus far, this chapter has only discussed the systems that reside outside of the pro- 
tected internal network. These servers are the ones that are located in the DMZ. 
The rest of the internal network is called the intranet, which means a private 
internal network. The intranet, therefore, is every part of a network that lies on the 
inside of the last firewall from the Internet. Figure 7.8 gives an example of an 
intranet. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
441 
The terminology can be confusing to beginners. One might think the 
internal network would be the Internet, but this is not the case. An 
Internet (including the global Internet) refers to communications 
between different networks, while the intranet refers to communica- 
tions within a network. It may help to use a comparison: interstate com- 
merce refers to business transacted across state lines (between different 
states), while intrastate commerce refers to business transacted within 
one state. 
Figure 7.8 A Simple Intranet Example 
It is expected that all traffic on the intranet will be secure and safe from the 
prying eyes on the Internet. It is the network security professional's job to make 
sure that this happens.While a security breach of a DMZ system can be costly to a 
company, a breach that occurs inside an intranet could be extraordinarily costly and 
damaging. If this happens, customers and business partners might lose faith in the 
company's ability to safeguard sensitive information, and other attackers will likely 
make the network a favorite target for future attacks. 
To ensure that all traffic on the intranet is secure, the following issues should be 
addressed: 
www.syngress.com 

442 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
9 Make sure that the firewall is configured properly to stop attack attempts 
at the firewall. There are many different opinions on how to do this, but 
the majority of security professionals agree that you should start with a 
deny all or "block everything" mentality and then open the firewall on a 
case-by-case basis, thereby only allowing specific types of traffic to cross it 
(regardless of which direction the traffic is flowing). It's important to 
remember that each open port and service offers the attacker an additional 
path from which he may potentially target the network. 
9 Additionally, make sure that the firewall is configured properly to prevent 
unauthorized network traffic, such as file sharing programs (for' example, 
BitTorrent, Gnutella or Morpheus) from being used on the internal net- 
work. These types of programs can sometimes be difficult to block, but it 
can be done. 
9 Make sure the firewall will watch traffic that egresses or leaves the net- 
work from trusted hosts, and ensure that it is not intercepted and altered 
en route; steps should also be taken to try to eliminate spoofing from 
attackers. 
9 Make sure that the antivirus software is in use and up to date. Consider 
implementing an enterprise-level solution, consisting of a central server 
responsible for coordinating and controlling the identification and collec- 
tion of viruses on your network. 
9 Educate users on the necessity of keeping their computers logged out 
when not in use. 
9 
Implement Secure Internet Protocol (IPSec) on the intranet between all 
clients and servers to prevent eavesdropping; note that more often than 
not, the greatest enemy lies on the inside of the firewall. 
9 
Conduct regular, but unannounced, security audits and inspections. Be 
sure to closely monitor all logs that are applicable. 
9 Do not allow the installation of modems or unsecured wireless access 
points on any intranet computers. Do not allow any connection to the 
Internet except through the firewall and proxy servers, as applicable. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
443 
A proxy server is a server that sits between an intranet and its Internet 
connection. Proxy servers provide features such as document caching 
(for faster browser retrieval) and access control. Proxy servers can pro- 
vide security for a network by filtering and discarding requests that are 
deemed inappropriate by an administrator. Proxy servers also protect 
the internal network by masking all internal IP addresses~all connec- 
tions to Internet servers appear to be coming from the IP address of the 
proxy servers. 
Of course, there are literally hundreds of other issues that may need to be 
addressed but these are some of the easiest ones to take care of and the most com- 
monly exploited ones. 
All of the Internet security measures listed here should be used at your 
discretion, based on what is available and what meets the business 
needs of your company. You can use any one of these, all of these, or 
continue with an almost infinite list of applied security measures that 
are covered in this book. 
Extranet 
Extranets are a special implementation of the intranet topology. Creating an 
extranet allows for access to a network (more likely, certain parts of a network) by 
trusted customers, partners, or other users. These users, who are external to the net- 
work~they are on the Internet side of the firewalls and other security mecha- 
nisms~can then be allowed to access private information stored on the internal 
network that they would not want to place on the DMZ for general public access. 
The amount of access that each user or group of users is allowed to have to the 
intranet can be easily customized to ensure that each user or group gets what they 
need and nothing more. Additionally, some organizations create extranets to allow 
their own employees to have access to certain internal data while away from the 
private network. 
www.syngress.com 

444 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
The following is an example of how two companies might each choose to 
implement an extranet solution for their mutual betterment. Company A makes 
door stoppers and has recently entered into a joint agreement with Company B. 
Company B makes cardboard boxes. By partnering together, both companies are 
hoping to achieve some form of financial gain. Company A is now able to get 
cardboard boxes (which it needs to ship its product) made faster, cheaper, and to 
exact specification; Company B benefits from newfound revenue from Company 
A. Everybody wins and both companies are very happy. After some time, both 
companies realize that they could streamline this process even more if they each 
had access to certain pieces of data about the other company. For example, 
Company A wants to keep track of when its cardboard boxes will be arriving. 
Company B, on the other hand, wants to be able to control box production by 
looking at how many orders for door stoppers Company A has.What these two 
companies need is an extranet. By implementing an extranet solution, both compa- 
nies will be able to get the specific data they need to make their relationship even 
more profitable, without either company having to grant full, unrestricted access to 
its private internal network. Figure 7.9 graphically depicts this extranet solution. 
Figure 7.9 A Simple Extranet Example 
Users attempting to gain access to an extranet require some form of authentica- 
tion before they are allowed access to resources. The type of access control imple- 
mented can vary, but some of the more common include usernames/passwords and 
digital certificates. Once an extranet user has been successfully authenticated, they 
can gain access to the resources that are allowed for their access level. In the pre- 
vious example, a user from Company B's production department might :need to see 
information about the number of door stoppers being ordered, while a user from 
Company A's shipping department might need to see information detailing when 
the next shipment of boxes is expected. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
445 
You must have a functional intranet setup before attempting to create 
an extranet. 
Be able to readily define an extranet. You must know the difference 
between the Internet, intranet, and extranet. 
VLANs 
A VLAN can be thought of as the equivalent to a broadcast domain. 
A broadcast domain consists of a group of nodes (computers) that 
receive layer 2 broadcasts sent by other members of the same group. 
Typically, broadcast domains are separated by creating additional net- 
work segments or by adding a router. 
Do not confuse broadcast domains with collision domains. Collision 
domains refer specifically to Ethernet networks. The area of network 
cabling between layer 2 devices is known as a collision domain. Layer 2 
devices typically include switches that rely on the physical address 
(Media Access Control [MAC] address) of computers to route traffic. 
VLANs are a way to segment a network, as discussed above. When thinking of 
a VLAN, think of taking a switch and physically cutting it into two or more pieces 
with an axe. Special software features found in newer, more expensive switches, 
allow administrators to physically split one physical switch into multiple logical 
switches, thus creating multiple network segments that are completely separate 
from one another. 
The VLAN is thus a logical local area network that uses a basis other than a 
physical location to map the computers that belong to each separateVLAN (e.g., 
www.syngress.com 

446 
Chapter 7. Topologies and IDS 
each department within a company could comprise a separate VLAN, regardless of 
whether or not the department's users are located in physical proximity). This 
allows administrators to manage these virtual networks individually for security and 
ease of configuration. 
Let's look at an example of using VLANs. There is an Engineering ,;ection con- 
sisting of 14 computers and a Research section consisting of 8 computers, all on 
the same physical subnet. Users typically communicate only with other systems 
within their respective sections. Both sections share the use of one Cisco Catalyst 
2924 XL switch. To diminish the size of the necessary broadcast domain for each 
section, the administrator can create two VLANs, one for the Engineering section 
and one for the Research section. After creating the two VLANs, all broadcast 
traffic for each section will be isolated to its respective VLAN. But what: happens 
when a node in the Engineering section needs to communicate with a node in the 
Research section? Do the two systems connect from within the Catalyst 2924 XL 
switch? No; this cannot occur since the two sections have been set up on two dif- 
ferent VLANs. For traffic to be passed between VLANs (even when they are on the 
same switch) a router must be used. 
Figure 7.10 graphically depicts the previous example of splitting one switch 
into two VLANs. Note that two switches can also be split into two VLANs or 
more, depending on the need. The following example shows how to split two 
switches into multiple VLANs with each VLAN acting as its own physically sepa- 
rated network segment. In reality, many more VLANs can be created; they are only 
limited by port density (the number of ports on a switch) and the feature set of the 
switch's software. 
Figure 7.10 Using VLANs to Segment Network Traffic 
Each VLAN functions like a separate switch due to the combination of hard- 
ware and software features built into the switch itself. Thus, the switch must be 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
447 
capable of supporting VLANs in order to use them. The following are typical char- 
acteristics of VLANs when implemented on a network: 
9 
Each VLAN is the equivalent of a physically separate switch as far as net- 
work traffic is concerned. 
9 
AVLAN can span multiple switches, limited only by imagination and the 
capabilities of the switches being used. 
9 
Trunks carry the traffic between each switch that is part of aVLAN. A 
trunk is defined as a point-to-point link from one switch to another 
switch. The purpose of a trunk is to carry the traffic of multiple VLANs 
over a single link. 
9 
Cisco switches, for example, use the Cisco proprietary Inter-Switch Link 
(ISL) and IEEE 802.1Q protocol as their trunking protocols. 
Know that VLANs implement security at the switch level. If you are not 
on the same VLAN as another user on your network and access is not 
allowed, you can secure communications from such hosts. 
A complete description of VLANs beyond the scope of the Security+ exam, can be 
found at www.ciscopress.com/articles/article.asp?p=29803&rl = 1. The IEEE 
802.1Qstandard can be downloaded at www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1Q.html. 
Network Address Translation 
NAT was developed because of the explosive growth of the Internet and the 
increase in home and business networks~the number of available IP addresses was 
simply not enough. A computer must have an IP address in order to communicate 
with other computers on the Internet. NAT allows a single device, such as a router, 
to act as an agent between the Internet and the local network.This device or 
router provides a pool of addresses to be used by your local network. Only a single, 
unique IP address is required to represent this entire group of computers. The out- 
side world is unaware of this division and thinks that only one computer is con- 
nected. Common types of NAT include: 
9 
Static NAT Used by businesses to connectWeb servers to the Internet 
www.syngress.com 

448 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
9 Dynamic NAT Larger business use this type of NAT because it can 
operate with a pool of public addresses 
9 Port Address Translation (PAT) Most home networks using Digital 
Subscriber Line (DSL) or cable modems use this type of NAT 
NAT is a feature of many routers, firewalls, and proxies. NAT has several bene- 
fits, one of which is its ability to hide the IP address and network design of the 
internal network. The ability to hide the internal network from the Internet 
reduces the risk of intruders gleaning information about the network and 
exploiting that information to gain access. If an intruder does not know the struc- 
ture of a network, the network layout, the names and IP address of systems, and so 
on, it is very difficult to gain access to that network. NAT enables internal clients 
to use nonroutable IP addresses, such as the private IP addresses defined in 1KFC 
1918, but still enables them to access Internet resources. The three ranges of IP 
addresses 1KFC 1918 reserved includes: 
I0.0.0.0 
- 10.255.255.255 
(10/8 
prefix) 
172.16.0.0 
- 172.31.255.255 
(172.16/12 
prefix) 
192.168.0.0 
- 192.168.255.255 
(192.168/16 
prefix) 
NAT can be used when there are many internal private IP addresses and there 
are only a few public IP addresses available to the organization. In this situation, the 
company can share the few public IP addresses among all the internal clients. NAT 
can also aid in security as outsiders cannot directly see Internal IP addresses. Finally, 
NAT restricts traffic flow so that only traffic requested or initiated by an internal 
client can cross the NAT system from external networks. 
When using NAT, the internal addresses are reassigned to private IP addresses 
and the internal network is identified on the NAT host system. Once NAT is con- 
figured, external malicious users are only able to access the IP address of the NAT 
host that is directly connected to the Internet, but they are not able to "see" any of 
the internal computers that go through the NAT host to access the Internet. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
449 
When NAT is used to hide internal IP addresses (see Figure 7.11), it is some- 
times called a NATfirewall; however, do not let the word firewall give you a false 
sense of security. NAT by itself solves only one piece of the security perimeter 
puzzle. A true firewall does much more than link private IP addresses to public 
ones, and vice versa. 
Figure 7.11 NAT Hides the Internal Addresses 
www.syngress.com 

450 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Tunneling 
Tunneling is used to create a virtual tunnel (a virtual point-to-point link:) between 
you and your destination using an untrusted public network as the medium. In 
most cases, this would be the Internet.When establishing a tunnel, commonly 
called aVPN, a safe connection is being created between two points that cannot be 
examined by outsiders. In other words, all traffic that is traveling through this 
tunnel can be seen but cannot be understood by those on the outside. All packets 
are encrypted and carry information designed to provide authentication and 
integrity. This ensures that they are tamperproof and thus can withstand common 
IP attacks, such as the Man-in--Middle (MITM) and packet replay. When aVPN is 
created, traffic is private and safe from prying eyes. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
451 
Tunneling is used in conjunction with encryption to provide total end- 
to-end data protection across an untrustworthy network, such as the 
Internet. Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) and Layer 2 Tunneling 
Protocol (L2TP) are popular VPN tunneling protocols, while Microsoft 
Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE) and IPSec are their encryption counter- 
parts. Do not confuse tunneling with encryption. 
VPN tunneling provides confidentiality of data, in that the traffic is encrypted, 
typically using MPPE or IPSec.VPNs created using the L2TP use IPSec for 
encryption, whereas tunnels created with the PPTP use MPPE.Windows XP and 
newer Microsoft OSes can use IPSec; all older versions must use MPPE. 
Most other new OSes also provide support for L2TP and IPSec. Tunnels can 
also be created using IPSec alone (without L2TP) or using Secure Shell (SSH) or 
Crypto Internet Protocol Encapsulation (CIPE) in Linux/UNIX environments. It 
is important to understand that tunneling and encryption are two separate pro- 
cesses, both of which are necessary to create aVPN. 
For more information about VPN technologies, see http://en.wikipedia. 
org/wiki/VPN. Tunneling is often used when configuring and implementing an 
extranet solution, but is not limited to usage only in that situation. Consider Figure 
7.12, where we have created a VPN tunnel from your network to the network of a 
business partner. 
Figure 7.12 Setting Up a Business-to-business VPN 
You can also establish a VPN from your home computer to the corporate net- 
work by making use of your ISP connection, as shown in Figure 7.13. 
www.syngress.com 

452 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Figure 7.13 Establishing a VPN Tunnel to Access the Corporate Network 
from Home 
Intrusion Detection 
Firewalls and other simple boundary devices lack some degree of intelligence when 
it comes to observing, recognizing, and identifying attack signatures that may be 
present in the traffic they monitor and the log files they collect. A successful secu- 
rity strategy requires many layers and components. One of these components is the 
IDS. Intrusion detection is an important piece of security in that it acts as a detec- 
tive control. As an example, consider a locked car in a parking lot. Locking the car 
is much like securing the network. It provides security but only deters attacks. 
What if someone breaks in the locked car, how would the driver detect this? In the 
world of automobile security that could be accomplished with an alarm system. In 
the computer world this is done with an IDS.Whereas other boundary devices may 
collect all the information necessary to detect (and often to foil) attacks that may 
be getting started or are already underway, they have not been programmed to 
inspect for and detect the kinds of traffic or network behavior patterns that match 
known attack signatures or that suggest potential unrecognized attacks may be 
incipient or in progress. 
In a nutshell, the simplest way to define an IDS is to describe it as a specialized 
tool that knows how to read and interpret the contents of log files from sensors 
placed on the network, routers, firewalls, servers, and other network devices. 
Furthermore, an IDS often stores a database of known attack signatures and can 
compare patterns of activity, traffic, or behavior it sees in the logs it is monitoring 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
453 
against those signatures to recognize when a close match between a signature and 
current or recent behavior occurs. At that point, the IDS can issue alarms or alerts, 
take various kinds of automatic action ranging from shutting down Internet links 
or specific servers to launching backtraces, and make other active attempts to iden- 
tify attackers and actively collect evidence of their nefarious activities. 
By analogy, an IDS does for a network what an antivirus software package does 
for files that enter a system: it inspects the contents of network traffic to look for 
and deflect possible attacks,just as an antivirus software package inspects the con- 
tents of incoming files, e-mail attachments, active Web content, and so forth to look 
for virus signatures (patterns that match known malicious software [malware]) or 
for possible malicious actions (patterns of behavior that are at least suspicious, if not 
downright unacceptable). 
To eliminate confusion on the Security+ exam, the simplest definition of 
IDS is a device that monitors and inspects all inbound and outbound 
network traffic, and identifies patterns that may indicate suspicious 
activities or attacks. Do not confuse this with a firewall, which is a 
device that inspects all inbound and outbound network traffic looking 
for disallowed types of connections. 
To be more specific, intrusion detection means detecting unauthorized use of 
or attacks on a system or network. An IDS is designed and used to detect and then 
to deflect or deter (if possible) such attacks or unauthorized use of systems, net- 
works, and related resources. Like firewalls, IDSes may be software-based or may 
combine hardware and software (in the form of preinstalled and preconfigured 
standalone IDS devices). There are many opinions as to what is the best option. For 
the exam what's important is to understand the differences. Often, IDS software 
runs on the same devices or servers where firewalls, proxies, or other boundary ser- 
vices operate; an IDS not running on the same device or server where the firewall 
or other services are installed to monitor those devices closely and carefully. 
Although such devices tend to operate at network peripheries, IDS systems can 
detect and deal with insider attacks as well as external attacks as long as the sensors 
are appropriately placed to detect such attacks. 

454 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Characterizing IDSes 
IDS systems vary according to a number of criteria. By explaining those criteria, 
we can explain what kinds of IDSes you are likely to encounter and how they do 
their jobs. First and foremost, it is possible to distinguish IDSes on the basis of the 
kinds of activities, traffic, transactions, or systems they monitor. In this case, IDSes 
may be divided into network-based, host-based, and application-based tNpes. IDSes 
that monitor network backbones and look for attack signatures are called network- 
based IDSes, whereas those that operate on hosts defend and monitor the operating 
and file systems for signs of intrusion and are called host-based IDSes. Some IDSes 
monitor only specific applications and are called application-based IDSes. (This type 
of treatment is usually reserved for important applications such as database manage- 
ment systems, content management systems, accounting systems, and so forth.) 
Read on to learn more about these various types of IDS monitoring approaches: 
9 
Network-based IDS Characteristics 
9 
Pros Network-based IDSes can monitor an entire large network with 
only a few well-situated nodes or devices, and impose little overhead 
on a network. Network-based IDSes are mostly passive devices that 
monitor ongoing network activity without adding significant overhead 
or interfering with network operation. They are easy to secure against 
attack and may even be undetectable to attackers; they also require 
little effort to install and use on existing networks. 
9 
Cons Network-based IDSes may not be able to monitor and analyze 
all traffic on large, busy networks, and may therefore overlook attacks 
launched during peak traffic periods. Network-based IDSes may not 
be able to monitor switch-based (high-speed) networks effectively, 
either. Typically, network-based IDSes cannot analyze encrypted data, 
nor do they report whether or not attempted attacks succeed or fail. 
Thus, network-based IDSes require a certain amount of active, manual 
involvement from network administrators to gauge the effects of 
reported attacks. 
9 
Host-based IDS Characteristics 
9 
Pros 
A host-based IDS can analyze activities on the host it monitors 
at a high level of detail; it can often determine which processes and/or 
users are involved in malicious activities. Though they may each focus 
on a single host, many host-based IDS systems use an agent-console 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
455 
model where agents run on (and monitor) individual hosts, but report 
to a single centralized console (so that a single console can configure, 
manage, and consolidate data from numerous hosts). Host-based IDSes 
can detect attacks undetectable to the network-based IDS and can 
gauge attack effects quite accurately. Host-based IDSes can use host- 
based encryption services to examine encrypted traffic, data, storage, 
and activity. Host-based IDSes also have no difficulties operating on 
switch-based networks. 
9 
Cons Data collection occurs on a per-host basis; writing to logs or 
reporting activity requires network traffic and can decrease network 
performance. Clever attackers who compromise a host can also attack 
and disable host-based IDSes. Host-based IDSes can be foiled by 
Denial of Service (DOS) attacks, because they may prevent any traffic 
from reaching the host where they are running or prevent reporting 
on such attacks to a console elsewhere on a network. Most signifi- 
cantly, a host-based IDS consumes processing time, storage, memory, 
and other resources on the hosts where such systems operate. 
9 
Application-based IDS Characteristics 
9 
Pros 
Application-based IDSes concentrate on events occurring within 
some specific application. They often detect attacks through analysis of 
application log files and can usually identify many types of attacks or 
suspicious activity. Sometimes an application-based IDS can track 
unauthorized activity from individual users. They can also work with 
encrypted data, using application-based encryption/decryption ser- 
vices. 
9 
Cons 
Application-based IDSes are sometimes more vulnerable to 
attack than the host-based IDS.They can also consume significant 
application (and host) resources. 
In practice, most commercial environments use some combination of network-, 
host-, and/or application-based IDS systems to observe what is happening on the 
network while also monitoring key hosts and applications more closely. 
You must be able to clearly describe the differences between the three 
types of IDS systems. Go back over them until you know them very well. 

456 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
It's also important to understand that an IDS can operate in one of four states. 
These include: 
9 Positive An attack occurred and the IDS detected it 
9 Negative No attack occurred and none was detected 
9 
False Positive No attack occurred yet the IDS believes one did and trig- 
gered an alert 
9 
False Negative An attack occurred yet was not detected 
As you can imagine, these states are not all the same. The goal of the security 
professional tuning the IDS is to configure it in such a way so that attacks are 
detected and false alarms do not occur. In reality, this is not always so easy as it can 
take a lot of time and effort to get an IDS properly set up. If configured[ incorrectly, 
there may be too many false positives so that users become desensitized and begin 
to ignore the alarms. There is even a worse condition in that the IDS may be mis- 
configured so that false negatives occur. In this condition, an attack that has hap- 
pened may never be detected. 
IDSes may also be distinguished by their differing approaches to event analysis. 
Some IDSes primarily use a technique called signature detection. This resembles the 
way many ant[virus programs use virus signatures to recognize and block infected 
files, programs, or active Web content from entering a computer system, except that 
it uses a database of traffic or activity patterns related to known attacks, called attack 
si2natures. Indeed, signature detection is the most widely used approach in commer- 
cial IDS technology today. Another approach is called anomaly detection, which uses 
rules or predefined concepts about "normal" and "abnormal" system activity (called 
heuristics) to distinguish anomalies from normal system behavior and to monitor, 
report on, or block anomalies as they occur. Some IDSes support limited types of 
anomaly detection; most experts believe this kind of capability will become part of 
how more IDSes operate in the future. Read on for more information about these 
two kinds of event analysis techniques: 
9 
Signature-based IDS characteristics 
9 
Pros 
A signature-based IDS examines ongoing traffic, activity, transac- 
tions, or behavior for matches with known patterns of events specific 
to known attacks.As with antivirus software, a signature-based IDS 
requires access to a current database of attack signatures and some way 
to actively compare and match current behavior against a large collec- 
www.syngress.com 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
457 
tion of signatures. Except when entirely new, uncataloged attacks 
occur, this technique works extremely well. 
9 Cons Signature databases must be constantly updated, and IDSes 
must be able to compare and match activities against large collections 
of attack signatures. If signature definitions are too specific, a signature- 
based IDS may miss variations on known attacks. (A common tech- 
nique for creating new attacks is to change existing known attacks 
rather than to create entirely new ones from scratch.) Signature-based 
IDSes can also impose noticeable performance drags on systems when 
current behavior matches multiple (or numerous) attack signatures, 
either in whole or in part. 
9 Anomaly-based IDS characteristics 
9 
Pros 
An anomaly-based IDS examines ongoing traffic, activity, trans- 
actions, or behavior for anomalies on networks or systems that may 
indicate attack. The underlying principle is the notion that "attack 
behavior" differs enough from "normal user behavior" that it can be 
detected by cataloging and identifying the differences involved. By cre- 
ating baselines of normal behavior, anomaly-based IDS systems can 
observe when current behavior deviates statistically from the norm. 
This capability theoretically gives anomaly-based IDSes the ability to 
detect new attacks that are neither known nor for which signatures 
have been created. 
9 Cons Because normal behavior can change easily and readily, 
anomaly-based IDS systems are prone to false positives, where attacks 
may be reported based on changes to the norm that are "normal," 
rather than representing real attacks. Their intensely analytical behavior 
can also impose heavy processing overheads on systems they are run- 
ning. Furthermore, anomaly based systems take a while to create statis- 
tically significant baselines (to separate normal behavior from 
anomalies); they are relatively open to attack during this period. 
Today, many antivirus packages include both signature-based and anomaly based 
detection characteristics, but only a few IDSes incorporate both approaches. Most 
experts expect anomaly based detection to become more widespread in IDSes, but 
research and programming breakthroughs will be necessary to deliver the kind of 
capability that anomaly based detection should be, but is currently not able to 
deliver. 
r 
www, syngress,com 

458 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
By implementing the following techniques, IDSes can fend off expert and 
novice hackers alike. Although experts are more difficult to block entirely, these 
techniques can slow them down considerably: 
9 BreakingTCP connections by injecting reset packets into attacker connec- 
tions causes attacks to fall apart. 
9 Deploying automated packet filters to block routers or firewalls from for- 
warding attack packets to servers or hosts under attack stops most attacks 
cold--even DoS or Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks.This 
works for attacker addresses and for protocols or services under attack (by 
blocking traffic at different layers of the ARPA networking model, so to 
speak). 
9 
Deploying automated disconnects for routers, firewalls, or serw:rs can halt 
all activity when other measures fail to stop attackers (as in extreme DDoS 
attack situations, where filtering would only work effectively on the ISP 
side of an Internet link, if not higher up the ISP chain as close to Internet 
backbones as possible). 
9 Actively pursuing reverse DNS lookups or other ways of attempting to 
establish hacker identity is a technique used by some IDSes, generating 
reports of malicious activity to all ISPs in the routes used between the 
attacker and the attackee. Because such responses may themselves raise 
legal issues, experts recommend obtaining legal advice before repaying 
hackers in kind. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
459 
Signature-based IDSes and Detection Evasion 
An IDS is, quite simply, the high-tech equivalent of a burglar alarm configured to 
monitor access points, hostile activities, and known intruders. These systems typi- 
cally trigger on events by referencing network activity against an attack signature 
database. If a match is made, an alert takes place and is logged for future reference. It 
is the makeup of this signature database that is the Achilles heel of these systems. 
Attack signatures consist of several components used to uniquely describe an 
attack. The signature is a kind of detailed profile that is compiled by doing an anal- 
ysis of previous successful attacks. An ideal signature would be one that is specific 
to the attack, while being as simple as possible to match with the input data stream 
(large complex signatures may pose a serious processing burden). Just as there are 
varying types of attacks, there must be varying types of signatures. Some signatures 
define the characteristics of a single IP option, perhaps that of an nmap portscan, 
while others are derived from the actual payload of an attack. 
Most signatures are constructed by running a known exploit several times, 
monitoring the data as it appears on the network, and looking for a unique pattern 
that is repeated on every execution. This method works fairly well at ensuring that 
the signature will consistently match an attempt by that particular exploit. 
Remember, the idea is for the unique identification of an attack, not merely the 
detection of attacks. 
Signatures are defined as a set of actions or events that constitute an 
attack pattern. They are used for comparison in real time against actual 
network events and conditions to determine if an active attack is taking 
place against the network. The drawback of using attack signatures for 
detection is that only those attacks for which there is a released signa- 
ture will be detected. It is vitally important that the signature database 
be kept up to date. 
A computing system, in its most basic abstraction, can be defined as a finite 
state machine, which literally means that there are only a specific predefined 
number of states that a system may attain. This limitation hinders the IDS, in that it 
can be well armed at only a single point in time (in other words, as well armed as 
the size of its database). This poses several problems: 
www.syngress.com 

460 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
9 
First, how can one have foreknowledge of the internal characteristics that 
make up an intrusion attempt that has not yet occurred? You cannot alert 
on attacks you have never seen. 
9 
Second, there can be only educated guesses that what has happened in the 
past may again transpire in the future.You can create a signature for a past 
attack after the fact, but that is no guarantee you will ever see that attack 
again. 
9 
Third, an IDS may be incapable of discerning a new attack from the back- 
ground white noise of any network. The network utilization may be too 
high, or many false positives cause rules to be disabled. 
9 And finally, the IDS may be incapacitated by even the slightest modifica- 
tion to a known attack. A weakness in the signature matching process, or 
more fundamentally, a weakness in the packet analysis engine (packet 
sniffing/reconstruction) will thwart any detection capability. 
The goals of an attacker in relation to IDS evasion are twofold: 
9 
To evade detection completely 
9 
To use techniques and methods that increase the processing load of the 
IDS sensor significantly 
As more methods are employed by attackers on a wide scale, more vendors will 
be forced to implement more complex signature matching and packet analysis 
engines. These complex systems will undoubtedly have lower operating throughputs 
and will present more opportunities for evasion. The paradox is that the more com- 
plex a system becomes, the more opportunities there are for vulnerabilities. Some 
say the ratio for bugs to code may be as high as 1" 1000, and even conservatives say a 
ratio of 1"10000 may exist.With these sorts of-figures in mind, a system of increasing 
complexity will undoubtedly lead to new levels of increased insecurity. 
Finally, advances in IDS design have led to a new type of IDS, called an intru- 
sion prevention system (IPS).An IPS is capable of responding to attacks when they 
occur. This behavior is desirable from two points of view. For one thing, a com- 
puter system can track behavior and activity in near-real time and respond much 
more quickly and decisively during the early stages of an attack. Since automation 
helps hackers mount attacks, it stands to reason that it should also help security 
professionals fend them off as they occur. For another thing, an IPS can stand guard 
and run 24 hours per day/7 days per week, but network administrators may not be 
able to respond as quickly during off hours as they can during peak hours. By 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
461 
automating a response and moving these systems from detection to prevention they 
actually have the ability to block incoming traffic from one or more addresses from 
which an attack originates. This allows the IPS the ability to halt an attack in pro- 
cess and block future attacks from the same address. 
To eliminate confusion on the Security+ exam about the differences 
between and IDS and an IPS, remember that an IPS is designed to be a 
preventive control. When an IDS identifies patterns that may indicate 
suspicious activities or attacks, an IPS can take immediate action that 
can block traffic, blacklist an IP address, or even segment an infected 
host to a separate VLAN that can only access an antivirus server. 
Popular Commercial IDS Systems 
Literally hundreds of vendors offer various forms of commercial IDS implementa- 
tions. The most effective solutions combine network- and host-based IDS imple- 
mentations. Likewise, most such implementations are primarily signature-based, 
with only limited anomaly based detection capabilities present in certain specific 
products or solutions. Finally, most modern IDSes include some limited automatic 
response capabilities, but these usually concentrate on automated traffic filtering, 
blocking, or disconnects as a last resort. Although some systems claim to be able to 
launch counterstrikes against attacks, best practices indicate that automated identifi- 
cation and backtrace facilities are the most useful aspects that such facilities provide 
and are therefore those most likely to be used. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

462 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
A huge number of potential vendors can provide IDS and IPS products to 
companies and organizations.Without specifically endorsing any particular vendor, 
the following products offer some of the most widely used and best-known solu- 
tions in this product space: 
9 Ciseo Systems is best known for its switches and routers, but offers sig- 
nificant firewall and intrusion detection products as well (www.cisco.com). 
9 GFI LANguard is a family of monitoring, scanning, and file integrity 
check products that offer broad intrusion detection and response capabili- 
ties (www. gfi. com/languard/). 
9 Internet Security Systems (ISS)offers a family of enterprise-class 
security products called RealSecure, that includes comprehensive intrusion 
detection and response capabilities (www.iss.net). 
9 McAfee offers the IntruShield IPS systems that can handle gigabit speeds 
and greater (www.rncafee.com). 
9 Sourcefire is the best known vendor of open source IDS software as they 
are the developers of Snort, which is an open source IDS application that 
can be run on Windows or Linux systems (www.snort.org). 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
463 
A clearinghouse for ISPs known as ISP-Planet offers all kinds of interesting 
information online about MSSPs, plus related firewall,VPN, intrusion detection, 
security monitoring, antivirus, and other security services. For more information, 
visit any or all of the following URLs" 
9 
ISP-Planet Survey: Managed Security Service Providers, participating 
provider's chart, 
www. isp-plan e t. c o m/technology / mssp / parti cip ants_c hart. html. 
9 Managed firewall services chart, www.isp- 
planet, c o m/te chnol ogy / mssp / firewalls_c hart. html. 
9 Managed virtual private networking chart, 
www. isp-planet, com/technology/mssp / servic es_chart, html. 
9 Managed intrusion detection and security monitoring, 
www. isp-planet, com/technology/mssp / mo nitoring_chart, html. 
9 Managed antivirus and managed content filtering and URL blocking, 
www. isp-planet, corn/technology/mssp/mssp_survey2, html. 
m Managed vulnerability assessment and emergency response and forensics, 
www. isp-plan e t. c ore/technology /mssp / mssp_survey3, html. 
Exercise 7.01 introduces you to WinDump. This tool is similar to the Linux 
tool TCPDump. It is a simple packet-capture program that can be used to help 
demonstrate how IDS systems work. All IDS systems must first capture packets so 
that the traffic can be analyzed. 
EXERCISE 7.01 
INSTALLING WINDUMP FOR 
PACKET CAPTURE AND ANALYSIS 
1. Go to www.winpcap.org/windump/install/ 
2. At the top of the page you will see a link for WinPcap. This pro- 
gram will need to be installed as it will allow the capture of low 
level packets. 
3. Next, download and install the WinDump program from the link 
indicated on the same Web page. 
www.syngress.com 

464 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
4. You'll now need to open a command prompt by clicking Start, 
Run and entering cmd in the Open Dialog box. 
5. With a command prompt open, you can now start the program 
by typing WinDump from the command line. By default, it will 
use the first Ethernet adaptor found. You can display the help 
screen by typing windump -h. The example below specifies the 
second adaptor. 
C: \>windump -i 2 
6. You should now see the program running. If there is little traffic 
on your network, you can open a second command prompt and 
ping a host such as www.yahoo.com. The results should be seen in 
the screen you have open that is running WinDump as seen 
below. 
windump: 
listening on \Device\eth0_ 
14:07:02.563213 
IP earth. 137 > 192.168.123.181.137: 
UDP, length 50 
14:07:04.061618 
IP earth. 137 > 192.168.123.181.137: 
UDP, length 50 
14:07:05.562375 
IP earth. 137 > 192.168.123.181.137: 
UDP, length 50 
Honeypots and Honeynets 
A hone)pot is a computer system that is deliberately exposed to public access~usu- 
ally on the Internet~for the express purpose of attracting and distracting attackers. 
Likewise, a honeynet is a network set up for the same purpose, where attackers not 
only find vulnerable services or servers but also find vulnerable touters, firewalls, 
and other network boundary devices, security applications, and so forth. In other 
words, these are the technical equivalent of the familiar police "sting" operation. 
Mthough the strategy involved in luring hackers to spend time investigating attrac- 
tive network devices or servers can cause its own problems, finding ways to lure 
intruders into a system or network improves the odds of being able to identify 
those intruders and pursue them more effectively. Figure 7.14 shows a graphical 
representation of the honeypot concept in action. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
465 
Figure 7.14 A Honeypot in Use to Keep Attackers from Affecting Critical 
Production Servers 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

466 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
The following characteristics are typical of honeypots or honeynets: 
9 
Systems or devices used as lures are set up with only "out of the box" 
default installations, so that they are deliberately made subject to all known 
vulnerabilities, exploits, and attacks. 
9 
The systems or devices used as lures do not include sensitive information 
(e.g., passwords, data, applications, or services an organization depends on 
or must absolutely protect), so these lures can be compromised:, or even 
destroyed, without causing damage, loss, or harm to the organization that 
presents them to be attacked. 
9 
Systems or devices used as lures often also contain deliberately tantalizing 
objects or resources, such as files named password.rib, folders named 7bp 
Secret, and so forth~often consisting only of encrypted garbage data or log 
files of no real significance or value~to attract and hold an attacker's 
interest long enough to give a backtrace a chance of identifying the 
attack's point of origin. 
9 
Systems or devices used as lures also include or are monitored by passive 
applications that can detect and report on attacks or intrusions as soon as 
they start, so the process of backtracing and identification can begin as 
soon as possible. 
Although this technique can help identify the unwary or unsophisticated 
attacker, it also runs the risk of attracting additional attention from savvier attackers. 
Honeypots or honeynets, once identified, are often publicized on hacker message 
boards or mailing lists and thus become more subject to attacks and hacker activity 
than they otherwise might be. Likewise, if the organization that sets up a honeypot 
or honeynet is itself identified, its production systems and networks may also be 
subjected to more attacks than might otherwise occur. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
467 
A honeypot is a computer system that is deliberately exposed to public 
access~usually on the Internet~for the express purpose of attracting 
and distracting attackers. Likewise, a honeynet is a network set up for 
the same purpose, where attackers not only find vulnerable services or 
servers, but also find vulnerable routers, firewalls, and other network 
boundary devices, security applications, and so forth. You must know 
these for the Security+ exam. 
The honeypot technique is best reserved for use when a company or organiza- 
tion employs full-time Information Technology (IT) security professionals who can 
monitor and deal with these lures on a regular basis, or when law enforcement 
operations seek to target specific suspects in a ~virtual sting" operation. In such sit- 
uations, the risks are sure to be well understood, and proper security precautions, 
processes, and procedures are far more likely to already be in place (and properly 
practiced). Nevertheless, for organizations that seek to identify and pursue attackers 
more proactively, honeypots and honeynets can provide valuable tools to aid in 
such activities. 
Although numerous quality resources on honeypots and honeynets are available 
(try searching on either term at www.searchsecurity.techtarget.com), the following 
resources are particularly valuable for people seeking additional information on the 
topic.John McMullen's article ~Enhance Intrusion Detection with a Honeypot" at 
www. techrep ublic, corn/article_guest.j html?id= r00220010412mul01, htm&fromtm = 
e036 sheds additional light on this topic.The Honeynet Project at 
http://www.honeynet.org is probably the best overall resource on the topic online; 
it not only provides copious information on the project's work to define and docu- 
ment standard honeypots and honeynets, it also does a great job of exploring 
hacker mindsets, motivations, tools, and attack techniques. 
Exercise 7.02 outlines the basic process to set up a Windows Honeypot.While 
there are many vendors of honeypots that will run on both Windows and Linux 
computers, this exercise will describe the install on a commercial honeypot that can 
be used on a corporate network. 
www.syngress.com 

468 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
INSTALL A HONEYPOT 
1. KFSensor is a Windows-based honeypot IDS that can be down- 
loaded as a demo from www.keyfocus.net/kfsensor/ 
2. Fill out the required information for download. 
3. Once the program downloads, accept the install defaults and 
allow the program to reboot the computer to finish the install. 
4. Once installed, the program will step you through a wizard pro- 
cess that will configure a basic honeypot. 
5. Allow the system to run for some time to capture data. The pro- 
gram will install a sensor in the program tray that will turn red 
when the system is probed by an attacker. 
Judging False Positives and Negatives 
As mentioned earlier, understanding the state of an IDS is very important. To be an 
effective tool, an IDS must be configured properly. A false positive is a triggered 
event that did not actually occur, which may be as innocuous as the download of a 
signature database (downloading of an IDS signature database may trigger every 
alarm in the book) or some unusual traffic generated by a networked game. False 
positives have a significant impact on the effectiveness of an IDS sensor. If there are 
a reasonable number of false positives being detected, the perceived urgency of an 
alert may be diminished by the fact that there are numerous events being triggered 
on a daily basis that turn into wild goose chases. In the end, all the power of IDS is 
ultimately controlled by a single judgment call on whether or not to take action. 
More dangerous, however, is the possibility for a false negative, whiclh is the 
failure to be alerted to an actual event. This would occur in a failure of one of the 
key functional units of a NIDS. False negatives can occur because of misconfigura- 
tions when an attacker modifies the attack payload in order to subvert the detec- 
tion engine. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
469 
A false positive is defined as a positive detection result that is false or 
untrue. This can be dangerous because you may spend wasted time 
trying to put together the facts of the case and look for a weakness in 
your system. A false negative, on the other hand, is a negative detection 
event that is actually positive or true. False negatives are the worst of 
the four states that can occur in an IDS. A false negative gives you the 
feeling that everything is OK, all the while an attacker has comprised 
your systems and is helping themselves to your sensitive and valuable 
data. 
Incident Response 
The first thing that must be done after receiving notification of an attack is to 
respond to the attack. In some cases the administrator may want to allow the attack 
to continue for a short period of time so that they can collect further data and 
other evidence about the attack, its origin, and its methods. After terminating the 
attack, or upon discovering the evidence of the attack, they must take all available 
steps to ensure that the chain of evidence will not be lost. They must save and 
export log and audit files, close open ports that have been exploited, and secure 
services that should not have been running in the first place. In short, take every 
available step to ensure that the same type of attack will not occur again some time 
in the future. 
For more detailed information about the practical and legal aspects of 
incident response, see "Scene of the Cybercrime" Computer Forensics 
Handbook" (ISBN" 1-928994-29-6), published by Syngress. 
www.syngress.com 

470 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
In today's networking world, networks no longer have to be designed the same 
way. There are many options available as to how to physically and logically design a 
network.All of these options can be used to increase the security of the internal 
network by keeping untrusted and unauthorized users out. The usage of DMZs to 
segment Web and e-mail traffic to a protected zone between external and internal 
firewalls, helps prevent attacks that may deface the Web server from having any 
effect on the critical database servers. Just the same, an attack on your Web server 
will have little lasting damage. 
A NAT device can be used to hide the private intranet from the public 
Internet. NAT devices work by translating all private IP addresses into one or more 
public IP addresses, therefore making it look as if all traffic from the internal net- 
work is coming from one computer (or a small group of computers). Tile NAT 
device maintains a routing table of all connection requests, and therefore is able to 
ensure that all returning packets get directed to the correct originating host. 
Extranets can be established using VPN tunnels to provide secure access to intranet 
resources from different geographic locations.VPNs are also used to allow remote 
network users to securely connect back to the corporate network. 
IDSes are used to identify and respond to attacks on the network. Several types 
of IDSes exist, each with its own unique pros and cons.Which type you choose 
depends on your needs, and ultimately on your budget. An IPS is a newer type of 
IDS that can quickly respond to perceived attacks. Honeypots are advanced IDSes 
that can intelligently respond to attacks, actually enticing the attacker to select them 
over other real targets on the network. Honeypots can be used to distract attackers 
from real servers and keep them occupied while you collect information on the 
attack and the source of the attack. 
After an attack has occurred, the most important thing to do is to collect all of 
the evidence of the attack and its methods.You will also want to take steps to 
ensure that the same type of attack cannot be successfully performed on the net- 
work in the future. 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
471 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Security Topologies 
ga 
V--el 
A DMZ is a network segment where systems that are accessible to the 
public Internet are housed and which offers some basic levels of 
protection against attacks. 
The creation of DMZ segments is usually done by placing systems 
between two firewall devices that have different rule sets. This allows 
systems on the Internet to connect to the offered services on the DMZ 
systems but not to the computers on the internal segments of the 
organization (often called the protected network). 
A private internal network is called the intranet, as opposed to the 
Internet (which is the large publicly accessible network). It is expected 
that all traffic on an intranet will be secure from outside attack or 
compromise. 
An extranet is a special topology that is implemented in certain cases 
where there is a need to allow access to some of the internal network data 
and resources by users outside of the internal network. 
Using special features found in newer, more expensive switches and special 
software in the switch, you can physically split one switch into two, thus 
creating two network segments that are completely separate from one 
another and creating a VLAN. 
NAT is a feature of many firewalls, proxies, and routing-capable systems. 
NAT has several benefits, one of which is its ability to hide the IP 
addresses and network design of the internal network. The ability to hide 
the internal network from the Internet reduces the risk of intruders 
gleaning information about the network and exploiting that information 
to gain access. If an intruder does not know the structure of a network, 
the network layout, the names and IP address of systems, and so on, it is 
very difficult to gain access to that network. 
Tunneling is used to create a virtual point-to-point connection between 
you and your destination using an untrusted public network as the 
medium. In most cases, this would be the Internet.When you establish a 
secure tunnel, commonly called a VPN, you are creating a safe connection 
www.syngress.com 

472 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
between two points that cannot be examined by outsiders.All packets are 
encrypted and carry information that ensure they are tamperproof and 
thus can withstand common IP attacks, such as the MITM and packet 
replay. When a VPN is created, you can be reasonably secure that the traffic 
is private and safe from prying eyes. 
Intrusion Detection 
An IDS is a specialized tool that knows how to read and interpret the 
contents of log files from routers, firewalls, servers, and other network 
devices. Furthermore, an IDS often stores a database of known attack 
signatures and can compare patterns of activity, traffic, or behavior it sees 
in the logs it is monitoring against those signatures to recognize when a 
close match between a signature and current or recent behavior occurs. At 
that point, the IDS can issue alarms or alerts, take various kinds of 
automatic action ranging from shutting down Internet links or specific 
servers to launching backtraces, and make other active attempts to identify 
attackers and actively collect evidence of their nefarious activities. 
V-----d IDSes that monitor network backbones and look for attack signatures are 
called network-based IDSes, whereas those that operate on hosts defend 
and monitor the operating and file systems for signs of intrusion and are 
called host-based IDSes. Some IDSes monitor only specific applications 
and are called application-based IDSes. (This type of treatment is usually 
reserved for important applications such as database management systems, 
content management systems, accounting systems, and so forth.) 
IDSes may also be distinguished by their differing approaches to event 
analysis. Some IDSes primarily use a technique called signature detection. 
This resembles the way many antivirus programs use virus signatures to 
recognize and block infected files, programs, or active Web content from 
entering a computer system, except that it uses a database of traffic or 
activity patterns related to known attacks, called attack signatures. 
Signature detection is the most widely used approach in commercial IDS 
technology today. Another approach is called anomaly detection. It uses 
rules or predefined concepts about "normal" and "abnormal" system 
activity (called heuristics) to distinguish anomalies from normal system 
behavior and to monitor, report on, or block anomalies as they occur. 


474 
Chapter 7 ,, Topologies and IDS 
A: The Internet is a network of networks that are connected together ;and is the 
biggest public network in existence, which grew out of the ARPANet project. 
An intranet is a private internal network available to users within the organiza- 
tion, whereas an extranet is a special topology that is implemented in certain 
cases where you have a need to allow access to some of your internal network 
data and resources by users outside of your internal network. 
Q 
o 
A: 
What type of IDS should I choose? 
The type of IDS you choose to employ on your network will depend on what 
type of network you have and what types of applications you are running. 
Host-based IDSes can effectively monitor one specific computer, but not the 
entire network. Network-based IDSes can monitor the entire network from a 
high-level view, but may miss some type of attacks. Application-based IDSes are 
specific to one application, such as a database application, and will monitor 
attacks only on that application. 
Q: Why would I want to use aVLAN? 
A: VLANs can be used to segment network traffic into different broadcast 
domains. This adds another layer of security for your network by keeping cer- 
tain traffic segmented from the rest of your network traffic~all inside of your 
firewall. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
. 
Your company is considering implementing a VLAN. As you have studied for 
you Security+ exam, you have learned that VLANs offer certain security ben- 
efits as they can segment network traffic. The organization would like to set 
up three separate VLANs in which there is one for management, one for man- 
ufacturing, and one for engineering. How would traffic move for the engi- 
neering to the management VLAN? 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
475 
a. 
B. 
Co 
D. 
The traffic is passed directly as both VLAN's are part of the same collision 
domain 
The traffic is passed directly as both VLAN's are part of the same broadcast 
domain 
Traffic cannot move from the management to the engineering VLAN 
Traffic must be passed to the router and then back to the appropriate 
VLAN. 
. 
. 
You have been asked to protect two Web servers from attack.You have also 
been tasked with making sure that the internal network is also secure. What 
type of design could be used to meet these goals while also protecting all of 
the organization? 
ao 
B. 
C~ 
D. 
Implement IPSec on his Web servers to provide encryption 
Create a DMZ and place the Web server in it while placing the intranet 
behind the internal firewall 
Place a honeypot on the internal network 
Remove the Cat 5 cabling and replace it with fiber-optic cabling. 
You have been asked to put your Security+ certification skills to use by exam- 
ining some network traffic. The traffic was from an internal host and you must 
identify the correct address.Which of the following should you choose? 
A. 127.0.0.1 
B. 10.27.3.56 
C. 129.12.14.2 
D. 224.0.12.10 
. You have been running security scans against the DMZ and have obtained the 
following results. How should these results be interpreted? 
C:\>nmap -sT 192.168.1.2 
Starting nmap V. 3.91 
Interesting ports on (192.168.1.2): 
(The 1598 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
53/tcp 
open 
DNS 
www.syngress.com 

476 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
111 / t cp 
open 
sun rpc 
Nmap run completed- 
1 IP address 
(i host up) scanned in 409 seconds 
A. TCP port 80 should not be open to the DMZ 
B. TCP port 53 should not be open to the DMZ 
C. UDP port 80 should be open to the DMZ 
D. TCP port 25 should be open to the DMZ 
5. You have been asked to use an existing router and utilize it as a firewall. 
Management would like you to use it to perform address translation and block 
some known bad IP addresses that previous attacks have originated from.With 
this in mind, which of the following statement is most correct? 
A. You have been asked to perform NAT services 
B. You have been asked to set up a proxy 
C. You have been asked to set up stateful inspection 
D. You have been asked to set up a packet filter 
6. You have been asked to compile a list of the advantages and disadwmtages of 
copper cabling and fiber-optic cable. Upon reviewing the list, which of the 
following do you discover is incorrect? 
A. Copper cable does not support speeds as high as fiber 
B. The cost of fiber per foot is cheaper than copper cable 
C. Fiber is more secure than copper cable 
D. Copper cable is easier to tap than fiber cable 
7. You have been asked to install a SQL database on the intranet and recom- 
mend ways to secure the data that will reside on this server. While traffic will 
be encrypted when it leaves the server, your company is concerned about 
potential attacks.With this in mind, which type of IDS should you recom- 
mend? 
A. A network-based IDS with the sensor placed in the DMZ 
B. A host-based IDS that is deployed on the SQL server 
C. A network-based IDS with the sensor placed in the intranet 
D. A host-based IDS that is deployed on a server in the DMZ 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
477 
8. Which security control can best be described by the following? Because 
normal user behavior can change easily and readily, this security control 
system is prone to false positives where attacks may be reported based on 
changes to the norm that are "normal," rather than representing real attacks. 
A. Anomaly based IDS 
B. Signature based IDS 
C. Honeypot 
D. Honeynet 
9. Your network is configured to use an IDS to monitor for attacks. The IDS is 
network-based and has several sensors located in the internal network and the 
DMZ. No alarm has sounded.You have been called in on a Friday night 
because someone is claiming their computer has been hacked.What can you 
surmise? 
A.The misconfigured IDS recorded a positive event 
B. The misconfigured IDS recorded a negative event 
C. The misconfigured IDS recorded a false positive event 
D. The misconfigured IDS recorded a false negative event 
10. You have installed an IDS that is being used to actively match incoming 
packets against known attacks.Which of the following technologies is being 
used? 
A. Stateful inspection 
B. Protocol analysis 
C. Anomaly detection 
D. Pattern matching 
11. You have been reading about the ways in which a network-based IDS can be 
attacked. Which of these methods would you describe as an attack where an 
attacker attempts to deliver the payload over multiple packets over long 
periods of time? 
www.syngress.com 

478 
Chapter 7 9 Topologies and IDS 
A. Evasion 
B. IP Fragmentation 
C. Session splicing 
D. Session hijacking 
12. You have been asked to explore what would be the best type of IDS to 
deploy at your company site.Your company is deploying a new program that 
will be used internally for data mining. The IDS will need to access the data 
mining application's log files and needs to be able to identify many types of 
attacks or suspicious activity. Which of the following would be the best 
option? 
A. Network-based that is located in the internal network 
B. Host-based IDS 
C. Application-based IDS 
D. Network-based IDS that has sensors in the DMZ 
13. You are about to install WinDump on your Windows computer.Which of the 
following should be the first item you install? 
A. LibPcap 
B. WinPcap 
C. IDSCenter 
D. A honeynet 
14. You must choose what type of IDS to recommend to your company.You need 
an IDS that can be used to look into packets to determine their composition. 
What type of signature type do you require? 
A. File based 
B. Context-based 
C. Content-based 
D. Active 

Topologies and IDS 9 Chapter 7 
479 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and epxlanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. D 
8. A 
2. B 
9. D 
3. B 
10. D 
4. A 
11. C 
5. D 
12. C 
6. B 
13. B 
7. B 
14. C 
www.syngress.com 

Chapter 8 
Exam objectives in this chapter" 
Concepts and Processes of OS and NOS 
Hardening 
Network Hardening 
Application Hardening 
Exam Objectives Review" 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
Self Test 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
481 

482 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Introduction 
Security+ technicians need to fully understand the fundamentals of system hard- 
ening (also described as "locking down" the system). This knowledge is needed not 
only to pass the Security+ exam, but also to work in the field of information secu- 
rity.You will learn that the skills needed to detect breeches and exploits are an 
essential part of the security technician's repertoire. 
The Security+ exam covers the general fundamentals of hardening.This 
chapter covers the hardening methods and techniques that can be applied on var- 
ious systems in the following broad categories: 
9 
OS-based, which includes information about securing and hardening var- 
ious OSs (client and server), as well as methods to secure file systems. 
9 Network-based, which examines the procedures and methods of hard- 
ening network devices, services, and protocols. 
9 
Application-based, which explores the many things that must be done to 
harden and secure application servers, including e-mail and Wet> servers. 
The first topic covered is operating system (OS) hardening, which covers 
important concepts such as locking down file systems and methods for configuring 
file systems properly to limit access and reduce the possibility of a breach. Many 
OS default configurations do not provide an optimum level of security, because 
priority is given to those who need access to data. Even so-called "secure" OSes 
may have been configured incorrectly to allow full access. Thus, it is important to 
modify OS settings to harden the system for access control. Other topics covered in 
the area of OS hardening are how to receive, test, and apply service packs and hot- 
fixes to secure potential vulnerabilities in systems. 
Network-based hardening is another important topic that Security+ technicians 
need to understand. Many network-based devices, such as routers and switches, 
must be secured to stop unauthorized individuals from updating the firmware 
installed on them, or modifying or installing configurations such as access control 
lists (ACLs). This chapter also looks at disabling unneeded services and protocols on 
a network. It is important that Security+ technicians know what services they need 
and how to disable those they do not need. This can eliminate headaches and make 
the network more secure. 
Application-based hardening explores the fundamentals of securing Domain 
Name Server (DNS), Dynamic Host Control Protocol (DHCP), databases, and 
other applications, systems, and services on a network. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
483 
Concepts and Processes 
of OS and NOS Hardening 
System security and hardening is the process of building a barrier between the net- 
work and those who would do it harm. The key is to make sure the network you 
are in charge of is not one that is an easy target.You want to make the barrier 
more difficult to cross than anyone else's network. In other words, Information 
Technology (IT) security involves creating a deterrent to convince a would-be- 
attacker that a system is more difficult to breach than some other system. 
Let's start with hardening the OS and the network operating system (NOS) 
environments. This area includes concepts previously studied such as access control, 
authentication and auditing (AAA), media access control (MAC), discretionary 
access control (DAC), role-based access control (RBAC), and auditing (discussed in 
Chapter 1), as well as a number of sublevels including: 
9 
File security 
9 Updates 
9 
Hotfixes 
9 
Service packs 
9 Patches 
When looking at ways to provide file and directory security, you must first look 
at how file security can be structured. 
Start with everything accessible and lock down the things you want to 
restrict 
Start with everything locked down and open up the things you want to 
allow access to 
Of these two potential methods, the second, which is also referred to as the rule 
of least privilege is the preferred method. Least privilege is when you start with the 
most secure environment and then loosen the controls as needed. Using this 
method works to be as restrictive as possible with the authorizations provided to 
users, processes, or applications that access these resources. Accessibility and security 
are usually at opposite ends of the spectrum; this means that the more convenient it 
is for users to access data, the less secure the network. While looking at hardening 
security through permissions (e.g.,AAA), administrators should also consider 
www.syngress.com 

484 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
updating the methods used to access the resources. It is important to look at the 
use and appropriateness of MAC, DAC, and RBAC in controlling access; appropri- 
ately, and to coordinate this effort with the establishment of file system controls. 
Other tasks within the OS and NOS hardening area include keeping; track of 
updates, hotfixes, service packs, and patches. This can be overwhelming, because 
these items are delivered at an incredibly rapid rate. Not only are there a lot of 
them, but many of the vulnerabilities they address may not apply to a particular 
system. Administrators need to make a huge effort to evaluate the need for each fix 
or patch. It is very important to fully test the upgrades, patches, service packs, and 
hotfixes on test equipment that parallels the live environment. It is never recom- 
mended or prudent to apply these "fixes" to production systems without testing, as 
sometimes the "fix" ends up breaking critical services or applications. The following 
sections discuss and explore the methods used to harden defenses and reduce vul- 
nerabilities that exist in systems. To get things started, let's review the general steps 
to follow for securing an OS: 
1. Disable all unnecessary services. 
2. Restrict permissions on files and access to the registry 
3. Remove unnecessary programs 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
485 
4. Apply the latest patches and fixes 
5. Remove unnecessary user accounts and ensure password guidelines are in 
place 
File System 
Controlling access is an important element in maintaining system security. The 
most secure environments follow the "least privileged" principle, as mentioned ear- 
lier. This principle states that users are granted the least amount of access possible 
that still enables them to complete their required work tasks. Expansions to that 
access are carefully considered before being implemented. Law enforcement officers 
and those in government agencies are familiar with this principle regarding non- 
computerized information, where the concept is usually termed need to know. 
Generally, following this principle means that network administrators receive more 
complaints from users unable to access resources. However, receiving complaints 
from authorized users is better than suffering access violations that damage an orga- 
nization's profitability or capability to conduct business. (For more detailed expla- 
nations of these principles, refer to Chapter 11.) 
In practice, maintaining the least privileged principle directly affects the level of 
administrative, management, and auditing overhead, increasing the levels required to 
implement and maintain the environment. One alternative, the use of user groups, 
is a great time saver. Instead of assigning individual access controls, groups of similar 
users are assigned the same access. In cases where all users in a group have exactly 
the same access needs, this method works. However, in many cases, individual users 
need more or less access than other group members.When security is important, 
the extra effort to fine-tune individual user access provides greater control over 
what each user can and cannot access. 
Keeping individual user access as specific as possible limits some threats, such as 
the possibility that a single compromised user account could grant a hacker unre- 
stricted access. It does not, however, prevent the compromise of more privileged 
accounts, such as those of administrators or specific service operators. It does force 
intruders to focus their efforts on the privileged accounts, where stronger controls 
and more diligent auditing should occur. Figure 8.1 displays a possible path for 
consideration and creation of file system access. 
www.syngress.com 

486 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Figure 8.1 File Security Steps 
Notice it starts with the process of evaluating risk. That's one of the key steps in 
the hardening process, as the question will often arise as to what is secure enough? 
That's the role of the risk assessment in this process.As an example, your child's 
piggy bank may be protected by no more than a small lock hidden on the bottom. 
While that's suitable for your child's change, you have probably noticed that your 
bank has many more controls protecting you and their other customer's :assets. Risk 
assessment works the same way in that the value of the asset will drive the process 
of access control and what type of authorization will be needed to access the pro- 
tected resource. 
Continued 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
487 
Updates 
Updates for OSes and NOSes are provided by the manufacturer of the specific 
component. Updates contain improvements to the OS, and new or improved com- 
ponents that the manufacturer believes will make the product more stable, usable, 
secure, or otherwise attractive to end users. For example, Microsoft updates are 
often specifically labeled Security Updates. If you have never taken a look at these, 
they can be viewed at www.microsoft.com/athome/security/update/bulletins/ 
200701.mspx.These updates address security concerns recognized by Microsoft, 
and should be evaluated and installed as needed. In addition, updates may enhance 
the capability of a function within the system that was underdeveloped at the time 
the system or application was released.While you may be tempted to rush out and 
install these updates on all your vulnerable systems, you may want to test their 
effect first. Updates should be thoroughly tested in non-production environments 
before implementation. It is possible that a "new and improved" function (especially 
one that enhances user convenience) may actually allow more potential for a secu- 
rity breach than the original component. Complete testing is a must. 
www.syngress.com 

488 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Hotfixes 
Hotfixes are repair components designed to repair problems occurring on relatively 
small numbers of workstations or servers. Hotfixes are generally created by the 
vendor when a number of clients indicate that there is a compatibility or functional 
problem with a manufacturer's products used on particular hardware platforms. 
These are mainly fixes for known or reported problems that may be limited in 
scope. As with the implementation of updates, these should be thoroughly tested in 
a non-production environment for compatibility and functionality before being 
used in a production environment. Because these are generally limited in function, 
it is not a good practice to install them on every machine. Rather, they should only 
be installed as needed to correct a specific problem. 
Service Packs 
Service packs are accumulated sets of updates or hotfixes. Service packs :are usually 
tested over a wide range of hardware and applications in an attempt to assure com- 
patibility with existing patches and updates, and to initiate much broader coverage 
than just hotfixes. The recommendations discussed previously also apply to service 
pack installation. Service packs must be fully tested and verified before being 
installed on live systems. Although most vendors of OS software attempt to test all 
of the components of a service pack before distribution, it is impossible for them to 
test every possible system configuration that may be encountered in the field, so it 
is up to the administrator to test their own. The purpose is to slow or deter com- 
promise, provide security for resources, and assure availability. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
489 
Patches 
Patches for OSes and NOSes are available from the vendor supplying the product. 
These are available by way of the vendor's Web site or from mirror sites around the 
world. They are often security-related, and may be grouped together into a cumu- 
lative patch to repair many problems at once. Since patches are issued at unpre- 
dictable intervals, it is important to stay on top of their availability and install them 
after they have been tested and evaluated in a non-production environment. The 
exception to this is when preparing a new, clean install. In this case, it is wise to 
download and install all known patches prior to introducing the machines to the 
network. 
The Security+ exam requires good knowledge of the hardening pro- 
cesses. It includes questions relating to hardening that you may not 
have thought about. For example, hardening can include concepts pre- 
sent in other security areas, such as locking doors, restricting physical 
access, and protecting the system from natural or unnatural disasters. 
Network Hardening 
When discussing network hardening, there are a number of concerns that are sepa- 
rate from those realized while evaluating and hardening OSes and NOSes. The 
appropriate firmware and OS updates implemented on hardware must be evalu- 
ated, tested, and implemented. In addition, network configurations must be as tight 
as possible. This includes developing appropriate rule sets and not allowing unnec- 
essary protocol or service access to other areas of the network. To keep access as 
restrictive as possible, administrators should follow the principle of least privilege, 
and not allow any services, protocols, or transports to operate that are not defined 
as critical or necessary to the operation of the networks. It may be appropriate to 
implement new technologies while in the network hardening process. Evaluation 
of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSes), firewall products, and anti-virus solutions 
are also appropriate to hardening networks. Monitoring systems must be checked 
and adjusted to verify that the network portion of the system is secure. 
Administrators must remain vigilant and proactive in maintaining these entryways 
www.syngress.com 

490 
Chapter 8, Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
into their environments, to ensure that they have done everything possible to elim- 
inate a breach or attack. 
The following section looks at the types of actions security professionals must 
take to limit or reduce attacks, accidental damage, or destruction through their net- 
works. It also discusses recommendations for the appropriate application, timing, 
and installation of updates to the firmware being used and to the OS in the net- 
work device. Additionally, recommendations and best practices for the configura- 
tion of network devices and whether there is a need to disable or enable services 
and protocols within a network scope are explored. Finally, recommendations and 
procedures for establishing appropriate access control levels for devices and systems 
within a network are discussed. 
Updates (Firmware) 
Firmware updates, like software updates, are provided by the manufacturer of the 
hardware device being used. These updates generally fix incompatibility issues or 
device operation problems, and should be applied if the update involves a repair for 
an existing condition, or if it will make the equipment more secure, more func- 
tional, or extends its operational life. It is always necessary to install and test 
firmware updates in a non-production environment, to verify that the update con- 
tains the necessary repairs and benefits that are needed. After sufficient testing of 
the update and its functionality, it can be installed on other devices of the same 
type, as appropriate. 
Configuration 
Configuration of network devices (such as routers and switches) with default instal- 
lation settings, leaves a system extremely vulnerable. It is of paramount importance 
that administrators understand the limitations of default settings. Ideally, ,configura- 
tions should be tested and assured prior to implementation of the devices on a live 
network. Often, basic device configurations are set for convenience and :not for 
control and security. It is easier to operate some devices with just the def'ault set- 
tings, but in many cases, there is a corresponding loss of security. 
Improperly configured or improperly secured devices left with default configu- 
rations will draw attackers if connected to the Internet. It is important to under- 
stand the ramifications of the settings made on any network device connected to a 
foreign or uncontrolled network. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
491 
USING N ETSTAT TO EXAMINE OPEN PORTS AND SERVICES 
While patching and hardening can consume a large amount of time, it's 
also important that the results of the hardening process are verified. 
One way to do this is to examine individual systems and analyze what is 
running. The second method is to use a security scanner. This exercise 
examines the first method. The tool we will examine is netstat, which is 
a command line tool that displays a list of the active connections and 
port numbers, and is available on Linux and Windows. Windows is used 
for this exercise. 
1. Open a command prompt by clicking on Start-Run. In the Dialog 
Box type cmd. 
2. With the command prompt open, type netstat-h. This listing will 
give you all of the options that are possible with netstat. 
3. Now type netstat-an. This should give a listing that looks similar 
to what is shown below. 
C-\>netstat 
-an 
Active Connections 
Proto 
Local Address 
TCP 
0.0.0.0-135 
Foreign Address 
0.0.0.0-0 
State 
LISTENING 
www.syngress.com 

492 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:445 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:990 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:1025 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:1026 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:1239 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:1545 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:2720 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:2722 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
0.0.0.0:3755 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
192.168.1.183:139 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
192.168.1.183:1545 
69.20.127.139:80 
ESTABLISHED 
TCP 
192.168.1.183:1547 
0.0.0.0:0 
LISTENING 
TCP 
192.168.1.183:1547 
192.168.123.185:139 
ESTABLISHED 
TCP 
192.168.1.183:80 
91.121.16.109:3755 
ESTABLISHED 
4. Look closely at the top two entries. These indicate that both 
ports 135 and 445 are open and listening for connections. 
5. Now look at the very last entry. Notice that it shows that the 
local machine 192.168.1.183 has an open port on 80 established 
to 91.121.16.109. This indicates that someone has made a web 
connection to this system. 
6. Now spend some time looking through the rest of the list shown 
here and the one that you have queried on your own computer. 
If any of the ports look unusual or are unknown to you, you may 
want to check out www.iana.org/assignments/port-nurnbers for a 
list of port numbers and their corresponding service. 
Enabling and Disabling Services and Protocols 
When considering whether to enable and disable services and protocols in relation 
to network hardening, there are extra tasks that must be done to protect the net- 
work and its internal systems.As with the OSes and NOSes discussed eaHier, it is 
important to evaluate the current needs and conditions of the network and infras- 
tructure, and then begin to eliminate unnecessary services and protocols. This leads 
to a cleaner network structure, more capacity, and less vulnerability to attack. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
493 
It is obvious that unnecessary protocols should be eliminated. For most that 
means eliminating Internetwork Packet Exchange (IPX), Sequenced Packet 
Exchange (SPX), and/or NetBIOS Extended User Interface (NetBEUI). It is also 
important to look at the specific operational protocols used in a network such as 
Internet Control Messaging Protocol (ICMP), Internet Group Management 
Protocol (IGMP), Service Advertising Protocol (SAP), and the Network Basic 
Input/Output System (NetBIOS) functionality associated with Server Message 
Block (SMB) transmissions in Windows-based systems. 
As you begin to evaluate the need to remove protocols and services, 
make sure that the items you are removing are within your area of con- 
trol. Consult with your system administrator on the appropriate action 
to take, and make sure you have prepared a plan to back out and 
recover if you make a mistake. 
While considering removal of non-essential protocols, it is important to look at 
every area of the network to determine what is actually occurring and running on 
the system. The appropriate tools are needed to do this, and the Internet contains a 
wealth of resources for tools and information to analyze and inspect systems. 
A number of functional (and free) tools can be found at sites such as 
www.foundstone.com/knowledge/free_tools.html. Among these, tools like 
SuperScan 3.0 are extremely useful in the evaluation process. If working in a mixed 
environment with UNIX and Linux machines or Netware machines, a tool such as 
Big Brother may be downloaded and evaluated (or in some cases used without 
charge) by visiting www.bb4.com. Another useful tool is Nmap, which is available 
at http'//insecure.org/nmap/.These tools can be used to scan, monitor, and report 
on multiple platforms, giving a better view of what is present in a environment. In 
Linux-based systems, non-essential services can be controlled in different ways, 
depending on the distribution being worked with. This may include editing or 
making changes to xinetd.conf or inetd.conf, or use of the graphical Linuxconf or 
ntsysv utilities. It may also include the use of ipchains or iptables in various versions 
to restrict the options available for connection at a firewall. 
Windows NT-based platforms allow the configuration of OS and network ser- 
vices from provided administrative tools. This can include a service applet in a con- 
trol panel in NT versions, or a Microsoft Management Console (MMC) tool in a 
www.syngress.com 

494 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Windows XP/.NET/Vista environment. It may also be possible to check or 
modify configurations at the network adaptor properties and configuration pages. 
In either case, it is important to restrict access and thus limit vulnerabili~ due to 
unused or unnecessary services or protocols. 
SCANNING FOR VULNERABILITIES 
In this exercise, you are going to examine a network to identify open 
ports and what could be potential problems or holes in specific systems. 
In this exercise, you are going to use Nmap, which you can download 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
495 
and install for free prior to starting the exercise by going to http:// 
insecure.org/nmap/download.html and selecting the download tool. This 
tool is available for Windows or Linux computers. 
To begin the exercise, launch Nmap from the command line. You will 
want to make sure you install the program into a folder that is in the 
path or that you open it from the installed folder. When you have 
opened a command line prompt, complete the exercise by performing 
the following steps" 
1. From the command line type Nmap. This should generate the fol- 
lowing response" 
C: \ >nmap 
Nmap V. 4.20 Usage: nmap [Scan Type(s)] 
[Options] 
<host or net list> 
Some Common Scan Types 
('*' options require root privileges) 
* -sS TCP SYN stealth port scan (default if privileged 
(root)) 
-sT TCP connect() port scan (default for unprivileged users) 
* -sU UDP port scan 
-sP ping scan (Find any reachable machines) 
* -sF,-sX,-sN Stealth FIN, Xmas, or Null scan (experts only) 
-sR/-I RPC/Identd scan (use with other scan types) 
Some Common Options 
(none are required, most can be combined): 
* -O Use TCP/IP fingerprinting to guess remote operating system 
-p <range> ports to scan. 
Example range: 
'1-1024,1080,6666,31337' 
-F Only scans ports listed in nmap-services 
-v Verbose. 
Its use is recommended. 
Use twice for greater effect. 
-P0 Don't ping hosts 
(needed to scan www.microsoft.com 
and others) 
* -Ddecoy_hostl,decoy2[ .... ] Hide scan using many decoys 
-T <Paranoid ISneaky IpOlitelNOrmallAggressivelInsane> 
General timing policy 
-n/-R Never do DNS resolution/Always 
resolve 
[default: sometimes resolve] 
-oN/-oX/-oG <logfile> Output normal/XML/grepable 
scan logs to <logfile> 
-iL <inputfile> Get targets from file; Use '-' for stdin 
* -S <your_IP>/-e <devicename> Specify source address or network interface 
--interactive Go into interactive mode (then press h for help) 
--win help Windows-specific features 
Example- nmap -v -sS -O www.my.com 192.168.0.0/16 
'192.88-90.*.*' 
SEE THE MAIN PAGE FOR MANY MORE OPTIONS, DESCRIPTIONS, 
AND EXAMPLES 
r ~- 
9 
www.syngress.com 

496 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
2. This should give you some idea of some of the types of scans that 
Nmap can perform. Notice the first and second entries. The-sS is 
a Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) stealth scan, and the-sT is 
a TCP full connect. The difference in these is that the stealth scan 
does only two of the three steps of the TCP handshake, while the 
full connect scan does all three steps and is slightly more reliable. 
3. Now run Nmap with the-sT option and configure it to scan the 
entire subnet. The following gives an example of the proper 
syntax. 
C:\>nmap -sT 192.168.1.1-254 
4. The scan will take some time. On a large network expect the tool 
to take longer as there will be many hosts for it to scan. 
5. When the scan is complete the results will be returned that will 
look similar to those shown here. 
Starting nmap V. 4.20 ( www.insecure.org/nmap ) 
Interesting ports on 
(192.168.1.17) : 
(The 1600 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
Interesting ports on 
(192.168.1.18): 
(The 1594 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
139/tcp 
open 
netbios-ssn 
445/tcp 
open 
printer 
9100/tcp 
open 
jetdirect 
9111/tcp 
open 
DragonIDSConsole 
9152/tcp 
open 
ms-sql2000 
Interesting ports on 
(192.168.1.19): 
(The 1594 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
9100/tcp 
open 
jetdirect 
9112/tcp 
open 
DragonIDSSensor 
9152/tcp 
open 
ms-sql2000 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
497 
Interesting ports on VENUS 
(192.168.1.20) : 
(The 1596 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
135/tcp 
open 
loc-srv 
139/tcp 
open 
netbios-ssn 
445/tcp 
open 
microsoft-ds 
Interesting ports on PLUTO (192.168.1.21) : 
(The 1596 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
21/tcp 
open 
ftp 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
139/tcp 
open 
netbios-ssn 
515/tcp 
open 
printer 
Interesting ports on 
(192.168.1.25) : 
(The 1598 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
23/tcp 
open 
Telnet 
69/udp 
open 
tftp 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
Nmap run completed -- 254 IP addresses 
(6 hosts up) scanned in 2528 seconds 
In the example shown above, notice how you can see the ports that 
were identified on each system. While this is the same type of tool that 
would be used by an attacker, it's also a valuable tool for the security 
professional. You can see from the example that there are a number of 
ports open on each of the hosts that were probed. (Note that these 
machines are in an internal network, so some of them are allowed.) 
The question as to should the ports be open should lead us back to 
our earlier discussion of policy and risk assessment. If nothing else this 
type of tool can allow us to see if our harden activities have worked and 
verify that no one has opened services on a system that is not allowed. 
Even for ports that are allowed and have been identified by scanning 
tools, decisions must be made as to which of these ports are likely to be 
vulnerable, and then the risks of the vulnerability weighed against the 
www.syngress.com 

498 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
need for the particular service connected to that port. Port vulnerabili- 
ties are constantly updated by various vendors, and should be reviewed 
and evaluated for risk at regular intervals to reduce potential problems. 
ACLs 
In network devices, an ACL performs a function much like those discussed in the 
DAC's section in Chapter 1. However, the functionality of an ACL is slightly dif- 
ferent, and its capacity to control access is limited by the type of device and the 
control software written to guide the device. Also, ACL's are controlled by a device 
operator or administrator, not by the "owner" of the resource. Following is a list of 
the areas of ACLs that can be controlled: 
9 
Protocols allowed 
9 
Ports allowed 
9 
Source of connection 
9 
Destination of connection 
9 
Interface type for connection 
ACLs are also used as a firewall rules method. A firewall router can be used 
with an ACL to filter or block traffic on specific ports, for specific protocols, and 
for source or destination network addresses. Packet filter tables are often derived 
from the construction of the ACL for the firewall. 
Finally, ACL configurations must be checked and verified to restrict access to 
the configuration information itself. The number of individuals or services that 
have permission to monitor or modify settings on network equipment, must be 
limited to tighten the security of the device. ACLs should also be set to :not allow 
use of network services such as Telnet and File Transfer Protocol (FTP) fbr access if 
alternatives are available, thus tightening the access level even more. P,.emember 
from earlier chapters that both these protocols pass usernames and passwords in 
cleartext. 
Many of the rule sets being defined while using ACL functions are set to either 
allow or deny a particular function, protocol, or access at an interface. As noted 
above, a number of conditions can be controlled at the hardware device with the 
ACL configurations. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
499 
For example: 
9 
To deny the use of ICMP on interface <ethO>, a line can be created in 
the ACL that reads int <ethO> ICMP deny. This would deny ICMP on 
interface <ethO>. 
9 
To deny a specific communication protocol, an ACL entry can be created 
that reads: int <ethO> IPX deny. This would block use of Internetwork 
Package Exchange (IPX) on the interface. 
9 To deny all protocols on an interface, a line can be added to the ACL that 
reads int <ethO> ANY deny. This would effectively eliminate the use of all 
protocols on the interface. 
9 An ACL can become complex, and may need to be centrally stored to be 
deployed to multiple devices. 
When working with ACLs, remember that you will be utilizing some of 
the concepts discussed in Chapter 1. However, you will also use some 
different procedures to accomplish access control. For example, you may 
use static access control list (SACL) configurations to maintain the set- 
tings on hardware devices in a network. Along with the SACL configura- 
tion, you may use other technologies to centralize the deployment of 
the rule sets defining the level of access. Additionally, as you will see 
later in this chapter, you may use a Directory Enabled Network (DEN) 
method system to manage overall ACL development and deployment. 
Application Hardening 
The Security+ exam covers a very large area of the concepts of application hard- 
ening. This section looks at procedures and best practices in a couple of different 
arenas to provide security. This section not only looks at end-user applications such 
as browsers, office suites, and e-mail client software applications, but also evaluates 
the problems that exist in applications provided through servers and services run- 
ning on networks. These include Web servers, e-mail servers, FTP servers, DNS 
servers, and DHCP servers.This section also looks at Network News Transfer 
www.syngress.com 

500 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Protocol (NNTP) servers, file and print servers, and data repositories. It also 
explores directory services and databases. 
As in the OS and NOS section, as you work to understand and utilize the 
updates, hotfixes, service packs, and patches in the application area, be 
sure to test these repairs on machines that are in a parallel network 
environment. It is always prudent to test and try out the patcihes on 
non-production equipment prior to implementation in a live production 
network environment. 
Updates 
Updates are provided by the manufacturer of the application, and are usually 
intended to enhance features or functionalities of the applications involved. 
9 Updates for end-user applications increase the capability of the software to 
perform tasks. 
9 Updates of server applications are often cosmetic in nature, or provided to 
expand the capability of a particular type of server beyond its original 
uses. 
In either case, it is important to evaluate the updates to determine whether or 
not they are required or beneficial to the operation. Again, it is imperative to always 
test on equipment that is not part of the production environment to limit problems 
and downtime. 
Hotfixes 
Hotfixes for applications are provided by the vendors. However, these tend to be 
specific to the function operating on a server. These include fixes for server applica- 
tions such as Sendmail, Exchange, Microsoft Structured Query Language (SQL) 
server, or a Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) DNS server. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
501 
Service Packs 
9 
Service packs for various application servers are produced nearly as often 
as those for OSes and NOSes. 
9 Expect to see service packs or major collections ofhotfixes, provided at 
fairly regular intervals. 
9 
Service packs may be utilized often to correct the initial problems discov- 
ered since the product's release. 
Patches 
9 
Patches for application servers are provided by the vendor of the product. 
9 
Patches are used to fix compatibility and minor operation issues and inter- 
face problems. 
9 Accumulations of patches are sent out as service packs. 
The Security+ exam contains questions about the additional security 
configurations required for most of the application servers discussed. Be 
sure to review the potential vulnerabilities of the various server types 
and the manufacturer-recommended security plans for them. For 
example, you may want to review settings relative to e-mail servers on 
disabling e-mail relay problems, FTP servers for restricting access, Web 
servers for restricting access, and database servers for protecting the 
databases and structure. 
Web Servers 
Most companies and organizations today have a Web presence on the Internet. An 
Internet presence offers numerous business advantages, such as the ability to adver- 
tise to a large audience, to interact with customers and partners, and to provide 
updated information to interested parties. 
www.syngress.com 

502 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Web pages are stored on servers running Web services software such as 
Microsoft's Internet Information Server (IIS) or Apache (developed for Linux and 
UNIX servers, but also now available for Windows) . Web servers must be accessible 
via the Internet if the public is to be able to access the Web pages. However, this 
accessibility provides a point of entry to Internet "bad guys" who want to get into 
the network, so it is vitally important that Web servers be secured. It's such a 
tempting target, because in many cases it's the only part of your network that an 
attacker can access. Protecting a Web server is no small task. Systems attached to the 
Internet before they are fully "hardened" are usually detected and compromised 
within minutes. Malicious crackers are always actively searching for systems to infil- 
trate, making it essential that a Web server is properly locked down before bringing 
it online. 
First and foremost, administrators must lock down the underlying OS. This pro- 
cess includes applying updates and patches, removing unneeded protocols and ser- 
vices, and properly configuring all native security controls. Second, it is wise to 
place the Web server behind a protective barrier, such as a firewall or a reverse 
proxy. Anything that limits, restricts, filters, or controls traffic into and out of a Web 
server reduces the means by which malicious users can attack the system. Third, 
administrators must lock down the Web server itself. This process actually has 
numerous facets, each of which are important to maintaining a secure ~reb server. 
Many Web servers, such as older versions of IIS, use a named user account to 
authenticate anonymous Web visitors.When a Web visitor accesses a Web site using 
this methodology, the Web server automatically logs that user on as the IllS user 
account. 
The visiting user remains anonymous, but the host server platform uses the IIS 
user account to control access. This account grants system administrator'; granular 
access control on a Web server. 
These specialized Web user accounts should have their access restricted so they 
cannot log on locally nor access anything outside the Web root. Additionally, 
administrators should be very careful about granting these accounts the ability to 
write to files or execute programs; this should be done only when absolutely nec- 
essary. If other named user accounts are allowed to log on over the Web, it is essen- 
tial that these accounts not be the same user accounts employed to log onto the 
internal network. In other words, if employees log on via the Web using their own 
credentials instead of the anonymous Web user account, administrators should 
create special accounts for those employees to use just for Web logon. 
Authorizations over the Internet should not be considered secure unless strong 
encryption mechanisms are in place to protect them. Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
503 
can be used to protect Web traffic; however, the protection it offers is not signifi- 
cant enough to protect internal accounts on the Internet. 
E-mail Servers 
E-mail servers have their own set of built-in and application-specific vulnerabilities. 
All e-mail servers are vulnerable to normal attacks that are mounted against their 
specific OS, but they are also vulnerable to Denial of Service (DOS) attacks, virus 
attacks, and relay and spoofing attacks that may affect the level of service. 
To protect the servers, the OSes and NOSes on the server must be hardened, as 
well as the e-mail service applications. In e-mail, no systems are immune to attack. 
There are many deficiencies in the various versions of e-mail server software 
such as Sendmail for Linux and UNIX, and the Exchange/Outlook platform. Any 
problems that have been exposed must be investigated, to evaluate the services and 
functions that should be included in the e-mail service. For example, specific vul- 
nerabilities exist if Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) e-mail is used on a 
system, both on the e-mail server side and the client side. If HTML e-mail is 
chosen, arrangements must be made to apply all security patches to client 
machines, browsers, and servers, to protect against arbitrary execution of code. It is 
also important to evaluate the messaging and instant messaging capabilities, as the 
implementation of Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) technologies may also 
www.syngress.com 

504 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
expose the network to further risk. Additionally, e-mail servers 
are constant poten- 
tial sources of virus attacks, and therefore must have the strongest possible protec- 
tion for scanning incoming and outgoing messages. Finally, e-mail servers should 
not have extraneous services and applications installed, and administrative and 
system access permissions should be tightly controlled to block installation or exe- 
cution of unauthorized programs and Trojans. 
When hardening an e-mail server, it is important to consider the fol]owing 
attack points: 
9 
E-mail relay, which allows unauthorized users to send e-mail through an 
e-mail server 
9 
Virus propagation; make sure the anti-virus planning and applications are 
performing correctly 
9 
Spamming, including DoS conditions that exist in response to "flame 
wars" 
9 
Mail bombing; the practice of flooding the recipients e-mail account with 
huge amounts of mail 
9 
Storage limitations, to limit DoS attacks based on message size ,or volume 
FTP Servers 
FTP servers 
are potential security problems, as they are exposed to outside inter- 
faces, thereby inviting anyone to access them. The vast majority of FTP servers 
open to the Internet support anonymous access to public resources. 
Incorrect file system settings in a server hosting an FTP server allows unre- 
stricted access to all resources stored on that server, and could lead to a system 
breach. FTP servers exposed to the Internet are best operated in the demilitarized 
zone (DMZ), rather than the internal network. They should be hardened with all 
of the OS and NOS fixes available, but all services other than FTP that could lead 
to breach of the system should be disabled or removed. Contact from the internal 
network to the FTP server through the firewall should be restricted and controlled 
through ACL entries, to prevent possible traffic through the FTP server 
from 
returning to the internal network. 
FTP servers providing service in an internal network are also susceptible to 
attack; therefore, administrators should consider establishing access controls 
including usernames and passwords, as well as the use of SSL for authentication. 
Some of the hardening tasks that should be performed on FTP servers include: 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
505 
9 
Protection of the server file system 
9 
Isolation of the FTP directories 
9 
Positive creation of authorization and access control rules 
9 
Regular review of logs 
9 
Regular review of directory content to detect unauthorized files and usage 
DNS Servers 
Hardening DNS servers consists of performing normal OS hardening, and then 
considering the types of control that can be done with the DNS service itself. Older 
versions of BIND DNS were not always easy to configure, but current versions run- 
ning on Linux and UNIX platforms can be secured relatively easily. Microsoft's ini- 
tial offering of DNS on NT was plagued with violations of their integrity, making 
internetwork attacks much easier to accomplish, since information about the 
internal network was easy to retrieve. By default, Windows 2003 prevents zone 
transfer operations to machines that are not approved to request such information, 
thus better protecting the resources in the zone files from unauthorized use. 
When hardening a DNS server, it is important to restrict zone transfers so that 
they will not be made to unauthorized or rogue servers. 
Zone transfers should only be made to designated servers.Additionally, those 
users who may successfully query the zone records with utilities such as 
NSLookup, should be restricted via the ACL settings. Zone files contain all records 
of a zone that are entered, therefore, an unauthorized entity that retrieves the 
records has retrieved a record of what is generally the internal network, with host- 
names and IP addresses. 
There are records within a DNS server that can be set for individual machines. 
These include HINFO records, which generally contain descriptive information 
about the OS and features of a particular machine. HINFO records were used in 
the past to track machine configurations when all records were maintained stati- 
cally, and were not as attractive a target as they are today. A best practice in this case 
would be to not use HINFO records in the DNS server.Attackers attempt zone 
transfers by using the following command: First, by typing nslookup from the com- 
mand line, next the target servers DNS server addresses is entered, server <ipaddress> 
then the set type=any command is entered. Finally, the Is -d target.corn is entered to 
try and force the zone transfer. If successful, a list of zone records will follow. 
www.syngress.com 

506 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
There are a number of known exploits against DNS servers in general. For 
example, a major corporation placed all of their DNS servers on a single segment. 
This made it relatively simple to mount a DoS attack utilizing ICMP to block or 
flood traffic to that segment. Other conditions administrators must harden against 
are attacks involving cache poisoning, in which a server is fed altered or spoofed 
records that are retained and then duplicated elsewhere. In this case, a basic step for 
slowing this type of attack is to configure the DNS server to not do recursive 
queries. It is also important to realize that BIND servers must run under the con- 
text of root and Windows DNS servers must run under the context of system, to 
access the ports they need to work with. If the base NOS is not sufficiently hard- 
ened, a compromise can occur. 
NNTP Servers 
NNTP servers are also vulnerable to some types of attacks, because they are often 
heavily utilized from a network resource perspective. NNTP servers that are used 
to carry high volumes of newsgroup traffic from Internet feeds are vulnerable to 
DOS attacks that can be mounted when "flame wars" occur. This vulnerability also 
exists in the case of listserv applications used for mailing lists. NNTP servers also 
have vulnerabilities similar to e-mail servers, because they are not always configured 
correctly to set storage parameters, purge newsgroup records, or limit attachments. 
It is important to be aware of malicious code and attachments that can be attached 
to the messages that are being accepted and stored. NNTP servers should be 
restricted to valid entities, which require that the network administrator correctly 
set the limits for access. It is also important to be aware of the platform being used 
for hosting a NNTP server. If Windows-based, it will be subject to the same hard- 
ening and file permission issues present in Windows IIS servers. Therefore, there are 
additional services and protocols that must be limited for throughput, and defenses 
such as virus scanning that must be in place. 
File and Print Servers 
The ability to share files and printers with other members of a network can make 
many tasks simpler and, in fact, this was the original purpose for networking com- 
puters. However, this ability also has a dark side, especially when users are unaware 
that they are sharing resources. If a trusted user can gain access, the possibility exists 
that a malicious user can also obtain access. On systems linked by broadband con- 
nections, crackers have all the time they need to connect to shared resources and 
exploit them. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
507 
On Windows OSes, there is a service calledfile and print sharing (the Server ser- 
vice in Windows NT).When enabled, this service allows others to access the 
system across the network to view and retrieve or use resources. Other OSes have 
similar services (and thus similar weaknesses). The Microsoft File and Print Sharing 
service uses NetBIOS with SMB traffic to advertise shared resources, but does not 
offer security to restrict who can see and access those resources. 
This security is controlled by setting permissions on those resources. The 
problem is that when a resource is created in a Windows NT-based system, they are 
set by default to give full control over the resource to everyone who accesses that 
system. By default, the file and print sharing service (or server service in NT) is 
bound to all interfaces being used for communication. 
This means that when sharing is enabled for the purpose of sharing resources 
with a trusted internal network over a network interface card (NIC), the system is 
also sharing those resources with the entire untrusted external network over the 
external interface connection. Many users are unaware of these defaults and do not 
realize their resources are available to anyone who knows enough about Windows 
to find them. For example, users with access to port scanning software, or using the 
basic analysis provided through the use of NetBIOS statistics (NBTSTAT) or the 
net view command in a Windows network, would have the ability to list shared 
resources if NetBIOS functionality exists. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

508 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
At the very least, the file- and print-sharing service should be unbound from 
the external network interface's adapter. Another solution (or a further precaution 
to take in addition to unbinding the external adapter) is to use a different protocol 
on the internal network. 
For example, computers could communicate over NetBEUI on a small local, 
non-routed network. If file and print sharing is bound to NetBEUI and unbound 
from Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), internal users can 
still share resources, but those resources will be unavailable to "outsiders" on the 
Internet. 
If a user does not need to share resources with anyone on the internal (local) 
network, the file- and print-sharing service should be completely disabled. On 
most networks where security is important, this service is disabled on all clients. 
This action forces all shared resources to be stored on network servers, which typi- 
cally have better security and access controls than end-user client systems. 
D H CP Servers 
DHCP servers add another layer of complexity to some layers of security, but also 
offer the opportunity to control network addressing for client machines',. This allows 
for a more secure environment if the client machines are configured properly. In 
the case of the clients, this means that administrators have to establish a strong ACL 
to limit the ability of users to modify network settings, regardless of platform. 
Nearly all OSes and NOSes offer the ability to add DHCP server applications to 
their server versions. 
As seen in each of the application server areas, administrators must also apply 
the necessary security patches, updates, service packs, and hotfixes to the DHCP 
servers they are configuring and protecting. DHCP servers with correct: configura- 
tion information will deliver addressing information to the client machines. This 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
509 
allows administrators to set the node address, mask, and gateway information, and 
to distribute the load for other network services by creation of appropriate scopes 
(address pools). 
Additional security concerns arise with DHCP. Among these, it is important to 
control the creation of extra DHCP servers and their connections to the network. 
A rogue DHCP server can deliver addresses to clients, defeating the settings and 
control efforts for client connection. In most systems, administrators are required to 
monitor network traffic consistently to track these possible additions and prevent a 
breach of the system. Some OS and NOS manufacturers have implemented con- 
trois in their access and authentication systems to require a higher level of authority 
for authorizing DHCP server operation. In the case of Windows, a Windows 
DHCP server that belongs to an Active Directory domain will not service client 
requests if it has not been authorized to run in Active Directory. However, a stand- 
alone Windows DHCP server can still function as a rogue. Someone could still also 
introduce a rogue server running a different OS and NOS, or a stand-alone server 
that does not belong to the domain. Administrators should also restrict access to 
remote administration tools, to limit the number of individuals who can modify 
the settings on the DHCP server. 
Data Repositories 
Data repositories include many types of storage systems that are interlinked in sys- 
tems for maintenance and protection of data. It is important to discuss the need for 
protection and hardening of the various types of storage that are maintained. This 
includes different storage media combinations, methods of connection to the infor- 
mation, consideration of the access implications and configurations, and mainte- 
nance of the integrity of the data.When considering tightening and securing the 
data repository area, file services such as those detailed earlier in the file and print 
arena and also the Network Attached Storage (NAS) and Storage Area Network 
(SAN) requirements must be considered. 
NAS and SAN configurations may present special challenges to hardening. For 
example, some NAS configurations used in a local area network (LAN) environ- 
ment may have different file system access protections in place that will not inter- 
operate with the host network's OS and NOS. In this case, a server OS is not 
responsible for the permissions assigned to the data access, which may make config- 
uration of access or integration of the access rules more complex. SAN configura- 
tion allows for intercommunication between the devices that are being used for the 
SAN, and thus freedom from much of the normal network traffic in the LAN, pro- 
www.syngress.com 

510 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
viding faster access. However, extra effort is initially required to create adequate 
access controls to limit unauthorized contact with the data it is processing. 
While discussing data repositories, administrators also need to examine a con- 
cept called Directory Enabled Networks (DEN). DEN is a model developed in the 
1990s by Microsoft and Cisco to centralize control and management of an entire 
network, rather than just controlling users and group assignments. It is currently 
controlled and developed by the Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF), and 
can be viewed by visiting www.dmtf.org/standards/wbem/den. DEN utilizes the 
capabilities of various data repository structures and directory services structures to 
provide a more centralized management and control function for entire networks. 
By definition, it is a centralized repository for information about networks, applica- 
tions, and users. For example, when networks were first being constructed and 
used, it was normal to have a network that contained only one hundred or so com- 
puters and users. However, the last decade has seen an explosion of network use 
and capability, which has led to management problems and high administrative 
costs. DEN networks, with much refinement, have allowed the development of 
integrated management solutions and control into the directory services', being 
used. Currently, many hardware vendors and OS and NOS vendors have designed 
solutions integrating their management capabilities into the directory service in 
use. For example, Novell has introduced eDirectory services, which are ,cross-plat- 
form capable, and Microsoft has introduced Active Directory. Both of these, and 
others, allow administrators to integrate control of network services into the direc- 
tory service arena. This includes the development of services such as Dynamic 
DNS (and the integration of zone files into the directory for security enhancement 
and control) and DHCP rogue server detection.Additionally, it allows the delivery 
of centralized policies for remote access, port, and interface controls, and router and 
switch configurations from a central repository. 
Directory Services 
Directory services information can be either very general in nature and publicly 
available, or restricted in nature and subject to much tighter control.While looking 
at directory services in the application area, it is important to look at different types 
of directory service cases and what should be controlled within them. 
Directory services data is maintained and stored in a hierarchical structure. One 
type of directory service is structured much like the white pages of a telephone 
book, and may contain general information such as e-mail addresses, names, and so 
forth. These servers operate under the constraints of Lightweight Directory Access 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
511 
Protocol (LDAP) and the X.500 standard. This type of service contains general 
information that is searchable. Typically, these directories are write-enabled to the 
administrator or the owner of the record involved, and read-enabled to all other 
users. A second type of directory services operation includes the operation of sys- 
tems like Novell's NDS and Windows 2003's Active Directory. Both of these ser- 
vices are based on the X.500 standard, as is the conventional LDAP directory 
service. They are not LDAP-compliant, however, as they can interoperate with 
LDAP directories, but have been modified for use in their respective directory ser- 
vices. These types of directories usually follow the LDAP/X.500 naming conven- 
tion to indicate the exact name of the objects, which include designations for 
common name, organization, country, and so on. This might appear as CN=.Joe 
User, O=His Company or C=US, which would designate that the record was for Joe 
User, a member of his company, in the United States. It is important to impose and 
verify stringent control on what is allowed to be written to a records database and 
who can write to it, because much of the information in this directory service is 
used to authenticate users, processes, services, and machines for access to other 
resources within the networks. At the same time, administrators will want to con- 
trol who can read information in specific areas of the database, because they need 
to restrict access to some parts of the directory information. 
Hardening of directory services systems requires evaluation not only of the per- 
missions to access information, but of permissions for the objects that are contained 
in the database. Additionally, these systems require the use of the LDAP on the net- 
work, which also requires evaluation and configuration for secure operation. This 
includes setting perimeter access controls to block access to LDAP directories in 
the internal network, if they are not public information databases. Maintenance of 
security-based patches and updates from the NOS manufacturer is absolutely 
imperative in keeping these systems secure. 
Network Access Control 
As seen in this chapter, hardening is an important process. Another way to harden 
the network is to use network access control (NAC). There are several different 
incarnations of NAC available. These include infrastructure-based NAC, endpoint- 
based NAC, and hardware-based NAC. 
1. Infrastructure-based NAC requires an organization to be running the most 
current hardware and OSes. OSes such as Microsoft Vista has the ability to 
perform NAC. 
www.syngress.com 

512 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
2. Endpoint-based NAC requires the installation of software agents on 
each network client. These devices are then managed by a centralized 
management console. 
3. Hardware-based NAC requires the installation of a network appliance. The 
appliance monitors for specific behavior and can limit device connectivity 
should noncompliant activity be detected. 
NAC offers administrators a way to verify that devices meet certain, health stan- 
dards before they're allowed to connect to the network. Laptops, desktop com- 
puters, or any device that doesn't comply with predefined requirements',, can be 
prevented from joining the network or can even be relegated to a controlled net- 
work where access is restricted until the device is brought up to the required secu- 
rity standards. 
Databases 
Database servers may include servers running SQL or other databases such as 
Oracle. These types of databases present unique and challenging conditions when 
considering hardening the system. For example, in most SQL-based systems, there 
is both a server function and a client front end that must be considered. In most 
database systems, access to the database information, creation of new databases, and 
maintenance of the databases is controlled through accounts and permissions cre- 
ated by the application itself. Although some databases allow the integration of 
access permissions for authenticated users in the OS and NOS directory services 
system, they still depend on locally created permissions to control most access. This 
makes the operation and security of these types of servers more complicated than is 
seen in other types. 
Unique challenges exist in the hardening of database servers. Most require the 
use of extra components on client machines and the design of forms for access to 
the data structure, to retrieve the information from the tables constructed by the 
database administrator. Permissions can be extremely complex, as rules must be 
defined to allow individuals to query database access to some records, and no access 
to others. This process is much like setting access permissions, but at a much more 
granular and complex level. 
Forms designed for the query process must also be correctly formulated to 
allow access only to the appropriate data in the search process. Integrity of the data 
must be maintained, and the database itself must be secured on the platfbrm on 
which it is running to protect against corruption. 

513 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
Other vulnerabilities require attention when setting up specific versions of SQL 
in a network. For example, Microsoft's SQL 7.0 and earlier versions set two default 
conditions that must be hardened in the enterprise environment. First, the "sa" 
account, which is used for security associations and communication with the SQL 
processes, and the host machine, is installed with a blank password. Second, the 
server is configured using mixed mode authentication, which allows the creation of 
SQL-specific accounts for access that are not required to be authenticated by the 
Windows authentication subsystem. This can lead to serious compromise issues and 
allow control of the server or enterprise data. It is strongly recommended that 
administrators harden these two conditions, using a strong password on the sa 
account, and utilizing Windows authentication instead of mixed-mode authentica- 
tion. 
Network access concerns must also be addressed when hardening the database 
server. SQL, for example, requires that ports be accessible via the network 
depending on what platform is in use. Oracle may use ports 1521, 1522, 1525, or 
1529, among others. MS SQL server uses ports 1433 and 1444 for communication. 
As can be seen, more consideration of network access is required when using 
database servers. Normal OS concerns must also be addressed. 
SQL server security takes an ongoing and constant effort to try to protect 
databases and their content. An excellent discussion of the SQL server security 
model by Vyas Kondreddi can be viewed at www.sql-server- 
performance, com/vk_sql_security, asp. 
Spend a few minutes reviewing port and protocol numbers for standard 
services provided in the network environment. This will help when you 
are analyzing questions that require configuration of ACL lists and 
determinations of appropriate blocks to install to secure a network. 

514 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
The Security+ exam can ask specific questions about ports and what ser- 
vices they support. It's advisable to learn common ports before 
attempting the exam. 
21 FTP 
22 Secure Shell (SSH) 
23 Telnet 
25 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) 
53 DNS 
80 HTTP 
110 Post Office Protocol (POP) 
161 Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) 
443 SSL 
Memorizing these will help you with the Security+ exam. 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
515 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
This chapter looked at the broad concept of infrastructure security, and specifically 
discussed the concepts and processes for hardening various sections of systems and 
networks. OS and NOS security and configuration protections were discussed as 
were file system permission procedures, access control requirements, and methods 
to protect the core of systems from attack. Security+ exam objectives were studied 
in relation to network hardening and in relation to hardening by visiting potential 
problem areas in the network arena, including configuration concerns, ACLs, and 
elimination of unnecessary protocols and services from the network.We also 
looked at how these hardening steps might improve and work with the OS and 
NOS hardening and ways to obtain, install, and test various fixes and software 
updates. The discussion ended by delving into the area of application hardening, 
concerning the potential configuration and security issues applied to various types 
of servers and services that administrators might offer in their overall environment. 
These included looks at network services such as DNS and DHCP, and specific 
types of application services such as e-mail, databases, NNTP servers, and others. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Concepts and Processes of OS and NOS Hardening 
gl Harden following the principle of"least privilege" to limit access to any 
resource 
gl Set file access permissions as tightly as possible 
gl Track, evaluate, and install the appropriate OS patches, updates, service 
packs, and hotfixes in your system environment 
Network Hardening 
gl Eliminate unused and unnecessary protocols and services to limit exposure 
to attacks 
Create and build strong ACLs for control of devices and network 
operations 
www.syngress.com 


Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
517 
A" ACL use can define who can access, configure, and control a device, and can 
also be used to control services and protocols that are allowed to pass through 
devices on your network. Therefore, they become very important in the config- 
uration of your security plan. 
Q: Why are Web servers considered to be a high vulnerability item? 
A: As development of the technologies for highly graphic sites has come about, 
many of the new processes have exposed weaknesses that were not anticipated 
in the original construction of the underlying OS and NOS structure. It is now 
increasingly important to keep current on all of the latest security fixes to 
reduce the level of vulnerability in your network. 
Q: I would have never thought about a DHCP server being vulnerable! Can you 
tell me why I need to worry about it? 
A: DHCP servers can be used to configure client machines to reach other net- 
works. A DHCP server that is not configured by you but is connected to your 
network in any way, could redirect your client machines and allow a high level 
of compromise to occur. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
. Bob is preparing to evaluate the security on his Windows XP computer and 
would like to harden the OS. He is concerned as there have been reports of 
buffer overflows. What would you suggest he do to reduce this risk? 
ao 
B~ 
Co 
Do 
Remove sample files 
Upgrade is OS 
Set appropriate permissions on files 
Install the latest patches 
www.syngress.com 

518 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
. 
~ 
Melissa is planning to evaluate the permissions on a Windows 2003 server. 
When she checks the permissions she realizes that the production server is still 
in its default configuration. She is worried that the file system is not secure. 
What would you recommend Melissa do to alleviate this problem? 
A. Remove the Anonymous access account from the permission on the root 
directory 
B. Remove the System account permissions on the root of the C drive direc- 
tory 
C. Remove the Everyone group from the permissions on the root directory 
D. Shut down the production server until it can be hardened. 
You have been asked to review the process your organization is using to set 
privileges for network access.You have gone through the process of evaluating 
risk.What should be the next step? 
A. Determine authorization requirements 
B. Make a decision on access method 
C. Document findings 
D. Create an ACL 
o 
o 
You have been asked to review the general steps used to secure an OS.You 
have already obtained permission to disable all unnecessary services.What 
should be your next step? 
A. Remove unnecessary user accounts and implement password guidelines 
B. Remove unnecessary programs 
C. Apply the latest patches and fixes 
D. Restrict permissions on files and access to the registry 
Yesterday, everything seemed to be running perfectly on the network. Today, 
the Windows 2003 production servers keep crashing and running erratically. 
The only events that have taken place are a scheduled backup, a CD/DVD 
upgrade on several machines, and an unscheduled patch install.What do you 
think has gone wrong? 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
519 
A. The backup altered the archive bit on the backup systems 
B. The CD/DVDs are not compatible with the systems in which they were 
installed 
C. The patches were not tested before installation 
D. The wrong patches were installed 
. 
You have been asked to examine a subnet of a computer and identify any 
open ports or services that should be disabled. These systems are located in 
several different floors of the facility. Which of the following would be the 
best type of tool to accomplish the task? 
A. A process review tool such as Netstat 
B. A port scanning tool such as Nmap 
C. A registry tool such as RegEdit 
D. Enable automatic updates on each of the targeted computers 
7. You have been given the scan below and asked to review it. 
Interesting ports on (12.16.3.199): 
(The 1594 ports scanned but not shown below are in state- filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
22/tcp 
open 
ssh 
69/udp 
open 
tftp 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
135/tcp 
open 
netbios ssn 
3306/tcp 
open 
mysql 
Based on an analysis, can you determine the OS of the scanned network system? 
A. Windows XP 
B. Windows NT 
C. Windows Vista 
D. Linux 
o 
You have been tasked with securing the network.While reviewing an Nmap 
scan of your network, one device had the following ports open. Which one 
will you choose? 

520 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
A. 22 
B. 110 
C. 161 
D. 31337 
. 
Justin is reviewing open ports on his Web server and has noticed that port 23 
is open. He has asked you what the port is and if it presents a problem.What 
should you tell him? 
A. Port 23 is no problem because it is just the Telnet client 
B. Port 23 is a problem because it is used by the Subseven Trojan 
C. Port 23 is open by default and is for system processes 
D. Port 23 is a concern because it is a Telnet server and is active 
10. You have been given the scan below and asked to review it. 
Interesting ports on (18.2.1.88): 
(The 1263 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
22/tcp 
open 
ssh 
53/udp 
open 
dns 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
ll0/tcp 
open 
pop3 
lll/tcp 
open 
sun rpc 
Your coworker believes it is a Linux computer. What open port led[ to that 
assumption? 
A. Port 53 
B. Port 80 
C. Port 110 
D. Port 111 
11. While your company has yet to develop a Web site, they consider the privacy of 
e-mail as very important because they are developing a new, highly ]profitable 
prescription drug.Which of the following will help them meet this goal? 
A. IPSec 

Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 9 Chapter 8 
521 
B. SMTP 
C. PGP 
D. SSL 
12. Your company has decided to outsource part of its DNS services. Since the 
old DNS servers will no longer need to be replicated to those outside the 
firewall, they would like you to lock down the potential hole.What port and 
protocol should be blocked on the firewall? 
A. UDP 53 
B. TCP 79 
C. TCP 110 
D. 53 TCP 
13. Monday morning has brought news that your company's e-mail has been 
blacklisted by many ISP's. Somehow your e-mail servers were used to spread 
spam. What most likely went wrong? 
A. An insecure email account was hacked 
B. Sendmail vulnerability 
C. Open mail relay 
D. Port 25 was left open 
14. Management was rather upset to find out that someone has been hosting a 
music file transfer site on one of your servers. Internal employees have been 
ruled out as it appears it was an outsider.What most likely went wrong? 
A. Anonymous access 
B. No Web access control 
C. No SSL 
D. No bandwidth controls 
15. Someone played a bad joke on your company.Visitors accessing the Web site 
were redirected to your competitors Uniform Resource Locator (U1KL). Can 
you describe what the attackers did? 
www.syngress.com 

522 
Chapter 8 9 Infrastructure Security: System Hardening 
A. Cross-site scripting 
B. DNS cache poisoning 
C. DoS attack 
D. ARP cache poisoning 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and epxlanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. D 
9. D 
2. C 
10. B 
3. B 
11. C 
4. A 
12. D 
5. C 
13. C 
6. B 
14. A 
7. B 
15. B 
8. D 
www.syngress.com 

Chapter 9 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
9 
Algorithms 
Concepts of Using Cryptography 
Exam Objectives Review" 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
Self Test 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
525 

526 
Chapter 9, Basis of Cryptography 
Introduction 
Algorithms are the underlying foundation of cryptography; therefore, this chapter 
looks at the basics of algorithms, covering symmetric and asymmetric encryption 
and hashing concepts. This chapter then discusses the concepts of cryptography. 
For as long as people have been writing down information, there has been the 
need to keep some information secret, either by hiding its existence or changing its 
meaning. The study of these methods is the science of cryptography. Encryption, a 
type of cryptography, refers to the process of scrambling information so that the 
casual observer cannot read it. What are algorithms and keys? An algorithm is a set of 
instructions for mixing and rearranging an original message, called plaintext, with a 
message key to create a scrambled message, referred to as ciphertext. Similarly, a 
cryptographic key is a piece of data used to encrypt plaintext to ciphertext, and 
ciphertext to plaintext, or both (depending on the type of encryption). 
What does the word crypto mean? It has its origins in the Greek word kruptos, 
which means hidden. Thus, the objective of cryptography is to hide information so 
that only the intended recipient(s) can read it. In crypto terms, the hiding of infor- 
mation is called encryption, and when information becomes readable, it is called 
decryption. A cipher is used to accomplish the encryption and decryption. Merriam- 
Webster's Collegiate Dictionary defines cipher as "a method of transforming a text 
in order to conceal its meaning." The information that is being hidden is called 
plaintext; once it has been encrypted, it is called ciphertext. The ciphertext is trans- 
ported, secure from prying eyes, to the intended recipient(s), where it is clecrypted 
back into plaintext. 
Finally, there are two different subclasses of algorithms" block ciphers and stream 
ciphers. Block ciphers work on "blocks" or chunks of text in a series. Just as a para- 
graph is composed of many sentences, plaintext is composed of many blocks, which 
are typically variable lengths of bits. In contrast, a stream cipher operates on each 
individual unit (either letters or bits) of a message. 
Cryptography is covered in detail on the Security+ exam. 
Algorithms 
Why are there so many algorithms? Why doesn't the world standardize on one 
algorithm? Given the large number of algorithms found in the field today, these are 
valid questions with no simple answers.At the most basic level, it's a classic case of 
tradeoffs between security, speed, and ease of implementation. Here, security indi- 
cates the likelihood of an algorithm to stand up to current and future attacks, speed 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
527 
refers to the processing power and time required to encrypt and decrypt a message, 
and ease of implementation refers to an algorithm's predisposition (if any) to hardware 
or software usage. Each algorithm has different strengths and drawbacks, and none 
of them are ideal in every way. There are many questions about the number of dif- 
ferent cryptographic algorithms on the Security+ exam.This section discusses the 
key algorithms, which fall into three main categories: 
9 Symmetric cryptography 
9 Asymmetric cryptography 
9 Hashing algorithms 
All of the algorithms presented in this chapter are open algorithms, 
which means that the internals of the algorithms, while they may or 
may not be covered by patents, are open for examination by the public. 
In contrast, proprietary algorithms keep the internal workings secret 
and are slightly harder to crack at their initial release. Open standards 
algorithms are usually the most secure. Proprietary algorithms are also 
based on security through obscurity, but that obscurity has prevented 
public examination that could discover undiscovered flaws. 
What Is Encryption? 
Encryption is a form of cryptography that "scrambles" plaintext into unintelligible 
ciphertext. Encryption is the foundation of such security measures as digital signa- 
tures, digital certificates, and the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) that uses these 
technologies to make computer transactions more secure. Computer-based encryp- 
tion techniques use keys to encrypt and &crypt data. A key is a variable (sometimes 
represented as a password) that is a large binary number~the larger, the better. Key 
length is measured in bits, and the more bits in a key, the more difficult the key will 
be to "crack." For example, a 40-bit key is considered insecure by today's standards, 
but it can have a value between 1 and 2A140 (1,099,511,627,776, over a trillion). 
The key is only one component in the encryption process. It must be used in 
conjunction with an encryption alsorithm (a process or calculation) to produce the 
ciphertext. Encryption methods are usually categorized as either symmetric or 
www.syngress.com 

528 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
asymmetric, depending on the number of keys that are used. These two basic types 
of encryption technology are discussed in the following sections. 
Symmetric Encryption Algorithms 
The most widely used type of encryption is symmetric encryption, which is aptly 
named because it uses one key for both the encryption and decryption processes. 
Symmetric encryption is also commonly referred to as secret-key encryption and 
shared-secret encryption, but all terms refer to the same class of algorithms. For pur- 
poses of the Security+ exam, the term shared key is used. 
The reason why symmetric encryption systems are abundant is speed and sim- 
plicity. The strength of symmetric algorithms lies primarily in the size of the keys 
used in the algorithm, as well as the number of cycles each algorithm employs. The 
cardinal rule is "fewer is faster." 
By definition, all symmetric algorithms are theoretically vulnerable to brute-force 
attacks (covered in Chapter 2), which are exhaustive searches of all possible keys. 
Brute-force attacks involve methodically guessing what the key to a message may 
be. Given that all symmetric algorithms have a fixed key length, there are a large 
number of possible keys that can unlock a message. Brute-force attacks methodi- 
cally attempt to check each key until the key that decrypts the message is found. 
However, brute-force attacks are often impractical, because the amount of time 
necessary to search the keys is greater than the useful life expectancy of the hidden 
information. No algorithm is truly unbreakable, but a strong algorithm takes so 
long to crack that it is impractical to try. Because brute-force attacks originate from 
computers, and because computers are continually improving in efficiency, an algo- 
rithmthat may be resistant to a brute-force attack performed by a computer today, 
will not necessarily be resistant to attacks by computers 5 to 10 years in the future. 
The numbers of symmetric algorithms used generally outweigh the 
number of asymmetric algorithms. If you run into a question concerning 
an algorithm you are unfamiliar with, chances are it is a symmetric algo- 
rithm. 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
529 
Data Encryption Standard 
and Triple Data Encryption Standard 
Among the oldest and most famous encryption algorithms is the Data Encryption 
Standard (DES), the use of which has declined with the advent of algorithms that 
provide improved security. DES was based on the Lucifer algorithm invented by 
Horst Feistel, which never saw widespread use. Essentially, DES uses a single 64-bit 
key~56 bits of data and 8 bits of parity~and operates on data in 64-bit chunks. 
This key is broken into 16 48-bit subkeys, one for each round, which are called 
Feistel cycles. Figure 9.1 gives a schematic of how the DES encryption algorithm 
operates. 
Figure 9.1 Diagram of the DES Encryption Algorithm 
How can symmetric algorithms such as DES be made more secure? 
Theoretically, there are two ways" either the key length needs to be 
increased, or the number of rounds in the encryption process needs to 
www.syngress.com 

530 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
be increased. Both of these solutions tend to increase the processing 
power required to encrypt and decrypt data and slow down the encryp- 
tion/decryption speed, because of the increased number of mathemat- 
ical operations required. Examples of modified DES include Triple Data 
Encryption Standard (3DES) and DESX. 
Each round consists of a substitution phase, wherein the data is substituted with 
pieces of the key, and a permutation phase, wherein the substituted data is scrambled 
(re-ordered). Substitution operations, sometimes referred to as confusion operations, 
occur within S-boxes. Similarly, permutation operations, sometimes called diffusion oper- 
ations, are said to occur in P-boxes. Both of these operations occur in the "F 
Module" of the diagram. The security of DES lies in the fact that since the substi- 
tution operations are non-linear, the resulting ciphertext does not resemble the 
original message. The permutation operations add another layer of security by 
scrambling the already partially encrypted message. 
Keep in mind that all of the operations mentioned above (substitution, 
................................... permutation, and so forth) are being performed on the data in binary 
:1111';1:7 I'~I~': form. Instead of trading out letters and numbers, l's and O's are being 
manipulated because these manipulations can be performed at high 
speeds. 
Triple DES (3DES) and DESX are methods that attempt to use the ]DES cipher 
in a way that increases its security. Triple DES uses three separate 56-bit IDES keys 
as a single 168-bit key, though sometimes keys 1 and 3 are identical, yielding 112- 
bit security. DESX adds an additional 64 bits of key data. Both 3DES and DESX 
are intended to strengthen DES against brute-force attacks. It would take many 
years to decrypt 3DES encrypted date (depending on available computing power). 
However, 3DES is inefficient because it requires two to three times the processing 
overhead as a single DES. 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
531 
You will not have to know much about the internals of any algorithms 
for the Security+ exam, nor will you need to calculate any of the encryp- 
tion algorithms. 
Advanced Encryption Standard (Rijndael) 
Because of its small key size of 56 bits, DES can't withstand coordinated brute- 
force attacks using modern cryptanalysis; dedicated machines can break DES within 
a day. Consequently, The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
selected the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) as the authorized Federal 
Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 197 for all non-secret communications by 
the U.S. government, which became effective in May 2002. AlES has the following 
important characteristics: 
9 Private key symmetric block cipher (similar to DES) 
9 Stronger and faster than 3DES 
9 Life expectancy of at least 20 to 30 years 
9 Supports key sizes of 128 bits, 192 bits, and 256 bits 
9 Freely available to all; royalty free, non-proprietary, and not patented 
9 Small footprint. AES can be used effectively in memory and in central 
processing unit (CPU) limited environments such as Smart Cards 
As a background note, the 1Kijndael algorithm (pronounced "rain doll") was 
selected by NIST from a group that included four other finalists: MARS, 1KC6, 
Serpent, and Twofish. It was developed by Belgian cryptographers Dr. Joan Daemen 
and Dr.Vincent 1Kijmen. NIST seems resistant to side-channel attacks such as power- 
and timing-based attacks, which are attacks against a hardware implementation, not 
against a particular algorithm. For example, power- and timing-based attacks mea- 
sure the time it takes to encrypt a message or the minute changes in power con- 
sumption during the encryption and decryption processes. Occasionally, these 
attacks are sufficient enough to allow hackers to recover keys used by the device. 
So how does AES/1Zijndael work? Instead of using Feistel cycles in each round 
like DES, Rijndael uses iterative rounds like International Data Encryption 
Algorithm (IDEA). Data operates on 128-bit chunks, which are grouped into four 
www.syngress.com 

532 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
groups of 4 bytes each. The number of rounds is also dependent on the key size, 
such that 128-bit keys have 9 rounds, 192-bit keys have 11 rounds, and 256-bit 
keys have 13 rounds. Each round consists of a substitution step of one S--box per 
data bit, followed by a pseudo-permutation step in which bits are shuffled between 
groups. Then each group is multiplied out in a matrix fashion and the results are 
added to the subkey for that round. 
Although you may be presented with a number of algorithms that were 
AES candidates, only the Rijndael algorithm is the one true AES algo- 
rithm. MARS, RC6, Serpent, and Twofish were only candidates. 
IDEA 
The European counterpart to the DES algorithm is the IDEA. Unlike DES, it is 
considerably faster and more secure. IDEA's enhanced speed is due to the fact that 
each round consists of simpler operations than in the Fiestel cycle in DES. IDEA 
uses simple operations like exclusive or (XOR), addition, and multiplication, which 
are more efficient to implement in software than the substitution and permutation 
operations of DES. Addition and multiplication are the two simplest binary calcula- 
tions for a computer to perform. XOR is also a simple operation that returns a "1" 
when two inputs are different, and a "0" when both inputs are the same. 
IDEA operates on 64-bit blocks with a 128-bit key, and the 
encryption/decryption process uses eight rounds with six 16-bit subkeys per round. 
The IDEA algorithm is patented both in the U.S. and in Europe, but free non- 
commercial use is also permitted. IDEA is widely recognized as one of t]he compo- 
nents of Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) (covered in Chapter 3). IDEA was developed 
in the early 1990s by cryptographer's James Massey and Xuejia Lai as part of a 
combined research project between Ascom and the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology. 

Basis of Cryptography ~ Chapter 9 
533 
Asymmetric Encryption Algorithms 
The biggest disadvantage to using symmetric encryption algorithms relates to key 
management. In order to ensure confidentiality of communication between two par- 
ties, each communicating pair needs to have a unique secret key. As the number of 
communicating pairs increases, there is a need to manage a number of keys related 
to the square of the communicators, which quickly becomes a complex problem. 
Asymmetric algorithms were developed to overcome this limitation. Also know as 
public-key cryptography, these algorithms use two different keys to encrypt and 
decrypt information. If cleartext is encrypted with an entity's public key, it can only 
be decrypted with its private key, and if it is encrypted with the private key, it can 
only be decrypted by the public key. The basic principle is that the public hey can be 
freely distributed, while the private key must be held in strict confidence. The owner 
of the private key can encrypt cleartext to create cyphertext that can only be 
decoded with its public key (assuring the identity of the source), or it can use the 
private key to decrypt cyphertext encoded with its public key (assuring the confi- 
dentiality of the data). Although these keys are generated together and are mathe- 
matically related, the private key cannot be derived from the public key. 
www.syngress.com 

534 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
Literally thousands of different cryptographic algorithms have been 
developed over the years. Cryptographic algorithms can be classified as 
follows" 
9 Encryption Algorithms Used to encrypt data and provide con- 
fidentiality 
9 Signature Algorithms Used to digitally "sign" data to provide 
authentication 
9 Hashing Algorithms Used to provide data integrity 
Algorithms (ciphers) are also categorized by the way they work at 
the technical level (stream ciphers and block ciphers). This categoriza- 
tion refers to whether the algorithm is applied to a stream of data, 
operating on individual bits, or to an entire block of data. Stream 
ciphers are faster, because they work on smaller units of data. The key is 
generated as a keystream, which is combined with the plaintext to be 
encrypted. RC4 is the most commonly used stream cipher. Another is 
ISAAC. 
Block ciphers take a block of plaintext and turn it into a block of 
ciphertext. (Usually the block is 64 or 128 bits in size.) Common block 
ciphers include DES, CAST, Blowfish, IDEA, RC5/RC6, and SAFER. Most 
AES candidates are block ciphers. 
Instead of relying on the techniques of substitution and transposition that sym- 
metric key cryptography uses, asymmetric algorithms rely on the use of large- 
integer mathematics problems. Many of these problems are simple to do in one 
direction but difficult to do in the opposite direction. For example, it is easy to 
multiply two numbers together, but it is more difficult to factor them back into the 
original numbers, especially if the integers used contain hundreds of digits. Thus, in 
general, the security of asymmetric algorithms is dependent not upon the feasibility 
of brute-force attacks, but the feasibility of performing difficult mathematical 
inverse operations and advances in mathematical theory that may propose new 
"shortcut" techniques. 
Asymmetric cryptography is much slower than symmetric cryptography. There 
are several reasons for this. First, it relies on exponentiation of both a secret and 
public exponent, as well as generation of a modulus. Computationally, exponentia- 
tion is a processor-intensive operation. Second, the keys used by asymmetric algo- 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
535 
rithms are generally larger than those used by symmetric algorithms, because the 
most common asymmetric attack (factoring) is more efficient than the most 
common symmetric attack (brute-force). 
Because of this, asymmetric algorithms are typically used only for encrypting 
small amounts of information. In this section, we examine the RSA, Diffie- 
Hellman, and E1 Gamal algorithms. 
If this is your first exposure to cryptography, make sure you understand 
the differences between public keys, private keys, and secret keys. 
Asymmetric algorithms use two keys, a private key and a public key, one 
of which does the encryption and the other the decryption. Symmetric 
algorithms use a single secret key, shared between the two parties, to 
perform both the encryption and the decryption. Secret keys and private 
keys need to be closely guarded, while public keys can be given out 
freely. 
Diffie-Hellman 
The biggest problem in symmetric cryptography is the security of the secret key. 
Obviously, you cannot transmit the key over the same medium as the ciphertext, 
since any unauthorized parties observing the communications could use the key to 
decode the messages. Prior to the development of asymmetric cryptography and the 
Diffie-Hellman key exchange, secret keys were exchanged using trusted private 
couriers and other out-of-band methods. 
In the mid-1970s,Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman published the Diffie- 
Hellman algorithm for key exchange, which allowed a secret key to be transmitted 
securely over an insecure line. This was the first published use of public-key cryp- 
tography, and one of the cryptography field's greatest advances. With the Diffie- 
Hellman algorithm, the DES secret key (sent with a DES-encrypted payload 
message) could be encrypted via Diffie-Hellman by one party, and decrypted only 
by the intended recipient. 
Because of the inherent slowness of asymmetric cryptography, the Diffie- 
Hellman algorithm was not intended for use as a general encryption scheme. 
Rather, its purpose was to transmit a private key for DES (or a similar symmetric 
algorithm) across an insecure medium. In most cases, Diffie-Hellman is not used 
www.syngress.com 

536 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
for encrypting a complete message, because it is much slower than DES, depending 
on implementation. 
In practice, this is how a key exchange using Diffie-Hellman works" 
1. Two parties agree on two numbers; one is a large prime number, the other 
is a small integer number. This can be done in the open, as it does not 
affect security. 
2. Each of the two parties separately generate another number, which is kept 
secret. This number is equivalent to a private key. A calculation is made 
involving the private key and the previous two public numbers. The result 
is sent to the other party. This result is effectively a public key. 
3. The two parties exchange their public keys. They then perform a calcula- 
tion involving their own private key and the other party's public key. The 
resulting number is the session key. Each party should arrive at the same 
number. 
. 
The session key can be used as a secret key for another cipher, such as 
DES. No third party monitoring the exchange can arrive at the, same ses- 
sion key without knowing one of the private keys. 
The most difficult part of the Diffie-Hellman key exchange is to under- 
stand that there are two separate and independent encryption cycles 
happening. As far as Diffie-Hellman is concerned, only a small message 
is being transferred between the sender and the recipient. It just so hap- 
pens that this small message is the secret key needed to unlock the 
larger message. 
Diffie-Hellman's greatest strength is that anyone can know either or both of the 
sender's and recipient's public keys without compromising the security of the mes- 
sage. Both the public and private keys are actually very large integers. The Diffie- 
Hellman algorithm takes advantage of complex mathematical functions known as 
discrete logarithms, which are easy to perform forward, but extremely difficult to 
inverse. Secure Internet Protocol (IPSec) uses the Diffie-Hellman algorithm in 
conjunction with the Rivest, Shamir, & Adleman (RSA) authentication to 
exchange a session key used for encrypting all traffic that crosses the IPsec tunnel. 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
537 
E1 Gamal 
The E1 Gamal algorithm is essentially an updated and extended version of the orig- 
inal Diffie-Hellman algorithm based on discrete logarithms. The security of the 
algorithm is roughly on par with that of the RSA algorithm. E1 Gamal has a few 
drawbacks, mainly its larger output and random input requirement. Encrypted E1 
Gamal ciphertext is much longer than the original plaintext input, so it should not 
be used in places where bandwidth is a limiting factor, such as over slow wide area 
network (WAN) links. The E1 Gamal algorithm also requires a suitable source of 
randomness to function properly. It is worth noting that the Digital Signature 
Algorithm (DSA) was based on the E1 Gamal algorithm. DSA is a complementary 
protocol to RSA that is widely used in the OpenSSH implementation of the 
Secure Shell (SSH) protocol. 
RSA 
Shortly after the appearance of the Diffie-Hellman algorithm, Ron Rivest, Adi 
Shamir, and Leonard Adleman proposed another public key encryption system. 
Their proposal is now known as the RSA algorithm, named for the last initials of 
the researchers. 
Depending on the literature you read, public-key cryptography and 
public-key encryption systems are terms that are used interchangeably. 
The RSA algorithm shares many similarities with the Diffie-Hellman algorithm 
in that RSA is also based on multiplying and factoring large integers. However, 
RSA is significantly faster than Diffie-Hellman, leading to a split in the asymmetric 
cryptography field that refers to Diffie-Hellman and similar algorithms as Public 
Key Distribution Systems (PKDS), and RSA and similar algorithms as Public Key 
Encryption (PKE). PKDS systems are used as session-key exchange mechanisms, 
while PKE systems are considered fast enough to encrypt small messages. However, 
PKE systems like RSA are not considered fast enough to encrypt large amounts of 
data such as entire file systems or high-speed communications lines. 
www.syngress.com 

538 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
Hashing Algorithms 
Hashing is a technique in which an algorithm (also called a hash function) is applied 
to a portion of data to create a unique digital "fingerprint" that is a fixed-size vari- 
able. If anyone changes the data by so much as one binary digit, the hash function 
will produce a different output (called the hash value or a message digest) and the 
recipient will know that the data has been changed. Hashing can ensure integrity 
and provide authentication. The hash function cannot be "reverse-engineered"; that 
is, you can't use the hash value to discover the original data that was hashed. Thus, 
hashing algorithms are referred to as one-way hashes. A good hash function will not 
return the same result from two different inputs (called a collision). In other words, 
the collision domain of the function should be large enough to make it extremely 
unlikely to have a collision. All of the encryption algorithms studied so far, both 
symmetric and asymmetric, are reversible, (i.e., they can be converted from clear- 
text to ciphertext and back again, provided the appropriate keys are used). 
However, there is no reversible function for hashing algorithms, so original material 
cannot be recovered. For this reason, hashing algorithms are commonly referred to 
as one-way hashing, functions. However, irreversible encryption techniques are useful 
for determining data integrity and authentication. 

Basis of Cryptography ~ Chapter 9 
539 
Sometimes it is not necessary or even desirable to encrypt a complete set of 
data. Suppose someone wants to transmit a large amount of data, such as a CD 
image. If the data on the CD is not sensitive, they may not care that it is openly 
transmitted, but when the transfer is complete, they want to make sure the image 
you have is identical to the original image. The easiest way to make this compar- 
ison is to calculate a hash value on both images and compare results. If there is a 
discrepancy of even a single bit, the hash value of each will be radically different. 
Provided they are using a suitable hashing function, no two inputs will result in an 
identical output, or collision. The hashes created, usually referred to as digital finger- 
prints, are usually of a small, easily readable fixed size. Sometimes these hashes are 
referred to as secure checksums, because they perform similar functions as normal 
checksums, but are inherently more resistant to tampering. 
Encrypted passwords are often stored as hashes.When a password is set for a 
system, it is generally passed through a hashing function and only the encrypted 
hash is stored.When a person later attempts to authenticate, the password is hashed 
and that hash is compared to the stored hash. If these are the same, they are authen- 
ticated, otherwise access is rejected. In theory, if someone were to obtain a pass- 
word list for a system, it would be useless, since by definition it is impossible to 
recover the original information from its hashed value. However, attackers can use 
dictionary and brute-force attacks by methodically comparing the output hash of a 
known input string to the stolen hash. If they match, the password has been cracked. 
Thus, proper password length and selection is highly desirable. 
There are several different types of hashing, including division-remainder, digit 
rearrangement, folding, and radix transformation. These classifications refer to the 
www.syngress.com 

540 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
mathematical process used to obtain the hash value. Let's take a quick look at the 
hashing algorithms you are likely to encounter on the Security+ exam: 
9 Message Digest 4/Message Digest 5 (MD4/MD5) The message 
digest (MD) class of algorithms were developed by 1Kon 1Kivest for use 
with digital signatures. They both have a fixed 128-bit hash length, but the 
MD4 algorithm is flawed and the MD5 hash has been adopted as its 
replacement. 
9 
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) This hashing algorithm was created by 
the U.S. government (NIST and the National Security Agency [NSA]) 
and operates similarly to the MD algorithms. The most common is SHA- 
1, which is typically used in IPSec installations, and has a fixed hash length 
of 160 bits. There are other forms of the SHA algorithm that have dif- 
ferent hash lengths, but they are unlikely to be encountered on the 
Security+ exam. 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
541 
Concepts of Using Cryptography 
Cryptograph), is a word derived from the Greek kryptos ("hidden"), and the use of 
cryptography pre-dates the computer age by thousands of years. In fact, the history 
of cryptography was documented over 4000 years ago, where it was first allegedly 
used in Egypt.Julius Caesar even used his own cryptography called Caesar's Cipher. 
Basically, Caesar's Cipher rotated the letters of the alphabet to the right by three 
(e.g., S moves to V and E moves to/-/). By today's standards, the Caesar Cipher is 
extremely simplistic, but it served Julius just fine in his day. Keeping secrets has long 
been a concern of human beings, and the purpose of cryptography is to hide infor- 
mation or change it so that it is incomprehensible to people for whom it is not 
intended. Cryptographic techniques include: 
9 Encryption 
Involves applying a procedure called an algorithm to plaintext 
to turn it into something that will appear to be gibberish to anyone who 
doesn't have the key to decrypt it. 
9 
Steganography 
A means of hiding the existence of the data, not just its 
contents. This is usually done by concealing it within other, innocuous 
data. 
The words cryptography and encryption are often used interchangeably, 
but cryptography is a much broader term than encryption; encryption is 
a form of cryptography. In other words, all encryption is cryptography, 
but not all cryptography is encryption. 
This section looks at some of the concepts and motivating factors behind the 
use of cryptography. 
Confidentiality 
The first goal of cryptography is confidentiality (covered in Chapter I). Through the 
use of cryptography, users are able to ensure that only an intended recipient can 
"unlock" (decrypt) an encrypted message. Most modern algorithms are secure 
enough that those without access to the message "key" cannot read the message. 
Thus, it is extremely important to keep the secret key (when using symmetric algo- 
www.syngress.com 

542 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
rithms) or private key (when using asymmetric algorithms) completely secret. If a 
secret or private key is compromised, the message essentially loses all confidentiality. 
Do not confuse confidentiality with authentication. Whether or not a 
person is allowed access to something is part of the authentication and 
authorization processes. An analogy: You are throwing a part!/. Because 
your house got trashed the last time, you want to ensure that only 
people who are invited attend. That is confidentiality, because you 
decided up front who would be invited. When the people come, they 
have to present an invitation to the doorman. That is authentication, 
because each guest had to show proof that they are who they claim to 
be. In general, confidentiality is planned in advance while authentica- 
tion happens as a user attempts to access a system. 
Integrity 
Guaranteeing message integrity is another important aspect of cryptography. With 
cryptography, most asymmetric algorithms have built-in ways to validate that all the 
outputs are equivalent to the inputs. Usually, this validation is referred to as a mes- 
sage digest, and, on occasion, can be vulnerable to man-in-the-middle (MTM) attacks. 
(For more information on MTM attacks, please refer to the section later in this 
chapter and to Chapter 2.) 
Continued 

Basis of Cryptography ~ Chapter 9 
543 
Digital Signatures 
Digital signatures serve to enforce data integrity and non-repudiation. A digital sig- 
nature ensures that the message received was the message sent, because a hash was 
performed on the original message using a hashing algorithm. The hash value cre- 
ated by this process is encrypted by the author's private key and appended to the 
message. To verify that the message has not been modified, the recipient uses the 
author's public key to decrypt the hash created by the author. The recipient also 
creates a hash of the message body. If the recipient's hash matches the hash created 
by the author of the message, the recipient knows that the message is unaltered. 
Refer to Figure 9.2 for the digital signature verification process. 

544 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
Figure 9.2 Digital Signature Verification Process 
Digital signatures serve a similar purpose to physical signatures: identify 
an individual by something that is cheap and easy to leave behind, yet 
difficult to forge. Remember that a digitally scanned handwritten signa- 
ture is not the same as a digital signature in the cryptography or secu- 
rity sense. You may also need to know that digital signatures are 
considered legally binding in many states and countries. 
MITM Attacks 
Some types of asymmetric algorithms are immune to MITM attacks, which are only 
successful the first time two people try to communicate.When a third party inter- 
cepts the communications between the two trying to communicate, the attacker 
uses his own credentials to impersonate each of the original communicators. 
www.syngress.com 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
545 
Beware of the key exchange mechanism used by any PKE system. If the key 
exchange protocol does not authenticate at least one and preferably both sides of 
the connection, it may be vulnerable to MITM-type attacks. Authentication sys- 
tems generally use some form of digital certificates (usually X.509), and require a 
PKI infrastructure. 
Also, note that MITM-based attacks can only occur during the initial corre- 
spondence between two parties. If their first key exchange goes unimpeded, then 
each party will authenticate the other's key against prior communications to verify 
the sender's identity. 
Bad Kef Exchanges 
Because there isn't any authentication built into the Diffie-Hellman algorithm, 
implementations that use Dis 
key exchanges without some sort of 
authentication are vulnerable to MITM attacks. The most notable example of this 
type of behavior is the SSH-1 protocol. Since the protocol itself does not authenti- 
cate the client or the server, it's possible for someone to cleverly eavesdrop on the 
communications. This deficiency was one of the main reasons that the SSH-2 pro- 
tocol was completely redeveloped from SSH-1.The SSH-2 protocol authenticates 
both the client and the server, and warns of or prevents any possible MITM 
attacks, depending on configuration, so long as the client and server have commu- 
nicated at least once. However, even SSH-2 is vulnerable to MITM attacks prior to 
the first key exchange between the client and the server. 
As an example of a MITM-type attack, consider that someone called A1 is per- 
forming a standard Diffie-Hellman key exchange with Charlie for the very first 
time, while Beth is in a position such that all traffic between A1 and Charlie passes 
through her network segment. Assuming Beth doesn't interfere with the key 
exchange, she will not be able to read any of the messages passed between A1 and 
Charlie, because she will be unable to decrypt them. However, suppose that Beth 
intercepts the transmissions of A1 and Charlie's public keys and she responds to 
them using her own public key. A1 will think that Beth's public key is actually 
Charlie's public key and Charlie will think that Beth's public key is actually Al's 
public key. 
When M transmits a message to Charlie, he will encrypt it using Beth's public 
key. Beth will intercept the message and decrypt it using her private key. Once 
Beth has read the message, she encrypts it again using Charlie's public key and 
transmits the message on to Charlie. She may even modify the message contents if 
she so desires. Charlie then receives Beth's modified message, believing it to come 
www.syngress.com 

546 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
from A1. He replies to A1 and encrypts the message using Beth's public key. Beth 
again intercepts the message, decrypts it with her private key, and modifies it. Then 
she encrypts the new message with Al's public key and sends it on to A1, who 
receives it and believes it to be from Charlie. 
Clearly, this type of communication is undesirable, because a third party not 
only has access to confidential information, but she can also modify it at will. In 
this type of attack, no encryption is broken because Beth does not know either A1 
or Charlie's private keys, so the Diffie-Hellman algorithm isn't really at fault. 
Beware of the key exchange mechanism used by any PKE system. If the.' key 
exchange protocol does not authenticate at least one and preferably botJh sides of 
the connection, it may be vulnerable to MITM-type attacks.Authentication sys- 
tems generally use some form of digital certificates (usually X.509), such as those 
available from Thawte or VeriSign. 
Authentication 
Is the receiver able to verify the sender? The answer depends on the type of 
encryption. In cases of symmetric cryptography, the answer is no, but in cases of 
asymmetric cryptography, the answer is yes.With symmetric cryptography, anyone 
with access to the secret key can both encrypt and decrypt messages. Asymmetric 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
547 
cryptography can authenticate a sender by their private key, assuming that the key 
is kept private. Because each person is responsible for their own private key, only 
that person is able to decrypt messages encrypted with their public key. Similarly, 
only those persons can sign messages with their private key that are validated with 
their public key. 
Non-Repudiation 
Asymmetric cryptography ensures that an author cannot refute that they signed or 
encrypted a particular message once it has been sent, assuming the private key is 
secured. Again, this goes back to the fact that an individual should be the only 
person with access to their private key. If this is true, only that person could sign 
messages with their private key and therefore, by extension, all messages signed 
with their private key originated with that specific individual. 
Access Control 
Additionally, in limited ways, cryptography can provide users with some access con- 
trol mechanisms. Some systems can provide access control based on key signatures. 
Similar systems use X.509 certificates in the same manner. The idea is that, based 
on a certificate presented by a user that has been signed by that user, a particular 
user can be identified and authenticated. Once the authentication has occurred, 
software access controls can be applied to the user. 
One-time Pad 
There is a type of cryptography that has been mathematically proven to be 
unbreakable. The concept is called the one-time pad (OTP). It requires you to use a 
series of random numbers equal in length to the message you want to send. The 
problem with using this type of cryptography is that both sides need access to the 
random number generator, and the random number listings can never be reused. A 
suitable source of randomness that is truly random and unpredictable to put the 
concept to use has not been found. Considering that OTP's were created almost 
100 years ago, far before most modern cryptography techniques, and have been 
used in the military and intelligence communities for many years, it is a very inter- 
esting concept. 
The OTP algorithm is actually a Vernam cipher, which was developed by 
AT&T in 1917. The Vernam cipher belongs to a family of ciphers called stream 
ciphers, since they encrypt data in continuous stream format instead of the chunk- 
by-chunk method of block ciphers. There are two problems with using the OTP, 
www.syngress.com 

548 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
however:You must have a source of truly random data, and the source must be bit- 
for-bit as long as the message to be encoded.You also have to transmit both the 
message and the key (separately), the key must remain secret, and the key can never 
be reused to encode another message. If an eavesdropper intercepts two messages 
encoded with the same key, then it is trivial for the eavesdropper to recover the key 
and decrypt both messages. The reason OTP ciphers are not used more commonly 
is the difficulty in collecting truly random numbers for the key and the difficulty of 
the secure distribution of the key. 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
This chapter examined many of the common cryptography algorithms and con- 
cepts that help apply cryptography in situations where it is necessary and effective. 
It discussed three different classes of algorithms, including symmetric (also 
known as secret key), asymmetric (also known as public key), and hashing 
algorithms. 
Specifically, the symmetric cryptography algorithms studied included[ DES, 
3DES, AES (1Kijndael), and IDEA. The most important aspects of these symmetric 
algorithms is that they use a single key for both encryption and decryption, are 
generally fast, use small key sizes (generally around 128 bits), and are vulnerable to 
brute-force attacks. 
The three asymmetric algorithms studied were 1KSA, Diffie-Hellman, and E1 
Gamal. Asymmetric algorithms use a combination of keys for encryption and 
decryption, are relatively slow, use large key sizes (greater than 512 bits), and are 
vulnerable to factoring-based attacks and mathematical discoveries. Some of the 
hashing algorithms looked at included MD4, MD5, and SHA-1. Hashing algo- 
rithms are most often used to verify file integrity and to encrypt system passwords. 
Also explored were some of the concepts behind cryptography, including confi- 
dentiality, integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation. Confidentiality is the idea 
that information should only be accessible by those with a "need to know," and 
authentication is the act of verifying that a person or process is whom they claim 
to be. Integrity means that a message has remained unmodified since the author 
sent it, and non-repudiation is a corollary of integrity that prevents an author from 
denying that a message or part of its contents were sent. Some of these concepts 
also tie into the discussions of digital signatures. Digital signatures are a public key 
cryptography application that uses the concepts of confidentiality, integrity, and 
non-repudiation to create an accountable messaging system. Some cryptography 
attacks were discussed, such as the MITM attack, which is a common attack against 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
549 
asymmetric encryption that allows a third party to eavesdrop on the initial commu- 
nications between two parties. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Algorithms 
gl 
r-el 
For the Security + exam, you need to know the general principles behind 
symmetric algorithms. Symmetric algorithms are relatively fast and use 
only a single key for both encryption and decryption. A single key for 
each communicating pair leads to complex key management issues. Some 
examples of symmetric algorithms are DES, 3DES, AES, and IDEA. 
For the Security + exam you need to know the general principles behind 
asymmetric algorithms.Asymmetric algorithms use a separate key for both 
the encryption and decryption processes, are relatively slow, and the 
concepts are newer than those of symmetric algorithms. Some examples of 
asymmetric algorithms include Diffie-Hellman, RSA, and E1 Gamal. 
For the Security + exam you need to know the general principles behind 
hashing algorithms. Hashing algorithms are used to create secure fixed- 
length checksums, which are often used for integrity verification. Some 
examples include MD4, MD5, and SHA-1. 
Concepts of Using Cryptography 
gl Digital signatures are an application of public-key cryptography that can 
prove a message came from a specific person and verify that the text of the 
recipient's message matches the text of the sender's message. 
El Confidentiality within the context of cryptography is the idea that 
information can only be accessed by people with a need to know. 
Integrity within the context of cryptography is the idea that a message has 
been received in its original unmodified form after transmission. 
Authentication is the act of verifying that a person or process is whom it 
claims to be. 
v------d Non-repudiation is a subset of integrity that prevents an author from 
denying that he or she wrote a particular message. 
www.syngress.com 


Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
551 
principle is that with algorithms like 3DES, AES, and RSA, decrypting a single 
piece of information will take tens, hundreds, or thousands of years. By that 
time, it is assumed that the information will no longer be valuable. 
Q 
I 
A: 
Are there any cryptography techniques which are 100 percent secure? 
Yes. Only the OTP algorithm is absolutely unbreakable if implemented cor- 
rectly. The OTP algorithm is actually a Vernam cipher, which was developed by 
AT&T in 1917. The Vernam cipher belongs to a family of ciphers called stream 
ciphers, since they encrypt data in continuous stream format instead of the 
chunk-by-chunk method of block ciphers.There are two problems with using 
the OTP, however:You must have a source of truly random data, and the source 
must be bit-for-bit as long as the message to be encoded.You also have to 
transmit both the message and the key (separately), the key must remain secret, 
and the key can ne~er be reused to encode another message. If an eavesdropper 
intercepts two messages encoded with the same key, then it is trivial for the 
eavesdropper to recover the key and decrypt both messages. The reason OTP 
ciphers are not used more commonly is the difficulty in collecting truly 
random numbers for the key (as mentioned in one of the sidebars for this 
chapter) and the difficulty of the secure distribution of the key. 
Q- How long are DES and 3DES expected to remain in use? 
A" Most systems are capable of either 3DES or AES encryption. Both are consid- 
ered secure and reliable, and no computer system in use today can crack them 
for the foreseeable future. DES, on the other hand, can already be broken 
within a day, so its use is highly discouraged.With high performance machines 
and dedicated processors and card, there should be no reason to use DES. 
Q: 
A: 
Why was the Content Scrambling System (CSS), the encryption technology 
used to protect DVDs from unauthorized copying, able to be broken so easily? 
Basically, DVD copy protection was broken so easily because one entity, Xing 
Technologies, left their key lying around in the open, which as we saw in this 
chapter, is a cardinal sin. The data encoded on a DVD-Video disc is encrypted 
using the CSS algorithm, which can be unlocked using a 40-bit key. Using 
Xing's 40-bit key, hackers were able to brute force and guess at the keys for 
over 170 other licensees at a rapid pace. That way, since the genie was out of 
the bottle, so to speak, for so many vendors, the encryption for the entire 
format was basically broken. With so many keys to choose from, others in the 
www.syngress.com 

552 
Chapter 9 ~ Basis of Cryptography 
underground had no difficulty in leveraging these keys to develop the CSS pro- 
gram, which allows data copied off of the DVD to be saved to anotlher media 
in an unencrypted format. Ultimately, the CSS scheme was doomed[ to failure. 
You can't put a key inside millions of DVD players, distribute them, and not 
expect someone to eventually pull it out. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
Algorithm Questions 
1. You have selected to use 3DES as the encryption algorithm for your company's 
Virtual Private Network (VPN).Which of the following statements about 
3DES are true? 
A. 3DES requires significantly more calculation than most other algorithms. 
B. 3DES is vulnerable to brute-force attacks. 
C 
3DES is an example of a symmetric algorithm. 
D 
3DES can be broken in only a few days using state-of-the-art techniques. 
2. What is the purpose of a hash algorithm? (Select all that apply) 
A. To encrypt e-mail. 
B. To encrypt short phrases in a one-way fashion. 
C. To create a secure checksum. 
D. To obscure an identity. 
3. Widgets GmbH is a German defense contractor.What algorithms are they most 
likely to use to secure their VPN connections? (Choose all that apply). 
A. 3DES 
B. E1Gamal 
C. AES 
D. IDEA 

Basis of Cryptography 9 Chapter 9 
553 
o The primary limitation of symmetric cryptography is: 
A. Key size 
B. Processing power 
C. Key distribution 
D. Brute-force attacks 
~ Which two of the following items most directly affect the security of an algo- 
rithm? 
A~ 
Bo 
C~ 
Do 
The skill of the attacker 
The key size 
The security of the private or secret key 
The resources of the attacker 
, 
o 
Which of the following encryption methods is the most secure for encrypting a 
single message? 
A. Hash ciphers 
B. OTPs 
C. Asymmetric cryptography 
D. Symmetric cryptography 
You have downloaded a CD ISO image and want to verify its integrity. What 
should you do? 
A. Compare the file sizes. 
B. Burn the image and see if it works. 
C. Create an MD5 sum and compare it to the MD5 sum listed where the 
image was downloaded. 
D. Create an MD4 sum and compare it to the MD4 sum listed where the 
image was downloaded. 
r 
www.syngress.com 

554 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
~ 
. 
If you wanted to encrypt a single file for your own personal use, wh,.at type of 
cryptography would you use? 
A. A proprietary algorithm 
B. A digital signature 
C. A symmetric algorithm 
D. An asymmetric algorithm 
Which of the following algorithms are available for commercial use without a 
licensing fee? (Select all that apply) 
A. RSA 
B. DES 
C. IDEA 
D. AES 
10. Which of the following characteristics does a one-way function exhibit? (Select 
all that apply) 
A. Easily reversible 
B. Unable to be easily factored 
C. Rarely get the same output for any two inputs 
D. Difficult to determine the input given the output 
11. The process of using a digital signature to verify a person's credentials is called: 
A. Mertness 
B. Integration 
C. Authentication 
D. Authorization 
12. A message is said to show integrity if the recipient receives an exact copy of 
the message sent by the sender.Which of the following actions violates the 
integrity of a message? (Choose all that apply) 
A. Compressing the message 
B. Spell checking the message and correcting errors 
C. Editing the message 
D. Appending an extra paragraph to a message 

Basis of Cryptography ~ Chapter 9 
555 
13. Why is it important to safeguard confidentiality? (Select all that apply) 
A. Because some information, such as medical records, is personal and should 
only be disclosed to necessary parties to protect an individual's privacy. 
B. Because certain information is proprietary and could damage an organiza- 
tion if it were disclosed to the wrong parties. 
C. Certain information might be dangerous in the wrong hands, so it should 
be guarded closely to protect the safety of others. 
D. Information leaks of any sort may damage an organization's reputation. 
14. How can cryptography be used to implement access control? 
A. By having people sign on using digital certificates, then placing restrictions 
on a per-certificate basis that allows access only to a specified set of 
resources. 
B. By using a symmetric algorithm and only distributing the key to those you 
want to have access to the encrypted information. 
C. By digitally signing all documents. 
D. By encrypting all documents. 
15. You receive a digitally signed e-mail message.Which of the following actions 
can the author take? 
A. Send you another unsigned message. 
B. Dispute the wording in parts of the message. 
C. Claim the message was not sent. 
D. Revoke the message. 
www.syngress.com 

556 
Chapter 9 9 Basis of Cryptography 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. A, C, and B 
9. A, B and D 
2. B and C 
10. C and D 
3. CandD 
11. C 
4. C 
12. B, C, and D 
5. BandC 
13. A,B,C, andD 
6. B 
14. A 
7. C 
15. A 
8. C 

Chapter 10 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
9 
PKI 
Key Management Lifecycle 
Exam Objectives Review" 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
Self Test 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
557 

558 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Introduction 
From its earliest days in academia, the Internet was designed with the assumption 
that it was something akin to a "private club," with the main goal being the free 
exchange of ideas and information. Although many of the research partners 
engaged in developing the networking protocols underlying the Internet were from 
the United States government's Department of Defense, protection was assumed to 
be present by the sheer complexity and innovativeness of the network itself, and an 
unstated assumption that "gentleman engineers" would not engage in deceitful 
endeavors.With the birth of the World Wide Web (the "Web") in the early 1990s, 
the Internet was opened up to anyone and everyone, and it soon became clear that 
something would need to be done to allow users, public and technical alike, to 
confirm that they were communicating with correctly identified parties. 
A related goal was to allow for the secret transmission of data across networks 
that were assumed to be publicly open and under attack by people monitoring 
and/or altering the traffic flowing across them. The protection from monitoring 
and alteration attacks has already been discussed in the chapter on cryptography, 
and the identification of communicating parties was achieved through protocols 
that allow for Public Key Infrastructures (PKIs) to be created and used. 
The Security+ exam covers PKI completely, due to its extensive integration 
into modern networks for security purposes. The Security+ exam also covers the 
components of PKI, such as certificates, trust models, and specialized servers. The 
Security+ exam tests your knowledge of key management and certificate lifecycle 
issues, including storage, revocation, renewal, and suspension. To survive in this 
evolving world of network security, you need to have a proficient understanding of 
PKI, not only as it is currently implemented in technology, but also as a conceptual 
framework that will be used regardless of the underlying technology. 
PKI 
With the incredible growth of the Internet, there is an increasing need for entities 
(people, computers, or companies) to prove their identity. As the old New Yorker 
cartoon has it,"On the Internet, no one knows you're a dog"- anyone ,can be sit- 
ting behind a keyboard at the other end of a transaction or communication, so 
who is responsible for verifying their credentials, and how can those credentials be 
reliably verified? 
PKI was developed to solve this very problem. The PKI identification process is 
based on the use of unique identifiers known as keys. Each person using PKI cre- 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
559 
ates two different keys, a public key and a private key, which are mathematically 
related; they are a key pair. The public key is openly available to the public, while 
only the person the keys were created for knows the private key. This may sound 
simple--public key is public, private key is kept secret~but it is common for indi- 
viduals to make the mistake of sending their private keys to others to decrypt files, 
or to carefully guard their public key. Never give your private key to anyone; it is 
yours alone, and when used to identify you, can only identify you if you are the 
only person who has ever held that key. Through the use of these keys, messages 
can be encrypted and decrypted to transfer messages in confidence. Messages can also 
be signed, to prove that they are unaltered from the version that you sent. 
Public keys are generally transported and stored in a document known as a "cer- 
tificate." To vouch for that identity, certificates are signed either by the certificate 
owner (a self-signed cert!ficate), or by another party who is already trusted. 
PKI has become such an integrated part of Internet communications that most 
users are unaware that they use it every time they access the Web. PKI is not lim- 
ited to the Web; applications such as Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) also use a form of 
PKI for e-mail protection; FTP over SSL/TLS uses PKI, and most other protocols 
have the ability to manage identities through the management and exchange of 
keys and certificates. 
So, what exactly is PKI and how does it work? Public key Infrastructure, or 
PKI, is a term for any system that associates public keys with identified users or sys- 
tems, and validates that association. 
For details on symmetric and asymmetric algorithms, please refer to 
Chapter 9. 
There are several different kinds of PKI. The most widely used is based on a 
hierarchical model of trust, but there are several different trust models that can be 
used to form a PKI. 
Trust Models 
Before looking at trust models, let's look at the word "trust" itself. The idea behind 
"trust" is that one party will automatically rely on another party to take an action 
or provide information on their behalf. Assuming that the trusted party (Tim) is 
www.syngress.com 

560 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
relied on, or trusted, by the relying party (Amanda), a one-way trust relationship is 
formed. Likewise, if Amanda is relied on by Tim, a two-way trust relations,hip is 
formed. In a marriage, a husband and wife rely on each other to act on their 
behalf. They have formed a two-way trust relationship (see Figure 10.1). 
Figure 10.1 A Two-Way Trust Relationship 
In a two-way trust, you simply trust someone (or something) whom you can 
directly identify (e.g., a computer trusting a keyboard's input because it ihas sent a 
known user's password, or a gas station trusting you to pump gas, because it has 
received your credit card information). This can be exercised as a very limited form 
of PKI, wherein each party gives its public key, perhaps in a self-signed certificate, to 
the other party to the trust, and these are used to confirm identity in future trusted 
transactions. 
Not all trusts need to be two-way. A simplistic example is if Bob trusts 
information he reads in his morning paper; he can identify the source of 
this information, and he believes it to be correct. Bob has established a 
one-way trust relationship that indicates he trusts the newspaper. The 
newspaper publishers, on the other hand, have not trusted Bob at all. 
Trust can be spread wider than an immediate connection, and is said to be 
based on the locality of the parties.When you are closer to directly identifying a 
person or object, you are more likely to have a higher confidence in them. For 
example, Tim's wife, Amanda, wants to host a dinner at their house.Amanda wants 
to invite her best friend, Kate; Tim's trust of his wife, and his knowledge of her 
trust of Kate, allows him to trust that she is a worthy dinner guest. Kate asks if she 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
561 
can bring her boyfriend, Mike. Although Tim does not know Kate's boyfriend, he 
still has a level of confidence in him because of the chain of trust established first 
through his wife, then Kate, and lastly to Kate's boyfriend. This type of indirect 
trust relationship is known as a transitive trust (see Figure 10.6). By a similar chain, 
Mike trusts that he will be comfortable at the dinner because Kate has vouched for 
Amanda, and Amanda vouches for Tim. 
A more technological example of transitive trust is in a Windows Forest, where 
a domain will trust any other domain in the forest, by virtue of transitive trust 
through their parent domains. 
Figure 10.2 A Chain of Trust 
Web-of-trust Model 
In our example above of transitive trust being developed into a chain of trust, it's 
obvious to see that if Amanda meets Mike at the dinner, and recognizes him as 
someone with whom she works, Tim's trust of Mike will increase- Mike has been 
identified as somewhat trustworthy by someone Tim trusts greatly, as well as being 
identified as very trustworthy by someone with whom Tim already has a level of 
trust with. As more complex relationships occur, we find that we trust individuals 
based not only on a direct chain of trust, but on a number of chains of trust, of 
www.syngress.com 

562 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
differing lengths.You can picture these trust relationships as a huge Web of links 
between individuals. This is how the "Web-of-trust" model comes about. 
In the Web-of-trust (or mesh) model (see Figure 10.3), key holders 'vouch for 
one another, thereby validating public keys based on their own knowledge of the 
key owner. The encryption program, PGP, which encrypts and decrypts e-mail, is 
based on the Web-of-trust model. Certificates are individually held so that if one 
person certifies someone of a questionable nature, not everyone in the ~reb-of-trust 
will do so as well, and there will be less chance of any random user trusting that 
person. The Web-of-trust model works well with smaller groups who have estab- 
lished a relationship (e.g., the regular appearance of"key signing parties" at tech- 
nical conferences, where people will identify themselves to one another and sign 
one another's keys). This creates many more links in the Web-of-trust. 
Figure 10.3 A Web-of-trust Model 
Single Certificate Authority Model 
Having said that Web-of-trust works well for small groups with the ability to rec- 
ognize one another's relationships, the obvious question to ask is how PKI can 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
563 
address the needs of the wider world, Where there is perceived to be a need to trust 
parties based on their assessment by a recognized authority. When I hire a techni- 
cian to repair my heating unit, I want to know that he has been certified by the 
state to do the work properly, without creating a lethal carbon-monoxide leak. For 
more minor work, I'm comfortable knowing that he did a good job at a neighbor's 
house, using the Web-of-trust. This example demonstrates that the solution is to 
create a Certification Authority (CA) who will vouch for credentials possessed by a 
party to a trust. 
Single CA models (see Figure 10.4) are very simplistic; only one CA is used 
within a public-key infrastructure. Anyone who needs to trust parties vouched for 
by the CA is given the public key for the CA using an out-@band method. (Out- 
of-band means that the key is not transmitted through the media or connection 
that the end user intends to use with the certificate.) 
Figure 10.4 A Single CA Model 
Hierarchical Model 
In a hierarchical model, a root CA functions as a top-level authority over one or more 
levels of CAs beneath it, called subordinate CAs. The root CA also functions as a 
trust anchor to the CA's beneath it, and to the users who trust the root CA.A trust 
www.syngress.com 

564 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
anchor is an entity known to be trusted without requiring that it be trusted by 
another party, and therefore can be used as a base for trusting other parties. Going 
back to the example of Tim, his wife Amanda would be the trust anchor, since Tim 
has trust in her without referring to his trust in anyone else. In terms of" the PKI, 
the root CA is the most trusted, and is the trust anchor. 
Since there is nothing above the root CA, no one can vouch for its identity; it 
must create a self-signed certificate to vouch for itself. With a self-signed certificate, 
both the certificate issuer and the certificate subject are exactly the same. Being the 
trust anchor, the root CA must make its own certificate available to all of the users 
(including subordinate CAs) that will ultimately be using the root CA. 
Under the root CA comes one or more intermediate CAs. In most hierarchies, 
there is more than one intermediate CA. The intermediate CA is responsible for 
issuing certificates to the CAs below them, known as leaf CAs. Leaf CA's are 
responsible for issuing certificates to end users, servers, and other entities that use 
certificates. The hierarchical model is the most popular model used today and is 
shown in Figure 10.5. 
www.syngress.com 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
565 
Figure 10.5 A Hierarchical Model 
Hierarchical models work well in larger hierarchical environments, such as large 
government organizations or corporate environments. In situations where different 
organizations are trying to develop a hierarchical model together (such as compa- 
nies that have merged or formed partnerships), a hierarchical model can be night- 
marish for the simple reason that it can be difficult to get all parties to agree on 
one single trust anchor. 
PKI in a hierarchical CA model is made up of several different components, 
typically CA's, Registration Authorities (RA's), Directory Services, and optionally, 
Timestamping Services. 
The centerpiece of PKI is the CA, which functions as the management center 
for dig, ital certificates. Digital certificates are collections of predefined information 
that is related to a public key. 
Some PKI implementations also use one or more RA's. An RA is used to take 
some of the burden off of the CA by handling verification of credentials prior to 
certificates being issued. In a single CA model, a RA can be used for verifying the 
identity of a subscriber, as well as setting up the preliminary trust relationship 
between the CA and the end user. 
An RA is generally an out-of-band service provider, whose task is usually to 
verify identity documentation before confirming that a CA may issue a certificate. 

566 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
The RA is usually a physical outlet, at which a party will present itself, its docu- 
mentation, and its certificate request. The RA verifies the physical documentation, 
ensures that it matches the information in the certificate request, and that the doc- 
umentation is sufficient to prove the identity claimed by the desired certificate. The 
RA typically also takes payment on behalf of itself and the CA, and on the basis of 
complete identification and payment, will request the CA to issue the requested 
certificate. 
RAs are found in stand-alone or hierarchical models where the workload of the 
CA may need to be offloaded to other servers. 
Make sure you understand the difference between a CA and a RA. You 
will need to know when a RA would be used within a PKI. 
Since many PKI implementations become very large, there must be a system in 
place to manage the issuance, revocation, and general management of certificates. 
PKI, being a public key infrastructure, must generally also be able to store certificates 
and public keys in a directory that is publicly accessible, the director), service. 
The private and public key of a key pair are created at the same time, using a 
predetermined algorithm. Ideally, the keys are created by the person who will be 
holding the private key, so that it can be ensured that nobody else ever touches the 
private key. Some CA services provide for the CA to create public and private keys, 
as well as the certificate signing request, on behalf of the key holder, and will then 
send the private key and issued certificate to the key holder, generally as a Personal 
Information Exchange (PFX) file. This is a convenience for those certificate 
requestors who are willing to sacrifice the security of being the only parties to 
know their private key, so that they may get a certificate without having to know 
the process involved. 
The private key is created by (or given by the CA to) the person, computer, or 
company that is attempting to establish its credentials. The public key is then stored 
in its certificate in a directory that is readily accessible by any party wishing to 
verify the credentials of the certificate holder. For example, if Ben wants to estab- 
lish secure communications with Jerry, he can obtain Jerry's public key (:from the 
CA, from a third party, or direct from Ben) and encrypt a message to him using 
Jerry's public key. If Ben is authenticating himself to Jerry (called mutual authentica- 
tion), Ben signs his message using his own private key. When Jerry receives the 
www.syngress.com 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
567 
message, he can check Ben's signature and validate Ben's public key with the CA, 
by verifying that Ben's certificate has been signed by the CA, and that the CA has 
not revoked this certificate. Assuming the CA responds that the certificate is valid, 
Jerry then decrypts the message with his own private key (see Figure 10.6). 
Because the certificate contains only publicly available information, including the 
certificate subject's public key, there is no reason that the certificate shouldn't be 
distributed by and to anyone; the CA's signature in the certificate guarantees its 
authenticity, no matter what the source. 
Figure 10.6 The PKI Key Exchange 
Let's look at PKI with a non-technical analogy. Let's say that in anticipation of 
the big raise you are going to receive once you pass the Security+ exam, you 
decide to go to the local electronics store and purchase a new high-definition tele- 
vision set.You decide to purchase it with a personal check.You give your check 
and driver's license to the clerk for processing of the transaction. The clerk verifies 
the check by comparing the information on the check with the information on 
your license. 
What happened here? How does this relate to PKI? 
You decided which television you wanted to purchase, and brought it to the 
clerk.You initiated the transaction with the clerk. The clerk now is a relying 
www.syngress.com 

568 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
party, meaning that he is going to rely on the accuracy of the information on 
your driver's license. 
The clerk asked for your driver's license. At this point, the clerk requested a 
certificate that was issued by a trusted authority. 
9 
The clerk verifies the check by validating the information on your license, 
which has been issued by a trusted authority (the Department of ;Motor 
Vehicles). At this point, the clerk validates your certificate. 
9 
After validating your information, the clerk trusts you and completes the 
transaction. The clerk gives you the new television. 
Certificates 
In our example, we compared a digital certificate to a driver's license (see Figure 
10.7).A digital certificate is the tool used for binding a public key with a particular 
owner. Let's compare the information on a digital certificate with the information 
on a driver's license. 
The information listed on a driver's license is: 
9 
Name 
9 
Address 
9 
Date of birth 
9 
Photograph 
9 
Signature 
9 
Social security number (or another unique number) 
9 
Expiration date 
9 
Signature/certification by an authority (the seal of the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts) 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
569 
Figure 10.7 A Sample Driver's License 
Why is this information important? Because it provides crucial information 
about the certificate owner. The signature from a state official, or a trusted authority, 
states that the information provided by the certificate owner has been verified and 
is legitimate, in as much as the trusted authority was able to verify it. 
Remembering the difference between the CA and the 1KA, the CA here is the 
government department that oversees the issuance of the driver's license, whereas 
the 1KA is the individual Registry of Motor Vehicles' office to which you took your 
identifying information when you got your license. 
Digital certificates work in almost exactly the same manner, using unique char- 
acteristics to describe the identification of a certificate owner. The information 
contained in the certificate is part of the X.509 certificate standard, which is dis- 
cussed in the following section. 
X.509 
Before discussing X.509, it is important to know that it was developed from the 
X.500 standard. X.500 is a directory service standard that was ratified by the 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU-T) in 1988 and modified in 1993 
and 1997. It was intended to provide a means of developing an easy-to-use elec- 
tronic directory of people that would be available to all Internet users. 
The X.500 directory standard specifies a common root of a hierarchical tree. 
Contrary to its name, the root of the tree is depicted at the top level, and all other 
containers (which are used to create "branches") are below it. There are several 
types of containers with a specific naming convention. In this naming convention, 
each portion of a name is specified by the abbreviation of the object type or con- 
tainer it represents. A CN = before a username represents it is a "common name," a 
C = precedes a "country," and an O = precedes "organization." Compared to 
www.syngress.com 

570 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Internet Protocol (IP) domain names (e.g., host.subdomain.domain) the X.500 ver- 
sion of CN=host/C=US/O=Org appears excessively complicated. 
An old joke goes something like this: If two people with Internet-style e-mail 
addresses want to exchange e-mails, they simply send messages to each other from 
the information on the other person's business card. If two people wish to 
exchange e-mails, and one has an X.500 style address, he will send a message to the 
person with the Internet-style e-mail address, and won't expect to receive anything 
until he has done so. If both people have X.500 e-mail addresses, they resort to 
using a fax machine. 
Each X.500 local directory is considered a directory system agent (DSA). The 
DSA can represent either single or multiple organizations. Each DSA connects to 
the others through a directory information tree (DIT), which is a hierarchical 
naming scheme that provides the naming context for objects within a directory. 
X.509 is the standard used to define what makes up a digital certificate. Section 
11.2 of X.509 describes a certificate as allowing an association between a user's dis- 
tinguished name (DN) and the user's public key. The DN is specified by a naming 
authority (NA) and used as a unique name by the CA who will create the certifi- 
cate.A common X.509 certificate includes the following information (see Figures 
10.8 and 10.9): 
9 
Serial Number A unique identifier. 
9 
Subject The name of the person or company that is being identified. 
(Sometimes listed as "Issued To") 
9 Signature Algorithm The algorithm used to create the signature. 
9 
Issuer The trusted authority that verified the information and generated the 
certificate. (Sometimes listed as "Issued By") 
9 Valid From The date the certificate was activated. 
9 Valid to The last day the certificate can be used. 
9 
Public Key The public key that corresponds to the private key. 
9 Thumbprint Algorithm The algorithm used to create the unique value of 
a certificate. 
9 
Thumbprint 
The unique value of every certificate, which positively identi- 
fies the certificate. If there is ever a question about the authenticity of a cer- 
tificate, check this value with the issuer. 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
571 
Figure 10.8 The "General" Tab of a Certificate 
Figure 10.9 The "Details" Tab of a Certificate 
www.syngress.com 

572 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
REVIEWING A DIGITAL CERTIFICATE 
Let's take a moment to go on the Internet and look at a digital certifi- 
cate. 
1. Open up your Web browser, and go to www.syngress.com. 
2. Select a book and add it to your cart. 
3. Proceed to the checkout. 
4. Once you are at the checkout screen, you will see a padlock in 
your browser. In Internet Explorer 7, this will be to the right of 
the address box; older browsers place the padlock in the bottom 
right of the window frame. Open the certificate properties. In 
Internet Explorer 7, you do this by clicking on the padlock and 
selecting "View Certificates" from the prompt; older browsers 
generally let you double-click on the padlock. 
5. Move around the tabs of the Properties screen to look at the dif- 
ferent information contained within a certificate. 
Certificate Policies 
Now that you know what a digital certificate is and what it is comprised of, what 
exactly can a digital certificate be issued for? A CA can issue a certificate.' for a 
number of different reasons, but must indicate exactly what the certificate will be 
used for. The set of rules that indicates exactly how a certificate may be used (what 
purpose it can be trusted for, or perhaps the community for which it can be 
trusted) is called a certificate policy. The X.509 standard defines certificate ]policies as 
"a named set of rules that indicates the applicability of a certificate to a particular 
community and/or class of application with common security requirements." 
Different entities have different security requirements. For example, users want 
a digital certificate for securing e-mail (either encrypting incoming e-mail or 
signing outgoing e-mail), Syngress (as other Web vendors do) wants a digital certifi- 
cate for their online store, and a video hardware manufacturer wants a digital cer- 
tificate they can use to verify that their hardware drivers have passed stringent 
verification tests and can be trusted. All three want to secure their information, and 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
573 
certificate owners will use the policy information to determine if they want to 
accept a certificate. 
The certificate policy is a plaintext document that is assigned a unique object 
identifier (OLD) so that anyone can reference it.There are many standard certificate 
policies, but there may be more developed as time goes on. 
If a certificate is issued for a public key, and the certificate policy states that this 
certificate can be used for document signing, you should not be allowed to encrypt 
data using that public key. Even if you were able to do so, the recipient would 
likely not be able to decrypt it. (Since keys are simply numbers, it's technically pos- 
sible that the keys could be extracted from the certificate and used against the cer- 
tificate policy. Developers should not write code that does this.) 
Certificate Practice Statements 
It is important to have a policy in place to state what is going to be done, but it is 
equally important to explain exactly how to implement those policies. This is 
where the Certificate Practice Statement (CPS) comes in.A CPS describes how 
the CA plans to manage the certificates it issues. If a CA does not have a CPS 
available, or does not trust the practices described in the CPS as being secure 
enough, users should consider finding another CA, and not trusting certificates 
signed by that CA's root certificate. 
www.syngress.com 

574 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Make sure you understand how a certificate policy differs from a CPS. 
Revocation 
Certificates are revoked when the information contained in the certificate is no 
longer considered valid or trusted. This can happen when a company changes 
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), moves to a new physical address, or the contact 
listed on the certificate has changed- anything that makes the certificate's informa- 
tion no longer reliable from that point forward. 
Information that has already been encrypted using the public key in a 
certificate that is later revoked is not necessarily invalid, just as the 
checks you signed last month are not voided by your reporting the theft 
of your driver's license this week. 
In an organization that has implemented its own PKI, a certificate owner may 
have their certificate revoked upon terminating employment. The most important 
reason to revoke a certificate is if the private key has been compromised in any 
way. If a key has been compromised, it should be revoked immediately. 
Certificate expiration is different from certificate revocation. A certifi- 
cate is considered revoked if it is terminated prior to the end date of 
the certificate. 
Along with notifying the CA of the need to revoke a certificate, it is equally 
important to notify all certificate users of the date that the certificate will no 
longer be valid. After notifying users and the CA, the CA is responsible for 
changing the status of the certificate and notifying users that it has been revoked. If 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
575 
a certificate is revoked because of key compromise, you must publish the date the 
certificate was revoked, as well as the last date that communications were consid- 
ered trustworthy. 
When a certificate revocation request is sent to a CA, the CA must be able to 
authenticate the request with the certificate owner. Once the CA has authenticated 
the request, the certificate is revoked and notification is sent out. Certificate owners 
are not the only ones who can revoke a certificate. A PKI administrator can revoke 
a certificate, but without authenticating the request with the certificate owner. A 
good example of this is a corporate PKI. If Mary, an employee of SomeCompany, 
Inc. leaves the company unexpectedly, the administrator will want to revoke her 
certificate. Since Mary is gone, she is not available to authenticate the request. 
Therefore, the administrator of the PKI is granted the ability to revoke the license. 
A revoked certificate cannot be un-revoked. Revocation is permanent, 
and a new certificate must be issued if a certificate is needed to fill the 
purpose of the revoked certificate. 
Certificate Revocation List 
The X.509 standard requires that CA's publish certificate revocation lists (CRLs). 
In their simplest form, CRLs are a published form listing the revocation status of 
certificates that the CA manages. There are several forms that revocation lists may 
take. Following are descriptions of two of them~simple CRLs and delta CRLs. 
Simple CRL 
A simple CRL is a container that holds a list of revoked certificates with the name 
of the CA, the time the CRL was published, and when the next CRL will be pub- 
lished. A simple CRL is a single file that continues to grow over time. The fact that 
only information about the certificate is included, and not the certificate itself, 
controls the size of a simple CRL container. 
Delta CRL 
Delta CRLs handle the issues that simple CRLs cannot~size and distribution. 
Although a simple CRL only contains certain information about a revoked certifi- 
www.syngress.com 

576 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
cate, it can still become a large file. The issue here is: how do you continually dis- 
tribute a large file to all parties that need to see the CRL? The answer is Delta 
CRLs. In a Delta CRL configuration, a base CRL is sent to all end parties to ini- 
tialize their copies of the CRL. After the base CRL is sent out, updates known as 
deltas are sent out on a periodic basis to inform the end parties of any changes. 
Another method of verifying the state of a certificate is called the Online 
Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP). 
OCSP 
The OCSP was defined to help PKI certificate revocation bypass the limitations of 
CRL schemes. OCSP returns information relating only to certain certificates that 
have been revoked.With OCSP, there is no need for the large files used in a CRL 
to be transmitted. A query is sent to a CA regarding a particular certificate over 
transport protocols such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Once the query is 
received and processed by the CA, an OCSP responder replies to the originator with 
the status of the certificate, as well as information regarding the response. An OCSP 
response consists of." 
9 
The status of the certificate ("gooa," .... revoKea," 
"" or "unknown") 
9 
The last update on the status of the certificate 
9 
The next time the status will be updated 
9 
The time that the response was sent back to the requestor 
One of the most glaring weaknesses of OCSP is that it can only return infor- 
mation on a single certificate, and does not attempt to validate the certificate for 
the CA that issued it. 
Standards and Protocols 
Without standards and protocols, a.juggernaut like PKI would become unmanage- 
able. For a real-life example, look at the U.S. railroad system in its earlier days. 
Different railroad companies were using different size rails, and different widths 
between the rails. This made it impossible for a train to make it cross-country, and 
in some cases, across regions. In the end, it cost millions of dollars to standardize on 
a particular type of track. 
To avoid this type of disaster, a set of standards was developed early on for PKI. 
The Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) are standard protocols used for 
securing the exchange of information through PKI. The list of PKCS standards was 

Public Key Infrastructure ~ Chapter 10 
577 
created by RSA laboratories, the same group that developed the original RSA 
encryption standard, along with a consortium of corporations including Microsoft, 
Sun, and Apple. The list of active PKCS standards (gaps in the sequence below are 
due to standards that have become inactive since they were originally published) is 
as follows: 
PKCS #1: RSA Cryptography Standard Outlines the encryption of data 
using the RSA algorithm. The purpose of the RSA Cryptography Standard is 
in the development of digital signatures and digital envelopes. PKCS #1 also 
describes a syntax for RSA public keys and private keys. The public-key 
syntax is used for certificates, while the private-key syntax is used for 
encrypting private keys. 
PKCS #3: Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement Standard Outlines the use 
of the Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement, a method of sharing a secret key 
between two parties. The secret key is used to encrypt ongoing data transfer 
between the two parties.Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman developed the 
Diffie-Hellman algorithm in the 1970s as the first public asymmetric crypto- 
graphic system (asymmetric cryptography was invented in the United 
Kingdom earlier in the same decade, but was classified as a military secret). 
Diffie-Hellman overcomes the issues of symmetric key systems, because man- 
agement of the keys is less difficult. 
PKCS #5: Password-based Cryptography Standard A method for 
encrypting a string with a secret key that is derived from a password. The 
result of the method is an octet string (a sequence of 8-bit values). PKCS #8 
is primarily used for encrypting private keys when they are being transmitted 
between computers. 
PKCS #6: Extended-certificate Syntax Standard Deals with extended 
certificates. Extended certificates are made up of the X.509 certificate plus 
additional attributes. The additional attributes and the X.509 certificate can be 
verified using a single public-key operation. The issuer that signs the extended 
certificate is the same as the one that signs the X.509 certificate. 
PKCS #7: Cryptographic Message Syntax Standard The foundation 
for Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) standard (see 
Chapter 3). Is also compatible with Privacy-Enhanced Mail (PEM) and can 
be used in several different architectures of key management. 
PKCS #8: Private-key Information Syntax Standard Describes a 
method of communication for private-key information that includes the use 
www.syngress.com 

578 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
of public-key algorithms and additional attributes (similar to PKCS #6). In 
this case, the attributes can be a DN or a root CA's public key. 
9 PKCS #9: Selected Attribute Types Defines the types of attributes for use 
in extended certificates (PKCS #6), digitally signed messages (PKCS #7), and 
private-key information (PKCS #8). 
9 
PKCS #10: Certification Request Syntax Standard Describes a syntax 
for certification requests. A certification request consists of a DN, a public key, 
and additional attributes. Certification requests are sent to a CA, which then 
issues the certificate. 
9 PKCS #11: Cryptographic Token Interface Standard Specifies an 
application program interface (API) for token devices that hold encrypted 
information and perform cryptographic functions, such as Smart Cards and 
Universal Serial Bus (USB) pigtails. 
9 
PKCS #12: Personal Information Exchange Syntax Standard 
Specifies a portable format for storing or transporting a user's priwtte keys and 
certificates. Ties into both PKCS #8 (communication of private-key informa- 
tion) and PKCS #11 (Cryptographic Token Interface Standard). Portable for- 
mats include diskettes, Smart Cards, and Personal Computer Memory Card 
International Association (PCMCIA) cards. On Microsoft Windows platforms, 
PKCS #12 format files are generally given the extension .pfx. On other plat- 
forms, other extensions may be used, including .pkcs 12. PKCS #12 is the best 
standard format to use when exchanging private keys and certificates between 
systems. 
PKI standards and protocols are living documents, meaning they are always 
changing and evolving. Additional standards are proposed every day, but before they 
are accepted as standards they are put through rigorous testing and scrutiny. 
NiST DAY TIP 
,.~!;~i~l!i~:~,:,,~,~,,:~,~,~,~:i On the day of the test, do not concern yourself too much with what the 
different standard numbers are. It is important to understand why they 
are in place and what PKCS stands for. 
www.syngress.com 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
579 
Key Management and Certificate Lifecycle 
Certificates and keys, just like drivers' licenses and credit cards, have a life cycle. 
Different factors play into the lifecycle of a particular key or certificate. Many 
things can happen to affect the usable life span of a key~they may become com- 
promised or their certificates may be revoked or destroyed. Certificates also have an 
expiration date. Just like a license or credit card, a certificate is considered valid for 
a certain period of time. Once the end of the usable time for the certificate has 
expired, the certificate must be renewed or replaced. 
Mechanisms that play a part in the life cycle of a certificate are: 
9 Centralized vs. decentralized key management 
n 
Storage of private keys 
9 Key escrow 
[] 
Certificate expiration 
m Certificate revocation 
9 Certificate suspension 
[] 
Key recovery 
9 Certificate renewal 
[] 
Key destruction 
m Key usage 
9 Multiple key pairs 
Centralized vs. Decentralized 
Different PKI implementations use different types of key management. A business 
enterprise often uses centralized key management, with all of the private keys gener- 
ated and held by a central system. Older implementations of PGP used decentralized 
key management, since the keys are contained in a PGP users key ring and no one 
entity is superior over another. Hierarchical CA models generally use decentralized 
key management, where the keys are generated and managed by the intended 
owner of the private key. 
Whether to use centralized or decentralized key management depends on the 
size of the organization.With decentralized key management, the private key can be 
assumed to belong only to its intended owner; with centralized key management, 
www.syngress.com 

580 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
there is a possibility for abuse of other users' private keys by the administrators of 
the central key store. However, with decentralized key management, key recovery is 
left up to the individual user to consider, and this can result in the inadvertent loss 
(destruction) of keys, usually at the time when they are needed most. 
Whether using centralized management or decentralized management for keys, 
a secure method of storing those keys must be designed. 
Storage 
Imagine what would happen if you left a wallet on a counter in a department store 
and someone took it.You would have to call your credit card companies; to close 
out their accounts, they would have to go to the DMV to get a duplicate license, 
they would have to change their bank account numbers, and so forth. 
Now, imagine what would happen if a company put all of their private keys 
into a publicly accessible File Transfer Protocol (FTP) site. Basically, once hackers 
discovered that they could obtain the private keys, they could very easily" listen to 
communications between the company and clients and decrypt and encrypt mes- 
sages being passed. 
Taking this a step further, imagine what could happen if a root CA key was not 
stored in a secure place; all of the keys that used the CA as their root certificate 
would have to be invalidated and regenerated. 
So, how to store private keys in a manner that guarantees their security? Not 
storing them in a publicly accessible FTP folder is just a start. There are also several 
options for key storage, most falling under either the software storage category or the 
hardware storage category. 
Hardware Key Storage vs. Software Key Storage 
A private key could be stored very naively on an operating system (OS) by creating 
a directory on a server and using permissions (NTFS in Windows) to lock access to 
the directory. The issue is that storing private keys in this way relies on the security 
of the OS and the network environment itself. Anyone with physical access to 
these systems could easily fetch these keys from their files. 
Say that you are the senior administrator for a company.You have a higher 
access level than all of the other administrators, engineers, and operators in your 
company.You create a directory on one of the servers and restrict access to the 
directory to you and the Chief Information Officer (CIO). However, Joe is respon- 
sible for backups and restores on all of the servers. Joe is the curious type:, and 
decides to look at the contents that are backed up each night onto tape. Joe notices 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
581 
the new directory you created, and wants to see what is in there. Joe can restore the 
directory to another location, view the contents within the directory, and obtain a 
copy of the private keys. As the security administrator, you can handle this problem 
two different ways. First, you can enable auditing for the network OS. Auditing file 
access, additions, deletions, and modifications, can track this type of activity within 
the network. Likewise, permissions for the backup operator can be limited to 
backup only, and require another party (such as the network administrator) to per- 
form recoveries. 
That's why most software key storage schemes encrypt the private keys, using 
some form of password or key prior to granting access. The password protecting 
the private key is prompted for when the key is needed. Or the key is encrypted 
using a key derived from the user's logon password, such that a user's keys all 
become available when he or she is logged on, and are unavailable when he or she 
is logged off, or to another person who is logged on. If the key is needed for a 
background process (e.g., a service or a daemon), the key can be encrypted using a 
machine-based secret. In Windows, this secret can be further protected by using the 
SYSKEY utility. 
There is another risk involved with the software storage of private keys.You 
granted access to yourself and the company CIO, Phil. Phil has a bad habit of 
leaving his computer without logging out or locking the screen via a screen saver. 
Dave, the mail clerk, can easily walk into Phil's office and look at all of the files and 
directories that Phil has access to, thereby accessing the directory where the private 
keys are stored. This type of attack is known as a lunchtime attack. The best fix for 
lunchtime attacks is user education. Teaching users to properly secure their work- 
station when not in use prevents many types of security breaches, including 
lunchtime attacks. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

582 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
It is generally accepted that software storage is not a reliable means of storing 
high-security private keys. To overcome the issues of software storage, Hardware 
Storage Modules (HSMs) were created. HSMs, such as Smart Cards, Personal 
Computer Memory Card International Association (PCMCIA) cards, and other 
hardware devices, store private keys and handle all encryption and decryption of 
messages so that the key does not have to be transmitted to the computer. (Using 
magnetic media is really the equivalent of software key storage with an offline file 
store, and should not be thought of as hardware storage of keys.) Keeping the keys 
off of the computer prevents information about the keys from being discovered in 
computer memory. 
Smart Cards are the most flexible method of storing personal private.' keys using 
the hardware storage method. Since Smart Cards are normally about the size of a 
credit card, they are easily stored and can resist a high level of physical stress. Smart 
Cards are also not very expensive. Unlike a credit card that has a magnetic strip, 
Smart Cards store information using microprocessors, memory, and contact pads for 
passing information (see Figure 10.10). 
Figure 10.10 A DSS Smart Card 
www, syngress.com 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
583 
Make sure that you understand what a HSM is and why a Smart Card is 
the most popular form of these modules. 
For banks, defense institutions, and other extremely high-security environ- 
ments, there is often a need to retain keys in a HSM that has very high security 
requirements. In such an HSM, all keys can be generated and kept inside the 
module, and tampering with the module will result in the destruction of all keying 
material onboard. As noted above, it can be very expensive to generate new root 
keys and distribute them, but if your certificate server is capable of signing several 
million dollars' worth of transactions, it's cheaper to do the wholesale replacement 
of the contents of your PKI than it is to have a key exposed to a malicious intruder 
(or a malicious insider). Hardware security models are very expensive. 
Private Key Protection 
Keeping private keys stored in technologically and physically secure locations must 
be your first priority when dealing with PKI. Many people take private keys for 
corporate root CAs completely offline (with modern virtualization techniques, you 
can create the entire root CA on a bootable USB stick and store it in a safe), store 
them in a secure place (such as a safe or an offsite storage company), and use them 
only when they need to generate a new key for a new intermediate CA. However, 
there is another method of protecting private keys, a process known as escrow. 
Escrow 
If you have ever owned a home, you are familiar with the term "escrow." In terms 
of owning a home, an escrow account is used to hold monies that are used to pay 
things like mortgage insurance, taxes, homeowners insurance, and so forth. These 
monies are held in a secure place (normally by the mortgage company) where only 
authorized parties are allowed to access it. 
Key escrow works in the same way. When a company uses key escrow, they 
keep copies of their private key in one or more secured locations where only 
authorized persons are allowed to access them. A simple key escrow scheme would 
involve handing a copy of your keys to an escrow company, who would only 
divulge the keys back to you (or your successor in the organization you represent), 
upon presentation of sufficient credentials. 
www.syngress.com 

584 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
In a more advanced key escrow scheme, there may be two or more escrow 
agencies. The keys are split up and one half is sent to the two different escrow 
companies (see Figure 10.11). Using two different escrow companies is a separation 
of duties, preventing one single escrow company from being able to compromise 
encrypted messages by using a client's key set. (A detailed discussion of separation 
of duties can be found in Chapter 12.) 
Remember that separation of duties, when referring to escrow, focuses 
on requiring two or more persons to complete a task. 
Figure 10.11 The Key Escrow Process 
Key escrow is a sore spot with many people and companies, because many pro- 
posed key escrow schemes are designed to allow a government or law-enforcement 
authority to have access to keys. Depending on your level of trust in the govern- 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
585 
ment, this is either a sensible method to allow prosecution of criminals who 
encrypt, or it's a way in which the government can have all of our commercial 
secrets in their hand, or something in between. In 1995, the U.S. government 
required that all parties keep copies of their key pairs with a key escrow company. 
Almost immediately, conspiracy theorists began questioning the government's 
intentions for requiring the use of key escrows. Eventually, the U.S. government 
decided to avoid a battle, and dropped the requirement. 
Although there are apparent down sides to escrow, it serves a useful purpose. 
For example, key escrow provides investigators with the ability to track criminal 
activity that is taking place via encrypted messages. Key escrow is also a method of 
archiving keys, providing the ability to store keys securely offsite. 
Expiration 
When a certificate is created, it is stamped with Valid From and Valid To dates. The 
period in between these dates is the duration of time that the certificate and key 
pairs are valid. During this period, the issuing CA can verify the certificate. Once a 
certificate has reached the end of its validity period, it must be either renewed or 
destroyed. 
Renewing a certificate can be carried out using the same key pair that was 
used for the original certificate request, as long as the renewal request is made 
before the existing certificate expires. Figure 10.12 shows the valid dates for a 
secure Web site. 
www.syngress.com 

586 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Figure 10.12 The Valid Dates of a Certificate 
Revocation 
As discussed at the beginning of this chapter, it is sometimes necessary to revoke a 
person's (or company's) certificate before the expiration date. Usually, revocation 
occurs when: 
9 
A company changes ISPs, if its certificate was based on its ISP's Domain 
Name Server (DNS) name or its IP address, rather than the company's own 
DNS name, or if the ISP had access to the private key. 
9 
A company moves to a new physical address, so that the address information 
in the certificate becomes incorrect. 
9 
The contact listed on a certificate has left the company. 
9 
A private key has been compromised or is lost. 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
587 
Do not get tripped up by a question about a certificate being revoked. 
The thing to remember is that crucial information in the certificate has 
changed or the key has been compromised 
When a certificate revocation request is sent to a CA, the CA must be able to 
authenticate the request with the certificate owner; otherwise, anyone could revoke 
your certificate. Certificate owners are not the only ones who can revoke a certifi- 
cate. A PKI administrator can also revoke a certificate, without authenticating the 
request with the certificate owner. A good example of this is in a corporate PKI, 
where certificates should be revoked immediately upon termination of an 
employee. 
Once the CA has authenticated the revocation request, the certificate is 
revoked and notification is sent out. A PKI user needs to check the status of a 
company's or person's certificate to know when it has been revoked. 
Status Checking 
As discussed earlier, there are two methods of checking the revocation status of cer- 
tificates: CRLs and the OCSP. 
CRL 
The X.509 standard requires that CAs publish C1KLs. The list in its simplest form is 
a published form listing the revocation status of certificates that the CA manages. 
There are several forms that the revocation list may take. To recap simple C1KLs and 
the delta C1KLs: 
9 
A simple CRL is a container that holds the list of revoked certificates. 
9 
A simple CIKL also contains the name of the CA, the time and date the C1KL 
was published, and when the next C1KL will be published. 
9 
A simple C1KL is a single file that continues to grow over time. 
9 
The fact that only information about the certificate is included and not the 
certificate itself, limits the size of a simple C1KL container. 
9 
Delta C1KLs were created to handle issues that simple C1KLs cannot~size and 
distribution. 
www.syngress.com 

588 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Mthough a simple CRL only contains certain information about the revoked 
certificate, it can still become a large file. 
In a Delta CRL configuration, a base CRL is sent out to all end parties to ini- 
tialize their copies of the CRL. After the base CRL is sent out, updates 
known as deltas are sent out on a periodic basis to inform the end parties of 
changes. 
OCSP 
OCSP was defined to help PKI certificate revocation get past the limitations of 
using CRL schemes. To recap some of the keys to OCSP: 
9 
OCSP returns information relating only to certain certificates that: have been 
revoked. 
9 
With OCSP, there is no longer a need for the large files used in CRL to be 
transmitted. 
9 
OCSP can only return information on a single certificate. OCSP does not 
attempt to validate the certificate for the CA that has issued the certificate. 
Suspension 
Sometimes it becomes necessary to suspend a user's certificate. A suspension usually 
happens because a key is not going to be used for a period of time. For example, if 
a company previously used a shopping cart tool for purchasing merchandise, but 
became unhappy with its current online store and is rebuilding it, they could have 
their CA suspend their certificate and keys. The reason this is done is to prevent the 
unauthorized use of keys during an unused period. Eventually, while the certificate 
is in a suspended mode, it must either be revoked or reactivated, or it will simply 
expire. 
Status Checking 
The same status checking methods used for revocation apply to the suspension of 
certificates. CAs use CRLs and OCSP to allow for the status of suspended certifi- 
cates to be reviewed. The difference is that the reason for revocation is li,;ted as 
Certification Hold instead of the typical revocation reasons (such as change in owner 
information, compromised keys, and so forth) 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
589 
The means to differentiating between a suspended key and a revoked 
key is to check the reason for revocation. If the certificate appears in a 
CRL as a Certification Hold, it is suspended and not revoked. Think 
"drivers license"~if it is revoked, you are not getting it back. If it is sus- 
pended, you may get it back after a specific period of time. 
Recovery 
Sometimes it may be necessary to recover a key from storage. One of the problems 
that often arises regarding PKI is the fear that documents will be unrecoverable, 
because someone loses or forgets their private key. Let's say that employees use 
Smart Cards to hold their private keys. Drew, one of the employees, accidentally 
left his wallet in his pants and it went through the wash, Smart Card and all. If 
there is no method of recovering keys, Drew would not be able to access any doc- 
uments or e-mail that used his existing private key. 
Many corporate environments implement a key recovery server for the sole 
purpose of backing up and recovering keys.Within an organization, there is at least 
one key recovery a2ent. A key recovery agent is an employee who has the authority 
to retrieve a user's private key. Some key recovery servers require that two key 
recovery agents retrieve private user keys together for added security (separation of 
duties). This is similar to certain bank accounts, which require two signatures on a 
check for added security. Some key recovery servers also have the ability to func- 
tion as a key escrow server, thereby adding the ability to split the keys onto two 
separate recovery servers, further increasing the security. 
Key Recovery Information 
Now that the contents of Drew's wallet have been destroyed, he is going to have to 
get his license, credit cards, and other items replaced. For him to get a new license, 
Drew is going to have to be able to prove his identity to the DMV. He may need 
to bring his social security card, birth certificate, passport, and so forth. Since the 
DMV is a trusted authority, they are going to make sure that Drew is who he 
claims to be before they will issue him another license. 
CAs and recovery servers also require certain information before they allow a 
key to be recovered. This is known as Key Recovery Information (KRI). KRI usu- 
ally consists of." 
www.syngress.com 

590 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
9 
The ?name of the key owner, along with information verifying that the 
person requesting key recovery is authorized to recover the key on behalf of 
that key owner. (Note that this is often a subset of the same credentials that 
would have been used to create the key in the first place.) 
9 
The time that the key was created. 
9 
The issuing CA server. 
Once the CA (or the key recovery agent) verifies the KRI, the key recovery 
process can begin. 
M of N Control 
As mentioned, some key recovery servers can break up the key recovery process 
between multiple key recovery agents. This type of key recovery security is known 
as m of n control, m of n works by splitting the PIN between n number of key 
recovery agents, then reconstructing the PIN only if m number of recovery agents 
provide their individual passwords, n must be an integer greater than 1 and m must 
be an integer less than or equal to n. Going back to the example of Drew, let's say 
that we are using the m of n control and we have three separate key recovery 
agents. 
To be able to recover Drew's private key, at least two of the key recovery agents 
must be present. If Drew arrives in the office before the key recovery agents, he has 
to wait for two of the three to arrive. If only one of the key recovery agents tried 
to recover Drew's key under m of n control, the recovery process would be denied. 
Here is an easy way to remember the rn of n control. Think about a 
door to a house. Now imagine the door has two locks, one on the 
handle and the other a deadbolt lock. If both locks were locked, and 
you only had the key to the handle, you would have to wait for 
someone who has the other key before you could open the door. That 
would be an example of a 2-of-2 control. You could build a 2-of-3 con- 
trol by having three doors, each with two locks, covering each combina- 
tion of two-out-of-three keys. 

Public Key Infrastructure = Chapter 10 
591 
Renewal 
Assuming your certificate makes it through the entire period of time it is valid 
without the need for revocation, you will need to renew it. The good news is that, 
just like at the DMV, you do not have to prove your identity again to get a new 
certificate. As long as the certificate is in good standing, and you are renewing the 
certificate with the same CA, you can use the old key to sign the request for the 
renewed certificate. The reason behind this is that since the CA trusts you based on 
your current credentials, there is no reason why they should not trust your request 
for a renewed certificate. There is a second method of renewal, called key update, 
where a new key is created by modifying the existing key. The key renewal process 
that is used will depend on the user and most likely the requirements of the CA. 
The renewal process is also true of a CA's key pair. Eventually, a CA will need 
to renew its own set of keys. Again, a CA can use its old key to sign the new key. 
As discussed earlier, a root CA signs its own keys. Since end users (and subordinate 
CAs) use the root CA's keys to validate the responses from the CA, there must be a 
procedure in place to notify end users that the CA's key is up for renewal. The CA 
renewal process is performed by creating three new certificates: 
1. The CA creates another self-signed certificate. This time, the CA signs the 
new public key using the old private key that is about to retire. This allows 
for relying parties to trust the new key on the basis that it is signed by the 
old key. 
2. Next, the CA server signs the old public keys with the new private key. 
This is done so that there is an overlap between when the new key comes 
online and when the old key expires; users who trust the new key will 
also trust certificates issued under the old key. 
3. 
Finally, the new public key is signed with the new private key. This will be 
the new key that will be used after the old key expires. 
The reason for this process is two-fold. First, since a CA verifies the credentials 
of other parties, there has to be a degree of difficulty to renewing the CA's own 
certificate. Second, creating all of these keys makes the changeover from old keys to 
new keys transparent to the end user. 
www.syngress.com 

592 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
The most important thing to remember about certificate renewal is that 
it occurs at or near the end of the certificate's life cycle, and is never 
due to a change of information. 
Destruction 
As we saw during the dot-com bust, there comes a time for some companies when 
they no longer need their key pairs.When the famous chocolate-coverecl cock- 
roach Web site, www.chocolatecrunchies.com, went out of business, they most 
likely had a certificate issued to them for their online store. To get rid of some cap- 
ital, they sold off some of their Web servers without clearing the data of.[" of them. 
On those Web servers were copies of Chocolate Crunchies' public and private keys. 
Now, a hacker buys a server off of the company and now has possession of their 
keys. The hacker can now potentially impersonate Chocolate Crunchies by using 
their key pair. 
The point is, when there is no longer a need for a key pair, all record of the key 
pair should be destroyed. Before a server is sold, the media needs to be erased and 
overwritten so that there cannot be recovery of the keys. Paper copies of the keys 
also need to be properly disposed of. Not only should the keys be destroyed, the 
CA must be notified that Chocolate Crunchies has gone out of business, and the 
certificate should be &registered. 
Deregistering a key pair is different from revoking a key pair. 'When you 
deregister a key pair, the association between the key pair, CA,, and the 
key owner is broken. When a key is revoked, it is because the informa- 
tion is no longer valid or the private key was compromised, but the key 
owner still exists. 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
593 
Key Usage 
In today's networking environment, key pairs are used in a variety of different 
functions. This book discusses topics such as virtual private network (VPN), digital 
signatures, access control (SSH), secure Web access (Secure Sockets Layer [SSL]), 
and secure e-mail (PGR S/MIME). Each of these topics implements PKI for man- 
aging communications between a host and a client. In most PKI implementations, 
only single key pairs are used. However, certain situations may be presented where 
you have to offer users multiple key pairs. 
Multiple Key Pairs (Single, Dual) 
Sometimes it becomes necessary for a CA to generate multiple key pairs. Normally, 
this situation arises when there is a need to back up private keys, but the fear of a 
forged digital signature exists. For example, consider Joe the backup operator. Joe is 
responsible for the backup of all data, including user's private keys.Joe comes in 
after a long weekend and decides that he deserves a raise. Since Joe has access to all 
of the private keys, he can recover the CIO's private key, send a message to the 
Human Resources department requesting a raise, and sign in using the CIO's cer- 
tificate. Since the CIO's digital signature provides non-repudiation, the Human 
Resources manager would have no reason to question the e-mail. 
To circumvent this problem, many PKIs support the use of dual keys. In the 
example above, the CIO has two separate key pairs. The first key pair is used for 
authentication or encryption, while the second key pair is used for digital signa- 
tures. The private key used for authentication and encryption can still be backed up 
(and therefore recovered) by Joe for safekeeping. However, the second private key 
would never be backed up and would not provide the security loophole that using 
single keys creates. The CIO could continue using his second private key for signing 
e-mails without fear of the key being misused. 
Remember that multiple key scenarios usually exist in cases where 
forged digital signatures are a concern. Multiple keys may also be used 
when there are different purposes for the certificates. For example, a 
user may wish to identify himself to a number of different Web sites, 
with a certificate for each, or he may wish to sign e-mail using a dif- 
ferent certificate from that which he uses to authenticate. 
www.syngress.com 

594 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
PKI and key management can be difficult topics to understand, mainly because PKI 
is such a robust mechanism and there are so many safeguards in place to protect key 
pairs. However, these are the same reasons why PKI is widely implemented 
throughout the connected world. Let's review some of the key points regarding PKI: 
9 
The PKI identification process is based on the use of unique identifiers, 
known as keys. 
9 Each person using the PKI creates two different keys, a public key and a private 
key. 
9 
The public key is openly available to the public, while the private key is only 
known by the person for whom the keys were created. 
9 
Through the use of these keys, messages can be encrypted and decrypted for 
transferring messages in private. 
In order to use PKI, you must possess a digital certificate. Much like a driver's 
license, a digital certificate holds crucial information about the key holder. 
Information stored in a digital certificate includes: 
9 
Serial number 
9 
Subject 
9 
Signature algorithm 
9 
Issuer 
9 
Valid from 
9 
Valid to 
9 
Public key 
9 
Thumbprint algorithm 
9 
Thumbprint 
Of" course, there must be a checks-and-balances system for managing: certifi- 
cates and associated keys. This issue is addressed through the key management life 
cycle. Security professionals have to resolve questions regarding centralized vs. decen- 
tralized key management; how keys will be stored for both online use ancl key 
archival. They also have to decide how a company will or will not use key escrow. 
Key/certificate management also includes the following maintenance duties: 

Public Key Infrastructure * Chapter 10 
595 
Certificate Expiration What do you do when a certificate expires? 
Certificate Renewal When a certificate reaches expiration, will you renew 
the certificate with the same key or a different one? 
9 
Certificate Revocation If information contained in a certificate changes, 
or if a key is compromised, what is the process for revoking the certificate? 
How is information about the certificate propagated? 
9 
Key Destruction If keys will no longer be used, is a process in place for 
their destruction? Does the process include deregistering the certificate with 
the associated CA? 
PKI is a robust solution with many components that need to be addressed. 
Understanding the components, and the associated standards, protocols, features, 
and uses of PKI will help to ensure a smooth integration with the networking 
environment. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
PKI 
gl Uses private keys and public keys for encrypting and decrypting messages. 
Digital certificates hold information about the owner of the key pair. 
gl Different architectures exist for the creation, distribution, verification, and 
management of keys. 
Key Management Lis 
[-r Private keys need to be stored in a safe place where they are not easily 
accessible to the public. Software and hardware mechanisms exist for the 
storage of private keys. 
Certificates expire and can be renewed as they reach the end of their 
validation period. 
gl Certificates may be revoked prior to their expiration due to factors such as 
a change in owner information or compromise of private keys. 
www.syngress.com 


Public Key Infrastructure ~ Chapter 10 
597 
A: The bottom line is it does not have to be destroyed. However, imagine what 
would happen if you decided to no longer use a particular credit card. If you 
left the credit card active and did not destroy it, an unauthorized party could 
potentially use it. The same is true of unused key pairs. 
Q: Which is better, software storage for private keys or hardware storage? 
A: As a rule of thumb, hardware storage is always better since in theory, there is a 
greater potential for keys to be compromised using software storage. However, 
hardware storage costs money, and generally has protections against porting the 
private key to a new location if this is required. 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete 
questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this 
chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. You are applying for a certificate for the Web server for your company.Which 
of these parties would you not expect to be contacting in the process? 
A~ 
B~ 
A registration authority (RA) 
A leaf CA 
C. A key escrow agent 
D. A root CA 
. 
o 
What portion of the information in your certificate should be kept private? 
A. All of it. It is entirely concerned with your private information. 
B. None of it.There is nothing private in the certificate. 
C. The thumbprint, that uniquely identifies your certificate. 
D. The public key listed in the certificate. 
In creating a key recovery scheme that should allow for the possibility that as 
many as two of the five key escrow agents are unreachable, what scheme is 
most secure to use? 
www.syngress.com 

598 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
A. Every escrow agent gets a copy of the key. 
B. M of n control, where m is 3 and n is 5. 
C. Every escrow agent gets a fifth of the key, and you keep copies of those 
parts of the key so that you can fill in for unreachable agents. 
D. Keep an extra copy of the key with family members, without telling them 
what it is. 
4. What statement best describes the transitive trust in a simple CA model? 
A. Users trust certificate holders, because the users and the certificate holders 
each trust the CA. 
B. Users trust certificate holders, because the users trust the CA, and the CA 
trusts the certificate holders. 
C. Certificate holders trust users, because the certificate holders trust the CA 
and the CA trusts its users. 
D. Users trust certificate holders, because the certificate holders have been 
introduced to the users by the CA. 
5. In a children's tree-house club, new members are admitted to the club on the 
basis of whether they know any existing members of the club.What form of 
PKI would be most analogous to this? 
A. A hierarchical CA model 
B. A chain of trust 
C. A simple CA model 
D. A Web of trust 
6. In a hierarchical CA model, which servers will use self-signed certificates to 
identify themselves? 
A. Root CAs 
B. Intermediate CAs 
C. Leaf CAs 
D. Subordinate CAs 
E. All CAs 
www.syngress.com 

Public Key Infrastructure ~ Chapter 10 
599 
. 
Where would you search to find documentation on the formats in which cer- 
tificates and keys can be exchanged? 
A. ITU X.500 standards. 
B. Internet Requests For Comment (P,,FCs). 
C. PKCS standards. 
D. ITU X.509 standards. 
E. Internet Drafts. 
o 
Which of the following certificate lifecycle events is best handled without 
revoking the certificate? 
A. The contact e-mail address for the certificate changes to a different person. 
B. The certificate reaches its expiry date. 
C. The company represented by the certificate moves to a new town in the 
same state. 
D. The certificate's private key is accidentally posted in a public area of the 
Web site. 
. 
If you are following best PKI practices, which of the following would require a 
certificate to be revoked? 
A. The private key is destroyed in an unfortunate disk crash. 
B. The certificate has been found circulating on an underground bulletin 
board. 
C. The private key was left on a laptop that was stolen, then recovered. 
D. A new certificate is generated for the same private key 
10. Which is an example of m of n control? 
A. A personal check book for an individual. 
B. A business check book, requiring signatures of two principals. 
C. A locked door with a dead-bolt. 
D. A bank vault with a time lock that allows opening at three separate times 
within a week. 
www.syngress.com 

600 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
11. Which statement is true about a CRL? 
No A CRL may contain all revoked certificates, or only those revoked since the 
last CRL. 
B. A CRL is published as soon as a revocation is called for. 
C. A CRL only applies to one certificate. 
D. A CRL lists certificates that can never be trusted again. 
12. In the trust diagram shown here, which statement is true? 
Figure 10.13 A Trust Diagram 
A. Bob trusts Mice 
B. Mice does not trust Dave or Carol. 
C. Bob trusts Carol. 
D. Dave trusts only Carol. 
13. When exchanging encrypted information with a trusted partner 
what information do you need to exchange first? 
A. Your certificates. 
B. Your private keys. 
C. The expected size of the data to be sent. 
D. Web site addresses. 
by e-mail, 

Public Key Infrastructure 9 Chapter 10 
601 
14. An attacker has broken into your SSL-secured Web server, which uses a certifi- 
cate held in local software storage, and defaced it. Do you need to revoke the 
certificate? 
A. Yes. Software storage is no protection against hackers, and the hacker may 
now have the private key in his possession. 
B. No. The hacker would have needed to know the key's password in order to 
sign anything. 
C. No. The hacker cannot use the key to sign data once the Web server has 
been repaired. 
D. Yes. The hacker may have used the key to sign information that others may 
continue to trust. 
www.syngress.com 

602 
Chapter 10 9 Public Key Infrastructure 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test: questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. D 
8. B 
2. B 
9. C 
3. B 
10. B 
4. B 
11. A 
5. D 
12. C 
6. A 
13. A 
7. 
C 
14. D 

Chapter 11 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
9 
Physical Security 
9 
Forensics 
9 
Risk Identification 
Exam Objectives Review" 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
Self Test 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
6o5 

606 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Introduction 
This chapter covers the concepts of applying physical security such as barriers, locked 
doors, biometrics, and other applications to secure an area against penetration. 
What do you do after a system has been penetrated? As a Security+ technician, 
it is important to understand the different types of incidents and how to respond to 
them. Incident response and forensics are covered in detail later in this chapter. 
Security+ technicians must also understand risk assessment and how to rate the 
risk levels of various vulnerabilities. Risk assessment involves identifying: areas of a 
business that are threatened by a potential loss, and the threats facing them. Once 
the risks are identified, countermeasures can be created to reduce the likelihood 
that they will become reality. 
Physical Security 
When people consider computer and network security, the focus revolves around 
accounts, passwords, file permissions, and software that limits and monitors access. 
However, even though a user's account has been denied access to files on a server, 
what is to stop that user from opening files directly at the server instead? Worse yet, 
what is to prevent them from stealing the server's hard disk? Issues like these are 
why physical security is so important to the protection of data and equipment. 
Physical security involves protecting systems from bodily contact. It requires 
controlling access to hardware and software, so that people are unable to damage 
devices and the data they contain. If people are unable to have physical access to 
systems, they will not be able to steal or damage equipment. Physical security also 
limits or prevents their ability to access data directly from a machine, or create 
additional security threats by changing account or configuration settings. 
Physical security also requires protecting systems from the environmental con- 
ditions within a business. Environmental conditions such as floods, fires, electrical 
storms, and other natural disasters can result in serious losses to a business. These 
conditions can also leave a business exposed to situations such as power outages, 
leakage of data due to poor shielding, and other potential threats.Without strong 
physical security in place, unauthorized persons can access information in a variety 
of ways.When designing physical security, the first step is to identify what needs to 
be protected and what it needs to be protected from. Inventories should be made 
of servers, workstations, network connectivity devices, and other equipment within 
an organization. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
607 
Not all equipment is at risk from the same threats. For example, a workstation at 
a receptionist's desk is vulnerable to members of the public who may be able to 
view what is on the monitor or access data when the receptionist steps away. 
Equipment is also vulnerable to accidental or malicious damage, such as when a user 
or visitor accidentally knocks a computer off a desk or spills something on a key- 
board. A server locked in the server room would not be subject to the same type of 
threats as the receptionist's workstation, since access to the room is limited to mem- 
bers of the Information Technology (IT) staff. Because the level of risk varies 
between assets and locations, risks must be evaluated for each individual device. 
When designing security, it is important to strike a balance between the cost of 
security and the potential loss~you do not want to pay more for security than the 
equipment and data are worth. Servers are costly and may contain valuable data, so 
a higher level of security is needed to protect them. On the other hand, an old 
computer in the Human Resources department that is used for keyboarding tests 
given to prospective employees needs little or no protection. 
When determining value, it is important to not only consider the actual cost of 
something, but how difficult it is to replace. While certain data may be of relatively 
low cost value, it may still be important to a company and difficult to replace. For 
example, a writer may have the only copy of a book on his hard disk. Because it 
has not been published, the actual value of the book is minimal, and the cost of 
creating the book is limited to the time it took the writer to type the material. 
However, if the hard disk crashed and the book was lost, it would be difficult to 
replace the entire book. Even if the writer rewrote the book, it would be unlikely 
that the new version would be identical to the original. By determining the diffi- 
culty in replacing data, you are better able to determine its non-monetary or 
potential value. 
Another point to remember is that equipment is often devalued yearly for tax 
purposes, making it seem that the equipment has no worth after a certain time 
period. If this is the only measurement of worth, security may be overlooked in 
certain areas, because the equipment does not seem to have any reasonable value. 
However, older systems may be vital to an organization, because they are used for 
important functions. For example, a small airport may use older systems for air 
traffic control such as takeoffs, landings, and flying patterns of aircraft. Because 
these older systems are essential to normal operations, they are more valuable than 
a new Web server that hosts a site with directions to the airport.When deter- 
mining value, you must look at the importance of the equipment as well as its 
current monetary value. 
www.syngress.com 

608 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
When creating measures to protect systems, it is important to note that threats 
are not limited to people outside the company. One of the greatest challenges to 
physical security is protecting systems from people within an organization. 
Corporate theft is a major problem for businesses, because employees have easy 
access to equipment, data, and other assets. Because an employee's job may require 
working with computers and other devices, there is also the possibility 1:hat equip- 
ment may be damaged accidentally or intentionally. Physical security must not only 
protect equipment and data from outside parties, but also those within a company. 
A good way to protect servers and critical systems is to place them in a central- 
ized location. Rather than keeping servers in closets throughout a building, it is 
common for organizations to keep servers, network connectivity devices, and crit- 
ical systems in a single room. Equipment that cannot be stored in a cenl:ralized 
location should still be kept in secure locations. Servers, secondary routers, switches, 
and other equipment should be stored in cabinets, closets, or rooms that: are locked, 
have limited access, are air-conditioned, and have other protective measures in place 
to safeguard equipment. 
Continued 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
609 
Access Control 
Physical security is a way of controlling access, so that only authorized people can 
gain entry to an area.Without access control, anyone can enter restricted locations 
that contain vital equipment, data, or personnel. If an unimpeded person has mali- 
cious intentions or causes accidental damage, the impact on people, data, and sys- 
tems could be severe. Physical security is needed to manage who can and cannot 
enter sensitive areas. 
Identification is a common method of determining who has access to certain 
areas. Badges, cards, or other IDs can be used to show that a person has gone 
through the proper security channels, and has an established reason for being in a 
particular location. For example, the identification may distinguish them as an 
employee, visitor, or another designation. To obtain such an identification card, the 
person would need to go through established procedures, such as being issued a 
card upon being hired, or signing a logbook at the front desk. 
www.syngress.com 

610 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Access logs require anyone entering a secure area to sign in before entering. 
When visitors require entry, such as when consultants or vendor support staff need 
to perform work in a secure room, an employee of the firm must sign the person 
in. In doing so, the employee vouches for the credibility of the visitor, and takes 
responsibility for this person's actions. The access log also serves as a record of who 
entered certain areas of a building. Entries in the log can show the name of a vis- 
itor, the time this person entered and left a location, who signed them in, and the 
stated purpose of the visit. 
Even after a visitor has been given access to an area, a member of tile organiza- 
tion should accompany them whenever possible. Doing so ensures that the visitor 
stays in the areas where they are permitted. It also provides a measure of control to 
ensure that the visitor does not tamper with systems or data while they are there. 
Chaperoning someone who has been given clearance to an area is not always 
possible or desirable. For example, if you have hired an outside party to install 
equipment that is needed for Internet access, you may not want to stand beside the 
installer for an extended period of time. However, workers can be monitored in 
high security locations using video cameras to provide electronic surveillance. This 
provides a constant eye, and allows for review of their actions if an incident occurs. 
Alarms are another method of notifying people of unauthorized access. Alarms 
can be put on doorways, windows, and other entrances, and set to go off if 
someone enters an area and fails to follow proper procedures. If someone enters an 
incorrect PIN number to unlock a door, or opens a door without deactivating the 
alarm properly, a noise will sound or a signal will be sent to a person or company 
that monitors alarms. Additionally, any number of added defenses can be used to 
sense entry into a secured location. Motion detectors can be used to sense any 
movement in a room, heat sensors can be used to detect body heat, and weight 
sensors can be used to detect the added weight of a person on the floor.While 
such elaborate methods may not be needed everywhere within a building, they are 
viable solutions to detecting unauthorized entries. 
Computers can also be configured to prevent unauthorized access by locking 
them with passwords. Computers can provide screensavers with password protec- 
tion, so that anyone without the password is unable to access the system. For 
example, Novell NetWare servers provide a password-protected screensaver that can 
be activated by entering the command SCRSAVER ACTIVATE from the server 
prompt. 
To deactivate the password, the user needs to enter a username and ]password 
with sufficient privileges.Windows computers also provide password protection on 
screensavers, which prevents access to the machines while the owner or designated 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
611 
user is away. As can be seen in Figure 11.1 and Exercise 1.01, setting up password 
protection is a relatively simple process. Although the steps may vary, password-pro- 
tected screensavers can also be installed and used on many different OSes, including 
Apple and Linux. 
Figure 11.1 Password-protected Screensavers Can Be Configured Through 
the Screen Saver Tab of the Windows Display Properties 
EXERCISE 1 1.01 
PREVENTING ACCESS TO A COMPUTER USING PASSWORD- 
PROTECTED SCREENSAVERS 
1. From the desktop select Start I Settings I Control Panel. 
2. When the Control Panel opens, double-click on the item labeled 
Display. 
3. When the Display applet appears, click on the Screensaver tab, 
and then select the On resume, password protect checkbox. 
4. When the computer enters screensaver mode, press the Spacebar. 
A dialog box will appear prompting you for your password. Enter 
www.syngress.com 

612 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
the password of the user who is currently logged in, to unlock 
the machine. 
One of problems with password-protected screensavers is that an intruder can 
bypass the protection by rebooting the machine.When the OS is loaded, the 
screensaver is off, so the intruder can access the data and applications on the 
machine. To ensure this does not happen, additional methods of protecting a 
machine with passwords should be used. 
Local user accounts can be set up so that usernames and passwords must be 
entered to gain access once the OS has loaded. These types of accounts are different 
from network accounts, as they are used to control access on the machine itself. 
User accounts can be set up on a variety of OSes, including Windows XP and 
Vista, and provide protection from unauthorized access. To set up local user 
accounts on Windows XP machines, the "User Accounts" applet in the Control 
Panel is used. As seen in Figure 11.2, the "User Accounts" applet provides an easy- 
to-use interface that allows you to create and maintain accounts on your computer. 
This is different from previous versions of Windows, where all users could logon to 
the machine using the same account. In XP andVista, each user is required to have 
their own account, allowing administrators to control what permissions and 
resources users have access to on the local machine. By clicking on the Create a 
new account link, a wizard appears that takes you step-by-step through the pro- 
cess of setting up a new account. Once you've set up the new account, you can 
then click Change 
an account to modify a particular account's password, and 
other elements of the account. 
The alternate method of accessing a version of this tool is through the Run 
command on the Start menu. By typing "control userpasswords2" in Start I Run, 
and clicking OK, a dialog box similar to the one in Figure 11.3 will appear. As you 
can see from this dialog box, not only can you create and manage local lasers, but 
by checking the Users must enter a user name 
and password 
to use this 
computer 
checkbox, users are forced to have individual accounts that t]hey must 
use to enter a username and password to logon to the computer. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
613 
Figure 11.2 The User Accounts Applet is Used to Create Usernames and 
Passwords for the Local Computer 
Figure 11.3 The User Accounts Dialog Box is Used to Force Users to Enter a 
Username and Password 
www.syngress.com 

614 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
While this prevents people without valid user accounts from using the 
machine, it does not prevent someone from accessing a system that a valid user has 
already logged into. People often need to walk away from their computers, leaving 
themselves logged in with files open. Since it is not practical to shut down your 
computer every time you leave your desk, the Lock Workstation feature can be 
used. The Windows Security dialog box appears when CTRL+ALT+DEL is 
pressed on machines running Windows OSes. By clicking on the Lock Computer 
option, another dialog box requesting a username and password appears.. Only the 
person logged onto the computer or an account that is a member of the 
Administrators group will be able to unlock the machine. A similar Lock 
Workstation feature is also available for machines running Novell NetWare. 
You can force users to press CTRL+ALT+DEL to login using either of two 
methods in Windows XP. As seen in Figure 11.4, the "Advanced" tab of the "User 
Accounts" dialog box has a checkbox titled "Require users to press 
CTRL+ALT+DEL," which when checked, forces users to logon in this manner. 
Also shown in Figure 11.4 is the Local Security Settings applet that's accessed 
through Administrative Tools in the Control Panel. In "Local Security Settings" you 
would expand Local Policies and then click on Security Options. In the right 
pane, a listing of policies will appear. By double-clicking on Interactive logon" 
Do not require CTRL+ALT+DEL, you can enable or disable the policy. 
Figure 11.4 The Local Security Settings or the User Accounts Dialog Box is 
Used to Force Users to Enter a Username and Password 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
615 
Another method of protecting a machine is by setting passwords that prevent 
unauthorized users from starting up the machine and/or changing the settings.A 
setup program that allows you to configure the system can be accessed on many 
machines by pressing the F10 or DEL key when the computer is first turned on. 
When the setup software appears, there are generally options that allow you to set 
passwords. A Power-On Password can be set, requiring anyone who starts the com- 
puter to enter a password before the OS loads. This prohibits hackers from using 
password-cracking tools to gain entry through the OS. Another password may also 
be set in the Basic Input Output System (BIOS) to prevent unauthorized persons 
from accessing the setup software and making changes to the computer. Setting this 
password also prevents malicious users from configuring Power-On and BIOS pass- 
words, which would restrict valid users from starting the computer or making 
system changes. 
While the methods discussed here provide varying degrees of security, each pro- 
vides an additional barrier to unauthorized access to a machine. Mixing different 
methods of access control makes it increasingly difficult for intruders to gain access 
to data, applications, system settings, and other important aspects of a computer. 
Physical Barriers 
One of the easiest methods of securing equipment is the simplest: keep it behind a 
locked door. There are a variety of different locks that can be used. Some locks 
require metal keys to open them, much like those used to unlock the front door of 
a home. Other types may be programmed and have keypads requiring a PIN 
number or card key to open them. With these more advanced locks, features may 
be available that allow logging of anyone who enters the area, which is useful for 
monitoring who entered a secure area at a particular time. 
If unable to store servers or other equipment in a dedicated server room, con- 
sider storing them in a locked closet, rack, or cabinet. By locking the equipment up, 
employees and visitors to a site will not be able to access it without authorization. 
Whether equipment is stored in a centralized server room or a locked closet, it 
is important that all sides of the room or closet are secure.Windows should be 
locked and alarmed, if possible, so that anyone climbing through will be stopped or 
detected. Air vents can also provide a route into a room, so any large vents should 
be bolted shut with grates. Even seemingly obscure routes should be blocked or 
secured. Intruders may be able to crawl into a room through the area between a 
false ceiling and the real ceiling, or the space between a raised floor and the con- 
crete beneath. Thus, walls surrounding the room should be extended to reach the 
www.syngress.com 

616 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
real ceiling. Even walls may not provide real security, when you consider that 
someone could break through weak drywall to enter a "secure" area. If the need for 
security justifies the cost, vault rooms constructed of concrete, metal, or other 
materials that are difficult to penetrate can be built. In more common situations, 
the server room can be positioned beside other secure areas, or in areas that use 
cinder blocks or bricks for walls.When designing a physical security plan, make 
sure that the walls, ceiling, and floor are secure. 
Remember that physical security includes all sides of a room; the walls, 
ceiling, and floor. Even if most of these are secure, leaving one side of 
the room insecure can provide an avenue of penetration. Looking at the 
room this way will also help to identify where security lapses exist, and 
what security measures should be implemented. 
Workstations should definitely be protected. Because users of a network need 
to use their workstations regularly, locking them up in cabinets or rooms that are 
not accessible to users is not an option. However, many portable computers and 
workstations have a lock slot on the back panel, with a heavy cable attached that 
can then be locked or bolted to a desk or wall. Disk locks can be used to prevent 
unauthorized persons from using floppy disks, CD burners, and so on. No one will 
be able to use the device to copy data without first unlocking the disk lock. Case 
locks are an additional method of preventing intruders from accessing data. A case 
lock prevents people from opening a computer case and removing hard disks or 
other components from a machine without permission. Combining methods of 
protecting hardware and restricting access to data makes it increasingly difficult for 
intruders to physically acquire data from the hardware. 
In addition to computer equipment, backup tapes should be stored under lock 
and key, with copies stored at offsite locations.When backups are made of data on a 
server or other machine, they should not be left in the open. If someone,' acquired a 
backup tape, they could restore the data to another computer. For this reason, 
backups of data should be stored in a safe or locked cabinet. Also, copies of backup 
tapes (and other media storing copies of sensitive data) should be stored offsite. If 
fire, flood, or another natural disaster destroys the main site, a copy of the data can 
be retrieved from the remote storage location and restored to another server. (See 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
617 
Chapter 12 "Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster 
Recovery.") 
Software is expensive, especially when considering the number of copies pur- 
chased for installation in a large organization. For this reason, any installation CDs 
and licenses should be kept in a secure area, such as a server room, safe, or locked 
cabinet. Securing software in this way will also prevent users from making pirated 
copies or illegally installing software on machines. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

618 
Chapter 11 = Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Biometrics 
Passwords are one of the most effective methods of preventing unauthorized access 
to a system. A password can be a collection of letters, numbers, or special characters 
(or a combination of same) that verify the proper person is using an account. 
However, this is not the only method of validating that a person has the authority 
to access a computer, network, or location. 
Biometric authentication uses the physical attributes of a person to determine 
whether access should be given. These include fingerprints, voice patterns, facial 
characteristics, and scans of the retinas or iris in the eye. Measurements of patterns 
and characteristics of what is scanned are compared to a previous scan that is stored 
in a database. If the comparison matches, authentication is given and the person has 
access to an area or system. 
To understand how biometrics works, say you have been hired by a company 
and need access to a secure area.Your fingerprint is scanned and converted into a 
digital form, which is then stored in a database. This digital measurement is used as 
the basis for your access. Now, when you need to access the secure area, you put 
your finger on a scanner by the sealed door. The fingerprint is scanned, :and again 
turned into a digital format. Points on the fingerprint are compared to those stored 
in the database. If these match, the door will open. If not, access is denied. 
Remember that biometric authentication is based on physical ,character- 
istics. While any number of factors can be used to authenticate an iden- 
tity and authorize access, biometrics always uses biological 
measurements (metrics) as the method of proving an identity. Biometrics 
offers a greater level of security than many other types of authentica- 
tion, but this does not mean it is foolproof. There are methods that can 
be used to fool biometric authentication, so biometrics should not be 
the only level of protection in an organization. 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
619 
Tailgating 
Even with the most stringent physical security in place, there are ways of bypassing 
these methods and gaining access. One of the simplest methods is tail2ating, or pi 2- 
2)/backing, in which an unauthorized person follows an authorized person into a 
secure area. Regardless of whether a person has to use a key, PIN number, card key, 
biometrics, or other methods to open a door and enter, all a second person needs 
to do is follow him or her through the door. Even if the first person notices the 
security breach, they may feel uncomfortable challenging the person whose tail- 
gating, and not bother asking the person to provide identification, get out, or go 
back and use their own key or access to enter. 
Intruders piggybacking on another person's access can be a real security chal- 
lenge, because any existing security measures are rendered useless even though 
they're functioning properly. It is especially common if the authorized person 
knows the tailgater, such as when management, a coworker, or others who are visu- 
ally recognized are piggybacking. It's common to see one person use a key card to 
enter a building and several others follow their way in. However, even in these 
cases, you cannot be a hundred percent sure that one of them has been dismissed 
from the company, under a disciplinary action (such as suspension), or is a con- 
tractor whose contract has ended. Even if the person legitimately works for the 
company, allowing them to piggyback their way into a server room could result in 
equipment being knocked over, sensitive documents (such as administrator pass- 
words) being seen, or other problems. 
As we'll see in the section on social engineering, human nature can cause sig- 
nificant problems for any security measures you put in place, and there is no easy 
way of dealing with it. Policies can be implemented that prohibit allowing anyone 
to enter an area unless they have used their own security access method (i.e. key, 
access card, PIN number, and so forth), with procedures on what to do if someone 
does sneak in behind a person (such as challenging the person to produce ID, noti- 
fying security personnel, and so forth). However, most employees are neither 
trained nor willing to confront or physically remove a person from the premises, so 
often the policy may be ignored for personal safety reasons or because it is emo- 
tionally uncomfortable. After all, no one wants to ask their boss to get out of the 
building or room because they snuck in the door. 
This makes education one of the best methods of combating the problem. 
Employees should be educated that tailgating is a security issue, that policies exist 
that make a person responsible for those permitted access, and that allowing an 
unauthorized person access could result in disciplinary actions (including termina- 
www.syngress.com 

620 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
tion of employment) . While this won't completely eliminate tailgating, it: will limit 
the number of people who attempt or allow security breaches. 
Dumpster Diving 
Another threat that can be overlooked in companies is dumpster diving. As with tail- 
gating, it is about as low tech a method of threatening security as anyone could 
think of. It literally involves getting into a dumpster and going through the trash, 
searching through garbage bags, looking in wastebaskets, and other places where 
people may have disposed sensitive information. 
The reason that this method of breaching security remains popular, is because it 
is so effective. In addition to the rotting refuse of people's lunches, one can find 
discarded printouts of data, papers with usernames and passwords, test printouts that 
have Internet Protocol (IP) address information, and even old hard drives, CDs, 
DVDs, and other media containing the information you'd normally have to hack 
the network to obtain. Even the most innocuous waste may provide a wealth of 
information. For example, printouts of e-mail will contain a person's name, e-mail 
address, contact information, and other data that could be used for social engi- 
neering purposes (discussed in the next section). 
There are many solutions to resolving dumpster diving as a security issue. 
Dumpsters can be locked with a padlock to limit access, or they can be kept in 
locked garages or sheds until they're ready for pickup. Companies cart also imple- 
ment a shredding policy, so that any sensitive information is shredded and rendered 
unusable by anyone who finds it. This is especially important if the company has a 
recycling program, in which paper products are kept separate. If documents aren't 
shredded, the recycling containers make it even easier to find information, as all of 
the printouts, memos, and other documentation are isolated in a single container. 
Because discarded data isn't always in paper form, companies also need to implement 
a strict hardware and storage media disposal policy, so that hard disks are completely 
wiped and old CDs and DVDs containing information are destroyed. By obliterating 
the data before the media is disposed, and protecting the waste containers used after- 
wards, dumpster diving becomes difficult or impossible to perform. 
Social Engineering 
Hacking may be done through expert computer skills, programs that acquire infor- 
mation, or through an understanding of human behavior. This last method is called 
social engineering,. When social engineering is used, hackers misrepresent themselves 
or trick a person into revealing information. Using this method, a hacker may ask a 
user for their password, or force the user to reveal other sensitive information. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
621 
Hackers using social engineering to acquire information will often misrepresent 
themselves as authority figures or someone in a position to help their victim. For 
example, a hacker may phone a network user and say that there is a problem with 
the person's account. To remedy the problem, all the caller needs is the person's 
password.Without this information, the person may experience problems with 
their account, or will be unable to access certain information. Since the person will 
benefit from revealing the information, the victim often tells the hacker the pass- 
word. By simply asking, the hacker now has the password and the ability to break 
through security and access data. 
Social engineering often involves more subtle methods of acquiring informa- 
tion than simply asking for a password. In many cases, the hacker will get into a 
conversation with the user and slowly get the person to reveal tidbits of informa- 
tion. For example, the hacker could start a conversation about the Web site, ask 
what the victim likes about it, and determine what the person can access on the 
site. The hacker might then initiate a conversation about families and pets, and ask 
the names of the victim's family members and pets. To follow up, the hacker might 
ask about the person's hobbies. Since many users make the mistake of using names 
of loved ones or hobbies as a password, the hacker may now have access.While the 
questions seem innocuous, when all of the pieces of information are put together, it 
can give the hacker a great deal of insight into getting into the system. 
In other cases, the hacker may not even need to get into the system, because 
the victim reveals all the desired information. People enjoy when others take an 
interest in them, and will often answer questions for this reason or out of polite- 
ness. Social engineering is not confined to computer hacking. A person may start a 
conversation with a high-ranking person in a company and get insider information 
about the stock market, or manipulate a customer service representative at a video 
store into revealing credit card numbers. If a person has access to the information 
the hacker needs, then hacking the system is not necessary. 
The best way to protect an organization from social engineering is through 
education. People reveal information to social engineers, because they are unaware 
they are doing anything wrong. Often they do not realize they have been victim- 
ized, even after the hacker uses the information for illicit purposes. Teaching users 
how social engineering works, and stressing the importance of keeping information 
confidential, will make them less likely to fall victim to social engineering. 
www.syngress.com 

622 
Chapter 11 . Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Phishing 
A variation of social engineering is phishing, or phising, in which a hacker uses e-mail 
to acquire information from the recipient. Because the hacker is fishing fbr informa- 
tion using the e-mail as bait, and hackers replaced "f" with "ph," the term phishing 
was born. A hacker will send e-mail to groups of people, posing as some authorita- 
tive source, and request the recipient to provide specific information. This may be a 
single department, the entire company, or (most often) sent as spam across the 
Internet. For example, common e-mails on the Internet pose as banks or companies 
like eBay, and request that people fill out an Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) 
form or visit a Web site to confirm their account information. The form asks for 
personal and credit card information, which can then be used to steal the, person's 
identity. The same technique can be used to pose as network administrators, human 
resources, or other departments of a company, and request the recipient to confirm 
information stored in various systems. For example, it could ask them to provide 
their employment information (i.e., name, position, department, Social Security 
number, and so forth), business information (i.e., business accounts, credit card num- 
bers, and so forth), or network information like usernames and passwords.While 
many people are educated in this technique, it succeeds, because out of the sheer 
number of people that are contacted, someone will eventually fall for the trick. 
Phishing is particularly effective in business environments, because unlike banks 
or companies who don't use e-mail to collect information over the Internet, busi- 
nesses may actually contact departments through internal e-mail to acquire infor- 
mation. For example, Finance departments have requested other departments 
provide information about their purchase accounts, credit cards, and other informa- 
tion, while Human Resource departments have requested updated information on 
employees. Because it takes knowledge to read the Multipurpose Internet Mail 
Extensions (MIME) information and identify whether e-mail was sent internally or 
externally, a member of a department may be easily duped by phishing. To prevent 
such problems, it is important to educate users and implement policies to specify 
how such information is to be collected. This may include stages, such as; sending 
out internal e-mails stating that on a specific date, a request for such information 
will be sent out. It is equally important that measures be taken to inform users 
what information is never requested, such as passwords. 
Environment 
Even with educated users and all critical systems locked behind closed doors, 
equipment and data are still at risk if the environment beyond those locked doors is 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
623 
insecure. Environment refers to the surroundings in which the computers and 
other equipment reside. If an environment is insecure, data and equipment can be 
damaged. To prevent the environment from affecting a system's safety and ability to 
function, the following elements should be considered: 
9 
Temperature 
9 
Humidity 
9 Airflow 
9 Electrical interference 
9 Electrostatic discharge (ESD) 
If a computer overheats, components inside it can be permanently damaged. 
While the temperature of the server room may feel comfortable to you, the inside 
of a computer can be as much as 40 degrees warmer than the air outside the case. 
The hardware inside the case generates heat, raising the interior temperature. 
Computers are equipped with fans to cool the power supply, processor, and other 
hardware, so that temperatures do not rise above 110 degrees. If these fans fail, the 
heat can rise to a level that destroys the hardware. 
Computers are also designed to allow air to flow through the machine, keeping 
the temperature low. If the airflow is disrupted, temperatures can rise. For example, 
say you removed an old adapter card that was no longer needed by a computer. 
Because you did not have a spare cover, there is now an opening where the card 
used to be. Because air can now pass through this hole, you might expect that this 
would help to cool the hardware inside, but airflow is actually lost through this 
opening. Openings in the computer case prevent the air from circulating inside the 
machine as it was designed to, causing temperatures to rise. 
A common problem with computers is when fans fail, causing increases in tem- 
perature within the case. These fans may be used to cool the processor, power 
supply, or other components. As with other causes of temperature increases, the 
machine may not fail immediately. The computer may experience reboots, "blue 
screens of death," memory dumps, and other problems that occur randomly. To 
determine whether increases in temperature are the cause of these problems, you 
can install hardware or software that will monitor the temperature and inform you 
of increases.When the temperature increases past a normal level, you should 
examine the fans to determine if this is the cause.Variations in temperature can also 
cause problems. If a machine experiences sudden changes in temperature, it can 
cause hardware problems inside the machine. Heat makes objects expand, while 
www.syngress.com 

624 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
cold makes these same objects contract.When this expansion and contraction 
occurs in motherboards and other circuit boards, chip creep (also known as socket 
creep) can occur. As the circuit boards expand and contract, it causes the computer 
chips on these boards to move until they begin to lose contact with the sockets in 
which they are inserted.When the chips lose contact, they are unable to send and 
receive signals, resulting in hardware failure. 
To prevent problems with heat and cold, it is important to store servers and 
other equipment in a temperature-controlled environment. Keeping machines in a 
room that has air conditioning and heat can keep the temperature at a cool level 
that does not fluctuate. To assist in monitoring temperature, alarms can be set up in 
the room to alert you when the temperature exceeds 80 degrees Fahrenheit. Other 
alarms can be used that attach to the servers, automatically shutting them down if 
they get too hot. 
ESD is another threat to equipment, as static electricity can damage hardware 
components so they cease to function. If unfamiliar with ESD, think of the times 
when you have walked over a dry carpet and received a shock when you touched 
someone. The static electricity builds up, and electrons are discharged between the 
two objects until both have an equal charge.When you receive a shock :From 
touching someone, the discharge is around 3000 volts. To damage a computer chip, 
you only need a discharge of 20 or 30 volts. Humidity levels can increase ESD. If 
the humidity in a room is below 50 percent, the dry conditions create an atmo- 
sphere that allows static electricity to build up. This creates the same situation as 
mentioned in the above paragraph. A humidity level that is too high can also cause 
ESD, as water particles that conduct electricity can condense and stick to hardware 
components. Not only can this create ESD problems, but if the humidit 7 is very 
high, the metal components may rust over time. To avoid humidity problems, keep 
the levels between 70 percent and 90 percent. Installing humidifiers and dehumidi- 
tiers to respectively raise and lower the level of humidity can be used to keep it at 
an acceptable point. 
Poor air quality is another issue that can cause problems related to ESD and 
temperature.As mentioned earlier, fans in a machine circulate air to cool the com- 
ponents inside. If the air is of poor quality, dust, smoke, and other particles in the 
air will also be swept inside the machine. Because dust and dirt particles have the 
ability to hold a charge, static electricity can build up, be released, and build up 
again. The components to which the dust and dirt stick are shocked over and over 
again, damaging them over time. If the room is particularly unclean, dust: and dirt 
can also build up on the air intakes. Since very little air can enter the case through 
the intake, temperatures rise, causing the components inside the machine: to over- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response ~ Chapter 11 
625 
heat.Vacuuming air intakes and installing an air filtration system in rooms with 
critical equipment can improve the quality of air and avoid these problems. 
Wireless Cells 
Environmental conditions can also play a large part in data falling into the wrong 
hands.Wireless technologies have become commonplace in networks. Devices 
using infrared light or radio frequencies are used to transmit data to and receive 
data from other computers and devices attached to the network.While the speeds 
may vary, wireless technologies allow users to access network data without being 
physically connected to a network. There are many applications and issues dealing 
with this technology, especially when you consider how many devices use wireless 
networking. Desktop computers, laptops, hand-held computers, personal data assis- 
tants (PDAs), and even cell phones commonly make use of wireless networking to 
connect to the Internet or exchange data with a network. Because so much data 
may be traveling through the air of your office, this also makes for some interesting 
issues related to security. 
As discussed in Chapter 4, data transmitted on wireless technologies are inher- 
ently insecure, and require additional measures to secure that data. If equipment 
used to transmit and receive data from these devices are placed too close to exte- 
rior walls, wireless transmissions can leak outside of an office area. This may enable 
others outside of" the office to connect to the network or intercept data, using a 
packet sniffer and other equipment that can be purchased from any store selling 
computer products. This is why encrypting all data on a wireless network is so 
important.The encryption prevents unauthorized individuals who access the signal 
from deciphering any of the data. Aside from moving antennas away from exterior 
walls, shielding can also be used to prevent wireless transmissions from escaping a 
www.syngress.com 

626 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
building or office area. Shielding blocks signals from escaping, but may also have 
the unwanted effect of blocking cellular communications. Information on how 
shielding works as well as other information on wireless cells, can be found in 
Chapter 4 of this book. 
Location 
When devising a physical security plan, it is important to determine which poten- 
tial disasters apply to the environment in which the equipment is located. After 
dealing with the environmental factors of a server room, the environmental factors 
surrounding the building must be considered. Different geographic areas face dif- 
ferent risks. A building located in Canada needs to consider the impact of blizzards, 
and needs proper heating and an alternative energy source if there are power out- 
ages. On the other hand, a building located in the middle of"Tornado Alley" will 
need to consider the possibility of tornadoes. Other areas may be prone to floods, 
earthquakes, or other natural disasters. 
Planning for disasters is a major part of security. It is important to devise strate- 
gies for how particular disasters can be dealt with. For example, if a company is 
located in Miami where hurricanes are a possible risk, they may face the possibility 
of power loss. Consequently, the company may want to purchase a generator to 
provide power when normal energy sources are disabled. If a company is, in 
Arizona, air conditioning is a necessity to keep equipment cool. To deal with the 
possibility of an air conditioner breaking down, a secondary air conditioner can be 
installed as a backup. When looking at the varying risks and needs a company 
might face, you can see that it differs based on the geographical location.. Analyzing 
these risks can help create a plan that addresses each situation. 
Beyond geographical location, the location of equipment within the environ- 
ment should also be considered in a physical security plan. Placing equipment in 
insecure locations creates a catastrophe waiting to happen. Considering where 
equipment is placed can help avoid many problems before they occur. 
Servers and other vital equipment should be raised off of the floor to prevent 
flood damage. Raising equipment off of the floor also protects it from being acci- 
dentally kicked. More than one network administrator has received calls from frus- 
trated users complaining that they cannot connect to the network, only 1:o find that 
the janitorial staff had knocked a network cable loose with a vacuum cleaner. In 
other cases, water damage may be caused by a soaked mop slopping water on 
equipment, or (worse yet) a mop bucket being knocked over near a serwm By 
raising equipment off the floor, any number of possible problems can be avoided. 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
627 
Placing servers up too high also has its disadvantages if it is an insecure loca- 
tion. Servers can be knocked off tables that are too narrow, rickety racks of routers 
can be tipped over, and equipment can fall from precarious shelves. Before placing 
equipment in a particular location, ensure that the location is safe from accident. 
Shielding 
As mentioned earlier, shielding can be used to prevent data signals from escaping 
outside of an office. Not only can communications signals leak out of a prescribed 
area, but unwanted signals can also leak in and interfere with communications. 
Thus, shielding is also necessary to prevent data from being damaged in transmis- 
sion from radio frequency interference (RFI) and electromagnetic interference 
(EMI). RFI is caused by radio frequencies emanating from microwaves, furnaces, 
appliances, radio transmissions, and radio frequency-operated touch lamps and dim- 
mers. Network cabling can pick up these frequencies much as an antenna would, 
corrupting data traveling along the cabling. EMI is cause by electromagnetism gen- 
erated by heavy machinery such as elevators, industrial equipment, and lights. The 
signals from these sources can overlap those traveling along network cabling, cor- 
rupting the data signals so that they need to be retransmitted by servers and other 
network devices.When EMI and RFI cause interference it is called "noise." 
To prevent data corruption from EMI and RFI, computers and other equip- 
ment should be kept away from electrical equipment, magnets, and other sources. 
This will minimize the effects of EMI and RFI, because the interference will dissi- 
pate as it travels over distance. 
When cabling travels past sources of EMI and RFI, a higher grade of cabling 
should be used, which have better shielding and can protect the wiring inside from 
interference. Shielded twisted-pair (STP) is a type of cabling that uses a series of 
individually wrapped copper wires encased in a plastic sheath. Twisted-pair can be 
unshielded or shielded.When the cabling is STR the wires are protected with foil 
wrap for extra shielding. 
For more information on cabling, please refer to Chapter 6, 
"Infrastructure Security: Devices and Media." 
www.syngress.com 

628 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Coaxial cable is commonly used in cable TV installations, but can also be found 
on networks. This type of cabling has a solid or stranded copper wire surrounded 
by insulation. A wire mesh tube and a plastic sheath surround the wire and insula- 
tion to protect it. Because the wire is so shielded from interference, it is more resis- 
tant to EMI and 1KFI than twisted-pair cabling. 
Network performance should always be considered when deciding "what type 
of cable to use. Different types of cable allow data to travel at different speeds and 
to maximum lengths before devices must be used to lengthen transmission dis- 
tances. The varying specifications for different types of coaxial, unshielded twisted- 
pair (UTP), and STP cable are shown in Table 11.1. 
Table 11.1 Specifications for Networks Using Different Cabling 
Type of Network Cable 
Maximum Length 
Maximum Speed 
10BaseT (STP/UTP) 
100 meters 
10 Mbps 
10Base2 (Coaxial 
185 meters 
10 Mbps 
(Thinnet)) 
10Base5 (Coaxial 
500 meters 
10 Mbps 
(Thicknet)) 
100BaseTX (STP/UTP) 
100 meters 
100 Mbps 
lOOBaseT4 (STP/UTP) 
100 meters 
100 Mbps 
When installing cabling, it is important that the cable is not easily accessible to 
unauthorized people. If an intruder or malicious user accesses the cable used on a 
network, they can tap the wire to access data traveling along it, or the cabling can 
be physically damaged or destroyed. Cable should not be run along the outside of 
walls or open areas where people may come into contact with it. If this cannot be 
avoided, then the cable should be contained within tubing or some other protec- 
tive covering that will prevent accidental or malicious actions from occurring. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
629 
Fire Suppression 
Fire is a major risk in any environment that contains a lot of electrical equipment, 
so fire suppression systems must be put in place to protect servers and other equip- 
ment. Because problems with moisture and flooding can damage or destroy equip- 
ment, water sprinklers are not an option in server rooms or other areas storing 
devices. Other problems may occur if the fire suppression system releases foam that 
damages equipment, creates significant smoke when putting out a fire, or causes 
other potential problems that can result in collateral damage.When choosing a fire 
suppression system, it is important to choose one that will put out a fire, but not 
destroy the equipment in the process. These are often referred to as clean agent fire 
extinguishing systems. 
Halon is a fire suppressant often found in older facilities. When a fire occurred, 
this chemical would be dumped into the room at high pressure, removing necessary 
elements needed to work with the oxygen and fuel the fire. Halon 1301, made by 
DuPont, worked by having bromine combine with the hydrogen released by the 
www.syngress.com 

630 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
fire, effectively removing it from the air. Because the oxygen and hydrogen were no 
longer able to work together, the fire would be extinguished. Although it worked, 
it was found to be damaging to the ozone, and was banned from new installations 
of fire suppression systems. This means that once an older system dumps its existing 
load of Halon to put out a fire (or some unfortunate soul accidentally sets off the 
system), the company must now pay to install a completely different fire system 
that doesn't have adverse effects. 
There are many different alternatives to Halon, which can be used safely 
without negative impacts on the environment. These include: 
9 
Inergen (IG-541) A combination of three different gases; nitrogen, 
argon, and carbon dioxide.When released, it lowers the oxygen content in 
a room to the point that the fire cannot be sustained. 
9 
Heptafluoropropane 
(HFC-227ea) A chemical agent that is. also 
known as FM-200. This agent is released as a gas suppressing the fire, but 
has been found not to be harmful to persons in the room. 
9 
Trifluromethane 
(FE-13) A chemical originally developed by DuPont 
as a refrigerant, but commonly used in new fire suppression systems. FE- 
13 molecules absorb heat, making it impossible for the air in the room to 
support combustion. It is considered to be one of the safest clean agents. 
9 
Carbon Dioxide Systems 
A popular method of fire suppression, as 
carbon dioxide reduces the oxygen content to the point where the atmo- 
sphere can no longer support combustion. 
When deciding on a fire suppression system, it is important to examine 
whether it will damage equipment or is toxic to people when the fire suppression 
system is deployed. 
Forensics 
When certain incidents occur, not only does the immediate problem need to be 
fixed, but the person causing the problem has to be investigated. Companies may 
find their Web sites or networks hacked by outside parties, receive threats via e- 
mail, or fall victim to any number of cyber-crimes. In other cases, an administrator 
may discover that people internal to the organization are committing crimes or 
violating policies. Once systems are secure from further intrusion, the next step is 
to acquire information useful in finding and prosecuting the person responsible. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response ~ Chapter 11 
631 
Because any facts acquired may become evidence in court, standard computer 
forensics techniques must be used to protect the integrity of potential evidence. 
Computer forensics is the application of computer skills and investigation tech- 
niques for the purpose of acquiring evidence. It involves collecting, examining, pre- 
serving, and presenting evidence that is stored or transmitted in an electronic 
format. Because the purpose of computer forensics is its possible use in court, strict 
procedures must be followed for evidence to be admissible. 
Even if an incident is not criminal in nature, forensic procedures are important 
to follow. There may be incidents where employees have violated policies. These 
actions can result in disciplinary actions (up to and including termination of 
employment). Such actions must be based on sound evidence to protect the com- 
pany from a wrongful termination or discrimination lawsuit, or other charges by the 
disciplined employee. If such a suit is filed, the documentation will become evidence 
in the civil trial. (Policies and procedures are covered in detail in Chapter 12.) 
For example, an employee may have violated a company's acceptable use policy 
by viewing pornography during work hours. Using forensic procedures to investi- 
gate the incident creates a tighter case against the employee, thereby making it diffi- 
cult for the employee to argue the facts. Also, if during an investigation illegal 
activities are found to have taken place (such as possession of child pornography), 
the internal investigation becomes a criminal one.Any actions taken in the investi- 
gation would be scrutinized, and anything found could be evidence in a criminal 
trial. 
As will be seen in the following sections, there are a number of standards that 
must be met to ensure that evidence is not compromised and that information has 
been obtained correctly. If forensic procedures are not followed, judges may deem 
evidence inadmissible, defense lawyers may argue its validity, and a case may be sig- 
nificantly damaged. In many cases, the only evidence available is that which exists 
in a digital format. This could mean that the ability to punish an offender rests with 
the security professional's abilities to collect, examine, preserve, and present evi- 
dence. 
www.syngress.com 

632 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Awareness 
The first security issue that should be dealt with is promoting awareness. Often, 
users of a system are the first to notice and report problems. If someone notices a 
door to a server room is unlocked, you want that person to notify someone so the 
door can be locked. The same applies to issues that are criminal, breach corporate 
policy, or violate security in some other way. Until the proper parties are notified, 
computer forensic examinations cannot be performed, because those in a position 
to perform them do not know a problem exists. 
Incident response policies should be implemented to provide an understanding 
of how certain incidents should be dealt with, and who will deal with them. 
Incident response teams have the general responsibilities of identifying what hap- 
pened, assessing and containing damage, and restoring normal operations, but the 
primary functions of computer forensics is to collect evidence that will identify 
what happened and who is responsible. To allow a system to be restored without 
destroying evidence, those performing computer forensic services must work in 
conjunction with those performing normal incident response duties. The: policy 
should outline these responsibilities and identify an Incident Response Neam, which 
must be notified of the issues and who has the knowledge and skills to deal with 
them effectively, and also identify which members are trained in computer foren- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
633 
sics. Members of the Incident Response Team should be experienced in handling 
issues relating to unauthorized access, denial or disruptions of service, viruses, unau- 
thorized changes to systems or data, critical system failures, or attempts to breach 
the policies and/or security of an organization. Specific members of this team who 
will conduct investigations should also be well versed in the tools and techniques of 
computer forensics, so they can quickly respond to situations requiring these skills. 
If the incident is of a criminal nature, the policy should also specify at what point 
law enforcement should be contacted to take control of the investigation. The 
policy should also provide basic procedures for users to follow when an incident 
occurs. Upon realizing an issue exists, users should notify their supervisor, a desig- 
nated person, or a designated department, who then contacts the Incident 
Response Team.While awaiting the team's arrival, the scene of the incident should 
be vacated and any technologies involved should be left as they were. The users 
should also document what they observed when the incident occurred, and list 
anyone who was in the area when the incident occurred. 
Management and employees need to be aware of the need to support computer 
forensic examinations. Funding should be available for tools and ongoing training 
in examination procedures, or to hire outside parties to perform an investigation. 
Since the corporate world revolves around budgets, management may initially balk 
at such an expense, until they realize that these skills provide day-to-day services for 
data recovery. Anytime someone has corrupt or deleted data, the skills and training 
can be used to restore the data, which could save significant amounts of money for 
the business if the data was important enough. If law enforcement is called in, there 
are no direct costs, but there is still the need to cooperate with investigators. 
Because digital evidence may be damaged or destroyed by improper handling 
or examination, management must be aware that considerable time may be 
involved to effectively investigate an incident.Vital systems or facilities might be 
unavailable while evidence is being gathered, and it may be necessary for equip- 
ment to be removed from service to be examined and stored as evidence until a 
criminal case has reached its conclusion. Because personnel may need to be inter- 
viewed and employees may be unable to do their jobs for periods of time, man- 
agers may become impatient and hinder the investigation by attempting to rush it 
along and get people back to work. The goal of management should be to assist the 
investigation in any way possible, and an atmosphere of cooperation should be nur- 
tured to help the investigation proceed quickly and effectively. 
To address how a company should handle intrusions and other incidents, it is 
important that a contingency plan be created. The contingency plan should address 
how the company will continue to function during the investigation, such as when 
www.syngress.com 

634 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
critical servers are taken offline during forensic examinations. Backup equipment 
may be used to replace these servers or other devices, so that employees can still 
perform their jobs and, in the case of e-commerce sites, customers can still make 
purchases. A goal of any investigation is to avoid negatively impacting normal busi- 
ness practices as much as possible. 
Conceptual Knowledge 
Computer forensics is a relatively new field that emerged in law enforcement in 
the 1980s. Since then, it has become an important investigative practice for both 
police and corporations. Not only do most larger police departments have their 
own technological crime units, but many larger companies also have IT staff 
trained in responding to such incidents, inclusive to using tools and techniques sim- 
ilar to those of the police. In doing so, they use scientific methods to retrieve and 
document evidence located on computers and other electronic devices. Retrieving 
this information may result in the only evidence available to convict a culprit or 
enhance more traditional evidence obtained through other investigative techniques. 
Computer forensics uses specialized tools and techniques that are accepted in 
court. Using these tools, digital evidence may be retrieved in a variety of ways. 
Electronic evidence may still reside on hard disks and other devices, even if it has 
been deleted through normal computer functions or hidden in other ways. 
Forensic software can reveal the data that is invisible through normal channels, and 
restore it to a previous state. 
Forensics has four basic components: evidence must be collected, exam- 
ined, preserved, and presented. The tasks involved in forensics will 
either fall into one of these groups, or be performed across most or all 
of them. A constant element is the need for documentation so that 
every action in the investigation is recorded. When taking the test, 
remember the four basic components and that everything must be doc- 
umented. 
Understanding 
An important function of computer forensics is making people understand what 
has happened, and what the evidence indicates. In any forensic investigation, there 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
635 
are many people who will need to be notified and informed as to what has 
occurred. Once a problem is recognized, you will need to maintain a list of who 
were involved in the situation (inclusive to witnesses and potential suspects), deter- 
mine what has occurred (e.g., a system failure or a hacking attempt), determine the 
scope of the problem, and document the steps that were taken. Once you've 
acquired enough information to have an understanding of the situation, you will 
then need to notify management of the problem, and determine if police interven- 
tion is necessary. 
The company's incident response policy should have procedures included in it 
dealing with disclosure, outlining who is to be notified of an incident and when 
police and the public should be notified. Laws or policies may exist stating that any 
crimes must be reported to the police and any incidents must be disclosed to the 
public. In some cases, the situation itself requires going public. For example, in 
October of 2006, Brock University had their systems hacked, with the personal 
information of alumni and other donators being stolen, including credit card and 
banking information. The situation required the university to contact police and 
notify the people whose information may have been stolen. If a company must go 
public with information about an incident or crime, then disclosure of the infor- 
mation should be coordinated with the company's public relations office. A respon- 
sibility of the Incident Response Team will be to provide decision makers with 
information that is easy to understand, and outlines what has occurred and what is 
being done about it. In doing so, management and public relations staff will be 
better able to properly notify the right people (i.e., media, customers, stockholders, 
and so forth) and defuse a potentially embarrassing situation. Because evidence may 
be used in criminal proceedings, thorough documentation cannot be stressed 
enough. Documentation provides a clear understanding of what occurred to obtain 
the evidence, and what the evidence represents. All observations and actions that 
were made must be documented. This information should include the date, time, 
conversations pertinent to the investigation, tasks that were performed to obtain 
evidence, names of those present or who assisted, and anything else relevant to the 
forensic procedures that took place. 
Documentation may also be useful as a personal reference tool or used to tes- 
tify in court. Because of the technical nature involved, it is important to review the 
details of the evidence before testifying at trial. These notes may also be referred to 
on the stand, but doing so will cause them to be entered into evidence as part of 
the court record. As the entire document is entered into evidence, it is very impor- 
tant not to have notes dealing with other cases or other sensitive information in the 
same document, as this will also become public record. 
www.syngress.com 

636 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
What Your Kole Is 
While law enforcement agencies perform investigations and gather evidence with 
the understanding that the goal is to find, arrest, prosecute, and convict a suspect, 
the motivation is not always clear in businesses. A network administrator's job is to 
ensure the network is up and running, while a Web master works to make sure the 
e-commerce site is working. Why would computer forensics be importa.nt to these 
jobs? Because if a hacker takes down a Web site or network, they may continue to 
do so until they are caught. Identifying and dealing with threats is a cornerstone of 
security, whether those threats are electronic or physical in nature. 
Even when police have been called in to investigate a crime, a number of 
people are involved. Members of the IT staff assigned to an Incident Kesponse 
Team are generally the first people to respond to an incident, who then work with 
investigators to provide access to systems and expertise, if needed. Senior staff 
members are notified to deal with the effects of the incident, and any inability to 
conduct normal business. A company's Public Information Officer may be 
involved, if the incident becomes known to the media and is deemed newsworthy. 
If police are not called in, and the matter is handled internally, the Incident 
Response Team deals with a much broader range of roles. Not only will team 
members deal with the initial response to the incident, but they will also conduct 
the investigation and provide evidence to an internal authority. This authority may 
be senior staff, or in the case of a law enforcement agency, an Internal Affairs 
department. Even though no police may be involved in the situation, the proce- 
dures used in the forensic examination should be the same. 
When conducting an investigation, a person must be designated as being in 
charge of the scene. This person should be knowledgeable in forensics, and directly 
involved in the investigation. In other words, just because the owner of the com- 
pany is available, they should not be in charge if they are computer illiterate and/or 
unfamiliar with the procedures. The person in charge should have the authority to 
make final decisions on how the scene is secured and how evidence is searched, 
handled, and processed. 
There are three major roles that people perform when conducting an investiga- 
tion. These roles are: 
9 First responder 
9 Investigator 
9 Crime scene technician 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
As shown in the paragraphs that follow and in Figure 11.5, each of these roles 
have specific duties associated with them, which are vital to a successful investiga- 
tion. In certain situations, such as those involving an internal investigation within a 
company, a person may perform more than one of these roles. 
Figure 11.5 Primary Roles in an Investigation Involving Computer Forensics 
637 
The First Responder 
The ;first responder is the first person to arrive at a crime scene. This does not mean 
the janitor who notices a server is making funny noises and calls someone else to 
check it.While someone like this is still important, a first responder is someone 
who has the knowledge and skill to deal with the incident. The first responder may 
be an officer, security personnel, a member of the IT staff or Incident Response 
Team, or any number of other individuals. The first responder is responsible for 
identifying the scope of the crime scene, securing it, and preserving volatile evi- 
dence. Securing a scene is important to both criminal investigations and internal 
incidents~both use computer forensics to obtain evidence. The procedures for 
investigating internal policy violations and criminal law violations are basically the 
same, except that internal investigations may not require the involvement of law 
enforcement. However, for the remainder of this discussion, the incident will be 
addressed as a crime that has been committed. 
Once the crime scene has been identified, the first responder must then estab- 
lish a perimeter and protect it. Protecting the crime scene requires cordoning off 
the area where evidence resides. Until it is established what equipment may be 
r 
www.syngress.com 

638 
Chapter 11 = Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
excluded, everything in an area should be considered a possible source of evidence. 
This includes functioning and nonfunctioning workstations, laptops, servers, hand- 
held PDAs, manuals, and anything else in the area of the crime. Until the scene has 
been processed, no one should be allowed to enter the area, and people who were 
in the area at the time of the crime should be documented. 
The first responder should not touch anything that is within the crime scene. 
Depending on how the crime was committed, traditional forensics may also be 
used to determine the identity of the person behind the crime. In the course of the 
investigation, police may collect DNA, fingerprints, hair, fibers, or other physical 
evidence. In terms of digital evidence, it is important for the first responder not to 
touch anything or attempt to do anything on the computer(s), as it may alter, 
damage, or destroy data or other identifying factors. 
Preserving volatile evidence is another important duty of the first responder. If 
a source of evidence is on the monitor screen, they should take steps to preserve 
and document it so it is not lost. For example, a computer that may contain evi- 
dence should be left on and have programs opened on the screen. If a power 
outage occurred, the computer would shut down and any unsaved information that 
was in memory would be lost. Photographing the screen or documenting what 
appeared on it would provide a record of what was displayed, and could be used 
later as evidence. 
The Investigator 
When the investigator arrives on the scene, it is important that the first responder 
provide as much information to them as possible. If the first responder touched 
anything, it is important that the investigator be notified so that it can be added to 
the report. Any observations should be mentioned, as this may provide insight into 
resolving the incident. 
The investigator may be a member of law enforcement or the Incident 
Response Team. If a member of the Incident Response Team arrives first: and col- 
lects some evidence, and the police arrive later, it is important that the person in 
charge of the team give all evidence and information dealing with the incident to 
the police. If more than one member of the team was involved in the collection of 
evidence, documentation needs to be provided to the investigator dealing with 
what each person saw and did. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
639 
To reduce the length of the chain of custody, and limit the number of 
people needed to testify as having possession of the evidence, you 
should limit the number of people collecting evidence. It is a best prac- 
tice (whenever possible) to have only one person collecting all of the 
electronic evidence. This may not always be practical in larger investiga- 
tions, where numerous machines need to be examined for possible evi- 
dence. However, even in these situations, you should not have more 
people than absolutely necessary accessing the scene and the evidence 
contained within it. 
A chain of command should be established when the person investigating the 
incident arrives at the scene. The investigator should make it clear that they are in 
charge, so that important decisions are made or presented to them. A chain of cus- 
tody should also be established, documenting who handled or possessed evidence 
during the course of the investigation and every time that evidence is transferred to 
someone else's possession. Once the investigation begins, anyone handling the evi- 
dence is required to sign it in and out, so that there is a clear understanding of who 
possessed the evidence at any given time. 
Even if the first responder has conducted an initial search for evidence, the 
investigator will need to establish what constitutes evidence and where it resides. If 
additional evidence is discovered, the perimeter securing the crime scene may be 
changed. The investigator will either have crime scene technicians begin to process 
the scene once its boundaries are established, or the investigator will perform the 
duties of the technician. The investigator or a designated person remains at the 
scene until all evidence has been properly collected and transported. 
The Crime Scene Technician 
Crime scene technicians are individuals who have been trained in computer forensics, 
and have the knowledge, skills, and tools necessary to process a crime scene. 
Technicians are responsible for preserving evidence, and make great effort to do so. 
The technician may acquire data from a system's memory, make images of hard 
disks before shutting them down, and ensure that systems are properly shut down 
before transport. Before transporting, all physical evidence is sealed in a bag and/or 
tagged to identify it as a particular piece of evidence. The information identifying 
the evidence is added to a log so that a proper inventory of each piece exists. 
www.syngress.com 

640 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Evidence is further packaged to reduce the risk of damage such as that from ESD 
or jostling during transport. Once transported, the evidence is stored under lock 
and key to prevent tampering, until such time that it can be properly examined and 
analyzed. 
As can be seen, the roles involved in an investigation have varying responsibili- 
ties, and the people in each role require special knowledge to perform it properly. 
While the paragraphs above provided an overview of what is involved, in the fol- 
lowing sections look at the specific tasks to understand how certain duties are car- 
ried out. 
Understanding the aspects of forensic procedure is not only vital to an 
investigation, but also for success in the Security+ exam. As with the 
exam as a whole, a broad number of topics are covered dealing with 
the various elements of forensics. Many of these questions are concep- 
tual and address standard practices rather than specific tools, which 
we'll discuss later in this chapter. Expect the main focus of the exam to 
address standard practices and concepts, with many of the questions 
attempting to apply them into real world situations. 
Chain of Custody 
Because of the importance of evidence, it is essential that its continuity be main- 
tained and documented. A chain of custody must be established to show how evi- 
dence went from the crime scene to the courtroom. It proves where a piece of 
evidence was at any given time, and who was responsible for it. Documenting this 
can establish that the integrity of evidence was not compromised. 
If the chain of custody is broken, it could be argued that the evidence fell into 
the wrong hands and was tampered with or that other evidence was substituted. 
This brings the value of evidence into question, and could make it inadmissible in 
court. To prevent this from happening, policies and procedures dealing with the 
management of evidence must be adhered to. 
Evidence management begins at the crime scene, where it is bagged and/or 
tagged.When a crime scene is being processed, each piece of evidence must be 
sealed inside an evidence bag. An evidence bag has two-sided tape that allows it to 
be sealed shut. Once sealed, the only way to open it is by either ripping or cutting 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response ~ Chapter 11 
641 
it open. The bag should then be marked or a tag should be affixed to it, showing 
the person who initially took it into custody. The tag should provide such informa- 
tion as a number to identify the evidence, a case number (which shows what case 
the evidence is associated with), the date and time, and the name or badge number 
of the person taking it into custody. A tag may also be affixed to the object, pro- 
viding the same or similar information to what is detailed on the bag. However, 
this should only be done if attaching a tag to the item does not compromise the 
evidence in any manner. 
Information on the tag is also written in an evidence log, which is a document 
that inventories all evidence collected in a case. In addition to the data available on 
the tag, the evidence log includes a description of each piece of evidence, serial 
numbers, identifying marks or numbers, and other information that is required by 
policy or local law. 
The evidence log also details the chain of custody. This document is used to 
describe who had possession of the evidence after it was initially tagged, transported, 
and locked in storage room. To obtain possession of the evidence, a person needs to 
sign it in and out. Information is added to a chain of custody log to show who had 
possession of the evidence, when, and for how long. The chain of custody log speci- 
fies the person's name, department, date, time, and other pertinent information. 
In many cases, the investigator will follow the evidence from the crime scene to 
court, documenting who else had possession along the way. Each time possession is 
transferred to another person it is written in the log. For example, the log would 
show the investigator had initial custody, while the next line in the log shows a 
computer forensic examiner took possession on a particular date and time. Once 
the examination is complete, the next line in the log would show that the investi- 
gator again took custody. Even though custody is transferred back to the investi- 
gator, this is indicated in the log so there is no confusion over who was responsible 
at any time. 
Preservation of Evidence 
If data and equipment are to be used as evidence, it is important to ensure that 
their integrity has not been compromised. Preservation of data involves practices 
that protect data and equipment from harm, so that original evidence is preserved 
in a state as close as possible to when it was initially acquired. If data is lost, altered, 
or damaged, it may not be admissible in court.Worse yet, the credibility of how 
evidence was collected and examined may be called into question, making other 
pieces of evidence inadmissible as well. 
www.syngress.com 

642 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Volatile data is any data that may be lost once power is lost. For example, if a 
computer is shut down or a power outage occurs, any evidence in the computer's 
Random Access Memory (RAM) will be lost. For this reason, nothing that is pow- 
ered on at a scene should be touched until the evidence is ready to be collected. In 
other words, if a system is on, leave it on. When an investigator arrives and is ready 
to begin collecting data, volatile data should be the first evidence collected. 
Exercise 11.02 demonstrates how to obtain volatile data from a Windows machine. 
If pagers, cell phones, or other equipment that contain possible evidence and 
runs on battery are involved, they need to be preserved for immediate examination. 
Phone numbers, pages received by the person, and other evidence could be lost 
once the battery power runs out. Document anything that is visible through the 
display of a device, and photograph it if possible. 
The same applies to any computers that are turned on at the crime scene. 
Information displayed on a computer's monitor may be lost if the computer is shut 
down. Photographing the screen will preserve information that was displayed on 
the screen at the time of seizure. If a camera is not available, keep detailed notes on 
what appeared on the screen, including any error messages, text in documents, or 
other information. 
If a system has power, it is advisable to make an image of the computer's hard 
disk before powering it down. Criminals sometimes "booby trap" their systems 
with malicious programs that may damage or erase data when the system is shut 
down or started up. An image can be created using special software that makes an 
exact bitstream duplicate of a disk's contents, including deleted data that has not 
been overwritten. (In some cases, even partially overwritten data can be recovered.) 
If the system does not have power when you arrive on the scene, do not start it up. 
A duplicate of the hard disk's contents can be created using imaging soft:ware, by 
booting the system safely from a floppy, preventing any malicious programs from 
damaging data. 
Disk imaging software creates an exact duplicate of a disk's contents, and can be 
used to make copies of hard disks, CDs, floppies, and other media. Disk imaging 
creates a bitstream copy, where each physical sector of the original disk is dupli- 
cated. To make it easier to store and analyze, the image is compressed into an image 
file, which is also called an evidence file. 
Once an image of a disk has been made, the duplicate disk's integrit T should be 
confirmed. Many imaging programs have a built-in ability to perform integrity 
checks, while others require the technician to perform checks using separate pro- 
grams. Such software may use a cyclic redundancy check (CR.C), using a checksum 
or hashing algorithm to verify the accuracy and reliability of the image. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
643 
When ready to perform an examination, copies of data should be made on 
media that is forensically sterile, which means that the disk has no other data on it 
and no viruses or defects. This prevents mistakes involving data from one case 
mixing with other data, as can happen with cross-linked files or when copies of 
files are mixed with others on a disk.When providing copies of data to investiga- 
tors, defense lawyers, or the prosecution, the media used to distribute copies of evi- 
dence should also be forensically sterile. 
While the situations involving each type of computer equipment will be dif- 
ferent, there are a number of common steps that can be followed to protect the 
integrity and prevent the loss of evidence. These procedures assume the computer 
was shut down when you encountered it. 
1. Photograph the monitor screen(s) to capture the data displayed there at 
the time of seizure. Be aware that more than one monitor can be con- 
nected to a single computer; modern OSes such as Windows 2000 and 
Windows XP support spreading the display across as many as ten moni- 
tors. Monitors attached to the computer but turned off could still be dis- 
playing parts of the desktop and open applications. 
2. Take steps to preserve volatile data. 
3. Make an image of the disk(s) to work with so that the integrity of the 
original can be preserved. This step should be taken before the system is 
shut down, in case the owner has installed a self-destruct program to acti- 
vate on shutdown or startup. 
4. Check the integrity of the image to confirm that it is an exact duplicate, 
using a CRC or other program that uses a checksum or hashing algorithm 
to verify that the image is accurate and reliable. 
5. Shut down the system safely according to the procedures for the OS that 
is running. 
6. Photograph the system setup before moving anything, including the back 
and front of the computer showing where the cables and wires are 
attached. 
7. Unplug the system and all peripherals, marking/tagging each piece as it is 
collected. 
8. Use an antistatic wrist strap or other grounding method before handling 
equipment, especially circuit cards, disks, and other similar items. 
www.syngress.com 

644 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
. 
Place circuit cards, disks, and the like in antistatic bags for transport. Keep 
all equipment away from heat sources and magnetic fields. 
Remember that copies of data made for examination should be created 
on forensically sterile media. If other data resides on the disk or CD 
storing the image file (or copy of original data), it can be argued that 
the evidence was compromised by this other data. When CDs that can 
be rewritten (CD-RW) are used, it can be argued that the evidence was 
preexisting data or that it was corrupted in some manner. 
EXERCISE 11.02 
VIEWING VOLATILE DATA IN MEMORY 
You have received a complaint about a possible hacking attempt on 
servers used by the company for file storage. These machines run 
Windows NT Server and Windows 2000 Server OSes. When you arrive, 
you find that these machines are still running. You want to document 
any volatile information that resides in memory before proceeding with 
further forensic procedures. Follow the following steps to acquire this 
volatile data: 
1. Using a computer running Windows NT or Windows 2000, click 
Start I Run. Type ClMID at the Run command, and click OK. 
2. When a window opens, you will see a command prompt. Type 
NETSTAT and then press Enter. Document any information on 
current network connections that is displayed. This will show 
whether the hacker is still connected to the machine. 
3. Type IPCONFIG and then press Enter. Document any information 
about the state of the network. 
4. Type ARP-A to view the ARP cache. Document the information 
on addresses of computers that are connected to the system. This 
will show the addresses of machines recently connected to the 
system, and may show the IP address of the machine used by the 
hacker. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
645 
5. Close the command prompt window. 
Collection of Evidence 
Collection is the practice of identifying, processing, and documenting evidence. 
When collecting evidence, always start by identifying what evidence is present and 
where it is located. For example, if someone breaks into a server room and changes 
permissions on the server, the room and server would be where to find evidence. 
To establish this, the scene is secured, preventing others from entering the area and 
accessing the evidence. If the area was not secured, suspects could enter the area 
and alter or contaminate evidence. For example, if fingerprints are being taken to 
determine who broke into a server room, merely touching the door and other 
items in the room would distort any findings. Maybe the perpetrator left the fin- 
gerprints during the process of breaking in, or maybe they were left by someone 
else when the crime scene was insecure. 
Once the evidence present is identified, investigators are then able to identify 
how the evidence can be recovered. Evidence on computers can be obtained in a 
variety of ways, from viewing log files to recovering the data with special software 
such as the following: 
9 SafeBaek SafeBack has been marketed to law enforcement agencies since 
1990 and used by the FBI and the Criminal Investigation Division of the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to create image files for forensics exami- 
nation and evidentiary purposes. It is capable of duplicating individual par- 
titions or entire disks of virtually any size, and the image files can be 
transferred to Small Computer System Interface (SCSI) tape units or 
almost any other magnetic storage media. SafeBack contains CRC func- 
tions to check the integrity of the copies, and date and timestamps to 
maintain an audit trail of the software's operations. The vendor also pro- 
vides courses to train forensics specialists in the use of the software, pro- 
viding computer evidence in court, and policy management and risk 
analysis. (The company does not provide technical support to individuals 
who have not undergone this training.) SafeBack is DOS-based and can 
be used to copy DOS, Windows, and UNIX disks on Intel-compatible sys- 
tems. Images can be saved as multiple files for storage on CDs or other 
www.syngress.com 

646 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
small-capacity media. To avoid legal concerns about possible alteration, no 
compression or translation is used in creating the image. 
9 Encase Unlike SafeBack, which is a character-based program, Encase has 
a friendly graphical interface that makes it easier for forensics technicians 
to use. It provides for previewing evidence, copying targeted drives (cre- 
ating a bitstream image), and searching and analyzing data. Documents, 
zipped files, and e-mail attachments can be automatically searched and 
analyzed, and registry and graphics viewers are included. The software sup- 
ports multiple platforms and file systems. The software calls the bitstream 
drive image an evidence fie and mounts it as a virtual drive (a read-only 
file) that can be searched and examined using graphical user interface 
(GUI) tools. Timestamps and other data remain unchanged during the 
examination. The "preview" mode allows the investigator to use a null 
modem cable or Ethernet connection to view data on the subject machine 
without changing anything; the vendor says it is impossible to make any 
alterations to the evidence during this process. 
9 ProDiscover This Windows-based application, designed by the 
Technology Pathways forensics team, creates bitstream copies saved as 
compressed image files on the forensics workstation. Its features; include 
the ability to recover deleted files from slack space, analyze alternate datas- 
treams for hidden data, analyze images created with the UNIX dd utility, 
and generate reports. The vendor hosts an e-mail discussion list for 
exchange of tips and techniques and peer support for users of computer 
forensics products (www.techpathways.com). 
If data recovery is needed, the OS being used and/or the media being used to 
store the evidence must be identified. Once this is determined, it is possible to 
decide on the methodology and tools needed to recover the data. 
Processing a crime scene also requires preventing any data from being damaged 
or lost before it can be examined and recorded. This involves taking the precautions 
mentioned above regarding the preservation of evidence. Photographs should be 
taken of what is on the screen of the computer, so that any information can be ana- 
lyzed at a later time. Photographs should also be taken of any other evidence and 
the scene itself. This provides a visual record that may also be presented as evidence. 
Photographs should also be taken of how the equipment is set up.When the 
equipment has been transported and before the examination begins, the equipment 
must be set up exactly as it was at the crime scene. After the case is completed, 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
647 
setup may also be required if the equipment is returned to the owner. To ensure 
the equipment is set up properly, the front and back of the machines should be 
photographed upon seizing it. Photographs or diagrams should be made showing 
how cables and wires were attached. 
As seen in the previous section, volatile data must be collected first, as any data 
stored in memory will be lost when power is lost. Because power failures can occur 
anytime, it is important to collect, photograph, and document whatever informa- 
tion is available on the screen or in memory. When evidence is collected, it is 
important that each piece is tagged with an identifying number and information 
about the evidence is added to the log. It also needs to be bagged properly to pre- 
serve the evidence, such as storing hard disks in anti-static bags to prevent damage 
and data corruption. Once placed in an anti-static bag, it should then be placed in 
a sealed bag to ensure that no one can tamper with it. It should then be placed in a 
locked storage facility (evidence locker or evidence room), so that access to the 
evidence can be properly controlled. 
Risk Identification 
Risk is the possibility of experiencing some form of loss. It does not necessarily 
mean that the risk will become a real problem, but that it has the potential to. To 
deal with this potential, risk management is used to determine what risks are 
potential threats, and then devise ways to deal with them before they become 
actual problems. By taking a proactive approach to risks, the damage that can occur 
from them is minimized. 
www.syngress.com 

648 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Risk identification is the process of ascertaining what threats pose a risk to a 
company so that it can be dealt with accordingly. There are many different types of 
risks that can affect a business, and each organization faces different ones. For 
example, an e-commerce site is at risk of credit card information being acquired by 
a hacker, while a public information site with no sensitive data would not consider 
this to be a potential problem. For this reason, you cannot identify risks by 
adopting a list created by another organization. Each business must identify the 
risks they may be in danger of confronting. 
A common type of risk is a disaster, which can be naturally occurring or the 
result of accidents and malfunctions. Natural disasters include storms, floods, fires, 
earthquakes, tornadoes, or any other environmental event. They can also include 
situations that may cause damage to an organization, such as when a fire breaks out 
due to faulty wiring, a pipe bursts, or a power outage occurs. In addition to these 
risks, an organization is commonly at risk for equipment failures, such as air condi- 
tioning breaking down in the server room, a critical system failing, or any number 
of other problems. As will be seen in Chapter 12, disasters can create massive 
damage to a company, so countermeasures must be established to deal with them. 
Risks from external sources do not just come in the form of natural[ occur- 
rences. As discussed throughout this book, there are a number of different risks that 
result from malicious persons and the programs they use and disseminate. Trojan 
horse attacks, viruses, hackers, and various other attacks can devastate an organiza- 
tion as effectively as any natural disaster. An attack on systems can result in disrup- 
tion of services or the modification, damage, or destruction of data. 
Internal risks are often overlooked. These are risks in which consequences result 
from the actions of persons employed by an organization. Corporate theft costs busi- 
nesses considerable amounts of money every year. This not only relates to the theft 
of computers and other office equipment, but to small thefts that add up over time. 
Software and data are also targets of corporate theft. Employees may steal instal- 
lation CDs or make copies of software to install at home. A single program can cost 
hundreds or even thousands of dollars, while copied CDs that are illegally installed 
can result in piracy charges and legal liability. If an employee takes sensitive data 
from a company and sells it to a competitor or uses it for other purposes, the com- 
pany could lose millions of dollars or face liability suits or even criminal charges if 
the stolen data breaches client confidentiality. In cases where data involves corpo- 
rate financial information, embezzlement could also result. By failing to address the 
risk of such theft, a company can be at risk of huge losses. 
When incidents occur, the impact of an event could pose additional risks. If a 
company loses confidence in a business, sales could drop significantly. For example, 
r 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
649 
if an e-commerce site was hacked and the culprit stole customer credit card num- 
bers, numerous customers would be uncomfortable with that site's security, and 
stop buying products from them online. Publicity from the incident could also 
devalue stocks, making the company's worth drop significantly. As seen in these 
examples, cause and effect can result in multiple risks involved in a single incident. 
Asset Identification 
A list of what assets a company possesses is needed to determine what risks would 
apply. Assets are the property and resources belonging to a company that are used 
to determine what risks will affect them and what impact those risks will have. 
Even a small company may own a considerable number of assets, which should be 
inventoried as part of the risk management process. 
All networks consist of a certain amount of hardware. Peer-to-peer networks 
have workstations, hubs, printers, scanners, and other equipment, while client/server 
networks also have servers that provide a number of different services to users. 
Without this equipment, the business may be unable to conduct normal operations. 
Computers and servers also have a number of different software installations, with 
additional software available on installation CDs that are stored separately. This may 
be commercial software, which can be purchased off the shelf in stores, or in-house 
software that is created by programmers working for the company. While commer- 
cial software could be replaced by purchasing additional copies from the vendor, in- 
house software may be irreplaceable and may need to be recreated in the event of a 
disaster. 
Another major asset of a business is its data. If a company lost its customer 
database, financial spreadsheets, crucial documents, or any number of other files, the 
business could be crippled. To effectively deal with risks, you need to determine 
what data is important and establish methods of protecting it. 
Although each of these focus on computer-related items, those who work for 
the company should not be forgotten. People are as much an asset to a company as 
any of the other assets used to run a business. For example, if the network adminis- 
trator is the only one with knowledge of the system, the impact of losing this 
person would be great. To deal with the risk that the administrator could be 
injured, killed, or otherwise lost from the company's employ, methods of ensuring 
their safety and well-being should be determined. It is important to identify vital 
members of an organization and provide methods of continuing business activities 
if they are unavailable. 
www.syngress.com 

650 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Other elements of an organization that should be identified as assets; are furni- 
ture, tools, office supplies, and other components of the business. Even though 
these are fairly low priority items when compared to the others, their loss could 
seriously jeopardize a company. 
Tagging and inventorying assets allows you to identify what assets are at risk, so 
you can develop plans to protect, recover, and replace them. Tagging assets involves 
putting a numbered sticker or barcode on each asset. The tags should have a 
number that is then documented in an asset log. The log should describe the asset, 
and provide such information as the tag number, description of the asset, serial 
number, and other information relevant to the equipment. Not only carl this inven- 
tory be used to identify risks, it can also be used to make insurance claims and 
replace equipment in the case of a disaster. 
When identifying assets, the value and importance of each should also be deter- 
mined.Value refers to the actual monetary worth of an item, while importance 
refers to the impact the asset will have on the company if it is lost. Determining 
the value and importance is essential, as it will be used to determine which assets 
require added protection from risks. 
To calculate value, look at the current depreciated value of assets. Equipment 
and certain other assets drop in value each year they are used. and are less valuable 
the longer they are used. This is the same principal as when purchasing a car.When 
a new car is driven off the lot, it becomes a used vehicle and is less valuable. As the 
years go by, wear and tear on the car depreciate it further. This same principle also 
applies to other assets owned by a company. 
The cost of replacing an item can also be used to determine the value of an 
asset.When considering critical systems that have been in service for a number of 
years, the depreciated value may have decreased to the point that it has no value 
under this calculation. For example, an e-commerce business may have been using 
the same server for the past six years, and the value depreciated by 25 percent per 
year. Does this mean that the Web server has no value to the organization and 
should not be considered in determining objects at risk? No. Because the server is 
vital to business operations, it would need to be replaced immediately if it was 
damaged or destroyed. To determine the value of an asset, the cost of this replace- 
ment must be determined and used in the calculations. 
Data is another asset that may be difficult to assess, as it may have no monetary 
value but is essential to the company's ability to function.While a value could be 
determined based on the cost of having programmers recreate a program from 
scratch and employees reenter the data, this may not provide an accurate assess- 
ment. For example, the secret recipe for a certain fried chicken could be typed into 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
651 
a single document, making its value seem almost worthless. However, since the 
entire company is based on the recipe, losing this data could bankrupt the business. 
For this reason, the importance of an asset must be considered. 
Determining the importance of an asset is often speculative, and generally 
involves assigning a weight (sometimes called a metric) to each asset. The weight of 
the asset is based upon the impact a loss will have on the company. For example, 
while a network router may have little monetary value, the loss of the router could 
take out parts of the network, preventing people from doing their work. This makes 
the weight of importance higher.When creating the inventory of assets, a column is 
included on the sheet where a value can be assigned based upon the importance of 
that equipment. This value is on a scale of 1 to I0, with 10 having the highest 
importance. 
The information gathered through asset identification can be used in priori- 
tizing which assets should be dealt with first in an incident, and where policies and 
procedures need to be created. As mentioned above, to calculate value, look at the 
current depreciated value of the assets. Equipment and certain other assets of 
importance are also used in other aspects of risk management, as will be seen in the 
following sections. 
Assets and risks may come not only in the form of objects, but also in 
the form of people. Humans are also a resource, and may provide dis- 
tinctive skill sets. They can also be the cause of major problems, such as 
theft or malicious damage to equipment and data. When answering 
questions dealing with risks and assets, do not forget that people are an 
important component of both topics. 
Risk Assessment 
Although you have gathered a considerable amount of data to this point, you will 
need to analyze this information to determine the probability of a risk occurring, 
what is affected, and the costs involved with each risk.Assets have different risks 
associated with them, and you need to correlate different risks with each of the 
assets inventoried in a company. Some risks will impact all of the assets of a com- 
pany, such as the risk of a massive fire destroying a building and everything in it, 
while in other cases, groups of assets will be effected by specific risks. 
www.syngress.com 

652 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Assets of a company will generally have multiple risks associated with them. 
Equipment failure, theft, or misuse can affect hardware, while viruses, upgrade 
problems, or bugs in the code can affect software. Looking at the weight of impor- 
tance associated with each asset should help prioritize which assets should be ana- 
lyzed first, and determine what risks are associated with each. 
Once you have determined what assets may be affected by different: risks, you 
then need to determine the probability of a risk occurring.While there, may be 
numerous threats that can affect a company, not all of them are probable. For 
example, a tornado is highly probable for a business located in Oklahoma City, but 
not highly probable in New York City. For this reason, a realistic assessment of the 
risks must be performed. 
Historical data can provide information on how likely it is that a risk will 
become reality within a specific period of time. Research must be performed to 
determine the likelihood of risks within a locality or with certain resources. By 
determining the likelihood of a risk occurring within a year, you can determine 
what is known as the Annualized Rate of Occurrence (ARO). 
Information for risk assessment can be acquired through a variety of sources. 
Police departments can provide crime statistics on areas where facilities are located, 
allowing the owners to determine the probability of vandalism, break-ins, or dan- 
gers potentially encountered by personnel. Insurance companies also provide infor- 
mation on risks faced by other companies, and the amounts paid out when these 
risks became reality. Other sources may include news agencies, computer incident 
monitoring organizations, and online resources. 
Once the ARO is calculated for a risk, it can be compared to the monetary loss 
associated with an asset. This is the dollar value that represents how much money 
would be lost if the risk occurred. This can be calculated by looking at the cost of 
fixing or replacing the asset. For example, if a router fails on a network, a new one 
must be purchased and installed. In addition, the company would have to pay for 
employees who are not able to perform their jobs because they cannot access the 
network. This means that the monetary loss would include the price of new equip- 
ment, the hourly wage of the person replacing the equipment, and the cost of 
employees unable to perform their work.When the dollar value of the loss is calcu- 
lated it provides a total cost of the risk, or the Single Loss Expectancy (SLE). 
To plan for a probable risk, you need to use the AR.O and the SLE to find the 
Annual Loss Expectancy (ALE). For example, say that the probability of a Web 
server failing is 30 percent. This would be the AR.O of the risk. If the e-.commerce 
site hosted on this server generates $10,000 an hour and the site is estimated to be 
down two hours while the system is repaired, the cost of this risk is $20,000. In 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
653 
addition, there would also be the cost of replacing the server itself. If the server cost 
$6,000, this would increase the cost to $26,000. This would be the SLE of the risk. 
Multiplying the AR.O and the SLE calculates how much money would need to be 
budgeted to handle this risk. The following formula provides the ALE: 
ARO x SLE = ALE 
When looking at the example of the failed server hosting an e-commerce site, 
this means the ALE would be: 
.3 X $26,000 = $7,800 
To deal with a risk, an assessment must be done on how much needs to be 
budgeted to handle the probability of the event occurring. The ALE provides this 
information, leaving you in a better position to recover from an incident when it 
Occurs. 
EXERCISE 11.03 
DETERMINING THE ANNUAL 
LOSS EXPECTED TO OCCUR FROM RISKS 
A widget manufacturer has installed new network servers, changing its 
network from a peer-to-peer (PTP) network to a client/server-based net- 
work. The network consists of 200 users who make an average of $20 an 
hour, working on 100 workstations. Previously, none of the workstations 
involved in the network had antivirus software installed on the 
machines. This was because there was no connection to the Internet, 
and the workstations did not have floppy disk drives or Internet connec- 
tivity, so the risk of viruses was deemed minimal. One of the new servers 
provides a broadband connection to the Internet, which employees can 
use to send and receive e-mail and surf the Internet. A manager reads in 
a trade magazine that other widget companies reported an 80 percent 
chance of viruses infecting their networks after installing T1 lines and 
other methods of Internet connectivity, and that it may take upwards of 
three hours to restore data that has been damaged or destroyed. A 
vendor will sell licensed copies of antivirus software for all servers and 
the 100 workstations at a cost of $4,700 per year. The company has 
asked you to determine the annual loss that can be expected from 
viruses, and determine if it is beneficial in terms of cost to purchase 
licensed copies of antivirus software. 
www.syngress.com 

654 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
1. What is the ARO for this risk? 
2. Calculate the SLE for this risk. 
3. Using the formula ARO x SLE = ALE, calculate the ALE. 
4. Determine whether it is beneficial in terms of monetary value to 
purchase the antivirus software, by calculating how much money 
would be saved or lost by purchasing it. 
Answers to exercise questions: 
1. The ARO is the likelihood of a risk occurring within a year. The 
scenario states that trade magazines calculate an 80 percent risk 
of virus infection after connecting to the Internet, so the ARO is 
80 percent or .8. 
2. The SLE is the dollar value of the loss that equals the total cost of 
the risk. In this scenario, there are 200 users who make an 
average of $20 per hour. Multiplying the number of employees 
who are unable to work due to the system being down by their 
hourly income means that the company is losing $4,000 an hour 
(200 x $20 = $4000). Because it may take up to three hours to 
repair damage from a virus, this amount must be multiplied by 3, 
because employees will be unable to perform duties for approxi- 
mately three hours. This makes the SLE $12,000 ($4000, x 3 = 
$12,000). 
3. The ALE is calculated by multiplying the ARO by the SI.E (ARO x 
SLE = ALE). In this case, you would multiply $12,000 by 80 percent 
(.8) to give you $9,600 (.8 x $12,000 = $9,600). Therefore, the ALE 
is $9,600. 
4. Because the ALE is $9,600 and the cost of the software that will 
minimize this risk is $4700 per year, the company would save 
$4900 per year by purchasing the software ($9600- $4.700 = 
$4900). 
Threat Identification 
Once the risks have been identified and the loss that can be expected from an inci- 
dent is determined, decisions can be made on how to protect the company. After 
performing a risk assessment, a company may find a considerable number of prob- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
655 
able threats that may include intrusions, vandalism, theft, or other incidents and sit- 
uations that vary from business to business. 
There is no way to eliminate every threat that may affect a business. There is no 
such thing as absolute security. To make a facility absolutely secure would be exces- 
sive in price, and it would be so secure that no one would be able to enter and do 
any work. The goal is to manage risks, so that the problems resulting from them will 
be minimized. 
The other important issue to remember is that some threats are expensive to 
prevent. For example, there are a number of threats that can impact a server. 
Viruses, hackers, fire, vibrations, and other risks are only a few. To protect the server, 
it is possible to install security software (such as antivirus software and firewalls) and 
make the room fireproof, earthquake proof, and secure from any number of threats. 
The cost of doing so, however, will eventually become more expensive than the 
value of the asset. It is wiser to back up the data, install a firewall and antivirus soft- 
ware, and run the risk that other threats will not happen. The rule of thumb is to 
decide which risks are acceptable. 
After calculating the loss that may be experienced from a threat, cost-effective 
measures of protection must be found. To do this, you need to identify which 
threats will be dealt with and how. Decisions need to be made by management as 
to how to proceed, based on the data collected on risks. In most cases, this involves 
devising methods of protecting the asset from threats by installing security software, 
implementing policies and procedures, or adding additional security measures to 
protect the asset. 
It may be decided that the risks and costs involved with an asset are too high. 
In such cases, the asset should be moved to another location or eliminated com- 
pletely. For example, if there is concern about a Web server being affected by vibra- 
tions from earthquakes in California, then moving the Web server to the branch 
office in New York nullifies the threat. Removing the asset subsequently eliminated 
the threat of it being damaged or destroyed. 
Another option is to transfer the potential loss associated with a threat to 
another party. Insurance policies can be taken out to insure an asset, so that if any 
loss occurs, the company can be reimbursed through the policy. Leasing equipment 
or services through another company can also transfer a risk. If a problem occurs, 
the leasing company is responsible for fixing or replacing the assets involved. 
Finally, the other option is to do nothing about the potential threat and live 
with the consequences (if they occur). This happens often, especially when consid- 
ering that security is a tradeoff. Every security measure put in place makes it more 
difficult to access resources and requires more steps for people to do their jobs. A 

656 
Chapter 11 ~ Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
company may have broadband Internet connectivity through a T1 line for 
employees working from computers inside the company, and live with the risk that 
they may download malicious programs.While this is only one possible situation 
where a company lives with a potential threat, it shows that in some situations it is 
preferable to have the threat rather than to lose a particular service. 
Vulnerabilities 
After identifying what threats a company must deal with, it is important to analyze 
where vulnerabilities exist in a system.Vulnerabilities are weaknesses that leave a 
system exposed to probable threats. For example, a damaged door lock to a server 
room would leave the assets inside vulnerable to break-ins. Identifying the vulnera- 
bilities that exist can lessen the possibility that a threat will occur by taking mea- 
sures to remove the weakness from a system. 
Vulnerabilities can exist in a variety of forms. Earlier in this chapter, a number 
of physical security issues and how their vulnerabilities could be addressed were 
discussed. Software also has a variety of vulnerabilities, requiring that service packs, 
patches, fixes, and upgrades be installed to repair any weaknesses that could be 
exploited. In addition, the OS may have services running that are not actually 
required. If unneeded services are left running, a hacker can use them to gain entry. 
As such, they should be removed. 
When a vulnerability exists, the threat associated with it remains until 
the vulnerability is removed. This means the vulnerability can actually 
contribute to the likelihood of a threat occurring. The only way to 
remove the threat associated with it is to ensure that the vulnerability is 
removed from the system. 
As mentioned earlier, there may be situations where a company decides to live 
with a potential threat, rather than do anything about it. Even though a known 
vulnerability exists in a system, the company may decide that the need ti)r a service 
exceeds any potential problems. For example, a company with a dial-in connection 
for remote access provides a possible route for hackers.Without the remote access, 
employees would not be able to dial into the computer and access network 
resources from home. Thus, the company may decide to live with the risk, rather 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
657 
than losing the ability to dial in remotely. However, if the threat has a severe 
enough risk of loss associated with it, the vulnerability should be removed. 
Failing to fix a known vulnerability can contribute to the likelihood of a threat 
occurring, so whenever possible, administrators should take steps to minimize the 
impact or likelihood of the risk. For example, say a bug existed in the Web server 
software, which would enable a hacker to access sensitive areas of the system or 
gain entry to the network. If there is no bug fix or service pack installed, the vul- 
nerability will continue to exist. The longer it is there, the greater the possibility of 
someone discovering this vulnerability and exploiting it. Once someone does, the 
information can be shared with other hackers, increasing the frequency of resulting 
incidents. To reduce the likelihood of the threat occurring in the first place, vulner- 
abilities should be removed once they are discovered. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

658 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Having stressed the need to keep up-to-date with patches, updates, and 
upgrades, there is something to be said about minor delays. Many network admin- 
istrators find it is a good idea to wait until others have tried installing and using 
new updates and patches before doing so themselves. Sometimes issues occur when 
installing such fixes, updates, or upgrades, and thus additional problems ;ire experi- 
enced. An example is Service Pack 6 for Windows NT, which caused so many 
problems upon installation that it was removed from Microsoft's Web site a short 
time later. Those who waited to see what issues other users experienced avoided 
these problems and used Service Pack 6a to update their systems. Waiting does not 
mean that you should delay applying a patch or update by weeks or months, but it 
may be wise to at least wait a day to see if there are any adverse effects reported. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
659 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Physical security is the process of safeguarding facilities, data, and equipment from 
bodily contact and environmental conditions. This security is provided through 
access control methods such as physical barriers that restrict access through locks, 
guards, and other methods. Biometric authentication is also used to prevent access 
by using measurements of physical characteristics to determine whether access will 
be granted. Unfortunately, even with these methods, nothing can prevent security 
from being breached through social engineering, in which the user is tricked into 
revealing passwords and other information. 
Forensics combines investigative techniques and computer skills for the collec- 
tion, examination, preservation, and presentation of evidence. Information acquired 
through forensic procedures can be used in the investigation of internal problems 
or for criminal or civil cases. Awareness should be promoted so that the users in an 
organization know to contact the Incident Response Team when incidents such as 
hacking occur, and management supports any investigations conducted by the 
team. Because any evidence acquired in an investigation may be used in court pro- 
ceedings, it is vital that strict procedures be followed in a forensic investigation. 
Risk is the possibility of loss, and may come in the form of natural disasters, 
internal theft, viruses, or any number of other potential threats. To address this pos- 
sibility, risk management is used to identify potential threats and develop methods 
of dealing with them before they occur. Risk management requires a company to 
identify what risks may affect them, the assets that are related to certain risks, the 
likelihood and impact of each risk occurring, and methods to reduce the damage 
that may be caused if they do occur. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Physical Security 
gl Physical security protects systems from physical threats, such as those 
resulting from bodily contact and environment conditions. 
Restricted areas like server rooms require all areas to be secure. This 
includes false ceilings and floors, walls, doors and other areas that could be 
used as points of access. This may involve installing barriers, alarms, 
scanners, locks or other security mechanisms. 
www.syngress.com 

660 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Biometric authentication uses the physical attributes of a person to 
determine whether access should be given. 
Tailgating or piggybacking involves a person following another authorized 
person (who has used access control methods like key cards, PIN numbers, 
biometrics or other methods) into a secure area or building 
r---el Dumpster diving involves going through trash to find documents that 
contain sensitive information, such as work product, usernames, passwords, 
or information on IP addresses and other data about systems and the 
network. 
Social engineering involves gaining the confidence of someone to trick 
them into providing information. 
Phishing involves sending e-mails to people to entice the recipient into 
responding and providing confidential information. 
The environment in which equipment resides must be air-conditioned, 
have proper humidity levels, and have other conditions that are suitable for 
the equipment stored inside. 
Forensics 
Computer forensics is the application of computer skills and investigation 
techniques for the purpose of acquiring evidence. It involves collecting, 
examining, preserving, and presenting evidence that is stored or 
transmitted in an electronic format. 
It is important that a crime scene is secure and that anyone who had 
access to the area and witnessed the incident is documented. Information 
displayed on monitors should be documented or photographed, computers 
that are running should be left running to protect volatile data, and those 
shut off should remain off to avoid activating any malicious soft:ware that 
may be installed on the machine. 
Computer forensic software should be used to make an image of the 
disk(s) to work with so that the integrity of the original can be preserved. 
Copies of data should be made on media that is forensically sterile. This 
means that the disk has no other data on it, and has no viruses ,or defects. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
661 
gl A chain of custody is used to monitor who has had possession of evidence 
at any point in time, from the crime scene to the courtroom. 
Risk Identification 
gl 
V--d 
Risk identification is the process of ascertaining what a company may be 
at risk from, so that it can be dealt with accordingly. Dealing with these 
risks is done through the process of risk management. 
Assets are the property and resources belonging to a company. Identifying 
assets is important to determining what risks will effect them and the 
impact those risks will have. This includes human assets. 
gl Vulnerabilities are weaknesses in a system that can leave a system open to 
possible threats. When a vulnerability exists, the threat associated with it 
remains until the vulnerability is removed. 
gl The SLE is the dollar value relating to the loss of equipment, software, or 
other assets. This is the total loss of risk that will be incurred by the 
company should a risk actually occur in the future. 
r-------d The A1KO is the likelihood of a risk occurring within a year. 
gl The ALE is the expected loss that will be incurred by a company each 
year from a risk, and is calculated from the SLE and the A1KO (ALE = 
ARO x SLE). 
www.syngress.com 


Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
A: A person conducting computer forensic investigations and examinations should 
have expert computer skills, including an understanding of hardware, network 
technologies, programming skills, and forensic procedures. It is also a good idea 
for the forensics investigator to have a good knowledge of applicable local, state, 
and federal laws regarding computer crimes and rules of evidence. 
Q~ 
A: 
How should I prepare evidence to be transported in a forensic investigation? 
Before transporting evidence, you should ensure that it is protected from being 
damaged. Hard disks and other components should be packed in anti-static 
bags, and other components should be packaged to reduce the risk of damage 
from being jostled. All evidence should be sealed in a bag and/or tagged to 
identify it as a particular piece of evidence, and information about the evidence 
should be included in an evidence log. 
Q 
m 
A 
ll 
I want to fix vulnerabilities by installing the latest bug fixes and service packs 
on my servers, but I'm concerned about issues where the service pack or bug 
fix causes more harm than what it is repairing. How can I minimize the risk of 
problems associated with installing service packs and bug fixes? 
A number of cases have occurred where problems arise after a bug fix or ser- 
vice pack has been installed. To minimize the risk of this occurring, wait a short 
period of time after it is initially released to determine what problems (if any) 
can be expected from installing the fix or service pack. Even after others have 
tried it successfully, you should not install major system updates on your critical 
systems without first testing them on a prototype system that is not connected 
to the production network. 
663 

664 
Chapter 11 , Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete cluestions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
. 
A company has just implemented a recycling program in which paper, plastics 
and other discarded items can be collected. Large containers are located 
throughout facilities, allowing employees to deposit papers, water bottles and 
other items in them, so they can be reprocessed into other products. After a 
custodian brings a full container out to be picked up by a recycling company, 
he uses his card key to get back into the building and holds the door for a 
woman wearing business attire and carrying an attach6 case. After the dump- 
ster has been emptied by the recycling company, he goes out, and wheels it 
back into the building. Which of the following security threats has occurred? 
A. Dumpster diving 
B. Tailgating 
C. Social engineering 
D. Phishing 
. 
A company consists of a main building with two smaller branch orifices at 
opposite ends of the city. The main building and branch offices are connected 
with fast links, so that all employees have good connectivity to the network. 
Each of the buildings has security measures that require visitors to sign in, and 
all employees are required to wear identification badges at all times.You want 
to protect servers and other vital equipment so that the company has the best 
level of security at the lowest possible cost.Which of the following will you 
do to achieve this objective? 
No 
Centralize servers and other vital components in a single room of the 
main building, and add security measures to this room so that t]hey are 
well protected. 
go 
Centralize most servers and other vital components in a single room of 
the main building, and place servers at each of the branch offices.Add 
security measures to areas where the servers and other components are 
located. 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
665 
Co 
Do 
Decentralize servers and other vital components, and add security mea- 
sures to areas where the servers and other components are located. 
Centralize servers and other vital components in a single room of the 
main building. Because the building prevents unauthorized access to visi- 
tors and other persons, there is no need to implement physical security in 
the server room. 
. 
o 
You are evaluating the physical security of a server room to determine if it is 
sufficient to stop intruders from entering the room. The room is 20 feet long 
with concrete walls that extend up to a false ceiling and down below the 
raised floor that contains network cabling. An air vent with a bolted grate is 
located at the top of one of these walls. There are no windows, and a keypad 
on the door that requires a four-digit code to unlock the door.Which of the 
following changes would you do to make this room secure? 
A. Seal the air vent to prevent people from crawling into the room through 
the vent. 
B~ 
Co 
Do 
Seal the area above the false ceiling to prevent people from crawling 
through the plenum. 
Seal the area below the raised floor to prevent people from crawling 
through this area. 
Replace the locking mechanism on the door. 
A company is using Apple computers for employees to work on, with UNIX 
servers to provide services and store network data. The servers are located in a 
secure server room, utilize password protection through a screensaver, and use 
disk encryption.Workstations are located throughout the facilities, with front 
desk computers in a reception area that is accessible to the public. The work- 
stations in the reception area have cables with locking mechanisms to prevent 
people from carrying them away, and don't have access to the Internet as man- 
agement feels the receptionist doesn't require it. All workstations are con- 
nected to the network, and automatically receive software updates from 
network servers.Which of the following needs to be done to improve security 
without affecting the productivity of the receptionist? 

666 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
, 
. 
o 
A. Replace all of the Apple computers with PCs running Windows 
B. Enable password protection on servers 
C. Enable password protection on workstation screensavers 
D. Provide front desk computers with Internet access, so they can update 
anti-virus software with the latest signature files 
A problem with the air conditioning is causing fluctuations in temperature in 
the server room. The temperature is rising to 90 degrees when the air condi- 
tioner stops working for a time, and then drops to 60 degrees when you get 
the air conditioner working again. The problem keeps occurring so that the 
raising and lowering of temperature keeps occurring over the next two days. 
What problems may result from these fluctuations? 
A. ESD 
B. Biometrics 
C. Chip creep 
D. Poor air quality 
A server has been compromised by a hacker who used it to send spam mes- 
sages to thousands of people on the Internet.A member of the IT staff 
noticed the problem while monitoring network and server performance over 
the weekend, and has noticed that several windows are open on the server's 
monitor. He also notices that a program he is unfamiliar with is running on 
the computer. He has called you for instructions as to what he should do 
next.Which of the following will you tell him to do immediately? 
A. Shut down the server to prevent the hacker from using the server further 
B. Reboot the server to disconnect the hacker from the machine and using 
the server further 
C. Document what appears on the screen 
D. Call the police 
You are at a crime scene working on a computer that was hacked over the 
Internet.You're concerned that a malicious program may have been installed 
on the machine that will result in data being damaged or destroyed if the 
computer is shut down or restarted.Which of the following tasks will you 
perform to deal with this possibility? 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response ~ Chapter 11 
667 
A. Photograph anything that is displayed on the screen 
B. Open files and then save them to other media 
C. Use disk imaging software to make a duplicate of the disk's contents 
D. Leave the system out of the forensic examination, and restore it to its pre- 
vious state using a backup. 
~ You have created an image of the contents of a hard disk to be used in a 
forensic investigation.You want to ensure that this data will be accepted in 
court as evidence.Which of the following tasks must be performed before it is 
submitted to the investigator and prosecutor? 
A. Copies of data should be made on media that's forensically sterile. 
Bo 
Copies of data should be copied to media containing documentation on 
findings relating to the evidence. 
Co 
Copies of data can be stored with evidence from other cases, so long as 
the media is read-only. 
D. Delete any previous data from media before copying over data from this 
case. 
. 
An investigator arrives at a site where all of the computers involved in the 
incident are still running. The first responder has locked the room containing 
these computers, but has not performed any additional tasks. Which of the fol- 
lowing tasks should the investigator perform? 
A. Tag the computers as evidence 
B. Conduct a search of the crime scene, and document and photograph what 
is displayed on the monitors 
C. Package the computers so that they are padded from jostling that could 
cause damage 
D. Shut down the computers involved in the incident 
10. You are part of an Incident Response Team investigating a hacking attempt on 
a server.You have been asked to gather and document volatile evidence from 
the computer.Which of the following would qualify as volatile evidence? 
www.syngress.com 

668 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
A. Any data on the computer's hard disk that may be modified. 
B. Fingerprints, fibers, and other traditional forensic evidence. 
C. Data stored in the computer's memory 
D. Any evidence stored on floppy or other removable disk 
11. You are assessing risks and determining which policies to protect assets will be 
created first. Another member of the IT staff has provided you with a list of 
assets, which have importance weighted on a scale of I to 10. Internet con- 
nectivity has an importance of 8, data has an importance of 9, personnel have 
an importance of 7, and software has an importance of 5. Based on these 
weights, what is the order in which you will generate new policies.? 
A. Internet policy, Data Security policy, Personnel Safety policy, Software 
policy. 
B. Data Security policy, Internet policy, Software policy, Personnel Safety 
policy. 
C. Software policy, Personnel Safety policy, Internet policy, Data Security 
policy. 
D. Data Security policy, Internet policy, Personnel Safety policy, Software 
policy. 
12. You are researching the ARO, and need to find specific data that can be used 
for risk assessment.Which of the following will you use to find infk3rmation? 
A. Insurance companies 
B. Stockbrokers 
C. Manuals included with software and equipment 
D. None of the above. There is no way to accurately predict the ARO. 
13. You are compiling estimates on how much money the company could lose if 
a risk actually occurred one time in the future.Which of the following would 
these amounts represent? 

Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 9 Chapter 11 
669 
A. Al%O 
B. SLE 
C. ALE 
D. Asset Identification 
14. You have identified a number of risks to which your company's assets are 
exposed, and want to implement policies, procedures and various security 
measures. In doing so, what will be your objective? 
A. Eliminate every threat that may affect the business. 
B. Manage the risks so that the problems resulting from them will be mini- 
mized. 
C. Implement as many security measures as possible to address every risk that 
an asset may be exposed to. 
D. Ignore as many risks as possible to keep costs down. 
www.syngress.com 

670 
Chapter 11 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Incident Response 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. 
B 
8. A 
2. A 
9. B 
3. B 
10. C 
4. C 
11. D 
5. C 
12. A 
6. C 
13. B 
7. C 
14. B 

Chapter 12 
Exam Objectives in this Chapter" 
9 
Policies and Procedures 
Privilege Management 
9 
Education and Documentation 
Disaster Recovery 
Business Continuity 
Exam Objectives Review" 
I-Vl Summary of Exam Objectives 
I-Vl Exam Objectives Fast Track 
I-Vl 
Exam Objectives Frequently Asked Questions 
I-r 
Self Test 
I-Vl Self Test Quick Answer Key 
671 

672 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Introduction 
Polices, procedures, documentation, and disaster recovery are some of the most 
important parts of a Security Analyst's job.Well thought out plans and documents 
provide information that is used to create a successful security system.~rithout 
them, organizations would find it difficult to deal with incidents when they occur, 
or avoid problems that can adversely affect a company.As a Security+ technician, 
you are expected to understand the fundamental concepts of different policies, pro- 
cedures, and documentation that make up the foundation on which computer 
security is built. 
This chapter examines the concepts of policy creation.You will see that even 
though a company may have a wide variety of different policies, without backing 
from management or a high-level executive, policies may be unenforceable and 
worthless. In such situations, security procedures may be challenged, declined, or 
rejected unless there is a good policy in place to enforce them. Having proper 
backing from decision makers enables policies to deal with situations when they 
occur, and deters employees from using technologies that negatively impact the 
company. There are many different types of policies and procedures available. A 
business may have a large collection of policies and procedures that address a 
variety of issues, because no one document can address every rule, regulation, or 
situation. The following sections look at some of the common ones that you will 
encounter or create. 
Privilege manag, ement allows you to control access through various metlhods, and is 
a primary feature of good security. This chapter discusses the fundamentals of single 
sign-on technology, auditing, and how to find and address problems as they occur. 
Education and documentation are two topics that are extremely important, yet 
often overlooked as part of security. If users were educated more, the amount of 
hacking in a company (or home) system would drop significantly. For instance, 
many users do not understand the importance of securing passwords, and use pass- 
words that are easy to guess or they leave them in plain view. Education informs 
the user as to what is expected of them, and how to perform actions securely. 
Documentation provides a resource on how tasks are to be carried out, chronicles 
changes to systems, and provides a written record that contributes to an organiza- 
tion's security. 
Business continuity and disaster recovery are covered in great detail on the 
Security+ exam; however, they are also a fundamental part of any secure infrastruc- 
ture. This chapter will show you how to implement a sound plan to keep your 
business running and disaster free. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
673 
Policies and Procedures 
In society, there are laws that govern proper conduct, and law enforcement and 
judicial systems to deal with problems as they arise. In organizations, policies are 
used to outline rules and expectations, while procedures outline courses of action 
to deal with problems. These policies and procedures allow everyone to understand 
the organization's views and values on specific issues, and what will occur if they 
are not followed. 
A policy is used to address concerns and identify risks. For example, a policy 
may be created to deal with physical security to an office building and the poten- 
tial threat of unauthorized access. It may state that members of the public are per- 
mitted in the lobby and front desk area, but points beyond this are for employees 
only. Through the policy, an issue that is pertinent to the organization is explained 
and dealt with. 
Procedures consist of a series of steps that inform someone how to perform a 
task and/or deal with a problem. For example, a procedure instructs someone on 
how to restore backed up data to a server that crashed. By following these instruc- 
tions, the person can effectively deal with the crisis. In other cases, procedures show 
how to avoid problems in the first place. For example, a procedure dealing with 
physical security might state how a visitor should be signed into a building and 
escorted to a particular department. Through such a procedure, problems associated 
with people having free access to secure areas (such as a server room) can be 
avoided. 
Creating policies and procedures may seem a daunting task, but it is easier 
when you realize that the document answers the following questions: who, what, 
when, where, why, and how? 
9 Who and where? A policy needs to specify which persons or depart- 
ments are affected. In many cases, it may apply to all employees, while in 
other situations it may be directed toward certain individuals in limited 
circumstances. For example, if everyone has access to the Internet, the 
policy outlining this access and rules dealing with it apply to everyone. In 
addition, the policy must specify who is responsible for dealing with prob- 
lems and violations of the policy. In the case of an Internet policy, the 
Information Technology (IT) staff may be assigned the task of controlling 
access and maintaining equipment, and department managers or other 
decision makers would be responsible for deciding a violator's punishment. 
www.syngress.com 

674 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
What? The policy needs to provide details of what is being addressed and 
the specifics relating to it. For example, an Internet policy may contain 
rules dealing with e-mail use, guidelines on Internet use, programs that are 
prohibited for use during work hours (such as Web-based games), and Web 
sites that are considered improper to use. In many cases, this will be the 
bulk of the policy. 
When? At what time does this policy come into effect? You will need to 
specify whether the policy should be followed immediately, or if it will be 
enforced after a specific date. In some cases, policies have an effective date 
and an expiration date. 
Why? This explains the purpose of the policy, and what an organization 
hopes to achieve from it. This may include a brief background on issues 
that brought about the need for the policy. 
How? This is the procedure needed to make a policy work.W]hen a policy 
includes procedures, it specifies how the policy is to be implemented, exe- 
cuted, and enforced. If additional procedures exist, these documents should 
also be referenced in the policy document so that readers know about 
their existence and where to find them. 
When you are writing policies, you are writing for an audience. Policies created 
by a company need to be relevant and understandable to those affected by it. In 
many cases, this requires using non-technical terms to describe technology, explain 
requirements, and outline proper actions. Part of the document may even include a 
section that defines specific terms used in the policy, such as explaining what a 
"client" and "server" are. There may also be a need to write for specific levels of 
education. For example, a policy used by elementary or high school students would 
be written differently than one for university students. For a policy to be followed, 
it must be understood by the intended reader. 
Policies and procedures are not static documents that live forever. Some policies 
outlive their time and need to be revised or revoked. For example, before the 
Internet became popular, many companies and individuals ran Bulletin Board 
Systems (BBSs) in which people dialed directly into a computer to download files, 
send messages, and perform other tasks. If a company had a BBS policy but has 
long since gotten rid of it and developed a Web site, the old policy should be can- 
celled and replaced by a new Internet policy. In such cases, the BBS policy should 
be categorized as cancelled and the new Internet policy should indicate it: is 
replacing this old policy. By regularly reviewing policies to determine which ones 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
675 
are no longer applicable to the company, organizations will have up-to-date policies 
that are meaningful and relevant. 
Security Policies 
Security policies address the need to protect data and systems within an organiza- 
tion. In other words, this not only includes files on a server, but also the server 
itself. A good security policy should: 
9 Dictate how employees acquire access to an organization's data 
9 Determine the level of access employees are given to specific data 
9 
Offer instructions on how to best provide physical security for an organi- 
zation's equipment 
In some organizations, these issues may be separated into multiple policies that 
address each topic separately. Some of the policies that may be needed when cre- 
ating security standards for an organization include: 
9 
Restricted access policies 
9 Workstation security policies 
9 
Physical security policies 
www.syngress.com 

676 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
While each of these policies address individual topics, together they .enhance 
the security of an organization as a whole. 
Restricted Access Policies 
Access can be controlled in a variety of ways.When determining access levels for 
employees, it is important that each user only receive the minimum access required 
to do their job. Anything more is a security risk. 
Determining what level of security a user needs to perform their job usually 
requires some investigation. All users of a network may have their own personal 
directories for storing files, but may need additional access to databases, programs, 
and files stored on various servers. To determine how much access a user or group 
needs, the user's duties should be discussed with management. Understanding the 
job a user performs enables the administrator to determine what resources the user 
will require access to. 
The Internet is another area where restricted access may be necessary. Many 
sites have areas that contain information that is limited to a selected group of users. 
Corporate Web sites may have sections for employees, where they are required to 
enter a username and password to view information on pensions, employee dis- 
counts, and other confidential or restricted information. Another common require- 
ment for restricted access on Web sites involves "members only" access, where 
customers pay for access to information, files, or other data that isn't available to the 
public at large. Generally, individual usernames and passwords are all that's required 
to prevent unauthorized users from accessing these sections. 
More elaborate security is needed if the data being accessed is sensitive enough, 
or users need to access resources on an internal network from the Internet or using 
dial-up connections.Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) may be used in a company, 
allowing authorized users to connect over the Internet to access files, programs, and 
other network resources. Using tunneling protocols like Point-to-Point ~hnneling 
Protocol (PPTP) or Layer Two Tunneling Protocol (L2TP), remote clients can 
access resources over an encrypted connection. Two factor authentications, using a 
username and password combined with a PIN number or some other identifier 
may also be used to authenticate users. For example, RSA Security provides an 
authentication method called SecurlD, where users have a token (a piece of hard- 
ware with a digital display) that generates a different numeric code every sixty sec- 
onds or so. This code is different for each token, and corresponds to a number 
generated on a server.When a user logs in over aVPN or remote connection, he or 
she must enter a username, PIN number, and the number provided by the token. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
677 
Because users need special hardware with this method of authentication, a 
restricted access policy would be used to specify the criteria for determining who 
is issued equipment as well as access. 
Restricted access policies are used to control access, and make it understandable 
as to how and why these limitations exist. They dictate who is able to acquire 
restricted access, how they obtain it, what the different levels of access provide, time 
limitations that may be involved, and other elements involved in the restrictions 
placed on users.While some situations may involve subscriptions for increased 
access, most organizations will base the requirements for restricted access on a 
member's need for classified information and controlled resources. 
A restricted access policy addresses not only addresses access to data, but also 
admittance to various locations. Most companies do not allow everyone freedom of 
movement to every area of a facility. Businesses will generally limit unaccompanied 
public access to a common area (such as a reception area), and may restrict 
employees from entering certain sections of a building or property. The reasons for 
such restrictions vary, but are usually logical and valid. A server room will be 
restricted to protect servers, networking equipment, and data, a computer forensics 
lab will seek to prevent contamination of evidence, while a medical lab will strive 
to protect patient privacy and the health and safety of other employees. To enforce 
these restrictions, identification cards may be used to classify access levels, and mea- 
sures of physical security may be implemented. As we'll see in a following section, 
physical security policies are often a counterpart of restricted access policies. 
Workstation Security Policies 
In any networking environment, workstations are the most widely used pieces of 
equipment, so they should also be addressed in a policy. A workstation is any com- 
puter that is connected to a network (inclusive to desktop and laptop computers) 
and utilizes network resources. If a user has unlimited access to the computer they 
are working with, they can store files on the local hard drive, floppy disks, or other 
drives. By not addressing workstations in a security policy, a user may consider it 
permissible to store non-work-related files on the local drive or copy sensitive data 
to removable media. 
Another issue involving workstation security is a user's ability to install pro- 
grams or change settings on a workstation. Potential issues to consider are: 
9 
Users could inadvertently alter their display settings so they are unable to 
view anything. 
www.syngress.com 

678 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
9 Users could inadvertently modify protocol settings so they are unable to 
access the network. 
9 If uneducated users have the ability to install programs, they could install a 
malicious or virus-infected program. 
9 Users could install games on their workstation that use up valuable hard 
drive space, or tie up an inordinate amount of an organization's, network 
bandwidth. 
9 Users could make a variety of mistakes, well meaning or otherwise, that 
cause additional work for IT staff. 
To protect resources, a workstation security policy should also address how 
workstations will be configured when initially put into use. This may include speci- 
fying multiple local accounts on workstatiorfs; one used by administrators to change 
settings and install programs, and another used by general users that have restricted 
permissions. By implementing such measures, users will be less likely to perform 
malicious or accidental actions that jeopardize security. It will also include strategies 
on protecting data on workstations, such as specifying whether the file system is to 
be encrypted. Encryption will prevent unauthorized persons from being able to 
read files, and deny an intruder from accessing folders and their contents.. By using 
a policy to specify how workstations are configured, security is enhanced 
throughout the organization. 
Because clients have evolved well beyond personal computers wired to a net- 
work, workstation security policies may also be part of a larger equipment policy. 
Such policies may include Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), cell phones, pagers, 
and other wireless handheld devices (such as a Blackberry), as well as printers, scan- 
ners, and other devices issued to individual users or available on the network. The 
policies should include information on the criteria or procedure for acquiring cer- 
tain equipment (as everyone generally won't get their own laptop), and the 
approved products that are supported by the organization. After all, if a department 
purchases Palm PDAs for its staff but the organization only supports Blackberry 
devices, then the department will have unusable equipment on their hands. 
Another aspect to consider when creating such policies is whether personal 
equipment will be supported by the organization. Many employees may have their 
own laptop computers, but generally a company won't provide technical support or 
allow them to be added to a network. After all, computers or devices owned by 
individuals won't be configured the same as systems owned by the company, nor 
will they have the same security settings and software installed. This could leave the 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
679 
network open to viruses and malicious software installed on the person's computer. 
Beyond this, allowing the personal equipment may exempt the person from other 
policies, such as those involving acceptable use that we discuss later in this chapter. 
In addition to this, if the person undergoes disciplinary proceedings or termination 
of employment, chances are he or she will be unlikely to supply the company with 
their computer to ensure any files, software, or other data on the machine has been 
properly removed. Due to the issues related to personal equipment being used on a 
network, it is often best not to allow personal equipment to be used for business 
purposes. 
Continued 
r 
www.syngress.com 

680 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Physical Security Policies 
Security policies should also address physical security. Physical security is the applica- 
tion of preventative measures, countermeasures, and physical barriers that are 
designed to prevent unauthorized individuals from accessing facilities, areas, or 
assets of a company. These unauthorized individuals can be intruders or employees 
of the business.After all, if a user does not have the ability to perform certain 
actions from their own workstation, a security risk may still exist if they can physi- 
cally sit at a server and modify security settings or delete important data. The solu- 
tion to such intrusions would be that servers and other vital equipment should be 
locked in a secure room (or closet) to prevent unauthorized persons from accessing 
it. Physical security policies outline how to restrict physical access, limiting the 
potential impact of various threats. 
There are numerous assets and aspects of physical security that must be 
addressed in security policies. These include: 
9 
Facilities, which focuses on the buildings and properties of an organiza- 
tion, and outlines access controls used to enter and leave various areas. The 
policy should also incorporate section security, where specific areas like 
server rooms, reception areas, labs, and other areas that are restricted or 
open to the public are addressed. 
9 Assets, which focuses on the hardware, software, data, equipment, per- 
sonnel, and other items of value in an organization. The policy should 
address issues that could result in tampering, theft, or damage. For 
example, a courthouse with heightened security may need to limit phys- 
ical access to front desk personnel, and require a barrier made of bullet- 
proof/shatterproof glass to be erected. 
9 
Control measures, which outline how facilities and other assets of the com- 
pany are secured. Areas that are designated as restricted zones may require 
locks, biometric authentication, or any number of other control :measures. 
Workstations, servers, and other equipment may also be physically secured, 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
681 
using cables that are locked to the hardware and bolted to the wall or racks 
in a server room. Similarly, physical access to computers may implement 
usernames and passwords, password-protected screensavers, smart cards, or 
other authentication methods that prevent unauthorized use. 
9 Validation procedures, which outline how access is given and how the 
validity of a person's presence in a restricted area can be verified. 
Authentication may involve the control measures we previously men- 
tioned, and other methods that identify and confirm the validity of indi- 
viduals. It may also specify the roles of specific departments to perform 
background checks, verify credentials, issue identification cards, and other 
tasks necessary in confirming a person's identity and what they are 
bringing into a facility (i.e., laptops, network analyzers, or other equip- 
ment that could pose a security risk). 
9 
Monitoring and record keeping, which manages who is or was in an area 
at a given time. Such measures may involve electronic surveillance 
methods like video cameras, or human interaction, such as security guards 
or receptionists who are responsible for individuals within a certain area. 
Records may also be used to manage access, such as using sign-in sheets, 
maintenance records, or other documents that identify a person presence, 
when they attended the location, and their purpose for being there. 
A physical security plan addresses numerous components of an organization, 
including its facilities, personnel, computers, equipment, and other assets. The 
objectives of the plan focuses on safeguarding these assets from theft, tampering, 
and other threats that could result from unauthorized physical access. To restrict 
access and reduce such risks, it is important that the policy be thorough in 
addressing any areas where security could be an issue. 
For more information on issues relating to physical security, refer to 
Chapter 11, "Operational and Organizational Security: Incident 
Response." 
www.syngress.com 

682 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Secu rity Proced u res 
Procedures are sets of detailed instructions that describe how to accomplish an 
objective, and provide guidance on how to perform certain actions to achieve a 
particular result. Security procedures are necessary, because they describe, the 
methods necessary to implement a policy. For example, a policy may require data 
on servers to be backed up, but procedures will inform members of the IT staff 
how to perform the backups, providing step-by-steps instructions on how to per- 
form the task. Without procedures, a policy would simply be a goal without a 
strategy. 
Procedures are different from policies in a number of other ways. While policies 
are available to view throughout an organization, procedures are available only to 
those who need them. This is because, although they address specific technologies, 
they are written in a way that a novice could follow. A procedure may provide 
instructions on programs to use, IP addresses of resources on a network, usernames 
and passwords, and other information needed to perform a series of tasks that will 
reconfigure equipment. In the wrong hands, this could make procedures a dan- 
gerous tool. 
Because procedures document each step in a process, they only need to be 
updated when a particular step or the process itself changes. For example'., a new 
version of a program may change its menus, requiring a procedure to be updated to 
indicate the new menus and menu items used. Similarly, if a company no longer 
supports the program, then the entire process may change to accommodate a new 
program with similar functionality. While a procedure may be changed, it will con- 
tinue to exist as long as a policy demands certain tasks to be performed. 
Acceptable Use Policies 
An acceptable use policy establishes guidelines on the appropriate use of" technology. It 
is used to outline what types of activities are permissible when using a computer or 
network, and what an organization considers proper behavior. Acceptable., use poli- 
cies not only protect an organization from liability, but also provide employees with 
an understanding of what they can and cannot do using company resources. 
In an organization, employees act as representatives of the company to the 
public. How they conduct themselves and the actions they perform, reflect upon 
the organization, and can either enhance or damage the reputation of the company. 
Because employees have greater access to clients and other members of the public 
through e-mail, Web pages, and other technologies, acceptable use policies are used 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
683 
to ensure that users conduct themselves appropriately. Acceptable use policies 
restrict users from making threatening, racist, sexist, or offensive comments. In 
many cases, companies fortify this position by providing empathy training. 
Acceptable use policies also restrict the types of Web sites or e-mail an 
employee is allowed to access on the Internet.When employees access pornography 
over the Internet, not only does it use up bandwidth and fill hard disk space on 
non-work-related activities, but it also creates an uncomfortable work environment 
for the other employees. Under the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and other legislation, 
a company can be liable for creating or allowing a hostile work environment. For 
this reason, businesses commonly include sections in their acceptable use policies 
that deal with these issues. 
Beyond dealing with potentially offensive materials, acceptable use policies also 
deal with other online activities that can negatively impact network resources or 
sidetrack users from their jobs. For example, a user who installs game software or 
other technologies is often distracted from the duties they were hired to perform. 
These distractions are activities the company did not intend to pay the user to per- 
form. For this reason, restrictions on installing software and other technologies on 
company computers can be found in acceptable use policies. 
With many companies providing users with laptop computers, wireless hand- 
held devices (such as Blackberry or Palm devices), cell phones, and other equip- 
www.syngress.com 

684 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
ment, the propensity of employees to use these devices for their own personal use 
is a problem. For example, an employee may use a company's wireless phone to call 
home, or use a laptop to pay their personal bills online. Acceptable use policies rou- 
tinely include sections that restrict users from using equipment for their own per- 
sonal use, home businesses, or other methods of financial gain. 
Acceptable use policies should also specify methods of how information can be 
distributed to the public to avoid sensitive information from being "leaked." 
Imposing rules on the dissemination of information may include: 
9 
Specifications that prohibit classified information from being transmitted 
via the Internet (e.g., e-mail, Short Message Service (SMS), or File 
Transfer Protocol (FTP) 
9 
Provisions on how content for the Web site is approved 
[] 
Rules on printing confidential materials 
9 
Restricting who can create media releases, and so on 
Through these rules, important information is protected and employees have an 
understanding of what files they can or cannot e-mail, print, or distribute to other 
parties. 
Continued 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
685 
Many organizations implement acceptable use policies as contracts between the 
company and the employee, and require workers to sign a copy of the policy to 
show that they agree to abide by it. Since schools teach computer skills in early 
grades, parents and guardians are routinely asked to sign such policies on behalf of 
minors. Through these contracts, organizations have justifiable reason to fire 
employees or (in the case of schools) expel students who violate the agreement. In 
extreme cases, it can be used as evidence for prosecution. Because the responsibility 
of adhering to the policy is placed on the person signing it, organizations can also 
use the signed acceptable use policy as part of their defense from litigation. For 
example, if an employee hacks a competitor's Web site, a company could use the 
signed policy to show the onus of responsibility rests with the employee and not 
the company itself. 
What is the best way to enforce an acceptable use policy? Audits should be 
conducted on a regular basis, inclusive of audits of data stored in personal directo- 
ries and local hard disks and audits of firewall and system logs, to determine what 
has been accessed. In cases where suspected breaches of policy have occurred, e- 
mail messages may also be audited. Because courts have generally held that 
employees have no reasonable expectation to privacy regarding data stored on com- 
puters belonging to a company means that such audits can occur regularly and 
without warning. To ensure users are aware that these audits occur, and inform 
them that the organization takes its acceptable use policy seriously, mention of such 
measures should be included in the policy. 
Due Care 
Due care is the level of care that a reasonable person would exercise in a given situa- 
tion, and is used to address problems of negligence. Due care may appear as a 
policy or concept mentioned in other policies of an organization. Put simply, an 
organization and its employees must be careful with equipment, data, and other 
elements making up the electronic infrastructure. Irresponsible use can cause lia- 
bility risks for an organization, or result in termination of a careless employee. 
www.syngress.com 

686 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Computer software and equipment is expensive, so employers expect staff 
members to take care when using it. Damage caused by irresponsible use can void 
warranties, meaning the company must pay for any repairs. Using assets in a way 
they were not intended, or breaching the recommendations or agreements estab- 
lished in the licensing or documentation (such as the owner's manual), are consid- 
ered irresponsible uses. For example, using security software for hacking: purposes 
or using equipment to hold open a door would be considered irresponsible. Users 
are expected to take reasonable levels of care when using the equipment and soft- 
ware that is issued to them.What is considered reasonable often depends on the 
equipment or software in question, but generally involves following the recommen- 
dations and best practices included in the equipment or software's documentation. 
Primarily, it involves using common sense and taking care of the assets as a reason- 
able person would. 
Maintaining equipment and software is not solely the responsibility of the user; 
employers must also acknowledge their part in due care. Technologies need to be 
maintained and updated regularly. For this reason, due care policies exist for the 
purpose of outlining who is responsible for taking care of specified equipment. This 
may be an IT staff member who ensures that users have the hardware, software, and 
access to resources to do their jobs properly. Because technology changes, the IT 
staff responsible for due care needs to determine the life spans of various technolo- 
gies and upgrade them after specified periods of time. 
Due care also applies to data. Irresponsibly handling data can destroy it, unin- 
tentionally modify it, or allow sensitive information to fall into the possession of 
unauthorized users. It can also result in privacy issues. Irresponsibility on the part of 
a company can infringe on an employee's right to privacy, such as when informa- 
tion in a personnel database or permanent record is allowed to be accessed without 
authorization. Irresponsibility on the part of users can also result in sensitive infor- 
mation becoming available to unauthorized parties, such as when a salesperson e- 
mails a client's credit card information over the Internet to another department or 
person. As will be seen in the next section, privacy policies may also be a legislated 
requirement of conducting business in certain industries, such as those involving 
health care or finance. 
Reasonable efforts must be made to ensure the integrity of data, including reg- 
ular checks for viruses, Trojan horse attacks, and malicious programs. Efforts must 
also be made to deal with the possibility of problems occurring, such as main- 
taining regular backups of data. By setting up proper procedures for protecting data 
and ensuring damaged data can be recovered, a system's integrity and security are 
drastically enhanced. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
687 
The methods of practicing due care can be found through the recommended 
or "best" practices offered by manufacturers of equipment, operating systems 
(OSes), and other software. For example, pushing the power button on a computer 
will shut it down, but may also corrupt data on the machine. OS manufacturers 
recommend that users shut down their OS in a specific way (such as by clicking 
Shut Down on the Windows Start menu). For users to follow best practices for 
using hardware and software, they must be educated in how to practice due care. 
Privacy 
Privacy has become a major issue over the last few years, as the people who use 
technology are increasingly fearful of unauthorized persons or employers viewing 
personal information transmitted across networks, saved on machines, or stored in 
databases. People often have an expectation of privacy when using various tech- 
nologies, and are unaware that actual privacy may not exist. Privacy policies spell 
out the level of privacy that employees and clients can expect, and an organization's 
perspective of what is considered private information. Areas typically covered in a 
privacy policy are: 
9 Unauthorized software 
9 E-mail 
9 Web site data 
While companies may voluntarily incorporate a privacy policy, some industries 
are required by law to maintain specific levels of privacy for client information. The 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) mandates hospitals, 
insurance companies, and other organizations in the health field to comply with 
security standards that protect patient information. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
(GLB) Act is another piece of legislation that mandates banks, credit unions, bro- 
kers, and other financial institutions to protect information relating to their clients. 
The GLB Act requires these institutions to inform clients of their policies regarding 
the information collected about them, and what will be shared with other organi- 
zations. If organizations that require privacy policies fail to comply with the legisla- 
tion, they are in violation of federal or state laws. 
Privacy policies commonly state that an organization has the right to inspect the 
data stored on company equipment. This allows an organization to perform audits 
on the data stored on hard disks of workstations, laptops, network servers, and so 
forth. By performing these audits on a regular basis, an organization can determine 
if employee resources are wasted on non-work-related activities, or if network 
www.syngress.com 

688 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
resources are being wasted on old data. For example, if an organization is consid- 
ering purchasing an additional file server, performing an audit on their current file- 
server may reveal that employees are using up hard disk space by saving outdated 
files, games, personal photos, duplicated data, and other items that can be deleted. 
Although employees may assume that the data stored in their personal directories on 
equipment that is issued to them is private, a privacy policy could state that the 
equipment and any data stored on it are the property of the organization. 
Privacy policies may also authorize such audits on the basis of searching for 
installations of pirated or unauthorized software. Pirated software is software that is 
not licensed for use by the person or company, and can cause liability issues 
resulting in fines or prosecution. Unauthorized software may include such things as 
games or applications for personal use (photo software, online bill paying software, 
and so on) installed on workstations and laptops. Unauthorized software can cause 
a plethora of problems including causing conflicts with company software or con- 
taining viruses or Trojan horses. 
Trojan horses are applications that appear to be legitimate programs, such as a 
game or software that performs useful functions but contain code that perform 
hidden and/or unwanted actions. For example, an employee may install a calculator 
program that they downloaded from the Internet, not knowing that it secretly 
sends data regarding the person's computer or network to a hacker's e-mail address. 
Not only can such programs reveal information about the system, but the Trojan 
horse may also acquire information from the network (such as sensitive informa- 
tion about clients). 
Just as data stored on a computer or network is considered the property of an 
organization, e-mail (another form of data) may also be considered corporate prop- 
erty. Privacy policies often state that e-mail sent or received through business e- 
mail addresses belongs to the organization and should not be considered private. 
The organization can then examine the e-mail messages, ensuring that the business 
e-mail account is being used properly. While this seems like a blatant violation of 
personal privacy, consider how e-mail can be abused. A person can make threats, 
reveal sensitive information, harass, or perform any number of immoral and crim- 
inal actions while posing as a representative of an organization. The organization 
uses the privacy policy to ensure that each employee is representing the organiza- 
tion properly while using corporate e-mail. 
As Internet access has become common in organizations, monitoring Web sites 
that have been visited has also become common. Firewalls are used to prevent 
unauthorized access to the internal network from the Internet, but also enable 
organizations to monitor what their employees are accessing on the Internet. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
689 
Companies can check firewall logs to determine what sites an employee visited, 
how long they spent there, what files they downloaded, and other information that 
the employee may consider private. Again, since the Internet access is provided 
through the company and is therefore their property, the company should inform 
users through the privacy policy of their privilege to investigate how employees are 
using this resource. 
Companies may also stipulate the privacy of client information, or those with a 
presence on the Web may include or create a separate policy that deals with the 
privacy of a visitor to their Web site. In terms of actual clients (those people with 
whom a company does business), the policy should state what level of privacy a 
client can expect. This may include the protection of client information, including 
information on sales, credit card numbers, and so forth. In the case of law enforce- 
ment, this might include information on a person's arrest record that cannot be 
concealed under the Public Information Act and Open Records laws, personal 
information, and other data. For both clients and visitors to Web sites, a company 
may stipulate whether information is sold to third parties, which may send them 
advertisements, spam, or phone solicitations. 
Separation of Duties 
Separation of duties ensures that tasks are assigned to personnel in a manner that no 
single employee can control a process from beginning to end. Separation of duties 
is a common occurrence in secure environments, and involves each person having a 
www.syngress.com 

690 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
different job, thus allowing each to specialize in a specific area. This provides a 
number of benefits to the security of an organization. 
In an organization that uses a separation of duties model, there is less chance of 
people leaking information, because of the isolated duties that each employee per- 
forms in contribution to the whole. If a user does not know something., they 
cannot discuss it with others. Because the needs of persons performing separate 
duties would not require the same access to the network and other systems, each 
person (or department) would have different security needs. In other words, the 
data of one person or department would not need to be viewed, deleted, or modi- 
fied by another. A good example of this would be the Internal Affairs office of a 
police department, which investigates infractions of officers. Because other officers 
are being investigated, you would not want them having access to the reports and 
data dealing with their case. Doing so could jeopardize the integrity of that data. 
Another benefit of separating duties is that each person (or group of people) 
can become an expert in their job. Rather than trying to learn and be responsible 
for multiple tasks, they can focus their expertise on a particular area. This means, 
theoretically, you always have the best person available for a job. 
Separation of duties does not mean that there is only one person in an organi- 
zation that can perform a specific duty, or that people are not accountable for their 
actions. It would be inadvisable to have only one person know a particular duty. If 
this were the case and that person were injured or left the company, no one else 
would be able to do that particular job. Thus, each task should be documented, 
providing detailed procedures on how to perform duties. 
Supervisors and managers should be aware of the duties of each subordinate so 
they can coordinate jobs effectively. This is particularly important in crisis situations 
such as those involving disaster recovery (discussed later in this chapter). By sepa- 
rating duties, each person is able to focus on their individual tasks, with each fixing a 
piece of the problem. Not only does this provide a more effective method of dealing 
with a crisis, but it also allows the situation to be successfully resolved faster. 
Need to Know 
A "need to know" basis refers to people only being given the information or access 
to data that they need to perform their jobs. The less information someone has, the 
less they have to share with others. It also decreases the risk of accidents or mali- 
cious actions, which can occur when people have access to more information than 
they need to perform their jobs. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
691 
An idiom of World War II was "loose lips sink ships," meaning that people 
sharing information could cause a disaster. This same philosophy applies to security 
issues today. Each piece of sensitive information a person has about a process, 
system, or company can be told to others. For example, someone who knows about 
corporate stock going up could tell others, resulting in insider trading. By mini- 
mizing the number of facts each employee knows, the risk of leaking information 
also decreases. 
To prevent sensitive data from leaking outside of an organization, non-disclo- 
sure agreements may also be used. A non-disclosure agreement is a formal agree- 
ment between a company and an employee, in which the employee agrees, not to 
reveal classified information to third parties. For example, a police officer would 
not be able to discuss sensitive information about an ongoing investigation, or a 
programmer would not be allowed to reveal information about a new process 
being developed by the company. On the other hand, if the information was non- 
classified, such as a media release that was sent to newspapers, the employee could 
discuss these non-classified elements of the project.Violating a non-disclosure 
agreement could leave a company legally liable, and may be grounds for termina- 
tion or prosecution of the employee. 
When setting up security on a network, it is important that each user does not 
receive more access than needed to perform their job. If users can access sensitive 
data, they can potentially view, alter, or delete it. This could have a devastating 
effect on a network and a company. 
Policies and procedures should be implemented that require written requests 
for network access. Employees should submit a written request, reasons for addi- 
tional access should be justified, and supervisors or managers should sign the docu- 
ment. As will be seen later in this chapter, access requests from new employees 
should be submitted to the network administrator by the Human Resources (H1K) 
department. This provides accountability through a paper trail that shows access was 
requested for a valid reason and who approved the request. 
Password Management 
Passwords are used to prevent unauthorized access to computers, networks, and 
other technologies, by forcing anyone who wants access to provide specific infor- 
mation. Password management involves enacting policies that control how passwords 
are used and administered.Without good password management, security could be 
compromised by passwords that are easy to guess, repeatedly used, or have charac- 
teristics that make them insecure. 
www.syngress.com 

692 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Passwords act as a secret between the system and the person, allowing entry 
only to those with the correct password and denying entry to those who fail to 
provide one. Unfortunately, while the system can keep a secret, people often 
cannot. For example, a secretary may give a temporary employee her password so 
they do not have to go through the trouble of applying for additional access. 
Another may write a password down on a piece of paper and tape it to the mon- 
itor. In both of these cases, people obtain unauthorized access by sharing a pass- 
word. Because of the importance of password protection, a policy should state that 
users are responsible for their accounts and anything that is done with them. 
Strong Passwords 
Even if a user is protective of their password, it can still be cracked through the use 
of tools or by simply guessing the password. Passwords that are words can be 
cracked using a dictionary hacking program, which goes through words found in a 
dictionary. In addition to this, hackers can easily guess names of family members, 
pets, or other interests. Strong passwords are more difficult to guess and cannot be 
cracked using dictionary hacks. Using a combination of two or more of" the fol- 
lowing keyboard character types can create strong passwords: 
9 
Lower case letters (a through z) 
9 
Upper case letters (A through Z) 
9 
Numbers (0 through 9) 
9 
Special characters (({}[],.<>;:'"?/]\'~!@#$%A&*0_-+ =) 
Strong passwords can still be cracked using a program that performs a brute- 
force attack (covered in Chapters 9 and 2), that tries to determine the password by 
using all possible combinations of characters in a password, but hacking a password 
in this manner can take a considerable amount of time. 
Longer passwords make it more difficult for brute-force hackers to crack a pass- 
word, so the policy should specify a minimum password length. For example, a 
policy may state that passwords must be at least eight characters long. 
Password Changes and Restrictions 
Passwords should be changed after a set period of time, so that anyone who has a 
particular password will be unable to use it indefinitely, and others will have more 
difficulty guessing it. A common recommendation is forcing users to change pass- 
words every 45 or 90 days, at the most. While changing it often is more secure, it 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
693 
will make it more difficult for users to remember their passwords. As with any 
security measure, you want authorized users to easily access the system and unau- 
thorized users to find it difficult. For this reason, the time limit set should allow 
users to memorize their new passwords before forcing them to change. 
In addition to changing passwords, it is important that a policy states that pass- 
words cannot be reused until a certain number of password changes have occurred. 
It does no good to force users to change their passwords and then allow them to 
change it back to the previous password again. If an old password has been compro- 
mised, a hacker could keep trying it until the user changes back to the old password. 
Password changes and not reusing old passwords is particularly important when 
strong passwords cannot be used. For example, a bankcard with a personal identifi- 
cation number (PIN) for accessing accounts through an automated teller machine 
(ATM). A PIN is a series of numbers, so combinations of alphanumeric and special 
characters are not possible. Another example might be a door lock to a server 
room, in which people type in a several-digit code on a keypad to unlock the 
door.When an authorized user enters the code, it is possible that unauthorized 
users could see it. Changing the numeric code on a regular basis prevents unautho- 
rized users from utilizing a code they have seen others successfully use. 
Using Passwords as Part 
of a Multifaceted Security System 
Because passwords are not always the most secure method of protecting a system, 
there are other methods that can be used to enhance security. As we discussed ear- 
lier in this chapter, SecurlD tokens are small components that can fit on a key ring 
and be carried by the user in their pocket. The token has a digital display that 
shows a number that changes at regular intervals.When a person logs into a 
SecurlD server, they must enter the number on the token in addition to the appro- 
priate username and PIN number. 
Another method that may be suitable for a network's security is biometric 
authentication. Biometric authentication uses a measurable characteristic of a person to 
control access. This can be a retinal scan, voiceprint, fingerprint, or any number of 
other personal features that are unique to a person. Once the feature is scanned, it 
is compared to a previous reading on file to determine whether access should be 
given. As with tokens, this method can be combined with passwords or other secu- 
rity methods to control access. Due to the expense of purchasing additional equip- 
ment and software, biometrics is generally used on high-security systems or 
locations. 

694 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Administrator Accounts 
Administrator passwords are another important issue that should be cow~red in a 
password policy, as anyone using an administrative account is able to make changes 
and access all data on a system. Because of the importance of this account, there 
should be limits on who knows the password to this account. If there are numerous 
people in IT who perform administrator duties, they should have their own 
accounts with the minimum access needed to perform their tasks, and fi~llow the 
same rules as other user accounts (e.g., changing passwords regularly, using strong 
passwords, and so forth). The password for the administrator account should be 
written down, sealed in an envelope, and stored in a safe. Should the administrator 
leave, or this account be needed, others in the IT staff can still use the account and 
make necessary system changes. 
SLA 
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) are agreements between clients and service 
providers that outline what services will be supplied, what is expected from the ser- 
vice, and who will fix the service if it does not meet an expected level of perfor- 
mance. In short, it is a contract between the parties who will use a particular 
service and the people who create or maintain it. Through an SLA, the expecta- 
tions and needs of all parties are clearly defined so that no misunderstandings about 
the system will occur at a later time. 
A SLA is often used when an organization uses an outside party to implement 
a new system. For example, if a company wanted Internet access for all its 
employees, they might order a wide area network (WAN) link from an Internet 
Service Provider (ISP). An SLA would be created to specify expected amounts of 
uptime, bandwidth, and performance. The SLA could also specify who will fix cer- 
tain problems (such as the T1 line going down), who will maintain the routers 
connecting the company to the Internet, and other issues related to the project. To 
enforce the SLA, penalties or financial incentives may be specified to deal with 
failing or exceeding the expectations of a service. 
SLAs can also be used internally, specifying what users of the network can 
expect from IT staff and procedures relating to the network. 
The SLA may specify that all equipment (such as printers, new computers, 
and so forth) must be purchased through the IT department. If this is not 
done, the IT staff is under no obligation to fix the equipment that is pur- 
chased improperly. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
695 
9 An SLA may also be used to specify the services the organization expects 
IT staff to provide, to support applications that are developed internally, or 
to address other issues related to the computers and network making up 
the organization's electronic infrastructure. 
An SLA often includes information on the amount of downtime that can be 
expected from systems, where customers will be unable to use a Web site, server, or 
other software and equipment. This information usually provides the expected 
availability of the system in a percentage format, which is commonly called the 
"Number of Nines." As Table 12.1 shows, the Number of Nines can be translated 
into the amount of time a system may be down in a year's time. If this estimate is 
longer than specified in the SLA, additional losses may be experienced, because 
employees are unable to perform their jobs or customers are unable to purchase 
items from an e-commerce site. 
Table 12.1 Availability Expectations ("Number of Nines") 
Percentage Availability (%) 
Allowed Downtime per Year 
99.9999 
32 seconds 
99.999 
5.3 minutes 
99.99 
53 minutes 
99.9 
8.7 hours 
99.0 
87 hours 
D isposa I/Destru cti on 
Nothing lasts forever. After a while, equipment becomes outdated and data is no 
longer needed.When this occurs, you need to determine what to do with it.You 
do not want people recovering data on hard disks that are thrown away, reading 
printed materials they find in the garbage, or acquiring other information that has 
been removed from service. Due to the sensitive nature of some data, a policy 
dealing with the safe disposal and destruction of data and equipment is necessary. 
The first step regarding disposal and destruction is deciding what needs to be 
disposed of and destroyed. Because data can become obsolete or is legally required 
to be removed after a period of time, certain data needs to be removed from a 
system. As we'll see later in this chapter, the period of time when data and printed 
records become obsolete may be outlined in a data retention policy. 
www.syngress.com 

696 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
When files, records, or paperwork are destroyed, a policy dealing with disposal 
and destruction of data should be used. Such a policy can also be referred to when 
determining what to do with data that is destroyed daily, such as forms :that are 
incorrectly filled out or corporate memos that are read but no longer needed. This 
policy provides clear guidelines of how an organization expects this material to be 
discarded. 
Data can be destroyed in a number of ways, with some being more .effective 
than others. If data is simply deleted, any number of data recovery or computer 
forensic tools can be used to restore the data. Even formatting the hard disk is not a 
suitable solution, when you consider that certain tools and data recover 3 , methods 
can still access the data. The only way to be certain that data cannot be :recovered 
using software solutions is to overwrite it with other data. 
Disk erasing software wipes the disk clean by erasing all of the files and over- 
writing the disk space with a series of ones and zeros. In doing so, every sector of 
the disk is overwritten, making the data unrecoverable. If anyone attempted to 
recover data on the disk, they wouldn't be able to retrieve anything because the 
data is completely destroyed. 
Data stored on magnetic media such as floppy disks and backup tapes 
can be effectively destroyed by using a degausser, which is also called a 
bulk demagnetizer. 
A degausser or bulk demagnetizer is hardware that can be used to destroy data 
stored on magnetic media such as floppy disks and backup tapes. A degausser is a 
powerful magnet that erases all data from magnetic media so that no one can 
retrieve information from it. Hard disks can also have data erased with a degausser, 
performing a low level format that erases all data from the disk. 
If there are concerns over particularly sensitive information being seen by out- 
side sources, an additional measure of security is physically scarring or destroying 
the media. For floppy disks and backup tapes, this involves shredding the media 
into pieces. For hard disks, you would open the hard drive, remove the platter 
inside, and physically scar or destroy it.Acid can also be used to destroy magnetic 
media. 
In addition to addressing data stored on computers, it is also important that 
your policy address hard (printed) copies of data. Printed materials can st:ill be 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
697 
accessed after they have been disposed of. Dumpster diving, is a term that describes 
the process of looking through the garbage for printed documents. A relatively 
simple method of deterring dumpster diving is by using a paper shredder to destroy 
sensitive printed material. Such documents may contain sensitive information about 
a company, its clients, or its employees. Imagine what a criminal could do with a 
personnel file or a list of passwords if they pulled it from the trash. To prevent 
printed materials from getting into the wrong hands, a policy should specify if all 
documents or only certain types should be shredded. 
Remember that disposing of sensitive information requires that you 
destroy the electronic and printed data as well. Throwing a piece of 
paper or hard disk in the garbage means that it is out of sight and out 
of mind, but does not mean it is gone forever. Anyone retrieving docu- 
ments or media from the trash may be able to view it. Once you 
remember that disposal and destruction goes hand-in-hand, you will 
find it easier to identify proper disposal methods when they are pre- 
sented in test questions. 
HR Policy 
HR departments deal with a large variety of issues, and need to work closely with 
IT departments to ensure security needs are met. HR performs such tasks as hiring, 
firing, retirement, and transferring employees to different locations. HR also main- 
tains personnel files of employees, and may be responsible for assisting in the distri- 
bution of identification cards, key cards, and other items relating to security. 
Because of the tasks they each perform, it is important that good communication 
exists between HR and IT staff. 
Upon hiring a person, HR may be responsible for issuing ID cards designed by 
IT staff, which are used to identify employees. This is important to physical security 
in the building, as the cards provide visual recognition of who is supposed to be in 
certain areas. HR may also be responsible for issuing key cards. 
When a person is hired or experiences a change in employment with an orga- 
nization, HR needs to notify the network administrator so that network access can 
be administered accordingly. Without a proper HR policy, network administrators 
will be uninformed of changes and will be unable to perform these tasks. 

698 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Adding or revoking passwords, privileges, and changes in a person's employ- 
ment status can affect the person's security needs dramatically. A person may need 
to have a network account added, disabled, or removed, and other privileges (such 
as access to secure areas) may need to be modified. As will be seen in the following 
paragraphs, adding or revoking passwords, privileges, and other elements of security 
may need to occur under such circumstances as: 
[] 
Resignation 
9 
Termination 
9 
New hires 
9 
Changes in duties or position within the company 
9 
Investigation 
9 
Leave of absence 
HR plays an important role in security, as they need to contact IT staff imme- 
diately of a person's employment status.When a person is hired, HR needs to con- 
tact IT staff to set up a new network account and password for the person, as well 
as the necessary privileges to access systems and data. In addition, the employee 
may need a corporate ID card, keycard, or other items necessary for the job.When 
a person's employment is terminated, they quit the company, are suspended, or are 
under investigation, it is equally important to immediately remove any access they 
have to the system. Keeping a person's account and password active allows them to 
continue to access systems and data. If a terminated person has an active keycard 
and ID, they are also able to enter secure locations. In both cases, the person will 
have the ability to cause massive damage to a company, so network accounts should 
be immediately disabled or deleted, and ID and keycards should be removed from 
the person's possession or at least rendered inactive. 
Disabling accounts and passwords should also occur when a person is away 
from a job for extended periods of time.When people are away from the job on 
parental leave, sabbaticals, and other instances of prolonged absence, they do not 
need their accounts to remain active. To prevent others from using the person's 
account while they are away, the account and password should be disabled immedi- 
ately after the person leaves. 
When employees are hired, change jobs, or have modified duties, their needs 
for network access also change.When setting up network privileges, it is important 
that employees only receive the minimum access necessary to do their jobs. Any 
additional access is a security risk, as they could purposefully or accident:ally view, 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
699 
modify, or delete important data or improperly make changes to a system. A good 
method of determining what level of security a person needs is to match the new 
person's security level to that of someone else in the same job, or to use the same 
settings as the employee the new employee is replacing. It is also important to 
determine whether a person was issued any equipment that belongs to the com- 
pany that should be returned. If a person was issued a laptop, wireless handheld 
device, mobile phone, pager, or other equipment, the items belong to the company 
and must be returned. Failure to do so could be considered theft, and may leave the 
former employee open to prosecution. 
Code of Ethics 
Many companies have a code of ethics, or a statement of mission and values, which 
outlines the organization's perspective on principles and beliefs that employees are 
expected to follow. Such codes generally inform employees that they are expected 
to adhere to the law, the policies of the company, and other professional ethics 
related to their jobs. As is the case with acceptable use policies, many companies 
require employees to sign a code of ethics as an agreement. Anyone failing to 
adhere to this code could face dismissal, disciplinary actions, or prosecution. 
For the Security+ exam you will need to know the difference between 
an acceptable use policy and a code of ethics. A code of ethics outlines 
the ethical behavior expected from employees, and may outline princi- 
ples dealing with such issues as racism, sexism, and fair business prac- 
tices. It explains the type of person a company expects you to be. This is 
different from an acceptable use policy, which may address the same 
issues, but also addresses how they relate to equipment and technolo- 
gies. For example, the code of ethics may say racism is not tolerated, 
while the acceptable use policy would address sending racist jokes or 
comments via e-mail. 
Incident Response Policy 
No matter how secure you think your network is, there may come a time when a 
security breach or disaster occurs.When such problems do occur, an incident 
response policy provides a clear understanding of what decisive actions will be 
www.syngress.com 

700 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
taken, and who will be responsible for investigating and dealing with problems. 
Without one, significant time may be lost trying to decide what to do and how to 
do it. 
Incidents can be any number of adverse events affecting a network or computer 
system or violations of existing policy. They can include, but are not limited to: 
unauthorized access, denial or disruptions of service, viruses, unauthorized changes 
to systems or data, critical system failures, or attempts to breach the policies and/or 
security of an organization. Since few companies have the exact same services, 
hardware, software, and security needs, the types of incidents an organization may 
face will often vary from business to business. 
A good incident response policy outlines who is responsible for specific tasks 
when a crisis occurs. It will include such information as: 
9 Who will investigate or analyze incidents to determine how they occurred 
and what problems are faced because of it 
9 Which individuals or departments are to fix particular problems and 
restore the system to a secure state 
9 
How certain incidents are to be handled, and references to other docu- 
mentation 
Including such information in the incident response policy ensures that the 
right person is assigned to a particular task. For example, if the Webmaster was 
responsible for firewall issues and the network administrator performed backups of 
data, you would assign them tasks relating to their responsibilities in the.' incident 
response policy. Determining who should respond and deal with specific incidents 
allows you to restore the system to a secure state more quickly and effectively. 
Incident response policies should also provide information on how to deal with 
problems when they occur, or provide references to procedures. As mentioned ear- 
lier, procedures should be clearly defined so that there is no confusion as to how to 
deal with an incident. Once an incident has been dealt with, the Incident Response 
Team should determine ways to ensure the same incident will not happen again. 
Simply resolving the crisis but not changing security methods increases the likeli- 
hood that the same incident may occur again in the exact same manner. Taking a 
proactive approach to future incidents decreases the chance of recurring problems. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
701 
CREATING POLICIES 
Use the following template to create one of the security policies dis- 
cussed in the previous sections. Instructions are provided as to what 
information should appear in each of the sections included in a policy. 
Scope: 
Subject: 
Replaces: 
Effective Date: 
Expiration Date: 
Originator: 
INDEFINITE 
Re-evaluation Date: 
1.0 Preamble 
1.1 This section explains the purpose of the policy, including refer- 
ences to any existing statutes or legislation that may be related 
to its creation. 
2.0 Definitions 
2.1 This section provides definitions of terms used in the document. 
For example, brief explanations of equipment (such as firewalls) 
or new teams created to deal with specific issues (such as an 
Incident Response Team who will deal with security incidents) 
3.0 Items Pertaininy~ To This Policy 
3.1 This section provides information on individual rules making up 
the policy, information on related procedures, or references to 
other policies and procedures related to this one. 
4.0 Responsibilities 
4.1 This section outlines who is responsible for carrying out this 
policy, investigating violations, or fixing problems as they occur. 
What everything means: 
9 In the Scope section of the document, indicate whom the 
policy applies to. This may be all employees of an organiza- 
tion or a single department (such as the IT staff). 
www.syngress.com 

702 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
9 In the Subject section of the document, enter the title of the 
policy. This could be the name of any of the types of policies 
discussed so far, such as the acceptable use policy or a varia- 
tion that deals with a single issue, such as an Internet policy 
that explains acceptable use of the Internet. 
9 If you were updating an existing policy, you would enter the 
name of the policy in the Replaces section. Since you are cre- 
ating a new policy, write NEW in this section of the docu- 
ment. 
The Effective Date section states when the new policy comes 
into effect. Until this date, there is either no policy in effect, 
or you will follow any of the old policies this one replaces. 
The Re-evaluation section states when this policy will be 
reevaluated to ensure it is up-to-date. Many organizations do 
so on a yearly basis, to ensure that the policies are still appli- 
cable, so enter a date that is one year from the date entered 
as the Effective Date. 
The Expiration Date section is used for policies that have a 
limited lifespan. For example, if you are creating a policy to 
deal with heightened security measures following a terrorist 
attack, the policy may only be in effect for a matter of 
months. Generally, there is no set expiration date for policies, 
so you would state that it is INDEFINITE. 
The Originator field is used to indicate who created the 
policy. This can be the name of a person or department in the 
organization. As you are the originator of this document, 
write your name in this field. 
The Preamble section of the policy provides one or more 
paragraphs outlining the reason for the policy. This explains 
why the policy was created, what it hopes to accomplish, and 
any other pertinent information (such as legislation) that 
makes the policy necessary. 
The Definitions section is provided to explain terms that the 
reader may be unfamiliar with. As you write your document, 
you should add any such definitions to this section. 
The Items Pertaining to this Policy section is the bulk of the 
policy, and will contain the rules, regulations, and any neces- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recoveryo Chapter 12 
703 
sary procedures involved to deal with the issues being pre- 
sented. 
Finally, the Responsibilities section is used to identify the per- 
sons or departments accountable for various tasks relating to 
the document. Specify who you want to be responsible for 
dealing with enforcing, investigating, and resolving incidents 
related to your policy. 
The Security+ exam expects you to have an understanding of the dif- 
ferent types of policies, procedures, and documentation used in 
designing security. The types of policies you may see in questions on the 
Security+ exam will include: 
9 Security policies, which address the need to protect data and 
systems within an organization. 
9 Acceptable use policies, which establish guidelines on the 
appropriate use of technology. 
9 Due care, which refers to the level of care that a reasonable 
person would exercise, and is used to address problems of negli- 
gence. 
9 Privacy policies, which outline the level of privacy that 
employees and clients can expect, and the organization's per- 
spective on what is considered private information. 
9 Separation of duties, which ensure that tasks are assigned to 
personnel in a manner that no single employee can control a 
process from its beginning to its end. 
9 Need to know, which refers to people only being given the 
information, or access to data, that they need in order to per- 
form their jobs. 
9 Password management, which involves enacting policies that 
control how passwords are used and administered. 
9 SLAs, which are agreements between clients and service 
providers that outline what services will be supplied, what is 
expected from the service, and who will fix the service if it does 
not meet an expected level of performance. 
9 HR policies, which outline the procedures involving changes in 
an individual's employment status as they relate to security. 
www.syngress.com 

704 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
II 
Disposal and destruction, which establishes procedures dealing 
with the safe disposal and destruction of data and equipment. 
Incident response policies, which provide a clear understanding 
of what decisive actions will be taken when an incident occurs, 
and who will be responsible for investigating and dealing with 
problems. 
Privilege Management 
Privilege management involves the administration and control of the resources and data 
available to users and groups in an organization. For example, privilege management 
would determine whether a specific user could print to a particular printer, use a 
special program, or access files in specified directories. Through privilege manage- 
ment, administrators maintain control over user access on a granular level. 
As will be seen later in this chapter, privilege management can be performed in 
a variety of ways. Privileges can be controlled by the accounts created t~r users, 
groups, and roles associated with the accounts, on the basis of servers to which a 
user connects, and other elements of a system. Firm control of access is vital to 
protecting a network and its resources from adverse security situations. 
User/Group/Role Management 
Network and computer operating systems provide different ways to define access 
permissions for users of a computer or network. The permissions may be specific 
to the user logging in, to a group of users with similar access needs, or to the role 
the users perform in a company. While user accounts generally apply to a single 
user, groups and roles can be associated with these accounts to control access on a 
larger scale. 
A user account can be created for each individual, so that each person can log 
onto a system, perform specific actions, and access the data they need. A default 
account may be created, such as a guest account, which allows users to have very 
limited access. It will control the default user's ability to access data on the net- 
work, use programs, view information on a corporate intranet, or view non-sensi- 
tive data. 
On the other end of the scale, an administrative account is used to ]provide full 
control access to a machine, system, or network. OSes may provide a default 
administrator account, which should be eliminated and replaced with an account(s) 
that has administrative rights. This makes it more difficult for hackers to access the 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
705 
default account, which has a common name like "Administrator," but allows IT 
staff to still perform administration functions. Exercise 12.02 demonstrates how 
new accounts can be added to an Administrator group in Windows XP, so that the 
account has the same rights as the default Administrator account. 
The account with administrator access can be used to create new accounts, 
change the access associated with other accounts, access all data, and many other 
user right assignments. By controlling the permissions associated with each 
account, administrators control what objects each person can or cannot access on a 
system. Because a company may have hundreds or thousands of users on a network 
or system, it would be an administrative nightmare to maintain access control over 
every single account. To make management easier, groups can be used to assemble 
user accounts together and define access control as a batch. For example, let's say a 
network administrator wanted branch office managers to have the ability to backup 
data on servers and workstations in their individual locations. The administrator 
could modify the account of every manager, or add each of these accounts to a 
Backup Operators group, which has the necessary permissions to backup data. By 
modifying the access control of one group, the access of each account that is a 
member of that group would also be affected. 
User accounts and groups may be local to a computer or server, or have the 
ability to connect to servers on a network. This allows administrators to control 
what a user or group can do on a specific machine, or on the network as a whole. 
This is particularly useful when they want users to have different levels of access on 
individual machines and the network. 
Network OSes like Novell NetWare also have the ability to control access 
through roles. Roles are similar to groups, as they can be used to control the access 
of numerous users as a batch. If a number of users have a similar role in an organi- 
zation, the administrator can associate them with a role created on the network 
OS. The role would have specific access to resources such as drive mappings or 
other privileges unique to this role. For example, department managers might have 
similar duties in an organization and wish to access a shared directory for storing 
data that all of the managers would need.You could create a role and associate each 
of the manager's accounts with this role. When the managers log in, they would 
have the same access to the shared directory and any other privileges provided 
through the role. 
www.syngress.com 

706 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Remember that users should only receive the minimum amount of 
access to perform their jobs. If users receive more than this, they can 
accidentally or intentionally cause damage to systems and data. This is 
especially true if users are added to administrator groups, which give 
them complete access and control over everything. 
ADDING USERS TO A GROUP IN WINDOWS XP 
1. 
Log onto Windows XP using an account that is a member of the 
Administrators group. 
2. 
From the Windows Start menu, select Settings I Control Panel. 
When the Control Panel opens, double-click on the 
Administrative Tools folder. 
3. 
Double-click on the Computer Management icon. 
4. 
When Computer Management opens, expand the Local Users 
and Groups folder in the left pane (shown in Figure 12.1). 
Figure 12.1 Computer Management Tool in Windows XP 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
707 
5. In the left pane, select the Users folder. 
6. From the Action menu, click on New User. 
7. When the New User dialog box appears (shown in Figure 12.2), 
type Test in the User name field. 
Figure 12.2 New User Dialog Box 
8. In the Password field, type Test. Enter this password a second 
time in the Confirm Password field. 
9. Ensure the "User must change password at next Iogon" is dese- 
lected Click the Create button to create the account. 
10. Click the Close button to return to the Computer Management 
console. 
11. In the left pane of the Computer Management console, select the 
Groups folder. 
12. In the right pane, select the Administrators group. 
13. From the Action menu, select Add to Group. 
14. When the Administrators Properties dialog appears, click the 
Add button. 
www.syngress.com 

708 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
15. When the Select Users dialog appears (shown in Figure 12.3), 
type the name of the user (Test) in the "Enter the object names 
to select," and then click the Add button. 
16. Click the Check Names button to have Windows XP check the 
name you entered to ensure it is the correct name used for the 
account. In the case of our user, it will resolve the name Test to 
the format of <computername>/Test, where "computer name" is 
the name of your local computer. In the case of the computer in 
Figure 12.3, it will be resolved to COMPUTER2007~Test. Click OK 
to continue. 
Figure 12.3 Select Users Dialog Box 
17. 
18. 
Click OK to exit from the Administrator properties. 
Log off the machine and then log back on using the Test account. 
Notice that this account now has the same rights as the 
Administrator group. 
Single Sign-on 
On many older network OSes, such as Windows NT, users who wanted to access 
data and resources on various servers were required to log onto each server indi- 
vidually. In other words, if you were logged onto Server A and wanted to open a 
file located on Server B, you would have to log onto Server B separately: This was 
annoying to users and a security issue for administrators. Every user who needed 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
709 
access to server resources needed a new account created on the different servers. If 
a user left the organization, or had different access needs, the administrator had to 
modify or delete the account from every server. If the administrator missed deleting 
or changing access for an account on a particular server, the user could still access 
the resources and data. This presented an administrative nightmare and a significant 
security risk. 
Single sign-ons are common to newer network OSes such as Windows and 
Novell NetWare. They allow a user to sign in from one computer, be authenticated 
by the network, and use resources and data from any server to which they have 
access. Single sign-ons have been used since Novell implemented Novell Directory 
Services (NDS), but are also available in newer Microsoft networks that implement 
Active Directory. Single sign-ons make it easier to manage a network. Changes 
made to one account are replicated to all servers in a domain or network. If a user's 
access needs change or a user is terminated and needs their account deleted, an 
administrator can make the change once and know that the changes are reflected 
network-wide. 
Centralized vs. Decentralized 
When it comes to security, there are tradeoffs. Controlling access is a tradeoff 
between convenience and a secure environment, with more security making it 
increasingly difficult for users to perform necessary tasks. Think about security as a 
lock on a door. The more locks you have will make the door more secure, but it 
also means that people wanting access beyond the door will need a greater number 
of keys, which could lead to a difficult experience.When discussing centralized and 
decentralized security, administrators need to make decisions that will trade off one 
consideration for another. 
When discussing centralization and decentralization in terms of networks, it 
often refers to the location of servers on a network. Centralizing servers into one 
location means that all of the servers are physically located in a single room or 
building. This allows an administrator to visit one location to perform security- 
related tasks such as backing up and restoring data, fixing failed hardware, 
upgrading system software, or dealing with incidents that are adverse to security 
(such as hacking attempts or viruses on a machine). By having the machines in one 
area, the administrator can deal with tasks more effectively than if they had to drive 
miles to get from one server to another. 
Unfortunately, having servers in one central location is not always an option. 
Users in branch offices or distant locations (such as other countries) may have to 
www.syngress.com 

710 
Chapter 12, Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
connect to the servers over a slow connection. Even if a fast connection is used 
between sites, accessing data may be slower than if they had their own server at that 
location. In such cases, a decentralized approach is useful. Placing a server at 
external locations allows users to login faster and access specific data from the local 
server. 
Another advantage of decentralization is fault tolerance. If all servers are in one 
room and that room is destroyed by fire or flood, everything is lost. When the 
servers are spread out across different locations, it is less likely that a catastrophe will 
befall all of them at the same time. If less serious problems occur, such as the link 
between branch offices and the main facility where servers are located, users will 
still be able to logon and access resources using the server at their branch office. 
A problem with decentralized servers occurs when you have to pelqTorm certain 
tasks necessary to the security and maintenance of the system. For example, data on 
a server needs to be backed up, requiring tapes to be put in the backup's tape drive. 
In other cases, a server may freeze and need to be rebooted. If the server is far 
enough away, this can leave users cut off from the network for great lengths of 
time. To deal with these issues, terminal services or remote control programs can be 
used to administer the server from across the network. Administrative authority can 
also be delegated to certain individuals in remote locations, so they haw. ~ the ability 
to take care of such issues, and the necessary security clearance to physically access 
the servers. The person can be a contact person, serving as the eyes and ears at that 
location, informing the administrator of what is appearing on the server's monitor 
when they cannot see it themselves. When incidents arise, the administrator can tell 
this person to remove connections to the server, reboot the machine, or other tasks 
that would otherwise require the administrator's physical presence. 
Physical security is another issue to consider when deciding on centralized or 
decentralized servers. Placing all servers in one location allows the administrator to 
better manage security for those machines. One large server room with locks pre- 
venting access to unauthorized persons is optimal. Unfortunately, the facilities avail- 
able at different locations may not provide the physical space for a secure server 
room. In such cases, servers should be locked in cabinets or closets. 
In other situations, even closets may not be an option, leaving a less than secure 
environment for the machine (s) . While this issue was discussed previously in 
Chapter 11, it is important to take such concerns into account when deciding 
whether to use a centralized or decentralized approach. 
Centralized versus decentralized security can also apply to the management of a 
network. As mentioned above, some network OSes allow administrators to manage 
users across the network through a single interface. By making changes from one 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
711 
location, the changes are replicated across the network. This method of centralized 
administration is considerabl F easier than the decentralized approach, which 
required administrators to visit or connect to multiple servers across the network to 
make security changes to accounts. 
However, as with tasks that require the administrator's physical presence at a 
site, they can designate someone to perform basic account management functions 
at a remote site. For example, someone at a remote location could be given the 
necessary access privileges to create new accounts, modify existing accounts, or 
delete accounts that are no longer needed. If a branch office hired a temporary 
employee, such a person could create the account and remove it when the tempo- 
rary employee no longer worked there.While this relieves the administrator from 
having to manage all accounts in all locations, they need to trust that the person 
they delegated this authority to is creating, modifying, and deleting accounts prop- 
erly and according to policy. 
Auditing 
Auditing is the process of monitoring and examining items to determine if prob- 
lems exist. Regular monitoring of different logs, data, and other sources can assist in 
determining if there are lapses in security. Enabling auditing on a system allows the 
system to record certain events to a log file or notify someone (e.g., by sending e- 
mail, sending a page, and so forth). By analyzing these records, administrators can 
identify attempted and successful breaches of security, and discover where lapses in 
security exist. 
Auditing can involve monitoring any number of events, allowing the adminis- 
trator to track the activities of accounts and attempts to access data and resources. 
For example, firewalls can be configured to monitor which Web sites users are vis- 
iting through the corporate local area network (LAN), while a network OS can be 
configured to monitor successful and unsuccessful logon attempts. Through 
auditing, administrators can identify attempts to breach security and see if security 
policies are being followed. 
When enabling auditing, it is important to remember that system resources will 
be used to monitor events, which will have an impact on performance. While pos- 
sible to audit every event on a server, doing so could slow down the system signifi- 
cantly. Also, the more events audited, the more entries are included in the log file 
showing auditing results. It can be difficult to sift through a high volume of infor- 
mation to find the information needed. To effectively audit a system, it is important 
to first determine what events are significant and need to be monitored to protect 
www.syngress.com 

712 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
security. For example, while it is important to monitor logon attempts to see if 
someone is hacking a system, it may be unimportant to see if someone !is success- 
fully printing to a network printer. Limiting auditing to significant items ensures 
that system performance is better and analysis of logged events becomes easier. 
To review auditing in a Windows environment, see the "Configuring 
Auditing in Windows XP" exercise (Exercise 1.03) in Chapter 1. 
Privilege 
Audits can be used to monitor privileges to resources and data, and to reveal incor- 
rect security settings. 
9 Reviewing the successes and failures of accounts accessing files, auditing 
allows administrators to determine if incorrect permissions have been set 
for accessing files on a network. 
9 Monitoring the success and failure of accessing other resources (such as 
printers) can show whether improper permissions have been set. 
9 Auditing successful changes to accounts, restarts, and shutdowns of sys- 
tems, and the ability to perform other actions, can show if certain users 
have more access than they need. 
The final item in this list can be a major problem, as users who should not have 
certain access are able to do such things as delete or modify data, make incorrect 
system changes, shut down vital systems, or perform other unauthorized tasks. 
Once incorrect privileges have been identified, an administrator can make the nec- 
essary changes to allow access to authorized users and forbid access to unautho- 
rized users. Not monitoring such events makes it possible for such activities to go 
unnoticed. 
Another issue with monitoring privileges involves the detection of viruses. If an 
account that has Write permissions to a file is unable to modify the file, or an 
account that does not have write privileges is suddenly able to modify the file, it 
could mean a virus has infected the system. Scanning the system for viruses may 
solve this problem immediately. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
713 
Usage 
Auditing how accounts are used on a network may reveal successful and attempted 
intrusions. Remember that a common method of hacking a system is to use an 
existing account and acquire the password for it. By auditing certain events, admin- 
istrators can determine if an intrusion is being attempted or occurring in this 
manner. 
Auditing logon and logoff failures can provide an indication that someone is 
attempting to hack their way into a system using a particular account or set of 
accounts. Upon realizing this, administrators can disable the account to block 
access through it, or ensure that strong passwords are used to make access even 
more difficult. 
Monitoring successful logons also provides important information such as when 
someone is successfully hacking a network. For example, the manager of finance is 
on vacation, but someone has been logging in using his account. Since this account 
should be inactive, monitoring the logons indicates that someone is using a stolen 
or hacked password to access the system. Disabling the account will prevent the 
hacker from using that account, and will protect the assets. 
Auditing can also provide information on systems that are no longer required. 
Certain services or resources may be used less by users or may no longer be used at 
all. Since these services or resources could be exploited, they should be removed 
from the network. 
Audits can also be used to identify violations of existing corporate policy. 
Firewall logs not only show which files and services are being accessed from the 
Internet, but can also be used to monitor which Web sites are being accessed by 
internal users. This can provide information on violations of acceptable use policies, 
such as employees who are visiting improper sites during work hours, or using 
company equipment for illicit purposes. 
Escalation 
Monitoring the escalating use of accounts or the irregular hours that accounts are 
being used can also indicate intrusions. For example, if a user works days but their 
account is being used at night or used more frequently than usual, it is possible that 
someone else is using the account to gain access. 
Systems should also be monitored for increased use, to determine if additional 
servers, services, or resources are required on a network. For example, the number 
of users visiting a corporate Web site has increased dramatically over the last year. If 
this trend continues, it could result in performance issues or system crashes. Adding 
www.syngress.com 

714 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
another Web server will remedy the problem. However, if the escalation had not 
been monitored, the administrator would not have known this additional server 
was need until after problems occurred. 
MAC/DAC/RBAC 
Chapter 1 of this book discussed several methods of access control including 
Mandatory Access Control (MAC), Discretionary Access Control (DAC), and 
Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). Each of these may be used in various OSes 
to provide access to systems and resources. It is important to understand them for 
the Security+ exam, thus, the following sections review and expand on the earlier 
discussion. 
MAC is the only method of the three that is considered to be a military 
strength access control.With MAC, every account and object is associated with 
groups and roles that control their level of security and access. These allow adminis- 
trators to control the privileges associated with an account, and what level of secu- 
rity is needed to access a particular object. For example, a user in Sales needs access 
to print to a color laser printer in his or her branch office. Because the adminis- 
trator does not want everyone to use the printer, they have set up security for the 
printer so that guests in Sales and people from other departments cannot print to 
it. To do this, they set up security on the printer so only the users associated with 
the Sales role and Users group can print to it. By associating the user with these 
labels, they give the user access to print to the printer.Without both of the labels, 
the user would be unable to do so. This example shows that MAC provides a gran- 
ular level of security, allowing administrators to specifically control who has access 
to resources and data. 
Although DAC is less stringent than MAC, it also provides access on the basis of 
users and groups. However, DAC allows access to data to be granted or denied at 
the discretion of the owner of the data. For example, if a user creates a file, they have 
ownership of it. Being the owner, they could then give anyone else access to it. In 
secure environments, this can be a major problem, as access can be acquired on the 
basis of friendship with the file's owner, rather than an actual need for access. 
RBAC involves users being associated with different roles to obtain access to 
resources and data. A network administrator creates the role with certain privileges 
and associates users with it. For example, a dentist's office uses RBAC as a method 
of access. Roles may be created for the dentist, receptionist, and dental assistant. The 
receptionist would need to view billing information and recommendations on 
when the patient should return for the next visit, but would not need to view clin- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
715 
ical information. The dental assistant would need to see this clinical information on 
the patient's history, but would not need to see billing information. The dentist 
would need to view all of the information. By dividing privileges into roles, 
administrators are able to control what access a person has based on the role associ- 
ated with their user account. 
The Security+ exam requires you to understand the terms MDAC, DAC, 
and RBAC, and the concepts behind them. When taking the Security+ 
exam, try to remember that: 
9 MAC has every account and object associated with groups and 
roles, which are used to control access. It is the only method of the 
three that is considered to be of military strength. 
9 DAC also provides access on the basis of users and groups, but 
access to data can be granted or denied at the discretion of the 
data's owner. 
9 RBAC associates users with different roles to obtain access to 
resources and data. 
Education and Documentation 
Throughout this chapter, we have discussed the importance of protecting data so 
that unauthorized persons are not able to view information. However, there are 
times when sharing information is necessary to the security of a network. After all, 
policies are useless if no one is able to read them, and procedures are worthless if 
the people who require them are unaware of their existence. Not sharing facts 
about the system, best practices to perform, and other important details, may create 
a situation that puts security at risk. 
Education and documentation is a vital part of any secure system. 
Knowledgeable users can be an important line of defense, as they will be better 
able to avoid making mistakes that jeopardize security, identify problems, and report 
them to the necessary persons. Proper documentation is imperative to security, as 
good diagrams, well thought out procedures, quality knowledge bases, and other 
papers dealing with security can be the difference in solving problems quickly. The 
following sections look at a number of ways to create an environment that 
enhances security through these methods. 
www.syngress.com 

716 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Communication 
Communication is important to educating users on different elements of a system, 
and allowing them to be able to contact you in case of problems. If no one can 
reach you, how will you know when problems occur? Similarly, if you do not have 
mechanisms in place to communicate with users, how will they have the informa- 
tion you want them to have. Communication is the key to understanding the issues 
users are facing when incidents occur, and getting information to the parties that 
need it. To deal with these issues and convey what an organization expects from 
users, administrators need to create a system that promotes and supports good 
communication. 
The first step to creating good methods of communication is determining what 
methods are available. This differs from business to business, but multiple', avenues of 
contacting people are always available. These may include: 
u 
Internal or Internet e-mail 
Internal phone extensions, home phone numbers, and cell phone numbers 
[] 
Pagers 
Corporate intranets and public Web sites 
Internal mail (memoranda) and snail mail (public postal services) 
Public folders and directories containing documents that can be viewed by 
users across the network 
Instant messaging, text messaging, Short Message Service (SMS), and live 
chat 
Once all of the methods available to communicate with users are identified, the 
administrator can decide which ones will be used and how. 
Obviously, administrators will want to control the ways in which users can con- 
tact them.While you wouldn't want to provide your personal contact information 
to everyone, home phone numbers, cell phone numbers, and pager numbers can be 
provided to certain people in an organization. For example, administrators could 
provide dispatchers, management, or certain departments with these numbers, so 
they can be contacted when major incidents occur (e.g., hacking attemF, tS, server 
crashes, and so forth). Providing contact information for IT staff ensures that inci- 
dents will not remain unattended and possibly grow worse before the next sched- 
uled workday. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
717 
In addition to having people provide notification, administrators can configure 
systems to automatically contact them. Some systems provide the ability to send 
out alerts when certain events occur (e.g., a system shutdown). The system can send 
an e-mail message to specific e-mail addresses, or send out messages to alphanu- 
meric pagers. In some cases, administrators may become aware of a problem and 
deal with it before any of the users on the network notice. 
Providing contact information for general users of a network is another positive 
component of a communicative environment. Users should have multiple methods 
of contacting IT staff, so they can acquire help and notify them of problems they 
are experiencing. This allows users to inform administrators of a seemingly minor 
problem that could grow into a major one. For example, a user may complain of 
specific symptoms his computer is experiencing that are indicative of a virus infes- 
tation. Early warning through users can catch such problems at an initial stage, 
before any real damage is done. 
There are many possible methods for users to contact IT staff. Help desks are 
commonplace in companies, providing a single phone extension that users can call 
when they are experiencing problems. A designated e-mail address and voicemail 
are other methods of enabling users to report problems. Methods of contacting a 
help desk should be advertised internally, through memos, internal e-mail, or on 
the corporate intranet. 
Signatures on e-mails can be used to provide alternative methods of contacting 
individual users. The signature is text or a graphic that is automatically added by 
the user's e-mail client software to each message sent by a person. The signature can 
state the name of the sender, the company phone number, an extension, fax 
number, business address, e-mail address, and the Uniform Resource Locator 
(URL) of the public Web site, along with any other information a person specifies. 
Not only is this useful for internal users who need to respond immediately, but also 
for vendors and other people external to the company. 
User Awareness 
Users cannot be expected to follow rules if they are not aware of them. 
Organizations sometimes make the mistake of imposing policies and procedures 
while failing to provide effective methods of sharing that information. This has the 
same effect as if the policies and procedures were never created. 
User awareness involves taking steps to make users conscious of and responsive 
to security issues, rules, and practices. To make users aware, administrators can use a 
number of the communications methods previously mentioned. For example, poli- 
www.syngress.com 

718 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
cies and procedures can be made available on a mapped drive that everyone has 
access to, allowing users to double-click on files to open and review read-only 
copies of the policies and procedures. A corporate intranet is another common 
method used to provide access to documentation and information on changes. This 
allows users to understand what is expected of them, and how they are supposed to 
carry out specific tasks. 
If users are kept informed, they will be more open to the rules imposed on 
them. If users are aware of the rules and practices but are unaware of their impor- 
tance, they may view these methods as bothersome and not follow them adequately. 
For example, the administrator may implement a mandatory policy forcing users to 
change their passwords every 30 days to a new password that has not been used by 
them before. Users may balk at having to make such changes every month, espe- 
cially at times when they forget their new passwords. If the administrator informs 
the users that this will protect their data and private information, they understand 
that doing so is in their best interest, and will be more willing to cooperate. 
Users should be made aware of how they can assist in security issues, so that 
mistakes made on a user level do not impact the network as a whole. They should 
know how to change their passwords to strong passwords, as discussed earlier in this 
chapter. They should also be aware that procedures must be followed when security 
changes are needed. A common problem in organizations is that users share pass- 
words with one another to provide another person access to certain systems or 
data. By logging on as another person, an unauthorized user will appear as the 
actual user and be able to send e-mail, make mistakes, or perform malicious actions. 
Members of an organization must know that they are responsible for anything 
done with their accounts, and that security change requests must be made to the 
network administrator. 
It is also important that administrators inform users of events that do not 
require their active participation, but will impact them directly. When creating a 
secure environment, the administrator needs to perform upgrades on server soft- 
ware, update equipment, and other tasks that will affect the network. When the 
network is affected, the users are affected. Servers may be shut down for mainte- 
nance, generator tests might cause momentary losses of power, or other events can 
occur that affect a user's ability to work.When performing such tasks, administra- 
tors should inform users, so they will know what is happening and can make 
arrangements to continue working. Bulk e-mail or broadcast messages should be 
sent to all users, informing them of what will occur and how long it will affect 
them.When users are involved and aware of what is going on, they are better able 
to deal with these events. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
719 
An added benefit of informing users about when upgrades to software and hard- 
ware will occur, is that they can provide information on problems that occur after- 
wards. At times, service packs and patches to software on a server can result in 
unexpected problems. If users are unaware that these changes have occurred, or if 
they are unaware of the need to report possible problems, the administrator may 
think that the update was successful and without incident, when in effect it was not. 
Education 
Educating users is the primary method of promoting user awareness and improving 
the skills and abilities of employees.When users are taught how and why certain 
activities need to be performed, they are generally more willing and better able to 
perform those tasks. In addition to enhancing work performance, education also 
provides the added benefit of lowering support costs, as users who are able to fix 
simple problems will not be as likely to call the help desk for assistance. 
In terms of security, users who know how to perform certain tasks properly are 
less likely to unknowingly put security at risk. Users who have an understanding of 
confidentiality and non-disclosure policies will not be as likely to reveal sensitive 
information, transmit classified data over the Internet, or provide access to unau- 
thorized users. In addition, users who know how to change their passwords 
monthly, know that they should not use previously used passwords, and understand 
how to create strong passwords that will make the system more secure. Because 
users are often the largest, least controlled variable in network security, education 
makes this variable more stable so that they are less likely to perform actions that 
compromise security. 
Educating users is commonly done through training sessions. This can be done 
in a classroom setting or one-on-one. In many other situations, training handouts 
are given to new hires that detail how certain actions are performed, and proce- 
dures that should be followed. These handouts can be referred to when needed, but 
may prove disastrous if this material falls into the wrong hands. In either case, a des- 
ignated trainer or member of the IT staff teaches users the proper methods and 
techniques that should be used to perform their jobs. As will be seen in the next 
section, online resources can also be a practical approach to educating users. 
www, syngress,com 

720 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
721 
Online Resources 
With the resources available on a local network, it would be remiss not to include 
them in the scheme of providing education and access to documentation. Policies, 
procedures, and other documentation should be available through the network, as it 
will provide an easy, accessible, and controllable method of disseminating informa- 
tion. For example, administrators can make a directory on a server accessible to 
everyone through a mapped drive, allowing members of an organization to view 
documents at their leisure. A directory that is only accessible to IT staff can also be 
used to provide easy access to procedures, which may be referred to when prob- 
lems arise. By using network resources this way, members of an organization are 
not left searching for information or left unaware of its existence. 
Many companies utilize Web technologies internally to provide a corporate 
intranet for members of the organization. Sections of the internal Web site may be 
dedicated to a variety of purposes, for example, providing read-only copies of poli- 
cies, procedures, and other documentation. A section of the site may even provide 
access to interactive media, so that users can train themselves by viewing 
PowerPoint presentations, AVI and MPEG movies, and other resources for self- 
training. 
IT staff and support specialists can also benefit from online resources. No one 
in the field of computer technology knows about every piece of software or hard- 
ware created. There are too many current and legacy systems to understand, so 
relying on the expertise of others is important.When in doubt, consulting 
resources on the Internet can be essential to solving problems correctly. 
Knowledge bases are databases that provide information on the features of var- 
ious systems and solutions to problems that others have reported. For example, if a 
user were experiencing a problem with Microsoft software, they could visit their 
knowledge base at http://support.microsoft.com. If they were experiencing prob- 
lems with Novell software, they could visit their knowledge base at http:// 
support.novell.com. Many software and hardware manufacturers provide support 
sites that contain valuable information. Not using these sites when needed is a mis- 
take. 
Manufacturer's Web sites are also valuable to the security and effectiveness of a 
network and its systems, as they provide service packs and patches. Service packs 
and patches are software that fix known problems and security vulnerabilities. 
Failing to install these may cause certain features to behave improperly, or leave a 
system open to attacks from hackers or viruses. 
www.syngress.com 

722 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Documentation 
Nothing is more powerful or enduring than the written word. Documented proce- 
dures may make the difference between resolving a crisis quickly or not at all; poli- 
cies relate the expectations of a company, and proper records in computer forensics 
can determine whether a person is convicted of a crime. The documents created in 
an organization can be referred to and built upon for years after they were initially 
created. 
Documentation should be clear and concise, so that anyone reading it can 
follow it without confusion. Even if a document was written as personal reference 
material, others may review it when a user is on vacation, out sick, or after they 
have left an organization. This is why it is important that every job and procedure 
be documented, so that if a person leaves a particular job or is unable to perform 
those duties, necessary tasks are not left undone. 
As discussed earlier in this chapter, and further discussed in the following sec- 
tions, there are many different types of documents that may be needed by an orga- 
nization.When creating various documents, it is important that administrators 
ensure that those needed by certain individuals are accessible to them. If" they 
cannot access them, it defeats the purpose of creating them. 
When creating documentation, there are a variety of programs that can be 
used. Microsoft Word or other word processing packages can be used to create tex- 
tual documents with graphics, which can be printed and used as manuals or hand- 
outs. Microsoft PowerPoint can be used to create slideshow presentations, which 
can be made available to users over a network or corporate intranet, allowing them 
to view the presentation from their workstations. Microsoft Visio is a program that 
can be used to generate detailed diagrams and flowcharts. By using such applica- 
tions to create documentation, administrators can create easy-to-follow information 
that users can use for on-the-job education and reference. 
Standards and Guidelines 
Standards are also used to describe the established rules and practices that are 
agreed upon by consensus. These may be set by legislation or by organizations in a 
specific field, such as: 
9 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (www.ieee.org) 
9 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) (www.ietf.org). 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
723 
IEEE is an organization that sets standards for computing and electronics indus- 
tries, while IETF sets standards for the Internet. By establishing standards and 
guidelines, everyone in a particular industry follows the same guidelines in the 
products they create. 
Even if your company isn't in the business of developing software or hardware 
products, using the standards and guidelines developed by such organizations can be 
extremely useful. By reviewing the documents outlining standards, you can achieve 
the same insight as those companies who develop the software and hardware used 
by your business. For example, Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol 
(TCP/IP),Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), and numerous other elements of a 
network are standards that have associated documents outlining how they function, 
commands, utilities, and other aspects that are important in daily use as a network 
administrator or IT professional. 
Standards and guidelines are also another term used to describe the policies and 
procedures used in an organization. A standard is a level of excellence that an orga- 
nization expects its members to live up to. Standards may deal with such issues as 
acceptable behavior, codes of ethics, or other topics of concern. Guidelines offer 
instructions on how members can achieve these standards. 
Standards are not limited to the conduct of employees, but also relate to the 
network. Software and equipment are expected to live up to certain standards, and 
when they fail to do so, performance and functionality may suffer. For example, if a 
database program is expected to support 10,000 users, but bogs down when 5,000 
users access it, it fails to achieve the standard initially set for it. Before imple- 
menting a new system, it is important to document what standards are set for a 
system, so that there is a clear understanding of what is expected between an orga- 
nization and the vendor who sold it to them. This provides a level of protection for 
an organization if the standard is not met and support is needed, or (in worse case 
scenarios) legal action must be taken. Guidelines can also be used to provide 
instructions on what actions should be taken when a problem occurs. Guidelines 
dealing with systems and users should include certain attributes. Administrators 
should title the document so that it reflects what the document deals with, 
enabling anyone who opens the document to see if it applies to what they are 
looking for. For example, if a user wanted to update the signature files for a server's 
antivirus program, seeing the title "Problems with Viruses" might make them think 
this describes why viruses are bad. A title such as "Updating Antivirus Files" would 
be clear to the reader, who would save time that would have been spent trying to 
determine what the document is about. The document should also provide infor- 
mation on symptoms, so the reader knows whether the procedure applies to a par- 
www.syngress.com 

724 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
ticular problem. Finally, the document should provide a step-by-step list of instruc- 
tions on how to perform a task or fix a problem.Without these attributes, the pro- 
cedures may be less than useful to anyone using the document. 
Systems Architecture 
Documentation about a system's architecture should be created to provide informa- 
tion on the system, its layout and design, and any of the subsystems used to create 
it. This is important because it provides a reference that can be used in the future 
when problems occur and/or changes are made. Even if the administrator has a 
secure knowledge of these factors, it is still important to document the system's 
architecture. 
Documentation dealing with systems architecture should include a variety of 
components such as an overview and specifications of software, hardware, protocols, 
and any other technologies that make up the system. It should also provide dia- 
grams of the network, and components that make up the design. This should 
include information about routers, servers, and security measures (such a,; firewalls) 
that have been implemented. 
Documentation should include data that was gathered when inventorying indi- 
vidual components of a network (discussed later in this chapter), as well as how 
every server, router, and major component of a network is configured. Such docu- 
mentation makes management of a system easier, and is vital to restoring the system 
to a previous state after a disaster occurs (also discussed later in this chapter). 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
725 
Information on configurations should be as thorough as possible. For example, 
when documenting the configuration of servers, administrators should include such 
aspects as: 
9 
Processor 
9 
Motherboard 
9 
System basic input output service (BIOS) 
9 
Components installed or attached to the server, including the parameters 
used to configure the server to work with them 
9 Asset tags and serial numbers 
9 
Software installed on the machine, and the parameters used in their con- 
figuration 
9 
Protocol information 
9 Administrative passwords used in the recovery 
Such information can be stored with information detailing the network as a 
whole, with additional information providing detailed specifics of individual com- 
ponents. 
EXERCISE 12.03 
CREATING AN INVENTORY OF A WINDOWS XP MACHINE 
In this exercise, you will export an inventory of components installed on 
a machine running Windows XR The Systems Information tool collects 
information about a system configuration, and can export it to a text 
file that can then be incorporated into System Architecture documenta- 
tion. 
, 
2. 
, 
Click Windows Start I Run. 
When the Run dialog box opens, type msinfo32.exe in the Open 
field and click the OK button. 
While any folder under System Information can be exported, for 
the purposes of this exercise you will save the System Summary 
to a text file. Select System Summary from the left pane of the 
console, and right-click on it. From the context menu that 
appears, select Save as Text File. 
www.syngress.com 

726 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
, 
~ 
When the Save As dialog box appears, enter the name for this 
text file in the File name field, and select where you want to save 
the file. Click the Save button to save the file and continue. 
Open the text file using Notepad or another text editor, and view 
the information about the system documented inside the file. 
Change Documentation 
Nothing stays the same and change is inevitable. These are the reasons why change 
documentation is so important. Change control documentation provides informa- 
tion of changes that have been made to a system, and often provides back out steps 
that show how to restore the system to its previous state.Without this, changes 
made to a system could go unrecorded causing issues in the future. Imagine starting 
a job as the new network administrator, and finding that the only documents about 
the network were the systems architecture documentation that your predecessor 
created seven years ago when the system was first installed. After years of adding 
new equipment, updating software, and making other changes, the current system 
would barely resemble its original configuration. If change documentation had 
been created, you would have had a history of those changes, which could have 
been used to update the systems architecture documentation. 
Change documentation can provide valuable information, which can be used 
when troubleshooting problems and upgrading systems. First, it should st:ate why a 
change occurred. Changes should not appear to be for the sake of change, but be 
for good reason, such as fixing security vulnerabilities, hardware no longer being 
supported by vendors, new functionality, or any number of other reasons. The doc- 
umentation should also outline how these changes were made and detail the steps 
that were performed. At times, an administrator may need to justify what was done, 
or need to undo changes and restore the system to a previous state, because of 
issues resulting from a change. In such cases, the change documentation can be 
used as a reference for backtracking the steps taken. 
Logs and Inventories 
Logs can be valuable tools when troubleshooting problems and identifying adverse 
incidents (e.g., intrusions to the system). Many systems provide logs that give auto- 
mated information on events that have occurred, including accounts that were used 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
727 
to log on, activities performed by users and by the system, and problems that tran- 
spired. Logs are not only a function of OSes, but may also be provided through a 
wide variety of applications. For example, while Windows provides logs dealing 
with the OS, additional logs may be provided through the firewall running on the 
server. 
Logs can also provide insight into physical security problems. Computerized 
door lock systems may require a PIN number, biometrics, or card key before access 
is granted. In other cases, a system may be implemented requiring a person to sign 
their name before entering a secure area. Logs of such entries may correspond to a 
problem occurring and provide valuable information of who caused or witnessed it. 
Inventories provide a record of devices and software making up a network. As 
seen earlier, such inventories should be as thorough as possible. Inventories provide 
a record that can be used to determine which computers require upgrades, which 
are old and need to be removed from service, and other common tasks.When 
changes occur on a network, such as switching to a more secure protocol, the 
inventory can be consulted to determine if all machines have been changed over. 
Failing to perform uniform upgrades on all machines can pose a security threat, as 
insecure protocols or services that are no longer needed but still running on 
machines can be exploited. 
Inventories are also useful when disasters occur. Imagine a fire burning up all 
the computers in a department. By consulting the inventory, the administrator can 
recoup their losses through insurance, by showing which machines were destroyed. 
When new machines are acquired, the inventory can again be used to set up the 
new equipment with the same configurations as those they are replacing. 
Inventories and logs are also used as a reference of common tasks, to ensure 
they were done and to provide a record of when they were performed and who 
completed the job. For example, backup logs are often used to record what data 
was backed up on a server, which tape it was placed on, when the backup 
occurred, who set up the backup, and the type of backup that was performed. 
When certain information is needed, the log can then be referred to so that the 
correct tape can be used to restore the backup. Similar logs and inventories can also 
be used to monitor diagnostics that are run, performance tests, and other tasks that 
are routinely carried out. 
Classification 
In order for users to be aware of what information they can share with certain 
members of their organization, distribute to the public, or keep to themselves, a 
www.syngress.com 

728 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
system of classification must be used. If you have ever seen any military or spy 
movies, you are probably familiar with the concept of " classified documents."You 
can use such a method to specify that certain documents are "top secret," "classi- 
fied," or "for your eyes only," to control which documents are to be kept private. In 
many cases, however, you will come up with your own system. 
A system of classification should be explained through a corporate policy, 
which defines the terms used and what they mean.When creating these classifica- 
tions, the following levels should be included: 
9 
Public or unclassified, meaning that it can be viewed by people outside of 
the organization. 
9 
Classified, meaning that it is only for internal use, not for distribution to 
outside parties. 
9 
Management only, meaning that only managers and supervisors may view 
the information. This can be further broken down so that only certain 
levels of management can view it. For example, certain information may 
be suitable for top management, but not for supervisors of individual 
departments. 
9 
Department specific, so that people outside of a particular department do not 
view the information. 
9 
Private or confidential, which denotes that the information is only for the 
person to whom it was specifically sent. 
9 
High security levels, such as top secret or other classifications that stress the 
importance of the information. For example, the secret recipe of a product 
would fall into this category, as leaking this information could ruin a 
company. 
9 
Not to be copied, denoting that hard copies are not photocopied, and data 
files are not printed or copied to other media (such as floppy disk) 
By providing a scheme of classification, members of an organization are able to 
understand the importance of information and less likely to leak sensitive informa- 
tion. Incorporating such a scheme will also make other policies more understand- 
able, as they can describe what information is being discussed. For example, a code 
of ethics could state that the private information of employees is classified and not 
to be shared with outside parties. This lessens the risk of sensitive data being shared 
with others, transmitted over insecure technologies, or other security risks. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
729 
The "Rainbow Series" is a collection of books created by the National 
Computer Security Center, with each book dealing with a different 
aspect of security. Each of the books in the series has a different colored 
cover, which is why it is called the Rainbow series. The orange book is 
the "Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" (TCSEC), which 
establishes criteria used in grading the security offered by a system or 
product. The red book is the "Trusted Network Interpretation," and is 
similar to the orange book in that it establishes criteria used in grading 
security in the context of networks. These books are often referred to in 
the classification of systems and networks. 
Notification 
Earlier in this chapter, when communication was discussed, we stressed the need for 
notifying the appropriate parties in case of a problem. Notification is vital to dealing 
with a crisis swiftly, so that problems are not left unresolved or for a period of time 
that makes them increase in severity. When critical incidents, such as system failures 
or intrusions occur, it is important that the right person(s) to deal with the situation 
be called in. Often, this is the person with expertise in a particular system (such as a 
network administrator who deals with servers and other network technologies), or 
an on-call person who is designated to deal with issues during off hours. 
Notification procedures should also include contact information for certain out- 
side parties who are contracted to support specific systems. For example, if there is a 
problem with a firewall, the support staff of the software's vendor may be called in 
to fix the system.When such people are called in during a crisis, other security prac- 
tices (such as signing them into secure areas) should be followed. Remember that 
emergencies are not an excuse to forgo other policies for the sake of expediency. 
Retention/Storage 
As discussed earlier in this chapter, policy regarding the retention of data decides 
how long a company will retain data before destroying it. If everyone kept every 
scrap of paper or record stored in a database, organizations would quickly run out 
of hard disk space and have rooms filled with paperwork. For this reason, adminis- 
trators need to determine whether certain records should be destroyed after a series 
of months or years. A retention policy clearly states when stored data is to be 
removed. 
www.syngress.com 

730 
Chapter 12 * Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
The length of time data is stored can be dictated by legal requirements or cor- 
porate decision-making. Using this policy, certain data will be kept for a specified 
length of time, so that it can be referred to if needed. For example, a police depart- 
ment will retain data related to a case for indeterminate lengths of time, so that it 
can be used if a person convicted of a crime appeals, or if questions related to the 
case need to be addressed. Contrary to this are medical records, which a doctor's 
office will keep throughout the life of the patient. In other situations, data is kept 
for an agreed upon time and then destroyed, as when backed up data is retained for 
a year to allow users the ability to restore old data for a specific use. 
Retention and storage documentation is necessary to keep track of data, so that 
it can be determined what data should be removed and/or destroyed once a spe- 
cific date is reached. Such documentation can be as simple as backup logs, which 
list what was backed up and when. By referring to the date the data was backed 
up, administrators can determine if the necessary period of time has elapsed to 
require destruction of this data. 
Destruction 
When a retention period is reached, data needs to be destroyed.As discussed earlier, 
legal requirements or policy may dictate how data is destroyed. This can be done by 
using tools (e.g., a degausser that demagnetizes media) or by totally destroying the 
information (e.g., by shredding it). When destroying data, it is important to follow 
procedures that dictate how information is expected to be destroyed. Even if data is 
destroyed on magnetic media, additional actions may be needed to destroy the 
media itself. Destroying the hard disks, floppy drives, backup tapes, and other media 
on which data is stored ensures that unauthorized persons are unable to recover 
data. Standard methods of physically destroying magnetic media include acid, pul- 
verization, and incineration. 
When destroying data or equipment that is outdated and slated to be destroyed, 
it is important that a log is kept of what items have been destroyed, and when and 
how the destruction was accomplished. This provides a reference that also serves as 
proof that data and equipment were actually destroyed, should anyone request 
information on the status of the data or equipment. A log may also be recluired for 
legal or corporate issues, such as when audits of equipment are performed for tax 
or insurance reasons. 
When destroying equipment and data, it is important that logs, inventory, and 
documentation are subsequently updated. Failing to remove equipment fi:om a sys- 
tems architecture document and equipment inventory could be misleading and 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
731 
cause problems, as they would indicate that the old equipment is still part of the 
system. The same applies to data, as failing to indicate that backup tapes have been 
destroyed would provide false information in a backup inventory. 
Disaster Recovery 
After the events of September 11, 2001, the widespread effects of a disaster became 
evident. Equipment, data, and personnel were destroyed, staggering amounts of 
money were lost by individual businesses, and the economic ripples were felt inter- 
nationally. While some companies experienced varying levels of downtime, some 
never recovered and were put out of business.While this was an extreme situation, 
a disaster recovery plan is used to identify such potential threats of terrorism, fire, 
flooding, and other incidents, and provide guidance on how to deal with such 
events when they occur. 
Disasters can also result from the actions of people. Such disasters can occur as a 
result of employee's accidentally or maliciously deleting data, intrusions of the 
system by hackers, viruses and malicious programs that damage data, and other 
events that cause downtime or damage.As with environmental disasters, a disaster 
recovery plan may be used to prepare and deal with catastrophes when they occur. 
Preparation for disaster recovery begins long before a disaster actually occurs. 
Backups of data need to be performed daily to ensure data can be recovered, plans 
need to be created that outline what tasks need to be performed by who, and other 
issues need to be addressed as well. While it is hoped that such preparation is never 
needed, it is vital that a strategy is in place to deal with incidents. 
The disaster recovery plan should identify as many potential threats as possible, 
and include easy-to-follow procedures.When discussing disaster recovery plans in 
greater detail, a plan should provide countermeasures that address each threat 
effectively. 
Backups 
Backing up data is a fundamental part of any disaster recovery plan.When data is 
backed up, it is copied to a type of media that can be stored in a separate location. 
The type of media will vary depending on the amount of data being copied, but 
can include digital audio tape (DAT), digital linear tape (DLT), compact disks 
(CDP,./CD-RW) and DVDs, or floppy disks. If unintended data is destroyed, it can 
be restored as if nothing had happened. 
www.syngress.com 

732 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
When making backups, the administrator needs to decide what data will be 
copied to alternative media. Critical data, such as trade secrets that a business relies 
on to function, and other important data crucial to a business' needs must be 
backed up. Other data, such as temporary files, applications, and other data may not 
be backed up, as they can easily be reinstalled or missed in a backup. Such deci- 
sions, however, will vary from company to company. 
Once the administrator has decided on what information needs to be backed 
up, they can determine the type of backup that will be performed. Common 
backup types include: 
9 
Full backup, which backs up all data in a single backup job. Generally, this 
includes all data, system files, and software on a system.When each file is 
backed up, the archive bit is changed to indicate that the file was 
backed up. 
9 
Incremental backup, which backs up all data that was changed since the last 
backup. Because only files that have changed are backed up, this type of 
backup takes the least amount of time to perform.When each file is 
backed up, the archive bit is changed. 
9 
Differential backup, which backs up all data that has changed since the last 
full backup. When this type of backup is performed, the archive bit is not 
changed, so data on one differential backup will contain the same infor- 
mation as the previous differential backup plus any additional files that 
have changed. 
9 
Cop), backup, which makes a full backup but does not change the archive 
bit. Because the archive bit is not marked, it will not affect any incre- 
mental or differential backups that are performed. 
Because different types of backups will copy data in different ways, the methods 
used to back up data vary between businesses. One company may do daily full 
backups, while another may use a combination of full and incremental backups (or 
full and differential backups). As will be seen in later sections, this affects how data 
is recovered and what tapes need to be stored in alternative locations. Regardless of 
the type used, however, it is important that data is backed up on a daily basis, so 
that large amounts of data will not be lost in the event of a disaster. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
733 
Rotation Schemes 
It is important to keep at least one set of backup tapes offsite, so that all of the 
tapes are not kept in a single location. If backup tapes were kept in the same loca- 
tion as the servers that were backed up, all of the data (on the server and the 
backup tapes) could be destroyed in a disaster. By rotating backups between a dif- 
ferent set of tapes, data is not always being backed up to the same tapes, and a pre- 
vious set is always available in another location. 
A popular rotation scheme is the Grandfather-Father-Son (GFS) rotation, 
which organizes rotation into a daily, weekly, and monthly set of tapes.With a GFS 
backup schedule, at least one full backup is performed per week, with differential 
or incremental backups performed on other days of the week. At the end of the 
week, the daily and weekly backups are stored offsite, and another set is used 
through the next week. To understand this better, assume a company is open 
Monday through Friday. As shown in Table 12.2, a full backup of the server's 
volume is performed every Monday, with differential backups performed Tuesday 
through Friday. On Friday, the tapes are moved to another location, and another set 
of tapes is used for the following week. 
Table 12.2 Sample Backup Schedule Used in Week 
Sunday Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
None 
Full Backup Differential 
Differential 
Differential 
Differential, None 
with week's 
tapes 
moved 
offsite 
Because it is too expensive to continually use new tapes, old tapes are reused 
for backups. A tape set for each week in a month is rotated back into service and 
reused. For example, at the beginning of each month, the tape set for the first week 
of the previous month would be rotated back into service, and used for that week's 
backup jobs. Because one set of tapes are used for each week of the month, this 
means that most sets of tapes are kept offsite. Even if one set were corrupted, the 
set up tapes for the previous week could still be used to restore data. 
In the GFS rotation scheme, the full backup is considered the "Father," and the 
daily backup is considered the "Son."The "Grandfather" segment of the GFS rota- 
tion is an additional full backup that is performed monthly and stored offsite. The 
Grandfather tape is not reused, but is permanently stored offsite. Each of the 
www.syngress.com 

734 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Grandfather tapes can be kept for a specific amount of time (such as a year), so that 
data can be restored from previous backups, even after the Father and Son tapes 
have been rotated back into service. If someone needs data restored from several 
months ago, the Grandfather tape enables a network administrator to retrieve the 
required files. 
A backup is only as good as its ability to be restored. Too often, backup jobs are 
routinely performed, but the network administrator never knows whether the 
backup was performed properly until the data needs to be restored. To ensure that 
data is being backed up properly and can be restored correctly, administrators 
should perform test restores of data to the server. This can be as simple as 
attempting to restore a directory or small group of files from the backup tape to 
another location on the server. 
PERFORMING A FULL BACKUP ON WINDOWS XP 
~ 
Log onto Windows XP using an account that has administrator 
access or is a member of the Backup Operators group. 
2. 
Click on Windows Start I Programs I Accessories I System Tools. 
Click on Backup. 
3. 
Once the Backup tool opens, click on Backup Wizard. 
4. 
When the Backup Wizard appears, you will see a Welcome 
screen. Click Next to continue. 
, 
, 
, 
8. 
, 
Select the option Back up everything on this computer, and then 
click Next to continue. 
Select the type of media you will backup to and the name of the 
media. This determines where data will be backed up to (for 
example, tape, CD, and so forth). Click Next to continue. 
When the Summary screen appears, click the Advanced button. 
Select the type of backup that will be performed. Select Copy so 
that a full backup of data is performed, but normal backup oper- 
ations will not be effected. Click Next. 
Click on the checkboxes to Verify the data after backup, and Use 
Hardware Compression. Once these checkboxes are checked, click 
Next. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
735 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
Select the option to Replace the data on the media with this 
backup. Click Next to continue. 
Begin scheduling the job by clicking Later from the When to Back 
Up dialog box, and then provide the name and password of an 
account that has administrator access or is a member of the 
Backup Operators group. Click OK. 
Provide a name for the job and click the button labeled Set 
Schedule. Select the date and time that the backup is to take 
place. Click OK and then click Next. 
Review the information on the Summary screen, and click Finish 
to confirm your settings. 
Offsite Storage 
Once backups have been performed, administrators should not keep all of the 
backup tapes in the same location as the machines they have backed up. After all, a 
major reason for performing backups is to have the backed up data available in case 
of a disaster. If a fire or flood occurred and destroyed the server room, any backup 
tapes in that room would also be destroyed. This would make it pointless to have 
gone through the work of backing up data. To protect data, the administrator 
should store the backups in a different location so that they will be safe until they 
are needed. 
Offsite storage can be achieved in a number of ways. If a company has multiple 
buildings, such as in different cities, the backups from other sites can be stored in 
one of those buildings, and the backups for servers in that building can be stored in 
another building. If this is not possible, there are firms that provide offsite storage 
facilities. The key is to keep the backups away from the physical location of the 
original data. 
When deciding on an offsite storage facility, administrators should ensure that it 
is secure and has the environmental conditions necessary to keep the backups safe. 
They should also ensure that the site has air conditioning and heating, as tempera- 
ture changes may affect the integrity of data. The facility should also be protected 
from moisture and flooding and have fire protection. The backups need to be 
locked up, and policies in place of who can pick up the data when needed. 
www.syngress.com 

736 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Backups are an important part of disaster recovery, so it is possible there 
will be a question or two dealing with this topic. Remember that copies 
of backups must be stored in offsite locations. If the backups are not 
kept in offsite storage, they can be destroyed with the original data in a 
disaster. Offsite storage ensures backups are safe until the time they are 
needed. 
Data is only as good as its ability to be restored. If it cannot be 
restored, the work performed to maintain backups was pointless. The 
time to ensure that backups can be restored is not during a disaster. Test 
restores should be performed to determine the integrity of data, and to 
ensure that the restore process actually works. 
Secure Recovery 
Recovering from a disaster can be a time consuming process with many unknown 
variables. If a virus, intruder, or other incident has adversely affected a small amount 
of data, it can be relatively simple to restore data from a backup and replace the 
damaged information. However, when disasters occur, hardware may also be 
destroyed, making it more difficult to restore the system to its previous condition. 
Dealing with damaged hardware will vary in complexity, depending on the 
availability of replacement equipment and the steps required when restoring data to 
the network. Some companies may have additional servers with identical configu- 
rations to damaged ones, for use as replacements when incidents occur. Other 
companies may not be able to afford such measures, or do not have enough addi- 
tional servers to replace damaged ones. In such cases, the administrator may have to 
put data on other servers, and then configure applications and drive mappings so 
the data can be accessed from the new location. Whatever the situation, administra- 
tors should try to anticipate such instances in their disaster recovery plan., and 
devise contingency plans to deal with such problems when they arise. 
Administrators also need to determine how data will be restored from backups. 
There are different types of backups that can be performed. Each of these take dif- 
fering lengths of time to restore, and may require additional work.When full 
backups are performed, all of the files are backed up. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
737 
As a backup job can fit on a single tape (or set of tapes), administrators only 
need to restore the last backup tape or set that was used. Full backups will back up 
everything, so additional tapes are not needed. 
Incremental backups take the longest to restore. Incremental backups contain all 
data that was backed up since the last backup, thus many tapes may be used since 
the last full backup was performed. When this type of backup is used, administra- 
tors need to restore the last full backup and each incremental backup that was 
made since. 
Differential backups take less time and fewer tapes to restore than incremental 
backups. Because differential backups back up all data that was changed since the 
last full backup, only two tapes are needed to restore a system. The administrator 
needs to restore the tape containing the last full backup, and the last tape con- 
taining a differential backup. 
Since different types of backups have their own advantages and disadvantages, 
the administrator will need to consider what type of backup is suitable to their 
needs. Some types of backups take longer than others to backup or restore, so they 
need to decide whether they want data backed up quickly or restored quickly 
when needed. Table 12.3 provides information on different aspects of backup types. 
Table 12.3 Factors Associated with Different Types of Backups 
Type of Backup 
Speed of Making 
the Backup 
Speed of 
Restoring the 
Backup 
Disadvantages of 
Backup Type 
Daily Full 
Backups 
Full Backup 
with Daily 
Incremental 
Backups 
Takes longer than 
using full backups 
with either 
incremental or 
differential 
backups. 
Fastest method 
of backing up 
data, as only 
files that have 
changed since 
the last full or 
incremental 
backup are 
backed up. 
Fastest to restore, Takes considerably 
as only the last 
longer to backup 
full backup is 
data, as all files are 
needed, 
backed up. 
Slowest to 
restore, as the 
last full backup 
and each 
incremental 
backup made 
since that time 
needs to be 
restored. 
Requires more tapes 
than differential 
backups. 
Continued 
www.syngress.com 

738 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Table 12.3 continued Factors Associated with Different Types of Backups 
Type of Backup 
Speed of Making 
the Backup 
Speed of 
Restoring the 
Backup 
Disadvantages of 
Backup Type 
Full Backup 
with Daily 
Differential 
Backups 
Takes longer to 
backup data 
than incremental 
backups. 
Faster to restore 
than incremental 
backups, as only 
the last full 
backup and 
differential 
backup is needed 
to perform 
the restore. 
Each time a backup 
is performed, all 
data modified since 
the last full backup 
(including that which 
was backed up in the 
last differential 
backup) is backed up 
to tape. This means 
that data c-ontained 
in the last differen- 
tial backup is also 
backed up in the 
next differential 
backup. 
Alternate Sites 
Alternate sites are important to certain companies, so that they experience minimal 
downtime or almost no downtime at all.When a disaster occurs, a company 
requires a temporary facility in which data can be restored to servers, and business 
functions can resume.Without such a facility, the company would need to find a 
new business location, purchase and set up new equipment, and then go live. When 
a company is not prepared, such activities can take so long that the disaster puts 
them out of business. 
A hot site is a facility that has the necessary hardware, software, phone lines, 
and network connectivity to allow a business to resume normal functions 
almost immediately. This can be a branch office or data center, but must be 
online and connected to the production network.A copy of the data is 
held on a server at that location, so little or no data is lost. Replication of 
data from production servers may occur in real time, so that an exact 
duplicate of the system is ready when needed. In other instances, the bulk 
of data is stored on servers, so only a minimal amount of data needs to be 
restored. This allows business functions to resume very quickly, with almost 
zero downtime. 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
739 
A warm site is not as equipped as a hot site, but has part of the necessary 
hardware, software, and other office needs needed to restore normal busi- 
ness functions. Such a site may have most of the equipment necessary, but 
will still need work to bring it online and support the needs of the busi- 
ness.With such a site, the bulk of the data will need to be restored to 
servers, and additional work (such as activating phone lines or other ser- 
vices) will need to be done. No data is replicated to the server, so backup 
tapes must be restored so that data on the servers is recent. 
A cold site requires the most work to set up, as it is neither online nor part 
of the production network. It may have all or part of the necessary equip- 
ment and resources needed to resume business activities, but installation is 
required and data needs to be restored to servers. Additional work (such as 
activating phone lines and other services) also needs to be done. The major 
difference between a cold site and a hot site is that a hot site can be used 
immediately when a disaster occurs, while a cold site must be built from 
scratch. 
When deciding on appropriate locations for such sites, it is important that they 
be in different geographical locations. If an alternate site is not a significant distance 
from the primary site, it can fall victim to the same disaster. Imagine having a cold 
site across the road from a company when an earthquake happens. Both sites would 
experience the same disaster, resulting in no alternate site available to resume busi- 
ness. On the other hand, you do not want the alternate site so far away that it will 
significantly add to downtime. If the IT staff needs to get on a plane and fly over- 
seas to another office, this can increase the downtime and result in additional losses. 
Designate a site that is close enough to work from (such as 200 miles away), but 
not so far that it will become a major issue when a disaster occurs. 
The Security+ exam expects you to know the difference between cold, 
warm, and hot sites. Do not get too stressed out trying to remember all 
of the features of each. A quick way of keeping them straight is to 
remember that a hot site is active and functional, a cold site is offline 
and nonfunctional, and a warm site is somewhere in between. 
www.syngress.com 

740 
Chapter 12, Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Disaster Recovery Plan 
Disaster recovery plans are documents that are used to identify potential threats, 
and outline the procedures necessary to deal with different types of threats.When 
creating a disaster recovery plan, administrators should try to identify all the dif- 
ferent types of threats that may affect their company. For example, a company in 
California would not need to worry about blizzards, but would need to be con- 
cerned about earthquakes, fire, flooding, power failures, and other kinds of disasters. 
Once the administrator has determined what disasters their company could face, 
they can then create procedures to minimize the risk of such disasters. 
Disasters are not limited to acts of nature, but can be caused through, electronic 
methods. For example, Denial of Service (DOS) attacks occur when large numbers 
of requests are sent to a server, which overloads the system and causes legitimate 
requests for service to be denied.When an e-commerce site experiences such an 
attack, the losses can be as significant as any natural disaster. 
Risk analysis should be performed to determine what is at risk when a disaster 
occurs. This should include such elements of a system as: 
9 
Loss of data 
9 
Loss of software and hardware 
9 
Loss of personnel 
Software can be backed up, but the cost of applications and OSes can make up 
a considerable part of a company's operating budget. Thus, copies of software and 
licenses should be kept offsite so that they can be used when systems need to be 
restored. Configuration information should also be documented and kept offsite, so 
that it can be used to return the system to its previous state. 
Additional hardware should also be available. Because hardware may not be 
easily installed and configured, administrators may need to have outside parties 
involved. They should check their vendor agreements to determine whether they 
provide onsite service within hours or days, as waiting for outsourced workers can 
present a significant bottleneck in restoring a system. 
Personnel working for a company may have distinct skill sets that can cause a 
major loss if that person is unavailable. If a person is injured, dies, or leaves a com- 
pany, their knowledge and skills are also gone. Imagine a network administrator 
getting injured in a fire, with no one else fully understanding how to pe:rform that 
job. This would cause a major impact to any recovery plans. Thus, it is important to 
have a secondary person with comparable skills who can replace important per- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
741 
sonnel, documentation on systems architecture, and other elements related to 
recovery, and clear procedures to follow when performing important tasks. 
When considering the issue of personnel, administrators should designate 
members who will be part of an incident response team who will deal with disas- 
ters when they arise. Members should have a firm understanding of their roles in 
the disaster recovery plan and the tasks they will need to perform to restore sys- 
tems. A team leader should also be identified, so a specific person is responsible for 
coordinating efforts. 
Recovery methods discussed in the plan should focus on restoring the most 
business-critical requirements first. For example, if a company depends on sales 
from an e-commerce site, restoring this server would be the primary focus. This 
would allow customers to continue viewing and purchasing products while other 
systems are being restored. 
Another important factor in creating a disaster recover plan is cost. As discussed, 
hot, warm, and cold sites require additional cost such as rent, purchasing hardware 
that may not be used until a disaster occurs (if one ever does), stock office supplies, 
and other elements that allow a business to run properly. This can present a dilemma; 
you do not want to spend more money on preparation than it would cost to recover 
from a disaster, but you also do not want to be overly frugal and not be able to 
restore systems in a timely manner. Finding a balance between these two extremes is 
the key to creating a disaster recovery plan that is affordable and effective. 
Business Continuity 
Business continuity is a process that identifies key functions of an organization, the 
threats most likely to endanger them, and creates processes and procedures that 
ensure these functions will not be interrupted (at least for long) in the event of an 
incident. It involves restoring the normal business functions of all business opera- 
tions, so that all elements of the business can be fully restored. 
For the Security+ exam you should be able to differentiate between a 
disaster recovery plan and a business continuity plan. A quick way to 
remember this is to associate disaster recovery planning with IT func- 
tions, while business continuity planning involves the business as a 
whole. Business continuity plans are made up of numerous plans that 
are focused with restoring the normal business functions of the entire 
www.syngress.com 

742 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
business, while disaster recovery plans focus on restoring the technology 
and data used by that business. 
Business continuity planning is a proactive approach to ensuring a business will 
function normally no matter what the circumstances. If this sounds similar to a dis- 
aster recovery plan, it should. Business continuity plans are a collection of different 
plans that are designed to prevent disasters and provide insight into recovering from 
disasters when they occur. Some of the plans that may be incorporated into a busi- 
ness continuity plan include: 
9 Disaster Recovery Plan Provides procedures for recovering t~om a dis- 
aster after it occurs 
9 Business Recovery Plan Addresses how business functions will resume 
after a disaster at an alternate site (e.g., cold site, warm site, or hot site) 
9 Business Resumption Plan Addresses how critical systems and key 
functions of a business will be maintained 
9 Contingency Plan Addresses what actions can be performed to restore 
normal business activities after a disaster, or when additional incidents 
occur during this process 
Because business continuity plans focus on restoring the normal business func- 
tions of the entire business, it is important that critical business functions are identi- 
fied. Each department of a company should identify the requirements that are 
critical for them to continue functioning, and determine which functions they per- 
form that are critical to the company as a whole. If a disaster occurs, the business 
continuity plan can then be used to restore those functions. 
Once key functions of an organization have been identified, it is important that 
budgets be created to establish how much money will be assigned to individual 
components. For example, while IT systems may be a key function, the corporate 
intranet may be a luxury and not essential to business operations. In the same light, 
while the existing server room may use biometrics to control access, the cold site 
facility may only provide a locked closet for security. This raises another important 
point: just because a system is being recovered to a previous state does not mean 
that things will be exactly the same as before. 
In addition to threats faced by an organization, administrators should also try to 
identify vulnerabilities in existing systems. These are areas that may leave their sys- 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
743 
tems open to attack, or make damage caused by disasters more significant. Once 
identified, the administrator needs to create countermeasures to deal with them. 
This can include such elements as installing a firewall to protect the internal net- 
work from the Internet, installing fire suppression systems to protect against fire, or 
other factors that will be discussed in the sections that follow. 
While implementing countermeasures is something that should be done before 
a disaster, countermeasures should also be created and implemented after a disaster 
occurs. Sometimes vulnerabilities may go unnoticed until after problems arise. 
Once a disaster occurs, however, areas that could have been protected but were not 
become clearer. For example, if a hacker breaks into a server through a service that 
was not required, restoring this unneeded service on a replacement server would 
involve making the same mistake twice. Changing systems to remove vulnerabilities 
will not protect you from a disaster that has already happened, but it will protect 
the system from repeat attacks. 
Utilities 
Even if an administrator is comfortable with the internal measures they have taken 
to protect data and other assets, outside sources may still have an impact on systems. 
Utility companies supply essential services, such as electricity and communication 
services. In some disasters, such as major storms or earthquakes, these services may 
become unavailable.Without them, servers and other vital systems are left without 
power and unable to phone for assistance to bring them back online when power is 
restored. To continue doing normal business functions, administrators need to imple- 
ment equipment that will provide these services when the utility companies cannot. 
Uninterruptible power supplies (UPS) are power supplies that can switch over 
to a battery backup when power outages occur. Multiple devices can be plugged 
into a UPS, similar to a power bar, and the UPS generally provides such functions 
as surge protection and noise filtering.When a drop in voltage occurs, the UPS 
detects it and switches over to battery backup. Components plugged into the UPS 
can then receive power for a limited amount of time (often ranging from 10 to 45 
minutes), until normal power is restored or the system can shut down properly. This 
does not allow you to continue normal business functions, but will protect data 
from corruption caused by sudden losses of power and improper shutdowns. 
When power is out for lengthy periods of time, additional measures may be 
necessary to supply electricity to equipment. Power generators can run on gasoline, 
kerosene, or other fuels for an extended time, and provide energy to a building. 
Certain power outlets may be connected to the generator, so that any systems 
plugged into these outlets will receive power when normal power is lost. 
www.syngress.com 

744 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Consideration should also be given to methods of communication. Members of 
the incident response team will not be able to coordinate their efforts, and func- 
tions of the business may not operate properly, if people cannot talk to one 
another. Imagine a police department that loses its radio system and officers are 
unable to respond to calls or report on their situations. To deal with the possibility 
of phone lines and other communication systems going down, administrators 
should plan to use other systems. Mobile phones are one possibility, while sending 
e-mails through high-speed broadband is another. The important thing :is to have 
an alternative system ready for when it is needed. 
High Availability/Fault Tolerance 
A single point of failure can be the Achilles heel that brings down a system. 
Imagine a single road with a bridge that provides the only way to enter or exit a 
town. If the bridge fell down, no one would be able to enter or leave the town. Just 
as the bridge provides a single point of failure that can cut people off from the out- 
side world, a single point of failure in a system can sever a company's ability to per- 
form normal business functions. 
High availability is provided through redundant systems and fault tolerance. If 
the primary method used to store data, transfer information, or other operations 
fails, then a secondary method is used to continue providing services. This ensures 
that systems are always available in one way or another, with minimal downtime to 
prevent people from doing their jobs. 
Redundancy is often found in networks, such as when multiple links are used 
to connect sites on a WAN. Network lines may be used to connect two sites, with 
a separate network line set up in case the first goes down. If this first link fails, the 
network can be switched over to use the second link. In other instances, additional 
lines may be set up in other ways to provide redundancy. For example, site A is 
connected to site B, which is connected to site C. These two links connect the 
three sites together, but if either of them fails, one of the sites will be unable to 
communicate with the others, and vice versa. To provide high availabili~f, a third 
link can be set up between sites A and C. As shown in Figure 12.4, the additional 
link allows the three sites to communicate with one another if any one link fails. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
745 
Figure 12.4 Multiple Links Used to Provide High Availability on a Network 
Many companies depend on Internet connectivity almost as much as network 
connectivity. In some cases, such as e-commerce businesses, they depend on it 
more. A redundant ISP can be used to provide connectivity when an organization's 
primary ISP's service becomes unavailable.The link to the secondary ISP can be 
configured as a low priority route, while the primary ISP is advertised as high pri- 
ority. Such a configuration will have users using the primary ISP for normal usage, 
but automatically switching over to the low priority connection when the first one 
fails. If a secondary ISP is not desired, the administrator should ensure that the ISP 
uses two different points qfpresence. A point os presence is an access point to the 
Internet; therefore, having multiple points of presence will allow access to the 
Internet if one goes down. 
Because data is a commodity of any business, it is important to ensure that it is 
always available to those who need it. Redundant Arrays of" Inexpensive Disks 
(RAID) was developed to prevent the loss os data and/or improve performance. 
RAID provides several methods of" writing data across multiple disks, and writing 
to several disks at once. Rather than losing a single disk and all the information, 
administrators can replace the damaged disk and regenerate the data quickly. When 
determining which level of RAID to use, it is important to remember that some 
RAID levels only increase performance, some only prevent loss os data, but not all 
will do both. The different levels of RAID available include: 
RAID 0 (Disk Striping) Data is written (striped) across two or more 
disks, but no copies of the data are made. This improves performance 
because data is read from multiple disks, but there is no fault tolerance if a 
disk fails. 
www.syngress.com 

746 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
9 RAID 0+1 ( Disk Striping with Mirroring) Combines features of 
RAID 0 and RAID 1. Allows four or more disks to be used as a set, but 
provides full redundancy and the same fault tolerance as RAID 51 
9 
RAID 1 (Mirroring or Duplexing) Data that is written to one disk is 
also written to another, so that each drive has an exact copy of the data. In 
other words, one disk's data is a mirror image of the other's. Additional 
fault tolerance is achieved by using separate disk controllers for each disk, 
which is called duplexing. If one of the disks fails or (in the case of 
duplexing) a controller fails, the data can still be available through the 
other disk in the pair. Because data from one disk is mirrored to another, a 
minimum of two disks must be used to implement RAID 1. 
9 
RAID 2 Similar to RAID 0, except that error correction codes are used 
for drives that do not have built-in error detection. 
9 
RAID 3 Data is striped across three or more drives, but one drive is used 
to store the parity bits for each byte that is written to the other disks.When 
a disk fails, it can be replaced and data can be restored to it from the parity 
information. If two or more disks in the set fail, data cannot be recovered. 
9 
RAID 4 Similar to RAID 3, but stripes data in larger blocks. As with 
RAID 3, if one disk fails, data can be recovered. However, if more than 
one disk fails, data cannot be recovered. Three or more hard disks are 
required to implement RAID 4. 
9 
RAID 5 (Disk Striping With Parity) Data is striped across three or 
more disks, but parity information is stored across multiple drives. 
9 
RAID 10 Allows four or more drives to be used in an array, and has data 
striped across them with the same fault tolerance as RAID 1. 
9 
RAID 53 Allows a minimum of five disks to be used in an array, but pro- 
vides the same fault tolerance as RAID 3. 
RAID is available through hardware or software. Hardware RAID generally 
supports more levels of RAID, and provides higher performance. This type of 
RAID can also support hot swapping, in which a disk can be removed from the 
server without having to take the server down. Software RAID is provided through 
OSes, such as Windows. When RAID is provided through the software, the levels of 
RAID supported may be limited. Also, it takes a higher toll on the system, as 
RAID functions must run through the OS running on the machine. Because of 
this, hot swapping is often unsupported, so you will need to take down the system 
to replace a disk. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
747 
Summary of Exam Objectives 
Policies provide information on the standards and rules of an organization, and are 
used to address concerns and identify risks. They are used to provide a reference for 
members of an organization, and are enforced to ensure they are followed properly. 
Procedures provide instructions on how policies are to be carried out, and may also 
be used to inform users on how to perform certain tasks and deal with problems. 
When used in an organization, policies provide a clear understanding of what they 
expect from employees and how issues are to be handled. 
There are many different types of policies that may be used within an organiza- 
tion. An acceptable use policy establishes guidelines on the appropriate use of tech- 
nology, a code of ethics outlines proper behavior, and privacy policies provide an 
understanding of the level of privacy employees and/or customers can expect from 
a company. Many other policies may also be created, based on the needs and 
expectations of the organization. Before implementing these policies, they should 
be authorized by senior management to ensure approval by the company, and 
reviewed by legal representation to ensure that they correspond to existing laws. 
Once this is done, they should be made available to those the policy applies to, so 
they understand their rights according to the policy and what is expected of them. 
Privilege management involves administration and control of the resources and 
data available to users and groups in an organization.This can be done on a user 
level to specify privileges for each account, or by associating the accounts with 
groups and roles to control access on a larger scale.To apply the security settings 
across a network, a single sign-in can be used. When the user logs onto any server, 
the privileges to any other servers they have access to are also applied. To increase 
the security of servers that are logged into, the administrator should consider cen- 
tralizing them in one area. Auditing each of these servers and other systems can be 
performed to monitor for lapses in security. 
Education and documentation provide people with the ability to perform 
actions securely, identify problems, and report issues to the necessary persons. 
Proper documentation should contain step-by-step procedures, diagrams, and other 
information necessary to perform tasks and solve problems. Different methods of 
communication should be provided to allow users to contact the administrator 
when needed, or for the administrator to educate them on different issues. By 
implementing different methods of reaching users, the administrator can make 
them aware of problem and proper procedures. 
Disaster recovery plans provide procedures for recovering after a disaster occurs, 
and provides insight into methods for preparing for the recovery should the need 
www.syngress.com 

748 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
arise. Disasters can also occur in the form of employee's accidentally or maliciously 
deleting data, intrusions of the system by hackers, viruses and malicious programs 
that damage data, and other events that cause downtime or damage. Because prepa- 
ration for disaster recovery begins long before a disaster actually occurs, the plan 
addresses such issues as proper methods for backing up data, offsite storage, and 
alternate sites for restoring systems to their previous state. 
A disaster recovery plan is incorporated into a business continuity plan, which 
identifies key functions of an organization and the threats that most likely endanger 
them, and creates processes and procedures that ensure these functions will not be 
interrupted long after an incident. In addition to the disaster recovery plan, the 
business continuity plan may also incorporate a business recovery plan that 
addresses how business functions will resume at an alternate site, and a business 
resumption plan that addresses how critical systems and key functions of the busi- 
ness will be maintained. A contingency plan may also be included to outline the 
actions that can be performed to restore normal business activities after a disaster. 
Together, they provide a proactive approach to dealing with incidents before they 
occur. 
Exam Objectives Fast Track 
Policies and Procedures 
Policies address concerns and identify risks, while procedures provide 
guidance on how these issues are to be addressed. 
Physical security is the application of preventative measures, 
countermeasures, and physical barriers that are designed to prevent 
unauthorized individuals from accessing facilities, areas, or assets of a 
company. 
Restricted access policies are used to control access to systems, data, and 
facilities. 
EI Workstation security policies are designed to address security is;sues related 
to any computer that is connected to a network (inclusive of desktop and 
laptop computers) and utilizes network resources. 
www.syngress.com 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
749 
An acceptable use policy can be signed by employees, and serve as a 
contract acknowledging how equipment and technology is to be properly 
used. 
Due care is the level of care that a reasonable person would exercise in a 
given situation, and is used to address problems of negligence. 
Privacy policies address the level of privacy that employees and clients can 
expect, and an organization's perspective of what is considered private 
information. 
Separation of duties involves each person having a different job, thus 
allowing each to specialize in a specific area. It ensures that tasks are 
assigned to personnel in a manner that no single employee can control a 
process from beginning to end. 
Need to know involves information being provided to those who need it. 
People are only given the information or access to data that they need to 
perform their jobs. 
V--r Password management involves enacting policies that control how 
passwords are used and administered. 
Strong passwords consist of a combination of lower case letters (a through 
z), upper case letters (A through Z), numbers (0 through 9), and special 
characters (({ }[1,.<>;:'"?/I \'-!@#S%~&*0_-+=). 
gl SLAs are agreements between clients and service providers that outline 
what services will be supplied, what is expected from the service, and who 
will fix the service if it does not meet an expected level of performance. 
The Number of Nines is a method of translating the expected availability 
of a system in a percentage format to the amount of time a system may be 
down in a year's time. 
gl Disposal and destruction policies address how data and equipment are to 
be properly disposed of or destroyed after they are no longer of use, 
outdated, or past a specified retention date. 
HP,. policies deal with issues related to employees. HP,. departments 
perform such tasks as hiring, firing, retirement, and transferring employees 
to different locations, so it is important that policy stipulates that network 
administrators are informed of changes so proper changes can be made to 
user accounts. 
r 
www.syngress.com 

750 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
A code of ethics is a statement of mission and values, which outlines the 
organization's perspective on principles and beliefs that employees are 
expected to follow. 
An incident response policy provides a clear understanding of what 
decisive actions will be taken during security breaches or other incidents, 
and who will be responsible for investigating and dealing with problems. 
Privilege Management 
Privilege management involves the administration and control of the 
resources and data available to users and groups in an organization. 
Security settings can be applied to users, groups, or roles. Users. accounts 
can have specific settings applied to them individually. To make 
management easier, security settings can also be applied to groups, so that 
each account in the group has the same settings applied. If a user performs 
a specific role in an organization, the account can also be associated with 
the role. 
Single sign-ons allow users to logon to a network once, and use resources 
on multiple servers and systems throughout the network. 
Centralized server models have all servers located in a single location, such 
as a main server room. Decentralized server models have servers located at 
different locations throughout the network. 
Auditing is the process of monitoring different events to determine if 
there are lapses in security. Enabling auditing on a system allows 
administrators to have the system record certain events to a log file or 
notify someone (such as by sending e-mail). Analyzing these records allows 
administrators to identify attempted and successful breaches of security, 
and discover where lapses in security exist. 
MAC has every account and object associated with groups and roles, 
which control the user account's level of security and access. 
DAC allows access to data to be placed at the discretion of the owner of 
the data. 
RBAC involves users being associated with different roles to obtain access 
to resources and data. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
751 
Education and Documentation 
[-r Educating users is the primary method of promoting user awareness, and 
improving the skills and abilities of employees. By teaching users how and 
why certain activities need to be performed, they are generally more 
willing and better able to perform those tasks. 
Vr Communication is vital to understanding the issues users are facing when 
incidents occur, and getting information to the parties that need it. 
[-----d Educating users is the primary method of promoting user awareness and 
improving the skills and abilities of employees. 
V------d Documentation about the system architecture should be created to 
provide information on the system, its layout and design, and any of the 
subsystems used to create it. 
gl Change documentation can provide valuable information, which can be 
used when troubleshooting problems and upgrading systems. 
gl Logs record events that have occurred. Operating systems commonly 
provide various logs that record such events as startups, shutdowns, security 
issues, and other actions or occurrences. 
Inventories provide a record of devices and software making up a network. 
Vr Classification is a scheme that allows members of an organization to 
understand the importance of information, and therefore, be less likely to 
leak sensitive information. 
v 
Documentation should be used to record when the retention date for data 
and documents expires, and how they are destroyed when this date is 
reached. 
Disaster Recovery 
gl 
El 
A disaster recovery plan identifies potential threats to an organization, and 
provides procedures relating to how to recover from them. 
Backing up data is a fundamental part of any disaster recovery plan and 
business continuity.When data is backed up, it is copied to a type of media 
that can be stored in a separate location. 
www.syngress.com 

752 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
V--d 
El 
gl 
gl 
El 
gl 
Full backups will backup all data in a single backup job.When each file is 
backed up, the archive bit is changed to indicate that the file was backed 
up. 
Incremental backups will backup all data that was changed since the last 
backup. When each file is backed up, the archive bit is changed. 
Differential backups will backup all data that has changed since the last full 
backup.When this type of backup is performed, the archive bit is not 
changed, so data on one differential backup will contain the same 
information as the previous differential backup plus any additional files 
that have changed. 
Copy backups will make a full backup, but does not change the archive 
bit. Because the archive bit is not marked, it will not affect any 
incremental or differential backups that are performed. 
Grandfather-Father-Son rotation organizes a rotation of backup tapes into 
a daily, weekly, and monthly set of tapes. 
Alternate sites should be identified to provide an area that business 
functions can be restored. There are three options for alternate sites: hot, 
warm, and cold. 
Business Continuity 
gl A Business continuity plan may incorporate a number of different plans to 
ensure the business's ability to continue key functions after an incident. 
These plans may include a disaster recovery plan, business recovery plan, 
business resumption plan, and contingency plan 
Business recovery plans address how business functions will resume after a 
disaster at an alternate site 
Business resumption plans address how critical systems and key functions 
of a business will be maintained 
gl Contingency plans address what actions can be performed to restore 
normal business activities after a disaster, or when additional incidents 
occur during this process 
UPS can be used to ensure a business can continue functioning for a 
limited time after a power outage. 


754 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
A: MAC is the only method of the three that is considered to be of highest 
strength. It is suitable for systems that need to be extremely secure, :such as 
those that use mission critical applications.With MAC, every account and 
object is associated with groups and roles that control their level of security and 
access. 
Q: 
A: 
I work for a small company that only has one facility, so storing backup tapes at 
another site is not an option.What can I do to keep the backup tapes safe in 
case of a disaster? 
There are many options for storing backup tapes offsite. A safety deposit box 
could be rented at a bank to store the backup tapes, or a firm that provides 
storage facilities for backups could be hired.When deciding on a storage 
facility, ensure that it is secure and has protection against fires and other disas- 
ters.You do not want to store your backups in a location that has a higher like- 
lihood of risk than your own facilities. 
Q 
~ 
A: 
I've implemented RAID for fault tolerance through my Windows OS, but still 
have to shutdown the system to remove and replace a failed hard disk. Is there 
any way to implement RAID and not have to shut down the server when a 
disk needs replacing? 
RAID can be implemented through hardware, which can support "lhot swap- 
ping," in which a disk can be removed from the server without having to take 
it down. RAID takes a higher toll on the system, as RAID functions must run 
through the OS running on the machine. Because of this, hot swapping is often 
unsupported through the OS, which is why you must take down the system to 
replace a disk. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
755 
Self Test 
A Quick Answer Key follows the Self Test questions. For complete questions, 
answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions in this chapter as well as 
the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test Appendix. 
, 
o 
o 
An organization has just installed a new T1 Internet connection, which 
employees may use to research issues related to their jobs and send e-mail. 
Upon reviewing firewall logs, you see that several users have visited inappro- 
priate sites and downloaded illegal software. Finding this information, you con- 
tact senior management to have the policy relating to this problem enforced. 
Which of the following policies would you recommend as applicable to this 
situation? 
A. Privacy policy 
B. Acceptable use policy 
C. HR Policy 
D. SLAs 
You are concerned about the possibility of hackers using programs to deter- 
mine the passwords of users.You decide to create a policy that provides infor- 
mation on creating strong passwords, and want to provide an example of a 
strong password. Which of the following is the strongest password? 
A. strong 
B. PKBLT 
C. ih8Xams! 
D. 12345 
You are developing a policy that will address that hard disks are to be properly 
erased using special software, and that any CDs or DVDs that are to be dam- 
aged by scarring or breaking them before they are thrown away. It is the hope 
of the policy that any information that is on the media will not fall into the 
wrong hands after properly discarding them. What type of policy are you 
creating? 
www.syngress.com 

756 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
A. Due care 
B. Privacy policy 
C. Need to know 
D. Disposal and destruction policy 
. 
You have a decentralized network and want to give managers and asisistant 
managers at each location the necessary rights to backup data on Windows 
servers and workstations running Windows XP. While managers have been with 
the company for years, there is some turnover in employees who are assistant 
managers. Based on this, what is the best method of allowing these users to 
backup data on the servers and workstations? 
A. Modify each user account so that each person can perform backups. 
B. Make each user a member of the Administrators group. 
C. Make each user a member of a Backup Operators group. 
D. Make each user a member of the Users group. 
~ 
You are concerned that mistakes may be made from accounts that are set up on 
each server in the network when users log into them.You also want to make it 
easier for users to log onto multiple servers which physically reside in a server 
room within the company's main building. To achieve these goals, which of the 
following features of a network are needed? 
A. Centralized servers 
B. Decentralized servers 
C. Single sign-on 
D. Auditing 
o 
A user is concerned that someone may have access to his account, and may be 
accessing his data.Which of the following events will you audit to identify if 
this is the case? 
A. Monitor the success and failure of accessing printers and other resources. 
B. Monitor the success of changes to accounts. 
C. Monitor the success of restarts and shutdowns. 
D. Monitor for escalated use of accounts during off hours. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery, Chapter 12 
757 
~ 
~ 
. 
You are configuring operating systems used in your organization. Part of this 
configuration involves updating several programs, modifying areas of the 
Registry, and modifying the background wallpaper to show the company's new 
logo. In performing these tasks, you want to create documentation on the steps 
taken, so that if there is a problem, you can reverse the steps and restore systems 
to their original state.What kind of documentation will you create? 
A. Change control documentation 
B. Inventory 
C. Classification 
D. Retention and storage documentation 
You are the administrator of a network running Novell NetWare, and are 
having problems with a server's ability to connect to other servers. The server 
was able to connect to the network before you installed a recent bug fix. After 
attempting to solve the problem, you decide to check and see if anyone else has 
had this problem.Where is the best place to find this information? 
A. The manual that came with the server 
B. The vendor's Web site 
C. Service pack 
D. Microsoft knowledge base 
You are concerned about the possibility of sensitive information developed by 
your company being distributed to the public, and decide to implement a 
system of classification. In creating this system, which of the following levels of 
classification would you apply to sensitive information that is not to be dissemi- 
nated outside of the organization? 
A. Unclassified 
B. Classified 
C. Public 
D. External 
www.syngress.com 

758 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
10. Changes in the law now require your organization to store data on clients for 
three years, at which point the data are to be destroyed. When the expiration 
date on the stored data is reached, any printed documents are to be shredded 
and media that contains data on the client is to be destroyed.What type of doc- 
umentation would you use to specify when data is to be destroyed? 
A. Disaster recovery documentation 
B. Retention policies and logs 
C. Change documentation 
D. Destruction logs 
11. You are designing a backup regime that will allow you to recover data to 
servers in the event of a disaster. Should a disaster occur, you want to use a 
backup routine that will take minimal time to restore.Which of the following 
types of backups will you perform? 
A. Daily full backups 
B. A full backup combined with daily incremental backups 
C. A full backup combined with daily differential backups 
D. A combination of incremental and differential backups. 
12. You are the administrator of a network that is spread across a main building and 
a remote site several miles away.You make regular backups of the data on your 
servers, which are centrally located in the main building.Where should you 
store the backup tapes so they are available when needed in the case: of a 
disaster? 
A. Keep the backup tapes in the server room within the main building, so 
they are readily at hand. If a disaster occurs, you will be able to obtain 
these tapes quickly and restore the data to servers. 
B. Keep the backup tapes in another section of the main building. 
C. Keep the backup tapes in the remote site. 
D. Keep the backup tapes in the tape drives of the servers so that a rotation 
scheme can be maintained. 

Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery- Chapter 12 
759 
13. An intruder has gained access to your Web site, and damaged a number of files 
needed by the company. Entry was gained through a new Web server that had 
unneeded services running on the machine. This Web server is used to provide 
e-commerce functions that provide a large percentage of the company's annual 
sales. During the intrusion, you were working on upgrading a router in another 
part of the building, which is why you did not notice audit notifications sent to 
your e-mail address, which could have tipped you off about suspicious activity 
on the server.You are concerned that a repeat attack may occur while repairs 
are underway. Which of the following should you do to deal with this incident 
and protect the network? 
A. Remove the Web server from the Internet. 
B. Remove the unneeded services running on the server. 
C. Continue upgrading the router so that you can focus on audit notifications 
that may occur. 
D. Recover data files that were damaged in the attack. 
14. You are creating a business continuity plan that incorporates several other plans 
to ensure that key functions will not be interrupted for long if an incident 
occurs.What plan would be used to identify a cold site that will be used to 
reestablish normal business functions in a disaster? 
A. Business recovery plan 
B. Business resumption plan 
C. Contingency plan 
D. SLA 
www.syngress.com 

760 
Chapter 12 9 Operational and Organizational Security: Policies and Disaster Recovery 
Self Test Quick Answer Key 
For complete questions, answers, and explanations to the Self Test questions 
in this chapter as well as the other chapters in this book, see the Self Test 
Appendix. 
1. 
B 
8. B 
2. 
C 
9. B 
3. D 
10. B 
4. 
C 
11. A 
5. C 
12. C 
6. D 
13. B 
7. A 
14. A 

Appendix 
Chapter 1: General Security 
Concepts: Access Control, 
Authentication, and Auditing 
1. 
You are acting as a security consultant for a company wanting to decrease 
their security risks. As part of your role, they have asked that you develop a 
security policy that they can publish to their employees. This security policy 
is intended to explain the new security rules and define what is and is not 
acceptable from a security standpoint as well as defining the method by 
which users can gain access to IT resources.What element of AAA is this 
policy a part of?, 
A. 
Authentication 
B. 
Authorization 
C. 
Access Control 
D. 
Auditing 
F-----d C. Access control is defined as a policy, software component, or hardware com- 
ponent that is used to grant or deny access to a resource. Since this policy is 
defining how to access resources, it is considered part of access control. 
[k-'l Answer A is incorrect because this type of written policy is not part of the 
authentication process although they may explain the authentication as part of 
the policy. Answer B is incorrect because this type of written policy is not part 
761 

762 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
of the authorization process. In addition, authorization is not included in the acronym AAA per 
CompTIA's definition.Answer D is incorrect because this type of written policy is not part of 
the auditing process. 
One of the goals of AAA is to provide CIA.A valid user has entered their ID and password 
and has been authenticated to access network resources.When they attempt to access a 
resource on the network, the attempt returns a message stating, "The server you are 
attempting to access has reached its maximum number of connections." Which part of CIA is 
being violated in this situation? 
A. 
Confidentiality 
B. 
Integrity 
C. 
Availability 
D. 
Authentication 
[-~ C. Availability under CIA has not been assured because the resource is not available to the user 
after they have authenticated. 
Answer A is incorrect because confidentiality has not been breached in this scenario. Answer B 
is incorrect because integrity has not been breached in this scenario. While the resource may 
not be available, that does not mean that the integrity of the data has been violated. Answer D 
is incorrect because authentication is not a component of CIA and the scenario describes that 
authentication has completed successfully. 
3. 
A user from your company is being investigated for attempting to sell proprietary information 
to a competitor.You are the IT security administrator responsible for assisting with the investi- 
gation. The user has claimed that he did not try to access any restricted files and is conse- 
quently not guilty of any wrongdoing.You have completed your investigation and have a log 
record showing that the user did attempt to access restricted files. How does AM~ help you to 
prove that the user is guilty regardless of what he says? 
A. 
Access Control 
B. 
Auditing 
C. 
Authorization 
D. 
Non-repudiation 
Vd D. Non-repudiation is part of authentication under AAA, and serves to ensure that the pre- 
senter of the authentication request cannot later deny they were the originator of the request 
through the use of time stamps, particular protocols, or authentication methods. 
!~1 Answer A is incorrect because access control does not provide a method of proving that the 
user accessed the files. Answer B is incorrect because auditing does not provide any proof that 
the user is guilty either. While auditing may be the method used for finding the authentication 
records proving the user's guilt, the auditing process itself is not proof. If there were no authen- 
tication method with non-repudiation, there would be no log for you to find in your audit. 
Answer C is incorrect because authorization is not a part of the acronym AAA per CompTIA's 
definition. 
www.syngress.corn 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
763 
. 
You have been brought in as a security consultant for a programming team working on a new 
operating system designed strictly for use in secure government environments. Part of your 
role is to help define the security requirements for the operating system and to instruct the 
programmers in the best security methods to use for specific functions of the operating 
system.What method of access control is most appropriate for implementation as it relates to 
the security of the operating system itself?. 
A. 
MAC 
B. 
DAC 
C. 
P,.BAC 
D. 
All of the above 
A. Mandatory access control is generally built into and implemented within the operating 
system being used and is hard-coded to protect specific objects. 
Answer B is incorrect because discretionary access control is optional and would not be able to 
protect the operating system itself from being modified. Answer C is incorrect because RBAC 
is also optional and would not be able to protect the operating system itself from being modi- 
fied. Answer D is incorrect because answers B and C do not fit the requirements. 
You are designing the access control methodology for a company implementing an entirely 
new IT infrastructure. This company has several hundred employees, each with a specific job 
function. The company wants their access control methodology to be as secure as possible due 
to recent compromises within their previous infrastructure. Which access control methodology 
would you use and why? 
A. 
RBAC because it is job-based and more flexible than MAC 
B. 
P,.BAC because it is user-based and easier to administer 
C. 
Groups because they are job-based and very precise 
D. 
Groups because they are highly configurable and more flexible than MAC 
A. Role-based access control is appropriate for this situation because it is job-based, highly con- 
figurable, more flexible than MAC, and more precise than groups. 
Answer B is incorrect because RBAC is not user-based, nor is it easier to administer. Answer C 
is incorrect because groups are not job-based, nor are they precise. Answer D is incorrect 
because groups are not highly configurable although they are more flexible than MAC. 
. 
You are performing a security audit for a company to determine their risk from various attack 
methods. As part of your audit, you work with one of the company's employees to see what 
activities he performs during the day that could be at risk. As you work with the employee, 
you see him perform the following activities: 
9 Log in to the corporate network using Kerberos 
9 Access files on a remote system through a Web browser using SSL 
www.syngress.com 

764 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
9 Log into a remote UNIX system using SSH 
9 Connect to a POP3 server and retrieve e-mail 
Which of these activities is most vulnerable to a sniffing attack? 
A. 
Logging in to the corporate network using Kerberos 
B. 
Accessing files on a remote system through a Web browser using SSL 
C. 
Logging into a remote UNIX system using SSH 
D. 
Connecting to a POP3 server and retrieving e-mail 
V--d D. Connecting to a POP3 server sends the ID and password over the network in a non- 
encrypted format due to the use of cleartext authentication. This data (in addition to the e-mail 
content itself) is consequently vulnerable to being collected when sniffing the network. 
JR-1 A, B, C. Answer A is incorrect because logging into a network using Kerberos is secure from 
sniffing attacks due to encryption and timestamps. Answer B is incorrect because using SSL 
encrypts the connection so that it cannot be viewed by sniffing. Answer C is incorrect because 
using SSH encrypts the connection to the remote UNIX system. 
. 
You are reading a security article regarding penetration testing of various authentication 
methods. One of the methods being described uses a time-stamped ticket as part of its 
methodology. Which authentication method would match this description? 
A. 
Certificates 
B. 
CHAP 
C. 
Kerberos 
D. 
Tokens 
i-4I C. Kerberos is the only access control method listed which uses time-stamped tickets. 
lk-1 Answer A is incorrect because certificates do not use tickets although they are time-stamped. 
Answer B is incorrect because CHAP does not use time-stamped tickets as part of its method- 
ology. Answer D is incorrect because tokens do not use tickets, although their numerical algo- 
rithms may be based on timestamps. 
You are validating the security of various vendors that you work with to ensure that your 
transactions with the vendors are secure. As part of this, you validate that the certificates used 
by the vendors for SSL communications are valid.You check one of the vendor); certificates 
and find the information shown in Figure 1.1. From the information shown, what vendor 
would you have to trust as a CA for this certificate to be valid? 

Self Test Appendix ~ Appendix 
765 
Figure 1.16 Sample Vendor Certificate 
A. 
Syngress 
B. 
Thawte 
C. 
Microsoft 
D. 
All of the above 
[-4I B. Thawte is listed as the issuer of the certificate. As such, you would have to trust Thawte as a 
CA in order for this certificate to be valid. 
Answer A is incorrect because Syngress is the holder of the certificate, not the CA. Answer C 
is incorrect because Microsoft is the vendor for the operating system, but is not the CA. Answer 
D is incorrect because answers A and C are not correct. 
You have been brought in to analyze the overall security strength of a banking organization. 
As part of your analysis, you work with the existing security administrator to see what issues 
she has to deal with on a daily basis. She receives a help desk ticket stating that a teller issued 
a credit to his own account then authorized the credit so that he was able to prevent 
bouncing a check. According to the human resources department who called in the ticket, he 
said that he planned on removing the credit later after he got paid. The security administrator 
made a change to the security policies around one of the following areas. If she analyzed the 
issue correctly, which area did she change the policy for? 

766 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
A. 
System logging in order to capture events similar to this in the future 
B. 
Segmentation of duties to prevent a teller from issuing and authorizing a credit 
C. 
System scanning in order to test other areas of the software for vulnerabilities similar to 
this 
D. 
Log analysis to ensure that future events like this are flagged for follow-up. 
I-'d B. Changing the security policy around the area of segmentation of duties would prevent a 
teller from performing this action in the future. In addition, the change in policy would prevent 
future incidents of the same type from occurring or at least make it more difficult:. 
Answer A is incorrect because logging the event will not prevent it from occurring. It is better 
to prevent something from happening rather than see that it has happened. Answer C is incor- 
rect because it does not have any action that prevents this problem from occurring. The admin- 
istrator would then know where the potential problems are, but she would not have performed 
any preventative measures. Answer D is incorrect because it also does nothing to prevent the 
problem from occurring again.While adding better logging and analysis are good ideas going 
forward, the focus should be on the immediate problem of preventing a user from performing 
both parts of a sensitive operation. 
10. As an administrator for a large corporation, you take your job very seriously and go through 
all of the systems' log data daily. While going through the fortieth log of the day, you decide 
that you're spending too much time skipping over meaningless information to get to the few 
chunks of data that you can do something with.Which of the following options should you 
consider to reduce the amount of effort required on your part without compromising the 
overall security of the environment? 
A. 
Reduce the frequency of system scans so that fewer logs are generated 
B. 
Tune the logging policy so that only important events are captured 
C. 
Write logs less frequently to reduce the amount of log data 
D. 
Use segmentation of duties to move analysis of the log files to other team members with 
more time 
g'r 
B. Tuning the logging policy so that only important events are captured is the best method to 
reduce the amount of effort while maintaining a secure environment. This must be done care- 
fully to ensure that all relevant log data is still captured. 
Answer A is incorrect because reducing the frequency of system scans may reduce the amount 
of log data, but it would also potentially reduce the security of the environment. Answer C is 
incorrect because writing logs less frequently does not reduce the amount of log data; it simply 
delays the writing of that data. Answer D is incorrect because this is not a situation where seg- 
mentation of duties would apply. 
11. You have a variety of tools available to you as a security administrator that help with your 
security efforts. Some of these tools are tools created to perform penetration testing or "pen 
testing." Based on your experience, what is the best use of these tools in your role as a secu- 
rity administrator? 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
767 
A. 
Break through a system's security to determine how to best protect it 
B. 
Test a system's response to various attack scenarios 
C. 
Check compliance of a system against desktop security policies 
D. 
Determine a logging policy to use which ensures the capture of log data for recent attack 
types 
1-41 B.The use of pen testing tools to test a system's response to various attack scenarios is the best 
use for this type of tool. 
[k-! Answer A is incorrect because the purpose of pen testing tools is not simply to break through a 
system's security.You also want to know if the system is already secure from known attacks. This 
is an analysis tool, not a tool to break into systems. Answer C is incorrect because pen testing is 
not necessary to test desktop compliance. Since the desktops would be corporate-controlled, 
you could use a variety of other methods to check compliance without going to the depths 
provided by pen testing tools. Answer D is incorrect because logging policies should not be 
defined just in response to recent attack patterns. Logging policies should be defined to capture 
relevant information regardless of the attack type used against a system. 
12. You are performing an audit to attempt to track down an intruder that managed to access a 
system on your network.You suspect that the intruder may have been a former employee 
who had intimate knowledge of the IT infrastructure. As part of your audit, which of the fol- 
lowing would you consider crucial to tracking the intruder? 
A. 
Log file analysis 
B. 
System scanning 
C. 
Penetration testing 
D. 
Segregation of duties 
A. Log file analysis will help you to determine what the intruder did and how the intruder 
accessed the systems. 
N1 Answer B is incorrect because system scanning will help you to identify risks, but will not help 
track this intruder. Answer C is incorrect because penetration testing will also help identify risks 
and may determine through which vulnerability the intruder accessed the system, but it will 
not help track what they did while in the system. Answer D is incorrect because segregation of 
duties does not apply in this situation. 
13. You have been asked to configure a remote access server (RAS) for external dial-up users to 
use on your TCP/IP-based network. As part of this configuration, you must determine which 
protocols to allow to be routed through the RAS and which to explicitly deny.Which of the 
following would you choose to explicitly deny? 
A. 
TCP/IP 
B. 
IPX/SPX 
C. 
NETBIOS 
D. 
CDP 
r 
www.syngress.com 

768 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
g-~ B. IPX/SPX should be explicitly denied as it would not be necessary on a TCP/IP-based net- 
work and could serve as a security risk. 
[k-! Answer A is incorrect because TCP/IP would be required in order for the remote system to 
function on the network. Answer C is incorrect because NETBIOS is not a routable protocol. 
Answer D is incorrect because since CDP is a proprietary protocol for Cisco devices, the RAS 
would not have the ability to explicitly deny this protocol. 
14. The screenshot below is from a file server on your corporate network.You had a suspicion 
that there were some services running on the system that were unnecessary. By performing a 
'netstat-a' you confirmed that there is a service listening on a well-known port which is not 
necessary for a file server.Which service is this? 
Figure 1.17 Netstat Screenshot 
A. 
POP3 
B. 
Oracle RDBMS 
C. 
HTTP 
D. 
SNMP 
i-4I C. HTTP uses port 80 which is shown as being in a listening state on this system. HTTP is not 
necessary for a file server and should be disabled. 
lk-i Answer A is incorrect because port 110 for POP3 is not shown in the screenshot.Answer B is 
incorrect because port 1521 for the Oracle RDBMS Listener is not shown in the screenshot. 
Answer D is incorrect because port 161 for SNMP is not shown in the screenshot. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
769 
Chapter 2: General 
Security Concepts: Attacks 
1. 
The company's HelpDesk begins to receive numerous calls because customers can't access the 
Web site's e-commerce section. Customers report receiving a message about an unavailable 
database system after entering their credentials. Which type of attack could not be taking 
place? 
A. 
A DDoS against the company's Web site 
B. 
A Web site spoofing of the company's Web site 
C. 
A DoS against the database system 
D. 
A virus affecting the Web site and/or the database system. 
[-r 
A. If a DDoS attack was being performed on the Web site, customers would not be able to 
access the Web site. The fact that the Web site shows a database error means the Web site is still 
operating. 
B. If the Web site is being spoofed, customers could be entering the password in an attacker's 
database. C. A DoS attack to the database could cause the database to be unavailable. D. A virus 
infecting either the Web site or the database could cause instability and the resulting message. 
2. 
Your Company's CEO is afraid of a DD JS attack against the company Web site, and has asked 
you to increase the connection to the Internet to the fastest speed available.Why won't this 
protect from a I)DoS attack? 
A. 
A DDoS attack refers to the connection to the Internet, not to Web sites. 
B. 
A DDoS attack can marshall the bandwidth of hundreds or thousands of computers, 
which can saturate any Internet pipeline the company can get. 
C. 
A DDoS attack can also be initiated from the internal network; therefore, increasing the 
Internet pipeline won't protect against those attacks. 
D. 
Increasing the Internet connection speed has no influence on the effectiveness of a DDoS 
attack. 
B. Even with a very fast Internet connection, if thousands of machines attack the same site, it 
will eventually be overrun. 
A. A DDoS attack refers to any DoS that comes from many sources. B A DDoS requires 
machines in distributed networks, so an attack from the local network does not qualify as a 
DDoS. D. Increasing the bandwidth slows down the impact of a DDoS. 
CodeRed was a mixed threat attack that used an exploitable vulnerability in IIS to install 
itself, modify the Web site's default page, and launch an attack against a the Web site 
www.whitehouse.gov on August 15.Which type of malware was not part of Code Red? 
www.syngress.com 

770 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
a. 
Worm 
B. 
Spyware 
C. 
Logic Bomb 
D. 
DDoS 
V'4I B. CodeRed did not spy upon the victim. As a Worm (A) it self-replicated through IIS; as a 
Logic Bomb it waited until August 15 to launch an attack; as a DDoS it tried to launch a coor- 
dinated attack from multiple sources at the same time. 
4. 
The mail server is receiving a large number of spam e-mails and users have hundreds of 
unwanted messages in their mailbox.What kind of attack are you receiving? 
A. A rootkit 
B. A DoS flooding attack 
C. A virus 
D. A Logic bomb 
[--'-'d B. The company is being flooded with e-mail in an attempt to deny service to the mail server. 
N1 A. No attempts to hide within the OS is being made. C. A virus normally is not self-repli- 
cating. D. A logic bomb would attack at a certain time only, and is not e-mail-based. 
5. 
You suspect your network was under a SYN Attack last night. The only data you have is a ses- 
sion captured by a sniffer on the affected network.Which of the following conditions is a 
sure-tell sign that a SYN attack is taking place? 
A. A very large number of SYN packets. 
B. Having more SYN I ACK packets in the network than SYN packets. 
C. Having more SYN I ACK packets in the network than ACK packets. 
D. Having more ACK packets in the network than SYN packets. 
['4I 
C. In a SYN attack, the victim keeps waiting for the ACK packets to establish a TCP hand- 
shake, so fewer ACK packets indicates that the victim will be waiting for those to arrive. 
JR-! A. Many SYN packets can be the result of peak traffic, not necessarily an attack. B. More SYN 
[ACK packets than SYN packets indicates a problem in the responding machines of an 
attacked network, not a SYN attack. D. It's very unlikely that more ACK packets 'will be seen 
than SYN packets, and it would not be a SYN attack. 
. 
While analyzing your logs, you notice that internal IPs are being dropped, because they are 
trying to enter through the Internet connection.What type of attack is this? 
A. DoS 
B. MITM 
C. Replay Attack 
D. IP Spoofing 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
771 
[-r 
D. IP spoofing is where attackers pretend to be from trusted networks to enter restricted loca- 
tions. A log would show an internal IP in an external interface. 
All the other attacks are different than a spoofing attack. 
. 
Your Chief Executive Officer (CEO) practices complete password security. He changes the 
password every 30 days, uses hard-to-guess, complex, 10-character passwords with lowercase, 
uppercase, numbers and special symbols, and never writes them down anywhere. Still, you 
have discovered a hacker that for the past year has been using the CEO's passwords to read his 
e-mail.What's the likely culprit behind this attack. 
A. A logic bomb 
B. A worm 
C. A keylogger 
D. Social Engineering 
C. Most likely a keylogger has been installed that secretly sends the day's log to the attacker, 
who can then easily read the CEO's passwords. 
JR-1 A. logic bomb typically does not run for a year, and does not collect and send passwords. B. A 
worm is more interested with self-replication than a target password attack. D. The CEO obvi- 
ously understands password security, so it's unlikely he would divulge his password on several 
occasions to another person. 
8. 
Packet sniffing will help with which of the following? (Select all that apply.) 
A. Capturing e-mail to gain classified information 
B. Launching a DDoS attack with zombie machines 
C. Grabbing passwords sent in the clear 
D. Developing a firewall deployment strategy 
!-~ A and C. Sniffing will show information shown in the clear, like e-mail and unencrypted 
passwords. 
N1 B. Sniffing is passive, not active as in DDoS. D. Sniffing is not part of a firewall, as a sniffer 
bypasses the perimeter protection. 
9. 
Which of the following are sniffers? (Select all that apply.) 
A. Wireshark 
B. Tcpdump 
C. Nessus 
D. Snoop 
I-#I A,B, 
and D. 
C. Nessus is a vulnerability scanner, not a sniffer. 
www.syngress.com 

772 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
10. Which password attack will take the longest to crack a password? 
A. Password guessing 
B. Brute force attack 
C. Dictionary attack 
D. All attacks are equally fast 
B. Brute force tries most if not all combinations, so it takes the longest time. 
JR-1 A. Password guessing can be the fastest if correct guesses are used. C. A dictionary attack, if 
successful, only uses a very finite amount of tries. D. Certainly different methods ]have different 
speeds. 
11. What are some of the advantages of off-line password attacks? (Select all that apply.) 
A. They do not generate noise on the target network or host. 
B. They are not locked out after a set amount of tries. 
C. They can be used to reset the user's password without the need for cracking. 
D. They can be initiated by zombies. 
A and B. Offline attacks are done on the cracker's machine, and so do not generate noise on 
the target network, and are not subject to account lock-outs. 
C. Password attacks cannot reset a users password, which would require write access to the 
password database, which is unlikely. D. Zombies take part in DDoS attack, not password 
attacks. 
12. Your machine was infected by a particularly destructive virus. Luckily, you have backups of 
your data.Which of the following should you do first? 
A. Restore the data from the backups. 
B. Scan the data from the backups for virus infection. 
C. Use the installed anti-virus program to scan and disinfect your machine. 
D. Boot from an anti-virus CD or floppy to scan and disinfect your machine. 
D. The first thing after being infected is to use a clean boot disk, CD, or floppy, to run a clean 
antivirus on the machine to be sure it can be disinfected. 
N1 A. Restoring the data from the backups can lead to it being re-infected unless you have 
cleaned the machine. B. Scanning the backup for virus without cleaning the machine is useless, 
since the active virus can affect the scan results. C. Scanning the machine from the: installed 
anti-virus is useless, since the active virus can affect the scan results. 
13. Because of their prevalence, phishing protection is offered in many products. Which of the 
following offer built-in phishing protection? (Select all that apply.) 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
773 
A. Windows Vista 
B. Microsoft Internet Explorer 7 
C. Mozilla Firefox 2 
D. Opera 9 
!--71 ALL 
OF THE ABOVE. They all offer phishing-protection. 
14. What are good ways to protect against worms? (Select all that apply.) 
A. User Education Programs 
B. Correct firewall configuration 
C. Timely software patches 
D. Anti-virus scans 
[-4I B and C. Firewalls can prevent ports like SQL and NetBIOS from being available and usable 
to worms. Most worms used known vulnerabilities, so timely patches will defend against the 
worms. 
[k-i A. Worms do not require user intervention, and so user education doesn't affect them. D. A 
worm is not resident, and so can only be detected in memory, where it already has infected the 
machine. 
Chapter 3: Remote Access and Email 
1. 
The use of VPNs and 
have enabled users to be able to telecommute. 
A. 
PGP 
B. 
S/MIME 
C. 
Wireless NICs 
D. 
RASs 
D. BothVPNs and RASs have enable users to telecommute. 
PGP (A) and S/MIME (B) are both methods of securing Internet e-mail. NICs (C) give users 
the ability to work without being physically connected to a network, but do not provide the 
ability to telecommute. 
2. 
PDAs, cell phones, and certain network cards have the ability to use 
net- 
works. Choose the BEST answer. 
A. 
Wired 
B. 
Private 
C. 
Wireless 
D. 
Antique 
www.syngress.com 

774 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
C. PDAs, cell phones, and wireless network cards all have the ability to use wireless networks. 
I~1 Although PDAs and network cards can use wired networks (A), cell phones cannot. Since 
wireless technology is passed over open airwaves, private networks (B) are not the best answer. 
All three (PDAs, cell phones, and network cards) are relatively new technologies, :and will not 
function on antique networks (D). 
. 
hackers. After the script kiddies come the 
of networks and security to launch an attack themselves. 
A. 
Web kiddies 
B. 
Clickers 
C. 
Click kiddies 
D. 
Dunce Kiddies 
Vql C. Click kiddies rely on attack portals to carry out their attacks because they lack the knowl- 
edge to perform the attack themselves. 
Answers A, B, and D are incorrect because none of these terms are used in reference to 
attackers. 
There are three recognized levels of hacking ability in the Internet community.The first is the 
skilled hacker, who writes the programs and scripts that script kiddies use for their attacks. 
Next comes the script kiddie, who knows how to run the scripts written by the skilled 
who lack the basic knowledge 
4. 
Choose the correct set of terms:When a wireless user, also known as the 
wants 
to access a wireless network, 802. l x forces them to authenticate to a centralized authority 
called the 
A. 
Authenticator; supplicant 
B. 
Supplicant; authenticator 
C. 
Supplicant; negotiator 
D. 
Contact; authenticator 
B. A supplicant (user) who wants to use 802.1x to protect their wireless transmissions first 
needs to authenticate to a centralized authority known as an authenticator. 
N] Answer A is incorrect because the order of terms is backwards. Answer C is only half correct. 
Although a supplicant is the correct term for a wireless user, a negotiator is a fictitious term in 
802.1x. Likewise, answer D is incorrect because a contact is a fictitious term in 802.1x, 
although authenticator is the correct term for the central authority. 
IPSec implemented in 
the transfer. 
A. 
Tunnel mode 
B. 
Unauthorized state mode 
C. 
Transfer mode 
specifies that only the data will be encrypted during 
D. 
Transport mode 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
775 
[-4I D. IPSec is designed to function in two modes:, transport and tunnel. If you want to encrypt 
only the data being transmitted, you set up IPSec to use transport mode. 
[k-I Tunnel mode (A) is used to encrypt both the IP headers and the data being transferred. 
Unauthorized state (B) is a term related to 802.1x wireless security protocol.Transfer mode 
(C) is a fictitious term unrelated to IPSec. 
One of the biggest differences between TACACS and TACACS+ is that TACACS uses 
as its transport protocol. 
as its transport protocol and TACACS+ uses 
A. 
TCP; UDP 
B. 
UDP;TCP 
C. 
IP;TCP 
D. 
IP; UDP 
[-r 
B.TACACS uses UDP (a connectionless-oriented protocol) for its transport protocol whereas 
TACACS+ uses TCP (a connection-oriented protocol) for transporting data because TCP is a 
reliable transport protocol. 
~I 
Answer A has the correct transport protocols (TCP and UDP), but they are backwards in terms 
of their relation to TACACS and TACACS+. Answers C and D are incorrect because the IP 
handles addressing and routing at the network layer and relies on either TCP or UDP to handle 
transport of data. 
7. 
The 
protocol was created from by combining the features of PPTP and L2E 
A. 
IPSec 
B. 
XTACACS 
C. 
PPP 
D. 
L2TP 
['41 D. L2TP is a hybrid of the PPTP and L2F protocols that combines the features of each. 
IPSec (A) is used by L2TP for encryption, but was not created by combining PPTP and L2E 
XTACACS (B) is the second generation of the TACACS authentication protocol.PPP (C) is 
the basis for PPTP protocol, and preexisted PPTP, L2E and L2TP. 
SSH is concerned with the confidentiality and 
between the client and the host. 
A. 
Integrity 
B. 
Availability 
C. 
Accountability 
D. 
Speed 
of the information being passed 
www.syngress.com 

776 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
F'r A.SSH is concerned with protecting the confidentiality and integrity of the data being passed 
between a client and a host. 
Although the availability (B) of information is important, it is not specified as part of the SSH 
protocol. SSH does not have an accounting function, and therefore does not have an account- 
ability (C) feature. Speed (D) is always important when communicating between clients and 
hosts, but it is not part of SSH by design. 
IPSec is made up of two basic security protocols: The AH protocol and the 
protocol. 
A. 
SPA 
B. 
IKE 
C. ESP 
D. EAP 
F--d C. The ESP protocol handles authentication, integrity, and confidentiality through the use of 
encryption. 
N1 A security association (A) is an agreement between two parties on the types of keys, authenti- 
cation, IP addresses, and other information that is unique to their IPSec connection. The IKE 
(B) is part of IPSec, but it is responsible for key management and is not a security protocol in 
itself. The EAP (D) is an authentication protocol commonly used with PPR 
10. You are a consultant working with a high-profile client. They are concerned about the possi- 
bility of sensitive e-mail being read by unauthorized persons. After listening to their issues, 
you recommend that they implement either S/MIME or PGP to 
their messages. 
Select the BEST answer. 
A. Encapsulate 
B. 
Encrypt 
C. Authorize 
D. 
Identify 
!---4I B. S/MIME and PGP are both common methods of encrypting e-mail messages. 
Traditionally, the term encapsulate (A) is used when referring to VPNs. Neither S/MIME or 
PGP are tunneling protocols, nor do they encapsulate messages. Authorization ( C ) and identi- 
fication (D) are both part of the encryption process, but the key here is the encryption of the 
messages. 
11. Most ISPs offer their customers a service to block 
A. 
Hoaxes 
B. 
SMTP relay 
C. Viruses 
D. 
Spam 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
777 
D. Most Internet providers have filters that are in place that block spam before it gets to your 
e-mail server. 
Most reputable Internet providers do not review the content of e-mails, so they have no way of 
knowing if an e-mail is a hoax (A), and therefore cannot block it. Although Internet providers 
usually block SMTP relay on their own servers (B), they do not control SMTP relay on a cus- 
tomer's e-mail server. Some Internet providers may have virus walls in place, but as a general 
rule ISPs do not filter for viruses (C). 
12. S/MIME uses a/an 
for key exchange as well as digital signatures. 
A. 
Symmetric cipher 
B. 
Asymmetric cipher 
C. 
Public-key algorithm 
D. 
Mimic algorithm 
[-r 
C. S/MIME uses a public-key algorithm for key exchange and digital signatures. 
Answer D is a nonsense answer, there is no such algorithm called a "mimic" algorithm. 
S/MIME uses a symmetric cipher (A) for encrypting messages, but not for key exchange or 
digital signatures. Asymmetric ciphers (13) are not used by S/MIME for any function. Answer 
D is a nonsense answer; there is no such algorithm called a "mimic" algorithm. 
13. PGP can fall victim to a 
attack, which occurs when a hacker creates a 
message and sends it to a targeted userid with the expectation that this user will then send the 
message out to other users.When a targeted user distributes a message to others in an 
encrypted form, a hacker can listen to the transmitted messages and figure out the key from 
the newly created ciphertext. 
A. 
Birthday 
B. 
Ciphertext 
C. 
Sniffer 
D. 
Brute-force 
B. A chosen ciphertext attack, which occurs when a hacker creates a message and sends it to a 
target with the expectation that this user will then send the message to other users. When the 
targeted user distributes the message to others in an encrypted form, a hacker can listen to the 
transmitted messages and figure out the key from the newly created ciphertext. 
A birthday attack (A) occurs when the same ciphertext is produced from the same plaintext. A 
sniffer attack (C) really is not an attack as much as it is an intrusion; sniffing is eavesdropping 
on the network for information. A brute-force attack (D) is someone trying millions of combi- 
nations of keys to try and break the cyphertext. 
www.syngress.com 

778 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
Chapter 4: 
Communication Security: Wireless 
1. 
You have created a wireless network segment for your corporate network and are using WEP 
for security. Which of the following terms best describes the APs and the clients who want to 
connect to this wireless network? 
A. Key Sharer and Key Requester 
B. Applicants and Supplicants 
C. Servers and Clients 
D. Authenticators and Supplicants 
E. All of the above 
I-4I D. When using the 802.1x authentication standard Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) the APs 
are called the authenticators and the clients who want to connect to them are called the suppli- 
cants. Answers A, B, C and E are invalid. 
2. 
What can be implemented in a wireless network to provide authentication, data and privacy 
protection? 
A. WTLS 
B. WEP 
C. WAP 
D. WSET 
/-4I Answer A is correct. In a wireless network WTLS (Wireless Transport Layer Security) can be 
used to specifically provide authentication, data and privacy protection. Choices B, C and D are 
incorrect. 
. 
You are tasked with creating a new wireless network for corporate users. Howewer, your CEO 
is very concerned about security and the integrity of the rest of the company's network.You 
assure your CEO that the new wireless network will be secure by suggesting you will place 
the wireless network APs in a special area. Where will you place the wireless APs? 
A. Your office 
B. The CEO's office 
C. ADMZ 
D. A secured server room 
E. A fresnel zone 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
779 
C. The solution is to place wireless APs on their own separate subnets, in effect creating a kind 
of Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) for the wireless network.The wireless subnet could be separated 
from the wired corporate network by either a router or a full-featured firewall. Answers A, B 
and D are incorrect because your office, the CEO's office and a secured server room do not 
properly meet the security requirements for the AP's. Answer E is incorrect because the area 
over which the radio waves propagate from an electromagnetic source is known as thefresnel 
~O//e. 
Your wireless network uses WEP to authorize users, but you also use MAC filtering to ensure 
that only preauthorized clients can associate with your APs. On Monday morning, you 
reviewed the AP association table logs for the previous weekend and noticed that the MAC 
address assigned to the network adapter in your portable computer had associated with your 
APs several times over the weekend.Your portable computer spent the weekend on your 
dining room table and was not connected to your corporate wireless network during this 
period of time.What type of wireless network attack are you most likely being subjected to? 
A. Spoofing 
B. Jamming 
C. Sniffing 
D. Man in the middle 
I-4I A.You are the victim of a MAC spoofing attack whereby an attacker has captured valid MAC 
addresses by sniffing your wireless network. The fact that you have no other protection in place 
has made becoming associated with your APs an easy task for this attacker. 
NI 
B, C, D. Answer B is incorrect, because jamming attacks are those in which high-power RF 
waves are targeted at a wireless network installation with the hope of knocking it out of opera- 
tion by overpowering it.. Answer C is incorrect, because although your network has been 
sniffed previously to obtain the valid MAC address, you are currently being attacked using a 
spoofing attack. Answer D is incorrect, because a man-in-the-middle attack is one in which an 
attacker sits between two communicating parties, intercepting and manipulating both sides of 
the transmission to suit his or her own needs. 
The biggest weakness in WEP stems from which vulnerability? 
A. 
The reuse of IV values. 
B. 
The ability to crackWEP by statistically determining the WEP key through the Fluhrer- 
Mantin-Shamir attack. 
C. 
The ability to spoof MAC addresses thereby bypassing MAC address filters. 
D. 
All of the above. 
www.syngress.com 

780 
Appendix ~ Self Test Appendix 
F---41 Answer B is correct. By far the most devastating attack against WEP is the Fluhrer-Mantin- 
Shamir attack of statistically determining the WEP key. This allows an attacker to crack a WEP 
key within hours and thereby gain full access to the wireless network or to the traffic on it. 
Answer A is incorrect. While the reuse of IV values does provide a significant problem (and in 
fact leads to the success, in some cases, of the Fluhrer-Mantin-Shamir attack) it is not as great a 
threat as FMS. Answer C is incorrect. The capability to spoof MAC addresses is not a problem 
with WEE but rather with 802.11 as a whole. Answer D is incorrect. 
6. 
The tool NetStumbler detects wireless networks based on what feature? 
A. 
SSID 
B. 
WEP key 
C. 
MAC address 
D. 
CRC-32 checksum 
Answer A is correct. NetStumbler detects wireless networks by looking for SSIDs. Answer B is 
incorrect. NetStumbler does identify networks with WEP enabled, but does not use that fact in 
identifying the network. Answer C is incorrect. NetStumbler does detect clients and APs based 
on their MAC but does not use this information for identifying wireless networks. Answer D is 
incorrect because CRC-32 checksums are of no concern to NetStumbler. 
Some DoS attacks are unintentional.Your wireless network at home has been having sporadic 
problems. The wireless network is particularly susceptible in the afternoon and the evenings. 
This is most likely due to which of the following possible problems? 
A. The AP is flaky and needs to be replaced. 
B. Someone is flooding your AP with traffic in a DoS attack. 
C. The wireless network is misconfigured. 
D. Your cordless phone is using the same frequency as the wireless network ancl whenever 
someone calls or receives a call the phone jams the wireless network. 
U4I Answer D is correct. The most likely problem is that a cordless phone (or a microwave or one 
of many other wireless devices) is jamming the wireless signal because it uses the same fre- 
quency. This is becoming more and more common as cordless phone manufacturers use the 2.4 
GHz frequency. Answer A may be possible, but should not be considered seriously until other 
sources of the problem are ruled out. Answer B is possible but unlikely. Answer C is incorrect 
because misconfiguration of the wireless network would probably result in the problem occur- 
ring at all times, rather than just in the afternoon or evenings. 
The 802. l x standard requires the use of an authentication server to allow access to the wire- 
less LAN.You are deploying a wireless network and will use EAP-TLS as your authentication 
method. What is the most likely vulnerability in your network? 
www.syngress.com 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
781 
A. Unauthorized users accessing the network by spoofing EAP-TLS messages 
B. DoS attacks occurring because 802.11 management frames are not authenticated 
C. Attackers cracking the encrypted traffic 
D. None of the above 
I-----4I Answer B is correct. One of the biggest problems identified in a paper discussing 802.1x secu- 
rity is the lack of authentication in the 802.11 management frames and that 802.1x does not 
address this problem. Answer A is incorrect because spoofing EAP-TLS is impossible. The 
attacker needs the user's certificate and passphrase. Answer C is incorrect because cracking 
encrypted traffic is possible but unlikely since EAP-TLS allows for WEP key rotation. Answer 
D is incorrect. 
9. 
Concerning wireless network security, WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) was originally 
designed to do which of the following? 
A. 
Provide wireless collision detection and collision avoidance access methods 
B. 
Provide the same level of security as a LAN (Local Area Network) 
C. 
Provide the ability to allow RF signals to penetrate through walls 
D. 
Provide greater accessibility than a wired LAN 
Answer B is correct.WEP was designed to provide the same level of security as a LAN (Local 
Area Network). Answers A, C and D are simply incorrect. 
10. Which of the following is the most common method used by attackers to detect and identify 
the presence of an 802.11 wireless network? 
A. 
Packet phishing 
B. 
War dialing 
C. 
Packet sniffing 
D. 
War driving 
Answer D is correct.War driving is the most common method used by attackers to detect and 
identify the presence of an 802.11 wireless network. Answers A and C are incorrect. Answer B 
is incorrect because. When hackers and attackers only had modems, they ran programs designed 
to search through all possible phone numbers and call each one, looking for a modem to 
answer. This type of scan was typically referred to as war dialing. 
11. Your company uses WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) for its wireless security. Who may 
authenticate to the company's access point? 
A. 
Anyone in the company can authenticate 
B. 
Only the administrator can authenticate 
C. 
Only users with the valid WEP key 
D. 
None of the above 
www.syngress.com 

782 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
I-----d Answer C is correct. If your company is using WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) for its wireless 
security, only those users with the correct or valid WEP key can authenticate at the access 
point. Answers A, B and D are incorrect. 
12. What is the purpose of conducting a wireless network site survey? 
A. 
To identify other wireless networks in the area. 
B. 
To determine the extent to which your wireless network extends beyond the physical 
boundary of the building. 
C. 
To hack into other companies' wireless networks. 
D. 
All of the above 
['-41 B is correct. The purpose of a site survey is to determine both the extent to which your wire- 
less network is visible beyond the building in which it is located, and the strength of the secu- 
rity of your wireless network. Answer A is incorrect. While one of the results of conducting a 
wireless network site survey will be the determination of other wireless networks in the area, it 
is not the primary intent of the survey. Answer C is incorrect because hacking into other com- 
panies' wireless networks is not the intent of a legal wireless site survey. Answer D is incorrect. 
13. This tool is used during site surveys to detect possible interference in RF bands. It can also be 
used by an attacker to eaves drop on communications session. What is it? 
A. 
Spectrum Analyzer 
B. 
Spectrum Packet Sniffer 
C. 
Spectrum Monitor 
D. 
Spectrum War Driver 
Answer A is correct. Certified site survey technicians use spectrum analyzers to detect potential 
interference between RF bands. This tool can also be used by an attacker to 
eaves drop on 
communications session.Answer B is incorrect. However, A Packet Sniffer is a program or 
device that collects and monitors data packets on a network. Answers C and D are invalid. 
14. You have just started your new job as security technician for a company.Your director informs 
you that several developers and the network administrator have left the company as disgrun- 
tled employees. No one has been keeping track of security and your director believes the 
former employees have been violating company policy by accessing company information 
through the wireless network.You conduct a site survey and expect to find what as the 
number one culprit? 
A. 
Compromised company data 
B. 
Wireless security breaches 
C. 
Unauthorized APs on the network 
D. 
None of the above 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
783 
Answer C is correct. It is highly likely that you will find unauthorized APs on the network. 
Even if a company does not use or plan to use a wireless network, they should consider con- 
ducting regular wireless site surveys to see if anyone has violated company security policy by 
placing an unauthorized AP on the network. Although answers A and B are likely to occur in 
this situation, they will not be specifically identified by the site survey. Answer D is invalid. 
Chapter 5: Communication 
Security: Web Based Services 
1. 
When performing a security audit on a company's Web servers, you note that the Web service 
is running under the security context of an account that is a member of the server's local 
Administrators group. What is the best recommendation to make in your audit results? 
A. 
Use a different account for the Web service that is a member of the Domain 
Administrators group rather than the local Administrators group. 
B. 
Use a different account for the Web service that only has access to those specific files and 
directories that will be used by the Web site. 
C. 
Use a different account for the Web service that is not a member of an Administrators 
group but has access to all files on the system. 
D. 
Recommend that the company continue with this practice as long as the account is just a 
member of the local Administrators group and not the Domain Administrators group. 
B. Use a different account for the Web service that only has access to those specific files and 
directories that will be used by the Web site. The security context of an account used by the 
Web service should always be restricted as much as possible to help prevent remote users from 
being able to cause damage using this account. 
N1 A is incorrect, because this would just make the security hole worse by increasing the access 
level of the account. Answer C is incorrect, because it will restrict the account a little more, but 
still give it complete access to everything on the Web server, including the system. Answer D is 
incorrect, because recommending that the company continue with this practice does nothing to 
eliminate the security vulnerability. 
While performing a routine port scan of your company's internal network, you find several sys- 
tems that are actively listening on port 80.What does this mean and what should you do? 
A. 
There are rogue FTP servers, and they should be disabled. 
B. 
There are rogue HTTP servers, and they should be disabled. 
C. 
These are LDAP servers, and should be left alone. 
D. 
These are FTP servers, and should be left alone. 
www.syngress.com 

784 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
!--'-'4I B. These are rogue HTTP servers, and they should be disabled. HTTP servers listen on port 80 
by default. This situation indicates that rogue Web servers have be intentionally or unintention- 
ally set up on your network. Without the administrator's knowledge, this presents a security 
vulnerability, as the operator(s) of the systems will probably not be able to or know how to 
secure them properly. 
[k-i Answers A and D are incorrect, because FTP uses port 20 and port 21. Answer C is incorrect, 
because LDAP uses port 389. 
3. 
You determine that someone has been using Web spoofing attacks to get your users to give out 
their passwords to an attacker. The users tell you that the site at which they have been entering 
the passwords shows the same address that normally shows in the address bar of the browser. 
What is the most likely reason that the users cannot see the URL that they are actually using? 
A. 
The attacker is using a digital certificate created by a third-party CA. 
B. 
The attacker is using HTTP/S to prevent the browser from seeing the real URL. 
C. 
The attacker is using ActiveX to prevent the Web server from sending its URL. 
D. 
The attacker is using JavaScript to prevent the browser from displaying the real URL. 
i--4I D. The attacker is using JavaScript to prevent the browser from displaying the real URL. By 
using JavaScript, the attacker can cause the browser to change the URL in the address bar to 
show whatever the attacker wants to, including the URL of a different site than the one the 
user is actually using. 
lk-1 Answer A is incorrect, because digital certificates would not mask the URL that the user 
would see in the address bar of the browser. Answer B is incorrect, because HTTP/S is used for 
encrypted HTTP connections, but the browser would still display the correct URL. Answer C 
is incorrect, because ActiveX doesn't have the ability to prevent a Web server from sending its 
URL to a client. 
You are setting up a new Web server for your company. In setting directory properties and per- 
missions through the Web server, you want to ensure that hackers are not able to navigate 
through the directory structure of the site, or execute any compiled programs that are on the 
hard disk. At the same time, you want visitors to the site to be able to enjoy the code you've 
included in HTML documents, and in scripts stored in a directory of the Web site.Which of 
the following will be part of the properties and permissions that you set? 
A. 
Disable script source access 
B. 
Set execute permissions in the directory to"None" 
C. 
Disable directory browsing 
D. 
Enable log visits 
[-'41 C. Disable directory browsing. Of the various tasks you would need to perform on the Web 
server, the only choice offered that would apply to this scenario is disabling directory browsing 
to prevent visitors from navigating through the directory structure of the Web site. 

Self Test Appendix ~ Appendix 
785 
Answer A is incorrect, because script source access is used to allow users to view the source 
code. Answer B is incorrect, because the scenario requires visitors to the Web site to be able to 
execute scripts in the directory. Answer D is incorrect, because setting the LogVisits property 
will record visits to the directory so that logging is enabled for the site. 
5. 
A user contacts you with concerns over cookies found on their hard disk.The user visited a 
banking site several months ago, and when filling out a form on the site, provided some per- 
sonal information that was saved to a cookie. Even though this was months ago, when the user 
returned the to site, it displayed his name and other information on the Web page. This led the 
user to check his computer, and find that the cookie created months ago is still on the hard 
disk of his computer.What type of cookie is this? 
A. 
Temporary 
B. 
Session 
C. 
Persistent 
D. 
Tracking 
i-----d C. Persistent. Persistent cookies are created to store for a long-term basis, so the person doesn't 
have to login each time they visit, or to save other settings like the language you want content 
to be displayed in, your first and last name, or other information. 
l~l 
Answers A and B are incorrect, because Temporary and Session cookies are created on a tem- 
porary basis, and removed from the computer when the Web browser is shut down. Answer D 
is incorrect, because the user filled out a form on a banking site, and it is retrieving this infor- 
mation months later to display on a Web page when the user returns to the site.This is the 
behavior of a persistent cookie. Tracking cookies are different, because they are used to retain 
information on sites visited by a user. 
When reviewing security on an intranet, an administrator finds that the Web server is using 
port 22. The administrator wants transmission of data on the intranet to be secure.Which of the 
following is true about the data being transmitted using this port? 
A. 
TFTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. 
B. 
TFTP is being used, so transmission of data is insecure. 
C. 
FTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. 
D. 
S/FTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. 
C----d D. S/FTP is being used, so transmission of data is secure. S/FTP is Secure FTP, and uses port 
22. S/FTP establishes a tunnel between the FTP client and the server, and transmits data 
between them using encryption and authentication is based on digital certificates. 
Answer A is incorrect, because TFTP provides no encryption or authentication. Answer B is 
incorrect, because TFTP uses UDP port 69. Answer C is incorrect, because FTP uses ports 20 
and 21. Depending on how the FTP server is configured, authentication may be required in the 
form of a username and password. 
www.syngress.com 

786 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
. 
A number of scans are being performed on computers on the network.When determining 
which computer is running the scans on these machines, you find that the source of the scans 
are the FTP server.What type of attack is occurring? 
A. 
Bounce attack 
B. 
Phishing 
C. 
DoS 
D. 
Web site spoofing 
i-4I A. Bounce attack. A bounce attack occurs when scans are run against other computers through 
the FTP server, so that it appears the FTP server is actually running the scans. The scans can be 
performed due to a mechanism in FTP called proxy FTP, which allows FTP clients to have the 
server transfer the files to a third computer. 
Answer B is incorrect, because phishing involves tricking users to provide information they 
normally wouldn't make available, such as through e-mails or Web sites requesting confidential 
information. Answer C is incorrect, because a DoS attack is a Denial of Service attack in which 
a hacker overwhelms a system, such as by making a massive number of requests on a Web 
server. Answer D is incorrect, because Web spoofing involves tricking Web browsers to connect 
to a different Web server than the user intended. 
8. 
You are attempting to query an o~ect in an LDAP directory using the distinguished name of 
the o~ect.The o~ect has the ~llowing attributes: 
cn: 
4321 
givenName: John 
sn: Doe 
telephoneNumber: 905 555 1212 
employeeID: 4321 
mail: jdoe@nonexist.com 
objectClass: organizationalPerson 
Based on this information, which of the following would be the distinguished name of the object? 
A. 
dc=nonexist, dc=com 
B. 
cn=4321 
C. 
dn: cn=4321, dc=nonexist, dc=com 
D. jdoe@nonexist.com 
l-----d C. dn: cn=4321, dc=nonexist, dc=com.The distinguished name is a unique identifier for the 
object, and is made up of several attributes of the object. It consists of the relative distinguished 
name, which is constructed from some attribute(s) of the object, followed by the distinguished 
name of the parent object. 
Answer A is incorrect, because this identifies the root of the tree. Answer B is incorrect, 
because this identifies the common name of the object. Answer D is incorrect, because this is 
the user account's e-mail address. 
www.syngress.com 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
787 
9. 
You are creating a new LDAP directory, in which you will need to develop a hierarchy of orga- 
nizational units and objects. To perform these tasks, on which of the following servers will you 
create the directory structure? 
A. 
DIT 
B. 
Tree server 
C. 
Root server 
D. 
Branch server 
C. The root server is used to create the structure of the directory, with organizational units and 
objects branching out from the root. Because LDAP directories are organized as tree structures, 
the top of the hierarchy is called the root. 
Answer A is incorrect, because the D IT is the name given to the tree structure. Answers B and 
D are incorrect, because there is no such thing as a Branch server or Tree server in LDAP 
Chapter 6: Infrastructure 
Security: Devices and Media 
1. 
You are working for a company who is updating their network and telecommunications infras- 
tructure. As part of the upgrade, they are in-sourcing their voicemail system rather than con- 
tinue to pay their telecom provider for this service. The new voicemail system is connected to 
the corporate network for maintenance purposes. What actions would you recommend be 
taken? 
A. 
Change all the default passwords on the new voicemail system. 
B. 
Disconnect the new voicemail system from the corporate network when the connection 
is not in use for servicing the system. 
C. 
Store the new voicemail system in a secure location. 
D. 
All of the above. 
D. All of the recommendations listed are valid, therefore D is the correct answer. 
A, B, C. Answers A, B, and C are all incorrect because they each comprise only a part of the 
best solution. 
You have recently installed an IDS on your corporate network.While configuring the NIDS, 
you decide to enable the monitoring of network traffic for a new exploit focused on attacking 
workstations that go to a malformed URL causing the browser to experience a stack dump. To 
configure the NIDS to watch for this, what must it be capable of monitoring? 
A. 
HTTP Headers 
B. 
TCP Headers 
C. 
XML Content 
D. 
HTTPS Content 
www.syngress.com 

788 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
V'r A. The URL for a browser session is contained in the HTTP header. Since this exploit uses a 
malformed URL, the NIDS must be able to extract the HTTP header from the incoming 
packet and analyze it. 
I~! B, C, D.Answer B is incorrect because the TCP header does not contain the URL informa- 
tion and would not be of use in identifying this attack. Answer C is incorrect because no use of 
XML by the exploit is stated in the scenario. Answer D is incorrect because the exploit does 
not use HTTPS content, which would be encrypted and unreadable for the IDS. 
3. 
You are performing a routine penetration test for the company you work for. As part of this 
test, you wardial all company extensions searching for modems. The test results inclicate that one 
of the company extensions has a modem answering when it shouldn't be.You track this down 
and find that a user has installed their own modem so they can connect to an online service. 
What should you do? 
A. 
Nothing, this is not a threat. 
B. 
Remove the modem. 
C. 
Disconnect the extension. 
D. 
Notify the user's supervisor. 
D. Answer D is the best choice. This allows for disciplinary actions to be taken if necessary 
against the user. In addition, it allows for this to be addressed as a business need if the online 
service is truly necessary and for the security risks to be properly addressed. 
Answer A is incorrect because any point of access into a corporate system should be considered 
a vulnerability. Answer B is incorrect because while this could solve the problem temporarily, 
the user could simply do the same thing again later. Answer C is incorrect because while this 
would fix the problem, it would also prevent the user from performing their job functions. 
. 
Your company has a mobile sales force which uses PDAs for entering orders while on the road. 
The application used for these orders requires an ID and password to log in. What else should 
be done to ensure that these orders are kept confidential when being sent to the host server? 
A. 
Encrypt the data stored on the mobile device. 
B. 
Encrypt the communication channel between the mobile device and the host server. 
C. 
Require an x.509 certificate in addition to the ID and password required to authenticate. 
r-el 
D. 
Encrypt the data stored on the host server. 
B. This is the only answer which covers the requirement of maintaining the confidentiality of 
the data during its actual transmission. 
[k-! A, C, D. Answer A is incorrect because encrypting the data stored on the device does not help 
when the data is in the process of being transferred. Answer C is incorrect because while it does 
provide for better authentication, it does not help maintain data confidentiality during transmis- 
sion. Answer D is incorrect because encrypting the data stored on the host server does not help 
during transfer. 
www.syngress.com 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
789 
You have been assigned a ticket from your company's help desk stating that a user is unable to 
access their files over theVPN although they can access the same files when connected to the 
corporate network at their office. While troubleshooting the problem, you have the user per- 
form a traceroute between their workstation and theVPN gateway while connected to the 
VPN. The traceroute results show that all eight hops respond with acceptable response times. 
What do you suspect the problem is? 
A. 
Network latency. 
B. 
The user is not connected to the VPN. 
C. 
Access permissions for the files are incorrect. 
D. 
The VPN gateway is behaving abnormally and needs to be examined. 
!"-4I B. If the traceroute is showing eight hops between the client and the VPN gateway, the user 
could not be connected to the VPN. Remember that aVPN connection once established shows 
up as a single hop. 
JR-! A, C, D. Answer A is incorrect because the traceroute shows acceptable response times for the 
connections indicating that latency is not the issue. Answer C is incorrect because the user can 
successfully access the file at the office, which indicates that the permissions are correct. Answer 
D is incorrect because determining this solution would require much more troubleshooting. 
While it is possible that a problem with the gateway is causino~ the user to be unable to connect 
to theVPN, you must first determine that the user is not connected then troubleshoot further 
to determine the cause. 
You are working with a network engineer to diagnose the cause for intermittent communica- 
tion issues on the corporate network. The engineer determines that the cause is attenuation on 
the UTP cables used for network traffic. What element of STP cable could help with this? 
A. 
Increased twist rate 
B. 
Shielding 
C. 
Higher wire gauge 
D. 
Optical data transmission 
V',-4I B. STP cables contain shielding which can help prevent issues related to attenuation. 
[k-1 Incorrect Answers & Explanations: A, C, D. Answer A is incorrect because although twist rate 
can have an effect on attenuation, UTP and STP cable of the same category share the same 
twist rate. Answer C is incorrect because the wire gauge is the same for UTP and STP cables of 
the same category. Answer D is incorrect because STP cables do not use optical data transmis- 
sion. 
You are working with a team to prepare outdated workstations for resale. As part of this task, 
you must ensure that no corporate data remains on the system.What is the best way to do this? 
A. 
Destroy the system hard disk drive. 
B. 
Overwrite the system hard disk drive with random data to clear it. 
C. 
Format the system hard disk drive. 
D. 
Overwrite the system hard disk drive with random data multiple times to clear it 
securely. 
www.syngress.com 

790 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
l-4I A. Destroying the hard disk drive is the best way to prevent the possibility of corporate data 
leaving with the systems. It may reduce the sale price, but is the most secure option. 
B, C, D. Answer B is incorrect because while this helps, it is not considered a secure solution. 
Answer C is incorrect because formatting the drives does not help at all as they can be easily 
unformatted. Answer D is incorrect because while this is the most secure option outside of 
destroying the drive, it does not completely eliminate the risk. The best way to prevent corpo- 
rate data from being left on the systems is to completely destroy the hard disk drive. 
One of the employees at your company frequently does presentations. She carries the slideshow 
for the presentation on a flash card which she always carries with her.What would you recom- 
mend to her to keep the data on the flash card confidential? 
A. 
Encrypt the data on the flash card. 
B. 
Use a flash card with shielding to prevent loss due to EMI. 
C. 
Use a flash card with a fingerprint reader to do authentication for her laptop. 
D. 
Put the flash card on a keychain so that it cannot be easily lost or stolen. 
A. Encrypting the data on the flash card is the best choice for keeping it confidential. 
B, C, D. Answer B is incorrect because the confidentiality of the data stored on the flash card 
could not be compromised with EMI. Answer C is incorrect because while this could help 
increase the security of her laptop, it does nothing to secure the data on the flash card itself. 
Answer D is incorrect because it is not the best method to prevent confidentiality from being 
compromised although it could help. 
To help protect corporate data from loss, your company regularly ships backup tapes offsite to 
one of its manufacturing facilities. This facility stores the tapes in a locked cabinet in a secure 
area where some of the automated manufacturing equipment operates. What is wrong with this 
scenario? 
A. 
Backup tapes should always be stored in a safe to protect the data. 
B. 
Backup tapes should be copied and the copies moved off site rather than move the master 
copies. 
C. 
Backup tapes should not be stored near manufacturing equipment. 
D. 
Backup tapes should not be stored in a company-owned facility to reduce legal liability. 
C. Magnetic tapes are vulnerable to EMI and P,.FI and should not be stored in locations with 
manufacturing equipment. 
A, B, D. Answer A is incorrect because storing backup tapes in a safe is not required although 
it could help keep them more secure. Answer B is incorrect because this addresses a need for 
reduced restore time which is not specified as a requirement in the scenario. Answer D is 
incorrect because in most cases there is not a legal liability issue with storing tapes at a com- 
paw-owned facility. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
791 
10. You are working with a team to set up a network in a manufacturing facility. While drawing up 
the specifications for their server room network, you must decide on the type of cable to use 
for the fastest speed and the most EMI protection.What cable type do you recommend? 
A. 
Fiber optic 
B. 
UTP 
C. 
STP 
D. 
Thick Coax 
A. Fiber optic is the best choice for high speed and EMI protection. 
B, C, D. Answer B is incorrect because UTP is highly vulnerable to EMI. Answer C is incor- 
rect because STP is protected from EMI, but cannot handle speeds as high as fiber can support. 
Answer D is incorrect because thick coax is vulnerable to EMI and supports only low speeds. 
11. You have been asked to help write a security policy regarding the subject of protecting confi- 
dential data. As part of this policy, you must define the best method to destroy the data on 
CDRs and DVDs.Which method would you recommend? 
A. 
Overwrite the CDR or DVD multiple times with random data to clear it. 
B. 
Run the CDR or DVD through a demagnetizer to clear it. 
C. 
Shred the CDR or DVD. 
D. 
All of the above. 
V41 C. Shredding CDRs and DVDs is the best way to destroy the data on them so that confiden- 
tiality is not breached. 
[k-i A, B, D. Answer A is incorrect because some CDRs and DVDs can only be written to one 
time. Answer B is incorrect because CDRs and DVDs are optical, not magnetic. Answer D is 
incorrect because answers A and B are not valid choices. 
12. The company you work for has many workers who take their work home with them. They 
will revise the work at home, and then bring it back to the office. To do this, they transport the 
work on floppy disk. To help prevent a user from inadvertently bringing in a virus from their 
home system, what should you do? 
A. 
Enact a policy to prevent this practice. 
B. 
Setup automatic mandatory virus scans on all workstations to scan incoming disks. 
C. 
Do nothing; the risk of infection from floppy disk is low. 
D. 
Require that the users use CDRs instead of floppy disks to transport their data. 
I---d B. Setting up mandatory virus scans is the best option available for lowering the risk of infec- 
tion from this source. 
N1 Incorrect Answers & Explanations" A, C, D. Answer A is incorrect because this would greatly 
interfere with the company's business practices. Answer C is incorrect because the risk of virus 
infection from floppy disks is very high. Answer D is incorrect because the risk of infection 
from CDR is almost as high as that from floppy disks. 
www.syngress.com 

792 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
Chapter 7: Topologies and IDS 
1. 
Your company is considering implementing aVLAN. As you have studied for you Security+ 
exam, you have learned that VLANs offer certain security benefits as they can segq'nent network 
traffic. The organization would like to set up three separate VLANs in which there is one for 
management, one for manufacturing, and one for engineering. How would traffic move for the 
engineering to the managementVLAN? 
A. 
The traffic is passed directly as bothVLAN's are part of the same collision domain 
B. 
The traffic is passed directly as bothVLAN's are part of the same broadcast domain 
C. 
Traffic cannot move from the management to the engineeringVLAN 
D. 
Traffic must be passed to the router and then back to the appropriate VLAN. 
D. The traffic is passed to the router as the VLAN's operate as totally separate switches.VLANs 
can be geographically dispersed or located all in one area. 
Answers A, B, and C are incorrect, even without VLAN's switches separate collision domains. 
While switches normally separate collision domains, broadcast domains are common to a 
switch. One of the reasons for using aVLAN is that it can disconnect ports on the switch so 
that broadcast traffic is no longer passed to all ports.While VLANs separate this traffic, this 
would be of no use if the separate systems could not communicate at all; thus a router is used 
to allow communication. 
. 
You have been asked to protect two Web servers from attack.You have also been tasked with 
making sure that the internal network is also secure. What type of design could be used to meet 
these goals while also protecting all of the organization? 
A. 
Implement IPSec on his Web servers to provide encryption 
B. 
Create a DMZ and place the Web server in it while placing the intranet behind the 
internal firewall 
C. 
Place a honeypot on the internal network 
D. 
Remove the Cat 5 cabling and replace it with fiber-optic cabling. 
I-4I B.You should create a DMZ and place the Web server in it while placing the intranet behind 
the internal firewall. This configuration would offer the greatest level of protection. 
i~1 Incorrect Answers & Explanations: Answer A is incorrect because IPSec would only offer 
encryption. While that would make the Web servers more secure, it would do nothing to pro- 
tect the internal network. Answer C is incorrect because a honeypot could be used to lure 
attackers away from critical assets, but by itself would not protect the internal network or pre- 
vent other attacks. Answer D is incorrect because removing copper cable would make the net- 
work harder to tap and would not protect it from many of the other attacks that could be 
launched. 
You have been asked to put your Security+ certification skills to use by examining some net- 
work traffic. The traffic was from an internal host and you must identify the correct address. 
Which of the following should you choose? 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
793 
A. 
127.0.0.1 
B. 
10.27.3.56 
C. 
129.12.14.2 
D. 
224.0.12.10 
B. NAT uses three ranges of private addresses which include 10.0.0.0, 172.16.0.0. and 
192.168.0.0. 
N-i Answer A is incorrect because 127.0.0.1 is a loopback address and should never be seen on the 
network. Answer C is incorrect because 129.12.14.2 is a public address. Answer D is incorrect 
because 224.0.12.10 is a multicast. 
You have been running security scans against the DMZ and have obtained the following 
results. How should these results be interpreted? 
C:\>nmap -sT 192.168.1.2 
Starting nmap V. 3.91 
Interesting ports on (192.168.1.2): 
(The 1598 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
53 / t cp 
open 
DNS 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
lll/tcp 
open 
sun rpc 
Nmap run completed- 
1 IP address 
(I host up) scanned in 409 seconds 
A. 
TCP port 80 should not be open to the DMZ 
B. 
TCP port 53 should not be open to the DMZ 
C. 
UDP port 80 should be open to the DMZ 
D. 
TCP port 25 should be open to the DMZ 
I-~ B.TCP port 53 should not be open to the DMZ.This port is used by DNS for zone transfers. 
N1 Answer A is incorrect because port 80 is used by Web services. Answer C is incorrect because 
UDP 80 should not be open and is not used by common DMZ services. Answer D is incorrect 
because port 25 is e-mail and the status of whether it is open or not would depend on if the 
organization has decided to allow e-mail to be used in the organization. 
You have been asked to use an existing router and utilize it as a firewall. Management would 
like you to use it to perform address translation and block some known bad IP addresses that 
previous attacks have originated from. With this in mind, which of the following statement is 
most correct? 
www.syngress.com 

794 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
A. 
You have been asked to perform NAT services 
B. 
You have been asked to set up a proxy 
C. 
You have been asked to set up stateful inspection 
D. 
You have been asked to set up a packet filter 
D. While routers are not designed to be a specialized security device, they can be used as a 
packet filter. Packet filters perform stateless inspection such as inspecting packet IP addresses 
and port numbers. 
Answer A is incorrect because most routers already perform NAT. Answer B is incorrect 
because a proxy stands in place of another device and that is not how the router is being used. 
Answer C is incorrect because routers do not have the ability to keep track of state. 1Kouters 
perform stateless inspection. 
6. 
You have been asked to compile a list of the advantages and disadvantages of copper cabling 
and fiber-optic cable. Upon reviewing the list, which of the following do you discover is 
incorrect? 
A. 
Copper cable does not support speeds as high as fiber 
B. 
The cost of fiber per foot is cheaper than copper cable 
C. 
Fiber is more secure than copper cable 
D. 
Copper cable is easier to tap than fiber cable 
!-41 B. Fiber is more expensive that copper cabling. 
Ik-i Answers A, C, and D are incorrect because they are all statements that are true when 
describing fiber or copper cabling. 
7. 
You have been asked to install a SQL database on the intranet and recommend ways to secure 
the data that will reside on this server.While traffic will be encrypted when it leaves the server, 
your company is concerned about potential attacks. With this in mind, which type of IDS 
should you recommend? 
A. 
A network-based IDS with the sensor placed in the DMZ 
B. 
A host-based IDS that is deployed on the SQL server 
C. 
A network-based IDS with the sensor placed in the intranet 
D. 
A host-based IDS that is deployed on a server in the DMZ 
I-----d B. The best option of those given in the question would be to deploy a host-based IDS that is 
deployed on the SQL server. Having it located on the server would allow it to detect traffic 
regardless of where it was coming from. 
[k-1 Answer A is incorrect because using a network-based IDS located in the DMZ would not 
detect any internal traffic, it would only detect traffic that passed through the DMZ. Answer C 
is incorrect because a network sensor could detect network level traffic, but if it is encrypted 
the IDS would be unable to analyze it. Answer D is incorrect because the host being used is in 
the DMZ and not on the SQL server. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
795 
8. 
Which security control can best be described by the following? Because normal user behavior 
can change easily and readily, this security control system is prone to false positives where 
attacks may be reported based on changes to the norm that are "normal," rather than repre- 
senting real attacks. 
A. 
Anomaly based IDS 
B. 
Signature based IDS 
C. 
Honeypot 
D. 
Honeynet 
l-4I A. Because normal user behavior can change easily and readily, these anomaly based IDSes are 
prone to false positives where attacks may be reported based on changes to the norm that are 
"normal," rather than representing real attacks. 
[x-1 Answers B, C, and D are incorrect because a signature IDS does not suffer from this weakness. 
Both honeypots and honeynets are used to lure attackers and hold them captive so that the 
attackers are detected before real targets are attacked. 
. 
Your network is configured to use an IDS to monitor for attacks.The IDS is network-based 
and has several sensors located in the internal network and the DMZ. No alarm has sounded. 
You have been called in on a Friday night because someone is claiming their computer has 
been hacked.What can you surmise? 
A.The misconfigured IDS recorded a positive event 
B.The misconfigured IDS recorded a negative event 
C. The misconfigured IDS recorded a false positive event 
D. The misconfigured IDS recorded a false negative event 
1-4I D.This situation indicates that a false negative occurred.This means that no alarm sounded yet 
that an attack occurred. 
1~ Answers A, B, and C are incorrect because a positive event would have triggered an alarm. A 
negative event would mean that no attack occurred. A false positive alert would mean that an 
alert sounded but no attack occurred. 
10. You have installed an IDS that is being used to actively match incoming packets against known 
attacks.Which of the following technologies is being used? 
A. Stateful inspection 
B. Protocol analysis 
C. Anomaly detection 
D. Pattern matching 
!-'4I D. Pattern matching is the act of matching packets against known signatures. 
Answers A, B, and C are incorrect because protocol analysis analyzes the packets to determine 
if they are following established rules. Anomaly detection looks for patterns of behavior that are 
out of the ordinary. Stateful inspection is used in firewalls. 
www.syngress.com 

796 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
11. You have been reading about the ways in which a network-based IDS can be attacked.Which 
of these methods would you describe as an attack where an attacker attempts to deliver the 
payload over multiple packets over long periods of time? 
A. 
Evasion 
B. 
IP Fragmentation 
C. 
Session splicing 
D. 
Session hijacking 
C. Session splicing is one way that attackers can attempt to bypass network-based IDS systems. 
Session splicing is accomplished by delivering the payload of the attack over multiple packets, 
thus defeating simple pattern matching without session reconstruction. 
Answers A, B, and D are incorrect because evasion is a technique that may attempt to flood 
the IDS to evade it. IP fragmentation is a general term that describes how IP handles traffic 
when faced with smaller maximum transmission units (MTU's). Session hijacking is a type of 
MITM attack that is used to take over an established session. 
12. You have been asked to explore what would be the best type of IDS to deploy at your com- 
pany site.Your company is deploying a new program that will be used internally t:or data 
mining.The IDS will need to access the data mining application's log files and needs to be able 
to identify many types of attacks or suspicious activity. Which of the following would be the 
best option? 
A. 
Network-based that is located in the internal network 
B. 
Host-based IDS 
C. 
Application-based IDS 
D. 
Network-based IDS that has sensors in the DMZ 
C. An application-based IDS would best meet the requirements specified in the question. 
Application-based IDSes concentrate on events occurring within some specific application. 
They often detect attacks through analysis of application log files and can usually identify many 
types of attacks or suspicious activity. Sometimes an application-based IDS can track unautho- 
rized activity from individual users. They can also work with encrypted data, using application- 
based encryption/decryption services. 
Answers A, B, and D are incorrect. A network-based IDS that has sensors on the internal net- 
work or the DMZ would not meet the requirements. A host-based IDS would meet some of 
the requirements but is not as well suited as an application IDS. 
13. You are about to install WinDump on your Windows computer. Which of the following should 
be the first item you install? 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
797 
A. 
LibPcap 
B. 
WinPcap 
C. 
IDSCenter 
D. 
A honeynet 
1-41 B. The purpose of WinPcap is to allow programs like WinDump, Snort, and other IDS applica- 
tions to capture low-level packets traveling over a network. It should be the first program 
installed before using most Windows-based IDS systems. 
Answers A, C , and D are incorrect because LibPcap is used for Linux computers. IDSCenter 
is a graphical user interface (GUI) interface for Snort, and a honeynet is used to simulate a vul- 
nerable network. 
14. You must choose what type of IDS to recommend to your company.You need an IDS that can 
be used to look into packets to determine their composition.What type of signature type do 
you require? 
A. 
File based 
B. 
Context-based 
C. 
Content-based 
D. 
Active 
l-----d C. A content-based signature looks at what is inside the content of the traffic such as specific 
traffic. 
Answers A, B, and D are incorrect because file-based is not a valid answer; a context-based sig- 
nature would be one that can identify a pattern such as a port scan. An active signature does 
not meet the requirements of the question and is invalid. 
Chapter 8: Infrastructure 
Security: System Hardening 
Bob is preparing to evaluate the security on his Windows XP computer and would like to 
harden the OS. He is concerned as there have been reports of buffer overflows. What would 
you suggest he do to reduce this risk? 
A. 
Remove sample files 
B. 
Upgrade is OS 
C. 
Set appropriate permissions on files 
D. 
Install the latest patches 
i-----d D. The best defense against buffer overflows is to apply the appropriate patches or fixes to elim- 
inate the buffer overflow condition. 
Answers A, B, and C are incorrect because removing sample files would not reduce the risk of 
buffer overflows. Upgrading the OS may fix the immediate buffer overflow, but is not a sustain- 
able long-term strategy. Patches and hotfixes were designed to address this issue. Setting appro- 
priate file permissions will not prevent a buffer overflow. 
www.syngress.com 

798 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
2. 
Melissa is planning to evaluate the permissions on aWindows 2003 server.When she checks the 
permissions she realizes that the production server is still in its default configuration. She is 
worried that the file system is not secure. What would you recommend Melissa do to alleviate 
this problem? 
A. 
Remove the Anonymous access account from the permission on the root directory 
B. 
Remove the System account permissions on the root of the C drive directory 
C. 
Remove the Everyone group from the permissions on the root directory 
D. 
Shut down the production server until it can be hardened. 
WI C. Remove the Everyone group permissions on the root directory will limit access and help 
secure the file system. 
Answer A is incorrect because removing the anonymous group will not prevent authenticated 
users from gaining access. Answer B is incorrect because removing the System account permis- 
sions on the root of the C drive directory will cause accessible problems by system processes. 
Answer D is incorrect as since it is a production server it may not be possible to take the 
system off line. Changes will need to be done with the approval of management. 
3. 
You have been asked to review the process your organization is using to set privileges for net- 
work access.You have gone through the process of evaluating risk.What should be the next 
step? 
A. 
Determine authorization requirements 
B. 
Make a decision on access method 
C. 
Document findings 
D. 
Create an ACL 
B.The next logical step would be to make a decision on the access method. 
[k-'] This would be followed by determining access requirements, creating an ACL, and finally you 
would need to document the results. Therefore Answers A, C, and D are incorrect. 
4. 
You have been asked to review the general steps used to secure an OS.You have already 
obtained permission to disable all unnecessary services.What should be your next step? 
A. 
Remove unnecessary user accounts and implement password guidelines 
B. 
Remove unnecessary programs 
C. 
Apply the latest patches and fixes 
D. 
Restrict permissions on files and access to the registry 
V'C[ A. The first step after disabling all unnecessary services should be to remove unnecessary user 
accounts and implement password guidelines. 
[~ 
Answers B, C, and D are incorrect because the proper order should be: 1) disable all unneces- 
sary services, 2) restrict permissions on files, 3) remove unnecessary programs, 4) apply the latest 
patches and fixes, and 5) remove unnecessary user accounts. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
799 
5. 
Yesterday, everything seemed to be running perfectly on the network. Today, the Windows 2003 
production servers keep crashing and running erratically. The only events that have taken place 
are a scheduled backup, a CD/DVD upgrade on several machines, and an unscheduled patch 
install.What do you think has gone wrong? 
A. 
The backup altered the archive bit on the backup systems 
B. 
The CD/DVDs are not compatible with the systems in which they were installed 
C. 
The patches were not tested before installation 
D. 
The wrong patches were installed 
V----d C. It is of utmost importance to verify all patches on non-production computers before they 
are deployed. Many times, security updates and patches can cause more problems than they fix. 
This makes it very important to verify their functionality first. 
Answer A is incorrect because a backup should not affect the functionality of software. At most, 
the backup will only alter the archive bit of each file that is accessed. Answer B is incorrect 
because CD/DVD units are mostly universal and will not typically cause this type of problem. 
Answer D is incorrect because most OSes will check to see if the patch is the right version 
before actually installing. 
6. 
You have been asked to examine a subnet of a computer and identify any open ports or ser- 
vices that should be disabled. These systems are located in several different floors of the facility. 
Which of the following would be the best type of tool to accomplish the task? 
A. 
A process review tool such as Netstat 
B. 
A port scanning tool such as Nmap 
C. 
A registry tool such as RegEdit 
D. 
Enable automatic updates on each of the targeted computers 
B. Using a port scanning tool would allow you to quickly scan a large number of machines and 
review the results from one location. 
[k-! Answer A is incorrect because tools such as Netstat would require you to physically access each 
system, which would be a time consuming process. Answer C is incorrect because a registry 
tool would not show you what ports are open. Answer D is incorrect because while automatic 
updates would help ensure that systems have the current patch, it would not help in your task 
of determining open ports. 
www.syngress.com 

800 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
7. 
You have been given the scan below and asked to review it. 
Interesting ports on (12.16.3.199): 
(The 1594 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
22/tcp 
open 
ssh 
69/udp 
open 
tftp 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
135/tcp 
open 
netbios ssn 
3306/tcp 
open 
mysql 
Based on an analysis, can you determine the OS of the scanned network system? 
A. 
Windows XP 
B. 
Windows NT 
C. 
Windows Vista 
D. 
Linux 
F-----d B.While newer versions of Windows use both port 135 and 445, NT uses only the previous 
versions. 
[k-! Answers A and C are incorrect because these systems would both have ports 445 present. 
Answer D is incorrect because no Linux type ports were found. 
8. 
You have been tasked with securing the network.While reviewing an Nmap scan of your net- 
work, one device had the following ports open.Which one will you choose? 
A. 
22 
B. 
110 
C. 
161 
D. 
31337 
[--'-'4I D. 31337 is the port normally used for Back Orifice. Back Orifice is a well-known backdoor 
program that is used by hackers to control systems. 
N1 Answer A is incorrect because port 22 is SSH.Answer B is incorrect because port 110 is 
POP3.Answer C is incorrect because port 161 is SNMP. 
Justin is reviewing open ports on his Web server and has noticed that port 23 is open. He has 
asked you what the port is and if it presents a problem.What should you tell him.; 
A. 
Port 23 is no problem because it is just the Telnet client 
B. 
Port 23 is a problem because it is used by the Subseven Trojan 
C. 
Port 23 is open by default and is for system processes 
D. 
Port 23 is a concern because it is a Telnet server and is active 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
801 
g4I D. Telnet passes usernames and passwords in cleartext. Typical DMZ services like the Web 
should be run on bastion hosts. Each service or open port offers another potential vulnerability. 
Answers A, B, and C are incorrect because port 23 is not used by Subseven, it is not open by 
default, and finding it open on a Web server would indicate that the Telnet server is open. 
10. You have been given the scan below and asked to review it. 
Interesting ports on (18.2.1.88): 
(The 1263 ports scanned but not shown below are in state- filtered) 
Port 
State 
Service 
22/tcp 
open 
ssh 
53/udp 
open 
dns 
80/tcp 
open 
http 
ll0/tcp 
open 
pop3 
lll/tcp 
open 
sun rpc 
Your coworker believes it is a Linux computer.What open port led to that assumption? 
A. 
Port 53 
B. 
Port 80 
C. 
Port 110 
D. 
Port 111 
[---41 B.While newer versions of Windows use both port 135 and 445, NT uses only the previous. 
Answers A and C are incorrect because these systems would both have ports 445 present. 
Answer D is incorrect because no Linux-type ports were found. 
11. While your company has yet to develop a Web site, they consider the privacy of e-mail as very 
important because they are developing a new, highly profitable prescription drug.Which of the 
following will help them meet this goal? 
A. 
IPSec 
B. 
SMTP 
C. 
PGP 
D. 
SSL 
www.syngress.com 

802 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
C. PGP is an e-mail and file encryption that uses asymmetric encryption to secure contents of 
e-mail. 
Answer A is incorrect because while IPSec is used for encryption, its primary role is to secure 
information in transit. PGP can secure the e-mail even while it is in the sender's or receiver's e- 
mail account. Answer B is. incorrect because SMTP is used for e-mail but is not secure. Answer 
D is incorrect because SSL is application independent, but would primarily be used for Web 
mail and would not protect non-Web-based e-mail. 
12. Your company has decided to outsource part of its DNS services. Since the old DNS servers 
will no longer need to be replicated to those outside the firewall, they would like you to lock 
down the potential hole.What port and protocol should be blocked on the firewall? 
A. 
UDP 53 
B. 
TCP 79 
C. 
TCP 110 
D. 
53TCP 
D. TCP port 53 is used for zone transfers. Remember that DNS stores name information about 
one or more DNS domains. Each DNS domain name included in a zone contains a wealth of 
information that an attacker would find useful.While simply having port 53 open does not 
mean an attack is possible, it is best to practice the principle of least privilege. 
N] 
Answer A is incorrect because UDP port 53 is used DNS lookups. Having this port blocked 
would make DNS resolution impossible. 
Ik-! Answer B in incorrect because port 79 is used for the Linux Finger service. Answer C is incor- 
rect because TCP port 110 is used for POP3 services. 
13. Monday morning has brought news that your company's e-mail has been blacklisted by many 
ISP's. Somehow your e-mail servers were used to spread spam. What most likely went wrong? 
A. 
An insecure email account was hacked 
B. 
Sendmail vulnerability 
C. 
Open mail relay 
D. 
Port 25 was left open 
F-----d C. The most likely cause of this is that an open mail relay was discovered by the spammers. An 
open mail relay is one that is configured in such a way that anyone can send mail through that 
company s mail servers. 
N] 
Answer A is incorrect because this type of situation is typically caused by open mail relays. 
Once a company's mail server is used by a spammer's ISP, providers will typically block all mail 
being sent through them. The company will be added to one or more blacklists. 
N1 Answer B is incorrect because a Sendmail vulnerability would most likely be used to take con- 
trol of local host. Answer D is incorrect because port 25 should be open for mail to be sent and 
received. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
803 
14. Management was rather upset to find out that someone has been hosting a music file transfer 
site on one of your servers. Internal employees have been ruled out as it appears it was an out- 
sider. What most likely went wrong? 
A. 
Anonymous access 
B. 
NoWeb access control 
C. 
No SSL 
D. 
No bandwidth controls 
i-4I A. Anonymous access allows visitors to send and receive files from the FTP server without 
having to use an assigned username and password. One of the first application-hardening activi- 
ties a security professional does, is disable anonymous access or disable FTP completely if it is 
not needed. 
Answer B, C, and D are incorrect because using authentication on the company's Web site 
would not have alleviated the problem. Also, the use of SSL again would have no effect on FTP. 
Finally, while bandwidth control may have slowed the damage, it would not have prevented it. 
15. Someone played a bad joke on your company.Visitors accessing the Web site were redirected to 
your competitors Uniform Resource Locator (URL). Can you describe what the attackers did? 
A. 
Cross-site scripting 
B. 
DNS cache poisoning 
C. 
DoS attack 
D. 
ARP cache poisoning 
I-4I B. Cache poisoning is an attack in which the attacker sends the DNS server bogus DNS 
responses. As the changes accumulate and are replicated to other DNS servers, the effect is that 
the user is redirected to a bogus site. This type of activity can be used to make a site appear to 
have been defaced or changed, or can be used to redirect the user to a similar looking sight so 
that some type of online scare can be attempted. 
Answer A is incorrect because cross-site scripting usually occurs by attempting to get a user to 
click on a link on a Web site or embedding it in an e-mail.Answer C in incorrect because a 
DoS attack would make the site unreachable. Answer D is incorrect because ARP cache poi- 
soning is typically done to attempt man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks. 
Chapter 9: Basics of Cryptography 
1. 
You have selected to use 3DES as the encryption algorithm for your company's Virtual Private 
Network (VPN).Which of the following statements about 3DES are true? 
A. 
3DES requires significantly more calculation than most other algorithms. 
B. 
3DES is vulnerable to brute-force attacks. 
C. 
3DES is an example of a symmetric algorithm. 
D. 
3DES can be broken in only a few days using state-of-the-art techniques. 
www.syngress.com 

804 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
I-4I Answers A and C. These are characteristics of the 3DES algorithm. Answer B. 3DES is a sym- 
metric algorithm and all symmetric algorithms are vulnerable to brute-force attacks. Consider 
the brute-force attack theoretical in this case, as it is computationally infeasible to do so. 
N1 Answer D. 3DES cannot be broken in any reasonable time frame with today's computers, 
regardless of the computational power available. However, DES (the single version.) can be theo- 
retically broken in hours using specialized hardware. 
2. 
What is the purpose of a hash algorithm? (Select all that apply) 
A. To encrypt e-mail. 
B. 
To encrypt short phrases in a one-way fashion. 
C. 
To create a secure checksum. 
D. 
To obscure an identity. 
Answers B and C. Hash algorithms are one-way, irreversible functions that are suitable for 
encrypting passwords or calculating secure checksums. 
[k-! Answer A.You might sign an e-mail using a hashing algorithm, but you would not encrypt and 
e-mail, since by definition there is no way to decrypt a hash. Answer D. This is a nonsense 
answer. 
. 
Widgets GmbH is a German defense contractor.What algorithms are they most likely to use to 
secure theirVPN connections? (Choose all that apply). 
A. 
3DES 
B. 
E1 Gamal 
C. 
AES 
D. 
IDEA 
I-4I Answers C and D. Because Widgets GmbH is a defense contractor, they may be less likely to 
choose encryption developed entirely in the U.S. They would most likely use the IDEA algo- 
rithm. They might also choose to use AES if their VPN's have been recently implemented. 
lk-1 Answers A and B. 3DES is a product of the U.S. that may not be considered trustworthy 
enough for domestic German defense work, because it was entirely foreign developed. E1 
Gamal is not a symmetric algorithm, and typically only symmetric algorithms are used for ses- 
sion encryption in a VPN setup. 
, 
The primary limitation of symmetric cryptography is: 
A. 
Key size 
B. 
Processing power 
C. 
Key distribution 
D. 
Brute-force attacks 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
805 
Answer C. Since symmetric key algorithms use the same key for both encryption and decryp- 
tion, the primary drawback is getting the key to both parties securely. 
Answers A, B, and D. In certain instances, key size, processing power, and brute-force attacks 
can be drawbacks to symmetric cryptography, but none are as apparent and outstanding as key 
distribution. 
5. 
Which two of the following items most directly affect the security of an algorithm? 
A. 
The skill of the attacker 
B. 
The key size 
C. 
The security of the private or secret key 
D. 
The resources of the attacker 
Answers B and C. The larger the key size, the more secure an algorithm becomes. 
Answers A and D. The attacker's skill and resources are important considerations when 
choosing an encryption methodology, but both are less important than key size and key secu- 
rity. 
6. 
Which of the following encryption methods is the most secure for encrypting a single message? 
A. 
Hash ciphers 
D. 
OTPs 
C. 
Asymmetric cryptography 
D. 
Symmetric cryptography 
Answer B. Only OTPs have been mathematically proven secure and unbreakable for a single 
message, provided a suitable source of randomness is available. 
~! 
Answers A, C, and D. Hash ciphers are not used for encrypting messages, since they are gener- 
ally irreversible algorithms. Neither symmetric nor asymmetric ciphers are as secure as the OTP 
for a single message. 
7. 
You have downloaded a CD ISO image and want to verify its integrity. What should you do? 
A. 
Compare the file sizes. 
B. 
Burn the image and see if it works. 
C. 
Create an MD5 sum and compare it to the MD5 sum listed where the image was down- 
loaded. 
D. 
Create an MD4 sum and compare it to the MD4 sum listed where the image was down- 
loaded. 
I-4I Answer C. MD5 sums are often listed with file downloads so that you can verify the integrity 
of the file you downloaded. 
N1 Answers A, B, and D. Comparing file sizes and burning the image to see if it works would not 
alert you to any possible Trojans that could have infected the image. MD4 sums are deprecated 
in use and are rarely seen anymore. 
www.syngress.com 

806 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
8. 
If you wanted to encrypt a single file for your own personal use, what type of cryptography 
would you use? 
A. A proprietary algorithm 
B. 
A digital signature 
C. A symmetric algorithm 
D. 
An asymmetric algorithm 
IN Answer C. Since you are the only person who will have access to the file, a symmetric algo- 
rithm with a single secret key would be sufficient. 
Answers A, B, and D. In general, proprietary algorithms are not considered more secure than 
published algorithms, because they have not withstood the battery of tests that public algo- 
rithms have. Digital signatures do not provide encryption, so that answer is incorrect. A public- 
key algorithm would be overkill because you are the only person who will be accessing the file. 
Asymmetric algorithms would also be slower than symmetric algorithms, which could be a 
factor if the file is large in size. 
~ 
Which of the following algorithms are available for commercial use without a licensing fee? 
(Select all that apply) 
A. 
RSA 
B. 
DES 
C. 
IDEA 
D. 
AES 
V'r Answers A, B and D. DES and AES have always been available for free for commercial and 
non-commercial use. RSA was placed in the public domain by RSA security just before their 
patent expired. 
Answer C. IDEA is patented and requires a licensing fee to be used commercially, although it 
can be used without royalties for non-commercial and educational purposes. 
10. Which of the following characteristics does a one-way function exhibit? (Select all that apply) 
A. Easily reversible 
B. 
Unable to be easily factored 
C. Rarely get the same output for any two inputs 
D. 
Difficult to determine the input given the output 
I-4I Answers C and D. One-way functions are functions that ideally produce a unique output for 
every input. It is impossible to determine the input by studying only the output. 
N1 Answers A and B. One-way functions are not reversible.Whether or not one-way functions are 
easily factored is irrelevant to their use, as it is certain asymmetric algorithms that rely on the 
difficult factoring principle. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
807 
11. The process of using a digital signature to verify a person's credentials is called: 
A. 
Alertness 
B. 
Integration 
C. 
Authentication 
D. 
Authorization 
Answer C. The act of verifying a person's credentials is known as authentication. 
Answers A, B, and D. Authorization refers to access control, which is a process that can only 
occur after a person has been authenticated. The other terms have no meaning in this context. 
12. A message is said to show integrity if the recipient receives an exact copy of the message sent 
by the sender.Which of the following actions violates the integrity of a message? (Choose all 
that apply) 
A. 
Compressing the message 
B. 
Spell checking the message and correcting errors 
C. 
Editing the message 
D. 
Appending an extra paragraph to a message 
1-4I Answers B, C, and D. Correcting spelling errors in a message can alter the meaning of a mes- 
sage, if the spelling errors were intentional. Editing the message and appending an additional 
passage violates the integrity of a message as the recipient is no longer receiving an identical 
message to what was actually sent. 
Answer A. As long as a message can be decompressed to an identical bit-for-bit copy of the 
original, compression does not alter the integrity of data. This includes software compression 
such as "gzip" and hardware compression such as that done by tape drives that archive data. 
13. Why is it important to safeguard confidentiality? (Select all that apply) 
A. 
Because some information, such as medical records, is personal and should only be dis- 
closed to necessary parties to protect an individual's privacy. 
B~ 
C. 
Because certain information is proprietary and could damage an organization if it were 
disclosed to the wrong parties. 
Certain information might be dangerous in the wrong hands, so it should be guarded 
closely to protect the safety of others. 
D. 
Information leaks of any sort may damage an organization's reputation. 
i-4I Answers A, B, C, and D. All of these reasons are valid when considering why confidentiality 
must be maintained. 
I~! N/A 
www.syngress.com 

808 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
14. How can cryptography be used to implement access control? 
A. 
By having people sign on using digital certificates, then placing restrictions ,an a per-cer- 
tificate basis that allows access only to a specified set of resources. 
B. 
By using a symmetric algorithm and only distributing the key to those you want to have 
access to the encrypted information. 
C. 
By digitally signing all documents. 
D. 
By encrypting all documents. 
[-4I Answer A. From the given responses, this is the only viable method for using cryptography- 
based access control. 
!~ 
Answers B, C, and D. Distributing secret keys is always a bad idea, so that answer is a poor 
means of providing access control. Digitally signing every document is not only infeasible, it 
would not implement any additional access controls. Similarly, encrypting all documents might 
keep information safe from those without the ability to decrypt them, but you would need to 
establish another system on top of that such that one person cleared for encrypting a certain 
document cannot automatically decrypt any other document. 
15. You receive a digitally signed e-mail message. Which of the following actions can the author 
take? 
A. 
Send you another unsigned message. 
B. 
Dispute the wording in parts of the message. 
C. 
Claim the message was not sent. 
D. 
Revoke the message. 
I-4I Answer A. Digital signatures apply only to the message that they sign. There is nothing in the 
technology that would prevent the author from sending you another message signed or 
unsigned. 
Answers B, C, and D. A digitally signed messaged has the property of non-repudiation. That 
means the author cannot claim that he did not send it, or that you did not receive his message 
with the intended wording. Digital signatures have nothing to do with revoking messages, so 
the author has no way to revoke his message either. 
Chapter 10: Public Key Infrastructure 
You are applying for a certificate for the Web server for your company. Which of these parties 
would you not expect to be contacting in the process? 
A. 
A registration authority (RA) 
B. 
A leaf CA 
C. 
A key escrow agent 
D. 
A root CA 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
809 
Answer D. A root CA. 
NI 
You will most likely contact a P,.A (answer A) to prove your identity as a representative of your 
company, and you will be receiving your issued certificate from the leaf CA (answer B).You 
will also want to escrow your private key with a key escrow agent (answer C) so that it can be 
recovered in the event of your departure from the company, or your losing the key. However, 
you will never want to contact the root CA, because the root CA is only used to form the trust 
anchor at the root of the certificate chain. 
2. 
What portion of the information in your certificate should be kept private? 
A. 
All of it. It is entirely concerned with your private information. 
B. 
None of it.There is nothing private in the certificate. 
C. 
The thumbprint, that uniquely identifies your certificate. 
D. 
The public key listed in the certificate. 
I-4I Answer B.The certificate contains no private information, and its design is that it should be 
transmitted publicly and shared with anyone who connects to your server. 
The thumbprint is simply an identifier, like a unique name, and the public key is, of course, 
public. Answers A, C and D are incorrect because they suggest that the certificate contains some 
or all private information. 
In creating a key recovery scheme that should allow for the possibility that as many as two of 
the five key escrow agents are unreachable, what scheme is most secure to use? 
A. 
Every escrow agent gets a copy of the key. 
B. 
M of n control, where m is 3 and n is 5. 
C. 
Every escrow agent gets a fifth of the key, and you keep copies of those parts of the key 
so that you can fill in for unreachable agents. 
D. 
Keep an extra copy of the key with family members, without telling them what it is. 
1-41 Answer B. M of n control is necessary for providing for key recovery in a secure manner while 
accommodating the possibility that a number of agents are unreachable. 
N] 
If every escrow agent gets a copy of the key (answer A), then any one of them is able to imper- 
sonate you. If every agent gets a fifth of the key (answer C), you can recover the key if all five 
agents are available, but if you are covering for unreachable agents, then you face the likelihood 
that the same disaster that wiped out your key also wiped out your copy of the key. Storing 
keys with family members (answer D) is not secure. 
www.syngress.com 

810 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
~ 
What statement best describes the transitive trust in a simple CA model? 
A. 
Users trust certificate holders, because the users and the certificate holders each trust the 
CA. 
B. 
Users trust certificate holders, because the users trust the CA, and the CA trusts the cer- 
tificate holders. 
C. 
Certificate holders trust users, because the certificate holders trust the CA and the CA 
trusts its users. 
D. 
Users trust certificate holders, because the certificate holders have been introduced to the 
users by the CA. 
l-4I Answer B. Users trust the CA, the CA trusts the certificate owners, and therefore the users trust 
the certificate owners. 
Answer A is wrong, because there is no trust from the certificate holders up to the CA. Answer 
C is wrong for the same reason, and also because there is no trust from the CA to its users. 
Answer B is wrong, because it does not involve the PKI model in any way. 
5. 
In a children's tree-house club, new members are admitted to the club on the basis of whether 
they know any existing members of the club.What form of PKI would be most analogous to 
this? 
A. 
A hierarchical CA model 
B. 
A chain of trust 
C. 
A simple CA model 
D. 
A Web of trust 
[-41 Answer D. A web of trust is a model in which new members are added to the trust model by 
creating a trust relationship between themselves and any existing member of the web. 
[k-I Any CA model (answers A and C)would require a CA, a trusted authority who would 
uniquely identify who is allowed in the club. A chain of trust (answer B) would assume that 
each newly admitted member knew only the most recent addition to the club. 
6. 
In a hierarchical CA model, which servers will use self-signed certificates to identify them- 
selves? 
A. 
Root CAs 
B. 
Intermediate CAs 
C. 
Leaf CAs 
D. 
Subordinate CAs 
E. 
All CAs 
I-----d Answer A. Any CA other than the root must chain up to the root; only the trust anchor is able 
to vouch for itself with no other authority to support its claim. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
811 
Intermediate CAs (answer B) are signed by another CA; Leaf CAs (answer C) are signed by the 
intermediate or root CA above them; subordinate CAs (answer D) are signed by the CA above 
them. Answer E - all CAs - cannot be true unless all A-D are true. 
7. 
Where would you search to find documentation on the formats in which certificates and keys 
can be exchanged? 
A. 
ITU X.500 standards. 
B. 
Internet Requests For Comment (RFCs). 
C. 
PKCS standards. 
D. 
ITU X.509 standards. 
E. 
Internet Drafts. 
I-~ Answer C - the PKCS standards define formats for exchange of certificates, keys, and 
encrypted info:*mation. 
The ITU X.500 standard (answer A) defines addresses; X.509 (answer D) defines certificates, 
but not the formats in which they are exchanged.The Internet Drafts (answer E) and Internet 
RFCs (answer B) define a large number of protocols, but not all of the PKCS standards. 
8. 
Which of the following certificate lifecycle events is best handled without revoking the certifi- 
cate? 
A. 
The contact e-mail address for the certificate changes to a different person. 
B. 
The certificate reaches its expiry date. 
C. 
The company represented by the certificate moves to a new town in the same state. 
D. 
The certificate's private key is accidentally posted in a public area of the Web site. 
I-d Answer B. When the certificate reaches its expiry date, it naturally expires everywhere, and you 
should already have requested a renewal certificate with a later expiry date. 
The other answers are all reasons to revoke the certificate as soon as possible. Answer A, a 
change of contact e-mail address, requires revoking the certificate to prevent the old e-mail 
contact from being able to submit a request for a changed certificate; a change of address 
(answer C) voids information in the certificate, so that it is no longer a true statement of iden- 
tity; accidental (or deliberate) exposure of the private key to unauthorized parties results in the 
certificate being unreliable as a uniquely identifying piece of information. 
If you are following best PKI practices, which of the following would require a certificate to be 
revoked? 
A. 
The private key is destroyed in an unfortunate disk crash. 
B. 
The certificate has been found circulating on an underground bulletin board. 
C. 
The private key was left on a laptop that was stolen, then recovered. 
D. 
A new certificate is generated for the same private key 
www.syngress.com 

812 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
Answer C. The private key may have been exposed to someone while the laptop was in their 
possession. 
N1 
If the private key is destroyed (answer A), you should follow key recovery procedures. The cer- 
tificate is supposed to circulate anywhere, even in public, so answer B is incorrect. If a new cer- 
tificate is generated from the same private key (answer D), that's just an overlap between two 
valid certificates, a natural part of certificate renewal. 
10. Which is an example of m of n control? 
A. 
A personal check book for an individual. 
B. 
A business check book, requiring signatures of two principals. 
C. 
A locked door with a dead-bolt. 
D. 
A bank vault with a time lock that allows opening at three separate times within a week. 
1-41 Answer B. This is a "2-of-N" control, where N is the number of principals at the company. 
N1 
Incorrect Answers & Explanations: Answer B requires one signature; answer C may require two 
or more keys, but they are possessed by the same individual; and answer D does not specify 
how many individuals may open the safe. 
11. Which statement is true about a CRL? 
A. 
A CRL may contain all revoked certificates, or only those revoked since the last CRL. 
B. 
A CRL is published as soon as a revocation is called for. 
C. 
A CRL only applies to one certificate. 
D. 
A CRL lists certificates that can never be trusted again. 
1-41 Answer A. A CRL may be simple, containing all certificates that have been revoked, or delta, 
containing all certificates that have been revoked since the last CRL was publisheci. 
N1 Answer B is not true. CRLs are published to a schedule. Answer C is not true of CRLs, but is 
true of OCSE Answer D is not true, because some of the certificates on the CRL may be 
merely "suspended," and will be trustable later. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
813 
12. In the trust diagram shown here, which statement is true? 
Figure 10.13 A Trust Diagram 
A. 
Bob trusts Alice 
B. 
Alice does not trust Dave or Carol. 
C. 
Bob trusts Carol. 
D. 
Dave trusts only Carol. 
Answer C. Even though the arrow directly connecting them goes in the direction "Carol trusts 
Bob," there is transitive trust through Dave, meaning that Bob trusts Dave, who trusts Carol. 
Bob does not trust Alice (answer A), because that would go against the arrow's direction 
between them, and there is no transitive trust. Alice trusts Dave and Carol through Bob, so 
answer B is wrong. Dave trusts Carol and Bob, making answer D wrong.. 
13. When exchanging encrypted information with a trusted partner by e-mail, what information 
do you need to exchange first? 
A. 
Your certificates. 
B. 
Your private keys. 
C. 
The expected size of the data to be sent. 
D. 
Web site addresses. 
www.syngress.com 

814 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
Answer AYour certificates need to be exchanged, so that e-mail to you can be encrypted using 
your public key. 
N1 Exchanging your private key with anyone (answer B) is a definite no-no. The expected size of 
the data to be sent (answer C) may be interesting, but is not a necessary precursor to sending 
encrypted e-mail; sending Web site addresses (answer D) is not of any particular use to 
exchanging encrypted information. 
14. An attacker has broken into your SSL-secured Web server, which uses a certificate held in local 
software storage, and defaced it. Do you need to revoke the certificate? 
A. 
Yes. Software storage is no protection against hackers, and the hacker may now have the 
private key in his possession. 
B. 
No. The hacker would have needed to know the key's password in order to ',sign anything. 
C. 
No. The hacker cannot use the key to sign data once the Web server has been repaired. 
D. 
Yes. The hacker may have used the key to sign information that others may continue to 
trust. 
V------d Answer D. The hacker has defaced the site, and as a result, a site behind SSL was giving out 
trusted information that was incorrect.. Revoking the certificate allows you to notify users to 
not trust the signed data. 
Answer A is false, because software storage is some protection against hackers, as the key is only 
known to those with the right password. Answer B is false, because even without knowing the 
key, the attacker has persuaded the Web site to certify that data is coming from your site 
through SSL. Answer C is false, because although the hacker can no longer use the key, he has 
already signed data of his own as yours 
Chapter 11: Operational and 
Organizational Security: Incident 
Response 
A company has just implemented a recycling program in which paper, plastics and other dis- 
carded items can be collected. Large containers are located throughout facilities, allowing 
employees to deposit papers, water bottles and other items in them, so they can be reprocessed 
into other products. After a custodian brings a full container out to be picked up by a recycling 
company, he uses his card key to get back into the building and holds the door for a woman 
wearing business attire and carrying an attach8 case. After the dumpster has been emptied by 
the recycling company, he goes out, and wheels it back into the building. Which of the fol- 
lowing security threats has occurred? 
A. 
Dumpster diving 
B. 
Tailgating 
C. 
Social engineering 
D. 
Phishing 
www.syngress.com 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
815 
I-4I Answer B. The threat that has occurred is tailgating, as a woman has entered the building after 
the custodian used his card key to open the door. The door was held for the woman, so she has 
used the custodian's authorized access to gain entry. 
N] 
Answer A is incorrect, because at no time has anyone taken information from the recycling bin 
or other containers storing trash. Answer C is incorrect, because social engineering involves 
gaining the confidence of a person, and tricking them to provide information. Answer D is 
incorrect, because phishing involves e-mail being sent to trick someone to provide information. 
2. 
A company consists of a main building with two smaller branch offices at opposite ends of the 
city. The main building and branch offices are connected with fast links, so that all employees 
have good connectivity to the network. Each of the buildings has security measures that require 
visitors to sign in, and all employees are required to wear identification badges at all times.You 
want to protect servers and other vital equipment so that the company has the best level of 
security at the lowest possible cost.Which of the following will you do to achieve this objec- 
tive? 
A. 
Centralize servers and other vital components in a single room of the main building, and 
add security measures to this room so that they are well protected. 
B. 
Centralize most servers and other vital components in a single room of the main 
building, and place servers at each of the branch offices.Add security measures to areas 
where the servers and other components are located. 
C. 
Decentralize servers and other vital components, and add security measures to areas 
where the servers and other components are located. 
D. 
Centralize servers and other vital components in a single room of the main building. 
Because the building prevents unauthorized access to visitors and other persons, there is 
no need to implement physical security in the server room. 
g'~ Answer A. Centralize servers and other vital components in a single room of the main 
building, and add security measures to this room so that they are well protected. 
Answers B and C are incorrect, because decentralizing servers and other equipment across mul- 
tiple locations will make it more difficult and costly to control access. By keeping them in one 
room, you will be better able to implement security measures to protect them. Because the 
locations are connected with fast links, there is no performance reason requiring decentralizing 
servers. Answer D is incorrect, because even though the building has security against unautho- 
rized visitors and other persons, the server room needs protection from employees and autho- 
rized visitors. 
You are evaluating the physical security of a server room to determine if it is sufficient to stop 
intruders from entering the room. The room is 20 feet long with concrete walls that extend up 
to a false ceiling and down below the raised floor that contains network cabling. An air vent 
with a bolted grate is located at the top of one of these walls. There are no windows, and a 
keypad on the door that requires a four-digit code to unlock the door.Which of the following 
changes would you do to make this room secure? 
www.syngress.com 

816 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
A. 
Seal the air vent to prevent people from crawling into the room through the vent. 
B. 
Seal the area above the false ceiling to prevent people from crawling through the plenum. 
C. 
Seal the area below the raised floor to prevent people from crawling through this area. 
D. 
Replace the locking mechanism on the door. 
I-~ Answer B. Seal the area above the false ceiling to prevent people from crawling through the 
plenum. Because the concrete walls only extend to the level of the false ceiling, it is possible for 
intruders to crawl into the server room between the false ceiling and the real ceiling. 
N1 Answer A is incorrect, because the air vent is already sealed with a bolted grate. Answer C is 
incorrect because the concrete walls extend below the raised floor. Answer D is incorrect 
because the door already has a lock that is sufficient to secure the room. 
4. 
A company is using Apple computers for employees to work on, with UNIX serw.~rs to provide 
services and store network data. The servers are located in a secure server room, utilize password 
protection through a screensaver, and use disk encryption.Workstations are located throughout 
the facilities, with front desk computers in a reception area that is accessible to the public. The 
workstations in the reception area have cables with locking mechanisms to prevent people from 
carrying them away, and don't have access to the Internet as management feels the receptionist 
doesn't require it. All workstations are connected to the network, and automatically receive soft- 
ware updates from network servers. Which of the following needs to be done to improve secu- 
rity without affecting the productivity of the receptionist? 
A. 
Replace all of the Apple computers with PCs running Windows 
B. 
Enable password protection on servers 
C. 
Enable password protection on workstation screensavers 
D. 
Provide front desk computers with Internet access, so they can update anti-virus software 
with the latest signature files 
Answer C. Computers can also be configured to prevent unauthorized access by using screen- 
savers with password protection, so that anyone without the password is unable to access the 
system. To deactivate the password, the user needs to enter a valid username and password. 
[k-1 Answer A is incorrect, because there is no reason why Windows workstations would provide 
any improvement to the insecurity of unauthorized people accessing the front desk: computers. 
Answer B is incorrect, because servers already use password-protected screensavers. Answer D is 
incorrect, because the front desk computers already receive software updates from network 
computers. 
A problem with the air conditioning is causing fluctuations in temperature in the server room. 
The temperature is rising to 90 degrees when the air conditioner stops working for a time, and 
then drops to 60 degrees when you get the air conditioner working again. The problem keeps 
occurring so that the raising and lowering of temperature keeps occurring over the next two 
days.What problems may result from these fluctuations? 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
817 
A. 
ESD 
B. 
Biometrics 
C. 
Chip creep 
D. 
Poor air quality 
l--d Answer C. Chip creep. Heat will make objects expand, while cold will make these same objects 
contract.When this expansion and contraction occurs in motherboards and other circuit 
boards, chip creep can occur. As the circuit boards expand and contract, it causes the computer 
chips on these boards to move until they begin to lose contact with the sockets they're in. 
When the chips lose contact, they're unable to send and receive signals, resulting in hardware 
failure. 
Answer A is incorrect, because ESD is commonly attributed to humidity problems, not prob- 
lems with temperature. Answer B is incorrect, because the temperature fluctuations would not 
be the result of an access control issue involving biometrics.Answer D is incorrect, because, 
although the air is going from hot to cold, it does not indicate that it would affect the quality 
of the air itself. 
A server has been compromised by a hacker who used it to send spam messages to thousands of 
people on the Internet. A member of the IT staff noticed the problem while monitoring net- 
work and server performance over the weekend, and has noticed that several windows are open 
on the server's monitor. He also notices that a program he is unfamiliar with is running on the 
computer. He has called you for instructions as to what he should do next. Which of the fol- 
lowing will you tell him to do immediately? 
A. 
Shut down the server to prevent the hacker from using the server further 
B. 
Reboot the server to disconnect the hacker from the machine and using the server fur- 
ther 
C. 
Document what appears on the screen 
D. 
Call the police 
['-r 
Answer C.When an incident is discovered, the scene should be secured, and any information 
on the screen should be documented. If the machine lost power before it can be examined, any 
information on the screen will be lost. By documenting (and if possible photographing) what is 
on the screen, this information will be preserved until the computer can be properly examined. 
Answers A and B are incorrect, because shutting down the server would destroy volatile infor- 
mation in memory, and could escalate the problem if a virus or other malicious software were 
installed on the server that activates on reboot.When an incident is first discovered, the com- 
puter should not be touched and any technologies involved in the incident should be left as 
they were until someone trained in computer forensics arrives. Answer D is incorrect, because 
it hasn't been determined what the incident entails.While it is known that spam has been sent 
through the server, it is not known whether a crime has been committed requiring police 
involvement. 
www.syngress.com 

818 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
7. 
You are at a crime scene working on a computer that was hacked over the Internet.You're con- 
cerned that a malicious program may have been installed on the machine that wi[[ result in data 
being damaged or destroyed if the computer is shut down or restarted. Which of the following 
tasks will you perform to deal with this possibility? 
A. 
Photograph anything that is displayed on the screen 
B. 
Open files and then save them to other media 
C. 
Use disk imaging software to make a duplicate of the disk's contents 
D. 
Leave the system out of the forensic examination, and restore it to its previous state using 
a backup. 
Answer C. Use disk imaging software to make a duplicate of the disk's contents. Disk imaging 
creates a bitstream copy, where each physical sector of the original disk is duplicated. To make it 
easier to store and analyze, the image is compressed into an image file, which is also called an 
evidence file. 
N1 Answer A is incorrect, because photographing information on the screen won't halve any 
impact on a possible malicious program on the hard disk. This will document volatile evidence, 
and might provide clues at a later date. However, it will not help in preserving data on the hard 
disk. Answer B is incorrect because opening files on the hard disk might modify the data, such 
as the date/time stamp that indicates the last time it was opened. Answer D is incorrect, because 
this will prevent you from obtaining evidence from the computer. 
8.You have created an image of the contents of a hard disk to be used in a forensic investigation. 
You want to ensure that this data will be accepted in court as evidence.Which of 1:he following 
tasks must be performed before it is submitted to the investigator and prosecutor? 
A. 
Copies of data should be made on media that's forensically sterile. 
B. 
Copies of data should be copied to media containing documentation on findings relating 
to the evidence. 
C. 
Copies of data can be stored with evidence from other cases, so long as the media is read- 
only. 
D. 
Delete any previous data from media before copying over data from this case.. 
Answer A. Copies of data should be made on media that's forensically sterile. This means that 
the disk has no other data on it, and has no viruses or defects. This will prevent mistakes 
involving data from one case mixing with other data, as can happen with cross-linked files or 
when copies of files are mixed with others on a disk.When providing copies of data to investi- 
gators, defense lawyers, or the prosecution, the media used to distribute copies of evidence 
should also be forensically sterile. 
Answer B is incorrect, because the copied data would reside with other documentation you've 
created, so that it is no longer forensically sterile. Answer C is incorrect, because it would mix 
the data with data from other cases, which could make the evidence inadmissible in court. 
Answer D is incorrect, because deleting data only removes the pointers to the files from the 
partition table, but does not erase the data itself. Thus, deleted data still resides on t]he media, 
meaning that it is not forensically sterile. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
819 
An investigator arrives at a site where all of the computers involved in the incident are still run- 
ning. The first responder has locked the room containing these computers, but has not per- 
formed any additional tasks. Which of the following tasks should the investigator perform? 
A. 
Tag the computers as evidence 
B. 
Conduct a search of the crime scene, and document and photograph what is displayed on 
the monitors 
C. 
Package the computers so that they are padded from jostling that could cause damage 
D. 
Shut down the computers involved in the incident 
Answer B. The investigator should document and photograph what is displayed on the moni- 
tors, because the first responder hasn't done so. The investigator should also conduct a search of 
the crime scene to identify evidence and determine whether the scope of the crime scene is 
larger than initially identified. 
Answers A and C are incorrect, because these are the responsibility of the crime scene techni- 
cian. Answer D is incorrect, because the computers should be left running until the crime 
scene technician has acquired evidence from the machines. 
10. You are part of an Incident Response Team investigating a hacking attempt on a server.You 
have been asked to gather and document volatile evidence from the computer. Which of the 
following would qualify as volatile evidence? 
A. 
Any data on the computer's hard disk that may be modified. 
B. 
Fingerprints, fibers, and other traditional forensic evidence. 
C. 
Data stored in the computer's memory 
D. 
Any evidence stored on floppy or other removable disk 
I---d Answer C. Data stored in the computer's memory.Volatile evidence is data stored in memory, 
which could be lost if the computer was shut down or lost power. 
I~1 
Answer A is incorrect, because data on the hard disk is digital evidence. If the system were shut 
down, the evidence would still be retained on the hard disk, so it isn't volatile. Answer B is 
incorrect, because members of the Incident Response Team wouldn't gather fingerprints, fibers, 
and other traditional forensic evidence. This evidence could still be gathered from the area after 
the volatile evidence was obtained and documented. However, because fingerprint evidence 
may be fragile and subject to destruction, Incident Response Team members should be careful 
about touching surfaces where prints might be located. Answer D is incorrect, because evidence 
stored on removable disks is non-volatile evidence that will not be affected by computer shut- 
down. 
11. You are assessing risks and determining which policies to protect assets will be created first. 
Another member of the IT staff has provided you with a list of assets, which have importance 
weighted on a scale of 1 to 10. Internet connectivity has an importance of 8, data has an 
importance of 9, personnel have an importance of 7, and software has an importance of 5. 
Based on these weights, what is the order in which you will generate new policies? 
www.syngress.com 

820 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
A. 
Internet policy, Data Security policy, Personnel Safety policy, Software policy. 
B. 
Data Security policy, Internet policy, Software policy, Personnel Safety policy. 
C. 
Software policy, Personnel Safety policy, Internet policy, Data Security policy. 
D. 
Data Security policy, Internet policy, Personnel Safety policy, Software policy. 
Answer D. Data Security policy, Internet policy, Personnel Safety policy, Software policy. The 
importance of assets is weighted on a scale of one to ten, with data having the highest weight, 
followed by Internet connectivity, personnel, and software. By creating policies with the most 
important first, you will be able to address issues relating to assets with the most importance 
before those of lesser value. 
Answers A, B and C are incorrect, because they do not address issues dealing with assets in the 
order of those with the highest weight first. 
12. You are researching the ARO, and need to find specific data that can be used for risk assess- 
ment. Which of the following will you use to find information? 
A. 
Insurance companies 
B. 
Stockbrokers 
C. 
Manuals included with software and equipment 
D. 
None of the above. There is no way to accurately predict the ARO. 
F'r 
Correct Answer & Explanation: may occur, you can refer to a variety of sources, including 
insurance companies. Insurance companies commonly keep statistics on how often a particular 
threat that they insure occurs per year. 
lk-1 Answer B is incorrect, because stockbrokers wouldn't carry accurate statistics dealing with the 
risks that threaten various assets in a company. Answer C is incorrect, because information on 
how often equipment and software is at risk from certain threats is not included in manuals that 
come with these assets. Answer D is incorrect, because information can be found through a 
wide variety of sources, including crime statistics, insurance companies, and other sources. 
13. You are compiling estimates on how much money the company could lose if a risk actually 
occurred one time in the future.Which of the following would these amounts represent? 
A. 
ARO 
B. 
SLE 
C. 
ALE 
D. 
Asset Identification 
Answer B. The SLE is the dollar value relating to the loss of equipment, software, or other 
assets. This is the total loss of risk that will be incurred by the company should a risk actually 
occur in the future. 
Answer A is incorrect, because the ARO is the likelihood of a risk occurring within a year. 
Answer C is incorrect, because the ALE is the expected loss that will be incurred by a company 
each year from a risk, and is calculated from the SLE and the ARO. Answer D is incorrect, 
because asset identification is used to identify the assets within a company, which could be at 
risk from various threats. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
821 
14. You have identified a number of risks to which your company's assets are exposed, and want to 
implement policies, procedures and various security measures. In doing so, what will be your 
objective? 
A. 
Eliminate every threat that may affect the business. 
B. 
Manage the risks so that the problems resulting from them will be minimized. 
C. 
Implement as many security measures as possible to address every risk that an asset may 
be exposed to. 
D. 
Ignore as many risks as possible to keep costs down. 
1-41 Answer B. Manage the risks so that the problems resulting from them will be minimized. Since 
there is no way to eliminate every risk from a company, the goal is to keep risks and their 
impact minimized. This involves finding cost-effective measures of protecting assets. This may 
involve installing security software, implementing policies and procedures, or adding additional 
security measures to protect the asset. 
N1 Answers A and C are incorrect, because there is no way to eliminate every threat that may 
affect your business, and there is no way to implement so many security measures that every 
asset is exposed to. There is no such thing as absolute security. To make a facility absolutely 
secure would be excessive in price, and would be so secure that no one would be able to enter 
and do any work. The goal is to manage risks, so that the problems resulting from them will be 
minimized. Answer D is incorrect, because ignoring risks doesn't make them go away.You need 
to find cost-effective measures of protecting assets, not keep costs down by doing nothing. 
Chapter 12: Operational and 
Organizational Security: Policies and 
Disaster Recovery 
1. 
An organization has just installed a new T1 Internet connection, which employees may use to 
research issues related to their jobs and send e-mail. Upon reviewing firewall logs, you see that 
several users have visited inappropriate sites and downloaded illegal software. Finding this infor- 
mation, you contact senior management to have the policy relating to this problem enforced. 
Which of the following policies would you recommend as applicable to this situation? 
A. 
Privacy policy 
B. 
Acceptable use policy 
C. 
HP,. Policy 
D. 
SLAs 
I-4I Answer B. Acceptable use policy. An acceptable use policy establishes guidelines on the appro- 
priate use of technology. It is used to outline what activities are permissible when using a com- 
puter or network, and what an organization considers proper behavior. Acceptable use policies 
not only protect an organization from liability, but also provide employees with an under- 
standing of what they can and cannot do when using technology. 
www.syngress.com 

822 
Appendix ,, Self Test Appendix 
N 
Answer A is incorrect, because a privacy policy will outline the level of privacy an employee 
and/or customer can expect from the company. Privacy policies generally include sections that 
stipulate corporate e-mail as being the property of the company, and that Internet browsing 
may be audited. Answer C is incorrect, because HP,. policies deal with the hiring, termination, 
and changes of an employee within a company. They do not provide information on the 
acceptable use of technology. Answer D is incorrect, because SLAs are agreement.,; between 
clients and service providers that outline what services will be supplied, what is expected from 
the service, and who will fix the service if it does not meet an expected level of performance. 
. 
You are concerned about the possibility of hackers using programs to determine the passwords 
of users.You decide to create a policy that provides information on creating strong passwords, 
and want to provide an example of a strong password.Which of the following is the strongest 
password? 
A. 
strong 
B. 
PKBLT 
C. ih8Xams! 
D. 
12345 
Answer C. ih8Xams! Strong passwords consist of a combination of lower case letters (a through 
z), upper case letters (A through Z), numbers (0 through 9), and special characters 
(({}~,.<>;:'"?/[ \'-!@#$%A&*0_-+= ). Of the possible passwords listed, the only one that has 
all these characteristics is ih8Xams! 
lk-! Answers A, B, and C are all incorrect, because they do not use a combination of numbers, spe- 
cial characters, and uppercase and lower case letters. 
You are developing a policy that will address that hard disks are to be properly erased using spe- 
cial software, and that any CDs or DVDs that are to be damaged by scarring or breaking them 
before they are thrown away. It is the hope of the policy that any information that is on the 
media will not fall into the wrong hands after properly discarding them. What type of policy 
are you creating? 
A. 
Due care 
B. 
Privacy policy 
C. Need to know 
D. 
Disposal and destruction policy 
Answer D. Disposal and destruction policy. This type of policy establishes procedures dealing 
with the safe disposal and destruction of data and equipment. 
N1 Answer A is incorrect, because due care refers to the level of care that a reasonable person 
would exercise, and is used to address problems of negligence. Answer B is incorrect, because 
privacy policies outline the level of privacy that employees and clients can expect, and the orga- 
nization's perspective on what is considered private information. Answer C is incorrect, because 
the need-to-know refers to people only being given the information, or access to data, that 
they need in order to perform their jobs. 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
823 
You have a decentralized network and want to give managers and assistant managers at each 
location the necessary rights to backup data on Windows servers and workstations running 
Windows XP. While managers have been with the company for years, there is some turnover in 
employees who are assistant managers. Based on this, what is the best method of allowing these 
users to backup data on the servers and workstations? 
A. 
Modify each user account so that each person can perform backups. 
B. 
Make each user a member of the Administrators group. 
C. 
Make each user a member of a Backup Operators group. 
D. 
Make each user a member of the Users group. 
Answer C. Make each user a member of a Backup Operators group.You could add each of the 
manager and assistant manager user accounts to a Backup Operators group, which has the nec- 
essary permissions to backup data. By modifying the access control of one group, the access of 
each account that is a member of that group would also be affected. 
Answer A is incorrect, because it would require modifying the user account of each person 
who served as a manager or assistant manager. Because there is turnover in assistant managers, 
this would cause the greatest amount of account maintenance. Answer B is incorrect, because 
making these users members of the Administrators group would give them more access than 
needed. Answer D is incorrect, because users do not have access to backup data by.being a 
member of the Users group. 
5. 
You are concerned that mistakes may be made from accounts that are set up on each server in 
the network when users log into them.You also want to make it easier for users to log onto 
multiple servers which physically reside in a server room within the company's main building. 
To achieve these goals, which of the following features of a network are needed? 
A. 
Centralized servers 
B. 
Decentralized servers 
C. 
Single sign-on 
D. 
Auditing 
Answer C. Single sign-on. A network with a single sign-on allows users to sign in from one 
computer, be authenticated by the network, and use resources and data from any servers to 
which they have access. Single sign-ons make administration easier, because changes made to 
one account are replicated to all servers in a network. If a user's access needs change, or a user is 
terminated and needs their account deleted, an administrator can make the change once and 
know that the changes are reflected network-wide. 
Answer A is incorrect, because centralizing servers locates the servers in a single area, but will 
not affect a user's inability to logon once to a network and have a single accounts security set- 
tings effect their ability to access data and resource across the network. Answer B is also incor- 
rect for this reason. Decentralizing servers will locate them in different areas, but will not affect 
a user's inability to logon once and use one account's security settings. Answer D is incorrect, 
because auditing is used to monitor activities and will not affect security settings. 
A user is concerned that someone may have access to his account, and may be accessing his 
data.Which of the following events will you audit to identify if this is the case? 
www.syngress.com 

824 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
A. 
Monitor the success and failure of accessing printers and other resources. 
B. 
Monitor the success of changes to accounts. 
C. 
Monitor the success of restarts and shutdowns. 
D. 
Monitor for escalated use of accounts during off hours. 
[-d Answer D. Monitor for escalated use of accounts during off hours. Because the user normally 
does not use the account as much as it is being used, it is indicative that someone has acquired 
the username and password and is using the account without authorization. 
N1 Answers A, B, and C are incorrect, because none of these indicate whether someone is using 
the account without authorization. Monitoring the success and failure of accessing printers and 
other resources can show whether improper permissions have been set. Auditing successful 
changes to accounts, restart, and shutdowns of systems, and the ability to perform other actions 
can also show if certain users have more access than they should. 
. 
You are configuring operating systems used in your organization. Part of this configuration 
involves updating several programs, modifying areas of the Registry, and modifying the back- 
ground wallpaper to show the company's new logo. In performing these tasks, you want to 
create documentation on the steps taken, so that if there is a problem, you can reverse the steps 
and restore systems to their original state.What kind of documentation will you create? 
A. 
Change control documentation 
B. 
Inventory 
C. 
Classification 
D. 
Retention and storage documentation 
Answer A. Change control documentation provides information of changes that ]have been 
made to a system, and often provides back out steps that show how to restore the system to its 
previous state. 
Answer B is incorrect, because inventories provide a record of devices and software making up 
a network, not changes made to the configuration of those devices. Answer C is incorrect, 
because classification is a scheme of categorizing information, so that members of an organiza- 
tion are able to understand the importance of information and less likely to leak sensitive infor- 
mation. Answer D is incorrect, because retention and storage documentation is necessary to 
keep track of data, so that it can be determined what data should be removed and/or destroyed 
once a specific date is reached. 
You are the administrator of a network running Novell NetWare, and are having problems with 
a server's ability to connect to other servers. The server was able to connect to the network 
before you installed a recent bug fix. After attempting to solve the problem, you decide to 
check and see if anyone else has had this problem. Where is the best place to find this informa- 
tion? 
A. 
The manual that came with the server 
B. 
The vendor's Web site 
C. 
Service pack 
D. 
Microsoft knowledge base 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
825 
Answer B. The vendor's Web site. Manufacturers'Web sites are also valuable to the security and 
effectiveness of a network and its systems, as they provide support, and may include a knowl- 
edge base of known problems and solutions. 
Answer A is incorrect, because the bug fix is for the OS and would not be included in the 
documentation for the server. Also, because it is a recent bug fix, it would have come out after 
the server's manual was published. Answer C is incorrect, because a service pack is software that 
is used to fix issues and upgrade elements of the OS. Answer D is incorrect because the OS is 
manufactured by Novell, so the Microsoft knowledge base would not have specific information 
on issues with another company's OSes. 
. 
You are concerned about the possibility of sensitive information developed by your company 
being distributed to the public, and decide to implement a system of classification. In creating 
this system, which of the following levels of classification would you apply to sensitive informa- 
tion that is not to be disseminated outside of the organization? 
A. 
Unclassified 
B. 
Classified 
C. 
Public 
D. 
External 
Answer B. Classified. When information is designated as classified, it means that it is for internal 
use only and not for distribution to parties outside of the organization. 
Answers A and C are incorrect because when information is classified as public or unclassified, 
then it can be viewed by parties outside of an organization. Answer D is incorrect, because 
external documents are those generated outside of the 
organization. 
10. Changes in the law now require your organization to store data on clients for three years, at 
which point the data are to be destroyed. When the expiration date on the stored data is 
reached, any printed documents are to be shredded and media that contains data on the client 
is to be destroyed. What type of documentation would you use to specify when data is to be 
destroyed? 
A. 
Disaster recovery documentation 
B. 
Retention policies and logs 
C. 
Change documentation 
D. 
Destruction logs 
Answer B. Retention policies and logs. Policy regarding the retention of data will decide how 
long the company will retain data before destroying it. Retention and storage documentation is 
necessary to keep track of this data, so that it can be determined what data should be removed 
and/or destroyed once a specific date is reached. 
Answer A is incorrect, because disaster recovery documentation is used to provide information 
on how the company can recover from an incident. Answer C is incorrect, because change doc- 
umentation provides information on changes that have occurred in a system. Answer D is 
incorrect, because destruction logs are used to chronicle what data and equipment have been 
destroyed after the retention date has expired. 
www.syngress.com 

826 
Appendix 9 Self Test Appendix 
11. You are designing a backup regime that will allow you to recover data to servers iin the event of 
a disaster. Should a disaster occur, you want to use a backup routine that will take minimal time 
to restore. Which of the following types of backups will you perform? 
A. Daily full backups 
B. 
A full backup combined with daily incremental backups 
C. 
A full backup combined with daily differential backups 
D. 
A combination of incremental and differential backups. 
F'-'d Answer A. Daily full backups. A full backup backs up all data in a single backup job. Because 
the data is backed up on a single tape or tape set, means that it will take the least amount of 
time to restore. While this may not be the most efficient method of performing backups, as 
combining full backups with incremental or differential backups take less time to backup each 
day, are the fastest to restore, and use fewer backup tapes. 
Answer B is incorrect, because a combination of a full backup and daily incremental backups 
would take the least amount of time to backup each day, but the most amount of time to 
restore. When restoring the data, the full backup must be restored first, followed by each incre- 
mental backup that was taken since. Answer C is incorrect, because a combination of a full 
backup with daily differential backups would require you to restore the last full backup and the 
last differential backup. This is still one more tape than if daily full backups were performed. 
Answer D is incorrect, because incremental and differential backups cannot be combined 
together. Each would be part of a different backup regime and both would require a full 
backup to be restored 
12. You are the administrator of a network that is spread across a main building and a remote site 
several miles away.You make regular backups of the data on your servers, which are centrally 
located in the main building. Where should you store the backup tapes so they are available 
when needed in the case of a disaster? 
A. 
Keep the backup tapes in the server room within the main building, so they are readily at 
hand. If a disaster occurs, you will be able to obtain these tapes quickly and restore the 
data to servers. 
B. 
Keep the backup tapes in another section of the main building. 
C. 
Keep the backup tapes in the remote site. 
D. 
Keep the backup tapes in the tape drives of the servers so that a rotation scheme can be 
maintained. 
1"4I Answer C. Keep the backup tapes in the remote site. Since the company has a remote location 
that is miles from the main building, the tapes can be kept there for safekeeping. A firm can also 
be hired to keep the tapes in a storage facility.When a disaster occurs, you can then retrieve 
these tapes and restore the data. 
Answers A, B and C are incorrect, because a disaster that effects the server room or main 
building could also destroy the backup tapes if they were stored in these locations. 
www.syngress.com 

Self Test Appendix 9 Appendix 
827 
13. An intruder has gained access to your Web site, and damaged a number of files needed by the 
company. Entry was gained through a new Web server that had unneeded services running on 
the machine. This Web server is used to provide e-commerce functions that provide a large per- 
centage of the company's annual sales. During the intrusion, you were working on upgrading a 
router in another part of the building, which is why you did not notice audit notifications sent 
to your e-mail address, which could have tipped you off about suspicious activity on the server. 
You are concerned that a repeat attack may occur while repairs are underway. Which of the fol- 
lowing should you do to deal with this incident and protect the network? 
A. 
Remove the Web server from the Internet. 
B. 
Remove the unneeded services running on the server. 
C. 
Continue upgrading the router so that you can focus on audit notifications that may 
occur. 
D. 
Recover data files that were damaged in the attack. 
Answer B. Remove the unneeded services running on the server. Since the attack was made 
possible through these services, removing them would eliminate the previous entry into the 
system. Once you have identified vulnerabilities, you should remove or deal with these weak- 
nesses as soon as possible. Failing to do so could leave your system open to repeat attacks, or 
make damage caused by disasters more significant. 
Answer A is incorrect, because removing the Web server from the Internet will prevent the 
business from continuing normal business functions. Answer C is incorrect, because the router 
upgrade is unimportant to the situation.You could have been performing any number of other 
tasks that would have had you fail to notice audit notifications.You cannot be expected to sit at 
your desk looking at e-mail all day. Answer D is incorrect, because recovering the data files that 
were damaged will not prevent a repeat attack. 
14. You are creating a business continuity plan that incorporates several other plans to ensure that 
key functions will not be interrupted for long if an incident occurs. What plan would be used 
to identify a cold site that will be used to reestablish normal business functions in a disaster? 
A. 
Business recovery plan 
B. 
Business resumption plan 
C. 
Contingency plan 
D. 
SLA 
Answer A. A business recovery plan addresses how business functions will resume at an alternate 
site after a disaster occurs. It also will identify a cold, warm, or hot site to be used during the 
recovery process. 
N1 Answer B is incorrect, because a business resumption plan does not specify locations used to 
establish normal business functions, but addresses how critical systems and key functions of the 
business will be maintained. Answer C is incorrect, because a contingency plan is used to 
specify what actions can be performed to restore normal business activities after a disaster, or 
when additional incidents occur during recovery. Answer D is incorrect, because SLAs are 
agreements between clients and service providers that outline what services will be supplied, 
what is expected from the service, and who will fix the service if it does not meet an expected 
level of performance. 
www.syngress.com 

Index 
A 
AAA, 4-5 
Acceptable use policies 
code of ethics vs., 699 
description of, 682-685 
summary of, 749 
Access 
file system, 486-487 
privilege management. See Privilege 
management 
single sign-ons, 708-709, 750 
Access control 
alarms, 610 
authentication vs., 4, 45 
definition of, 6 
disadvantages of, 709 
discretionary, 6-7 
identification card for, 609 
mandatory, 8-9 
methods of, 609 
network communications and, 438 
password protection, 610-615 
RBAC, 6-8 
restricted access policies, 676-677 
role-based, 9, 714 
roles used for, 705 
rule-based, 9 
security policies, 680-681 
summary of, 43 
unauthorized starting up of machines, 
615 
user account configurations, 612-614 
web server, 256-257 
Access control, authentication, and 
auditing 
access control. See Access control 
auditing. See Auditing 
authentication. See Authentication 
definition of, 3 
description of, 2-3 
goals of, 3 
summary of, 42-43 
Access control lists 
configuration of, 498-499 
definition of, 426 
description of, 304, 371 
firewall use of, 498 
function of, 430, 498 
packet filters and, 430 
security concerns, 516-517 
Access logs, 6 i0 
Access points 
definition of, 377 
placement of, 377-378 
questions regarding, 247 
rogue, 224, 243 
Access requests, 691 
Accidental Trojan horses, 292 
ACK packet, 60-61 
ACLs. See Access control lists 
Active attacks, 56-78, 91-92, 198-199. 
See also specific attack 
Active Directory, 339 
Active FTR 330, 347 
Active server pages, 307 
ActiveX 
authentication certificates used by, 290 
bugs in, 295 
client-level protection, 297 
"container" applications, 289 
controls, 293-294 
dangers associated with, 292-294 
definition of, 289 
developer responsibilities, 301 
disabling controls, 300-301 
Internet Explorer default setting for, 
292 
Java vs., 290-292 
network-level protection, 296-297 
old versions of, 296 
preventing problems with, 303-306 
security zones, 297-300 
summary of, 347 
unsigned controls, 291 
vulnerabilities, 293-296 
weakness of, 291 
Adapter unit interface, 402 
Address resolution protocol spoofing, 
70-71,223,225,375-376 
Address space layout randomization, 65 
Ad-hoc network configuration, 
181-182, 241 
Administrative accounts, 704-705 
Administrator 
passwords for, 694 
vulnerabilities for, 135 
Advanced encryption standard, 234, 
531-532 
Adware, 89-90 
AES. See Advanced encryption standard 
AH. See Authentication header 
Air quality, 624-625,662 
AirCrack, 112-113 
AirSnort, 112 
Alarms, 610 
Algorithms 
block ciphers, 526, 534 
classification of, 534 
definition of, 526 
description of, 526-527 
E1 Gamal, 537 
encryption. See Encryption algorithms 
Fortezza, 278 
hashing, 534, 538-540 
international data encryption, 
531-532 
one-time pad, 547,551 
P,.ij ndael, 531-532 
Rivest, Shamir, & Adleman, 537 
signature, 534 
stream ciphers, 526, 534, 551 
strength of, 533 
summary of, 549 
Amplification attacks, 60 
Annual loss expectancy, 652-654, 661 
Annualized rate of occurrence, 652,661 
Anonymous FTP, 332-333 
Anti-virus software 
real-time scans by, 149 
updates, 657-658 
Applets, 288,292. See also ActiveX 
Application hardening 
description of, 482,499-500 
hotfixes, 500 
patches, 501 
service packs, 501 
summary of, 516 
updates, 500-501 
Application layer gateways, 360, 
367-368,414, 418 
Application-based attacks, 92 
AP,.P spoofing. See Address resolution 
protocol spoofing 
Asset(s) 
due care policies for use of, 685-687 
identification of, 649-651,661,680 
risk assessments for, 651-654 
Asymmetric cryptography 
authentication issues, 546-547 
encryption algorithms 
description of, 533-535 
Diffie-Hellman algorithm, 535-536 
E1 Gamal algorithm, 537 
man-in-the-middle attacks, 544 
P,.ivest, Shamir, & Adleman 
algorithm, 537 
summary of, 548 
symmetric algorithms vs., 534-535 
non-repudiation issues, 547 
Attack(s) 
active, 56-78, 91-92, 198-199 
amplification, 60 
application-based, 92 
backdoor, 86-88, 94 
birthday, 122 
bounce, 334 
brute force. See Brute force attack 
buffer overflow, 65, 95, 119, 122, 313 
classification of, 56 
code. See Code attacks 
day zero, 150 
denial of service, 57-59 
dumpster diving, 75, 92, 95,620, 697 
eavesdropping, 79, 134, 221,245-246 
file traversal, 503 
Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir, 112 
logic bombs, 89,260-261 
lunchtime, 581-582 
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM). See 
Man-in-the-Middle attack 
Metasploit, 394-396 
mixed-threat, 57, 92 
passive. See Passive attacks 
password. See Password attacks 
phishing, 73-74, 152-155,622 
replay, 68, 121 
resource consumption, 59-60 
rootkits, 86, 94 
session hijacking, 67-68 
smurf, 60 
sniffing. See Sniffing 
829 

830 
Index 
social engineering. See Social 
engmeering 
software exploitation for, 65-66 
spoofing. See Spoofing 
synchronous (SYN), 56, 60-61, 92 
TCP/IP hijacking, 67-68 
Trojan horse, 6-7, 85-86, 93 
vulnerability scanning for, 77, 92 
war dialing. See War dialing 
wireless network. See Wireless 
network, attacks on 
worm. See Worm 
Attack signatures 
components of, 459 
database of, 459 
description of, 389-390, 456 
Audit logs, 28 
Auditing 
definition of, 7, 711,750 
logging, 33-34 
in Microsoft Windows, 30-35 
of e-mail, 753 
of systems, 29-34 
of usage patterns, 713 
privilege management through, 
711-714 
purpose of, 27 
summary of, 44 
system resources affected by, 711 
Authentication 
access control vs., 4, 45 
asymmetric cryptography, 546-547 
biometric, 26, 618,659,693 
certificates, 20-21 
challenge handshake authentication 
protocol, 19-20 
cleartext, 14 
computer-level, 128 
confidentiality vs., 542 
definition of, 4-5 
description of, 12-13,681 
802.1x, 188-191 
IPSec, 132-133 
Kerberos, 16-19 
lightweight directory access protocol, 
344 
MAC, 113-114 
methods of, 4-5, 11-12 
mixed mode, 513 
multi-factor, 24-25 
mutual, 25-26, 191-192, 566 
purpose of, 11 
RADIUS, 118-119 
remote access servers, 381 
Rivest, Shamir, & Adleman, 536-537 
secret key used for, 11 
shared-key, 187-188, 199, 240 
summary of, 44 
symmetric cryptography, 546 
token technology for, 23-24 
two-factor, 243,676 
user-level, 128 
username/password combinations for, 
22-23 
wired equivalent privacy, 183 
Authentication certificates, 290 
Authentication hashes, 133 
Authentication header, 116, 132 
Authentication POP, 12 
Authentication server, 110 
Authentication spoofing, 222, 226 
Authentication tokens, 16 
Authenticator, 110 
Authenticator port access entity, 189 
B 
Back doors, 86-88, 94 
Backup(s) 
copy, 732, 752 
data selection, 732 
differential, 732,737-738, 752 
full, 732,734-737,752 
importance of, 731 
incremental, 732, 737,752 
media used for, 731 
offsite storage of, 735,754 
programs for, 409 
restoration of data, 734, 736-737 
rotation scheme for, 733-734 
security for, 616 
summary of, 751-752 
web server, 261 
Backup logs, 727 
Bastion host, 434 
Bayonet Neill Concelman connector, 401 
Best practices, 687 
Biometric authentication, 28,618,659, 
693 
BIOS password, 615 
Birthday attacks, 122 
Birthday paradox, 80-81,204 
BlackBerry, 285 
"Black-hat" hackers, 119 
Blaster worm, 84 
Blind FTP, 332-333 
Blind spoofing, 69 
Block ciphers, 526, 534 
Bluetooth, 172,399 
Bootstrap sector viruses, 83 
Bounce attacks, 334 
Broadcast domain, 445 
Browsers. See Web browsers 
Brute force attack 
description of, 12, 80-81 
password cracks by, 692 
symmetric encryption algorithm 
susceptibility to, 528, 550-551 
Buffer overflows, 65, 95, 119, 122,282, 
296, 312-313 
Bulk demagnetizer, 696 
Bulletin board systems, 150, 674 
Bus topology 
coax cable use of, 403 
UTP/STP cable use of, 405 
Business continuity planning 
countermeasures, 743 
definition of, 741-742 
fault tolerance, 744-746 
high availability, 744-746, 753 
plans included in, 742 
power loss, 743-744 
summary of, 748,752-753 
utilities, 743-744 
Business functions, 742 
Business recovery plan, 742 
Business resumption plan, 742 
C 
CA. See Certification authority 
Cabling 
coaxial. See Coax 
electromagnetic interference concerns, 
627 
fber-optic, 407,416,419, 629 
installation considerations, 628 
radio frequency interference concerns, 
627 
UTP/STR 404-407,416, 627-628 
Caesar's Cipher, 541 
Carbon dioxide systems, for fire 
suppression, 630 
Carrier protocol, 114 
Carrier sense multiple access with 
collision avoidance, 174-176 
CDE See Cisco Di:~covery Protocol 
CDRs. See Recordable compact disks 
CDs. See Compact disks 
Cell phones, 285 
Centralized key management, 579-580, 
594 
Centralizing of servers, 608, 709-710, 
750 
Certificate(s) 
definition of, 559 
deregistration of; 592 
description of, 22-23 
digital, 308-309. 565,568, 594 
expiration of, 57'4, 579, 585,595 
life cycle of, 579 
mutual authentication use of, 25 
online certificate status protocol, 576 
renewal of, 585,591,595 
revocation of. &'e Revocation of 
certificate 
self-signed, 559--560, 564 
summary of, 594 
suspension of, 588-589 
X.509, 569-570 
Certificate authority 
definition of, 132, 279, 308 
digital certificates issued by, 309, 572 
hierarchical models, 579, 596 
intermediate, 564 
leaf, 564 
root, 563-564, 591 
single models, 5,52-563, 596 
subordinate, 563-564 
Certificate policies, 572-573 
Certificate practice statements, 573-574 
Certificate revocat!ion, 574-575 
Certificate revocation list, 310, 575-576, 
587-588 
Certification authority, 20-21 
Certification Hold, 588 
Certification request syntax standard, 578 
CGI. See Common gateway interface 
Chain of custody, at forensics 
investigation, 639-641 
Challenge handshake authentication 
protocol, 21-22,381 
Change documentation, 726, 751 
CHAE See Challenge handshake 
authentication protocol 
Chat rooms, 326 
Chernobyl virus, 89 
Chip creep, 624 

Index 
831 
chmod, 9-10 
Chosen ciphertext, 142 
Ciphers 
block, 526, 534 
message encryption using, 139 
stream 
definition of, 111,185,526, 534, 551 
vulnerability of, 203-205 
Ciphertext, 111,526 
Cisco Discovery Protocol, 37 
Cisco PIX firewalls, 433 
Cisco router, 371 
Classified documents, 728 
Cleartext authentication, 14 
Cleartext passwords 
demonstration of, 15-18 
packet sniffing, 13-16 
"Click kiddies," 106 
Client/server architecture, 368 
Client-side scripting, 302 
Clipper Chip, 585 
Clock arithmetic, 539 
Closed systems, 198 
Coax cabling 
bus topology, 403 
definition of, 401 
description of, 628 
fiber-optic cable vs., 407 
summary of', 416 
thick, 402 
thin, 401 
vulnerabilities of, 403 
Code attacks 
back doors, 86-88, 94 
description of, 57, 81 
logic bombs, 89,260-261 
rootkits, 86, 94 
summary of, 93 
Trojan horse, 6-7, 85-86, 93 
viruses, 82-83, 93 
worms. See Worm 
Code of ethics, 699,750, 753 
Code Red worm, 84 
Code signing 
benefits of, 309-310 
description of, 308-309 
problems associated with, 310-311 
vulnerabilities, 311 
Cold site, 739 
Collision, 538-539 
Collision domain, 445 
Common gateway interface 
definition of, 307,322 
examples of, 325-326 
mechanism of, 323-325 
misconceptions about, 325 
scripts 
description of, 323-325 
exploiting of, 326-328,350 
Nikto program for assessing, 
328-329 
uses for, 325-326 
weak, break-ins caused by, 326-328 
security concerns, 322 
uses of, 325-326 
vulnerabilities, 322 
wrappers, 328 
Common name, 342 
Communication 
business continuity planning for, 744 
summary of, 747 
with users, 716-718 
in wireless networks, 169-173 
Communications-based security 
importance of, 161 
need for, 105-106 
overview of, 1()6-107 
Compact disks 
destruction of, 696 
discarding of, 620 
recordable, 409-410, 416 
stealing of, 648 
Companion virus, 83 
Computer(s) 
crime scene preservation of, 642 
due care policies for use of, 685-687 
fan cooling of, 623 
photographing of, 646-647 
temperature concerns for, 623-624 
Computer-level authentication, 128 
Confidential documents, 728 
Confidentiality, 541-542,548 
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability 
security concept, 5,550 
Confusion operations, 530 
Content scrambling system, 551-552 
Contingency plan 
after disaster, 742 
after incidents, 633-634 
Cookie 
contents of, 271 
definition of, 151,269-270,347,349 
Internet Explorer settings for, 318-319 
persistent, 270 
stealing of, 271-272 
temporary, 270 
tracking, 270 
Cookie poisoning, 271 
Cookie theft, 271 
Copy backup, 732,752 
Corporate theft, 608,648 
Counter-mode/CBC-Mac protocol, 109 
Crack-A-Mac, 327 
Crawler, 303 
Crime scene investigation. See Forensics 
investigation 
Crime scene technician, 639-640 
Crime stings, 465-466 
Cryptanalysis, 543 
Crypto Internet protocol encapsulation, 
451 
Cryptographic attacks, 57. See also 
Attack(s) 
Cryptographic message syntax standard, 
577 
Cryptographic token interface standard, 
578 
Cryptography 
access control mechanisms, 547 
asymmetric. See Asymmetric 
cryptography 
confidentiality concerns, 541-542,548 
definition of, 526, 541 
encryption. See Encryption 
message integrity, 542,550 
one-time pad, 547-548,551 
principles of, 542-543 
public-key, 533 
reasons for understanding, 550 
summary of, 549 
symmetric. See Symmetric 
cryptography 
Cryptosystems, 542-543 
CTRL+ALT+DEL, 614 
D 
DAC 
description of,9-10, 714 
settings, 9-10, 45 
DAC lists, 8 
Daemon, 63-64 
DAE See Directory access protocol 
Data 
as asset, 649-651 
copying of, in forensics investigation, 
643 
destruction of, 696, 730 
due care policy applicability to, 686 
integrity of 
Message Digest 5 for, 540 
reasonable efforts to maintain, 686 
"need to know" policies regarding, 
690-691 
privacy policies regarding, 687-688 
RAID, 745-746, 754 
recovery of, from backup, 736-737 
retention policies for, 729-730 
security of, 617-618 
transmission of, media for, 400-408 
valuation of, 650-651 
volatile. See Volatile data 
Data encryption 
magnetic tape, 409 
in mobile devices, 400, 625 
on flashcards, 412 
on servers, 399 
wireless networks, 175-176 
Data encryption standard, 529-530,551 
Data modification, 134 
Data repositories 
description of, 509 
directory enabled networks, 510 
Data storage zone, 438 
Data virus, 83 
Databases, 512-514 
Day zero attack, 150 
Decentralization of servers, 710 
Decentralized key management, 579-580, 
594 
"Deep packet inspection" firewall, 360 
Defense-in-depth strategy, 431 
Degausser, 696 
Delta certificate revocation list, 575-576, 
587 
Demilitarized zone 
bastion host, 434 
definition of, 432 
description of, 230, 257,398,426 
domain name services, 436 
e-commerce and, 436 
e-mail relaying, 435 
firewalls, 433-434 
FTP services, 435,504 
hosts in, 434 
intrusion detection system in, 436 
layered, 433 
multiple interface, 433-434 
need for, 473 
protections using, 433-434 

832 
Index 
services hosted by, 435-436 
summary of, 470 
word origin of, 432 
DEN. See Directory enabled networks 
Denial all strategy, 440 
Denial of service attack. See also 
Distributed denial of service 
attack 
amplification attacks, 60 
application-based intrusion detection 
systems, 455 
coax cabling susceptibility to, 403 
definition of, 57, 64, 225,363,740 
distributed denial of service attack vs., 
64, 94 
effects of, 59 
e-mail spam as, 60 
firewall susceptibility to, 363 
focus of, 57-58 
local, 58 
malformed TCP/IP packets used for, 
393 
objective of, 58, 363 
private branch exchange susceptibility 
to, 384 
protecting against, 227-228 
resource consumption attack, 59-60 
spam as, 60, 151 
summary of, 91 
switches susceptibility to, 375 
SYN attack, 56, 60-61, 92 
wireless networks, 225-228 
Department-specific documents, 728 
Deregistration of certificate, 592 
Destruction 
bulk demagnetizer for, 696 
degausser for, 696 
documentation regarding, 730-731 
of data, 696 
of fixed media, 75 
of key pairs, 592, 596-597 
of printed materials, 696-697 
policies regarding, 695-697,749 
Devaluation, of equipment, 607 
Devices 
firewalls. See Firewalls 
overview of, 358-359 
routers. See Routers 
servers. See Servers 
switches, 374-376 
workstations. See Workstations 
DHCP. See Dynamic host control 
protocol 
Dial-in numbers, war dialing 
identification of, 382 
Dictionary-based attacks, 81 
Differential backup, 732, 737-738,752 
Diffie-Hellman algorithm, 535-536 
Diffie-Hellman key agreement standard, 
577 
Diffie-Hellman key exchanges 
description of, 25 
man-in-the-middle attack 
vulnerabilities, 545 
mechanism of operation, 536 
Diffusion operations, 530 
Digital certificates, 308-309,565,568, 
594. See also Certificate(s) 
Digital fingerprints, 539 
Digital signature, 132, 543-544, 548 
Digital signature algorithm, 537 
Digital versatile disks, 410 
Direct sequence spread spectrum, 173, 
238, 242 
Directory 
definition of, 339 
description of, 257-259 
lightweight directory access protocol, 
340-341 
Directory access protocol, 339 
Directory enabled networks, 510 
Directory information tree, 340 
Directory services, 338-339, 510-511 
Disaster 
planning for, 626-627 
as risk, 648 
Disaster recovery 
alternate facility site, 738-740 
backups. See Backup(s) 
countermeasures, 743 
preparation for, 731 
risk analysis, 740 
summary of, 747-748, 751-752 
Disaster recovery plan, 740-742,747-748 
Discrete logarithms, 536 
Disk locks, 616 
Diskettes 
imaging of, for forensics investigation, 
642 
security concerns, 411,417 
Disposal 
of DVDs, 620 
of printed materials, 696-697 
policies regarding, 695-697,749 
Distinguished name, 342 
Distributed component object model 
remote procedure call service, 84 
Distributed denial of service attack 
command structure of, 62 
definition of, 363 
denial of service attack vs., 64, 94 
flow of, 64 
hosts involved in, 62 
phases of, 61-62 
progression of, 57 
software components of, 62 
zombies used in, 61-63,363 
Distributed RADIUS, 118 
DNS. See Domain name system 
Documentation 
change, 726, 751 
classification of, 727-729,751 
creation of, 722 
criteria for, 722 
description of, 715 
destruction, 730-731 
in forensics investigation, 635 
importance of, 672 
inventories, 726-727 
logs. See Log(s) 
of guidelines, 722-723 
of standards, 722-723 
retention, 729-730 
storage, 729-730 
summary of, 751 
systems architecture, 724-726 
Domain name system 
description of, 36, 137, 436 
dynamic, 510 
reverse lookups, 458 
Domain name system servers 
description of, 147 
exploitation of, 506 
hardening of, 505-506 
dsniff, 70 
Dual key pairs, 593 
Due care, 685-687,749 
Dumpster diving, 7!5, 92, 95,620, 697 
DVDs 
content scrambling system encryption 
of, 551-552 
description of, 410 
disposal of, 620 
Dynamic domain name system, 510 
Dynamic host control protocol, 36, 193 
Dynamic host control protocol servers, 
508-509, 517 
Dynamic network address translation, 448 
E 
EAE 109, 111 
Eavesdropping, 79, 134, 221,245-246 
E-commerce, 436-,+37 
eDirectory, 339 
Education 
benefits of, 719 
description of, 715 
importance of, 6'72 
methods of, 719 
online resources used for, 721 
summary of, 747, 751 
training sessions used for, 719 
user awareness through, 719-720 
802.1x 
authentication, 188-191,240 
description of, 1<)8-110 
dynamic key derivation, 191 
EAR 111 
mutual authentication, 191-192 
temporal key integrity protocol with, 
232-233 
terminology associated with, 189 
user identification, 191 
vulnerabilities, 111-113,228 
802.3, 174 
802.11 
authentication in 
mutual, 191-192 
open, 186-18"7,240 
per-packet, 192 
shared-key, 187-188, 199,240 
spoofing of, 222 
control frames, 182 
data frames, 182 
description of, 176 
development of, 178 
802.11a, 180-181,238 
802.11b, 179-181,238 
802.11g, 180-18.1 
802.1 li, 234 
management frames, 182 
purpose of, 178--179 
traffic on, 182 
wired equivalent: privacy protocol. See 
Wired equivalent privacy 
protocol 
E1 Gamal algorithm, 537 
Electromagnetic interference 
causes of, 627 
description of, 406 
shielding to prevent against, 627 
Electrostatic discharge, 624-625 
EM fields, 170-171 
E-mail 
auditing of, 753 

Index 
833 
definition of, 136 
digital certificate for securing of, 572 
encryption of, 12, 138, 158 
format of, 136-137 
MIME format, 138-139, 158 
mobility issues, 147-148 
packets, 138 
PGP encryption of, 140-142, 158, 162 
phishing attacks, 73-74, 152-155,622 
"preview" pane for, 149 
principles of, 137-138 
privacy policies regarding, 688,753 
security of, 136-138 
signatures on, 717 
simple mail transfer protocol, 138-139 
S/MIME format, 138-139, 158, 162 
SMTP relay vulnerabilities, 143-146, 
158 
spam. See Spam 
spoofing of, 71-73, 146-147 
summary of, 158 
unsolicited bulk, 150 
viruses and, 148-150, 158-159 
vulnerabilities of, 143-155 
E-mail hoaxes, 152, 159 
E-mail relaying, 435 
E-mail servers, 136-137, 148,503-504 
EMI. See Electromagnetic interference 
Employee(s) 
acceptable use policies for, 682-685, 
699, 749 
as assets, 649, 651 
communication with, 716-718 
education of 
about physical security, 619-620 
about social engineering threats, 621 
human resources policies, 697-699, 
749 
injury to, disaster recovery plan in 
event of, 740-741 
privacy policies for, 687-689, 753 
security level for, 699 
separation of duties policies, 689-690 
Encapsulated security protocol, 116, 132 
Encapsulating, 114 
Encapsulating protocol, 114 
Encase, 646 
Encrypted passwords, 539 
Encryption 
cryptography vs., 541 
data 
magnetic tape, 409 
in mobile devices, 400, 625 
on flashcards, 412 
on servers, 399 
wireless network, 175-176,625-626 
definition of, 526-527,541 
e-mail, 138, 158 
hard drive, 410 
on servers, 399 
PGP, 140-142, 158, 162 
public key, 537 
tunneling and, 451 
Encryption algorithms 
asymmetric 
authentication issues, 546-547 
description of, 533-535 
Diffie-Hellman algorithm, 535-536 
E1 Gamal algorithm, 537 
Rivest, Shamir, & Adleman 
algorithm, 537 
sun-m-lary of, 548 
symmetric algorithms vs., 534-535 
definition of, 527 
IKC4 
description of, 111,185 
vulnerability of, 202-203 
symmetric 
abundance of, 528 
advanced encryption standard, 
531-532 
asymmetric algorithms vs., 534-535 
authentication issues, 546 
brute-force attack susceptibility of, 
528,550-551 
data encryption standard, 529-530, 
551 
definition of, 528 
international data encryption 
algorithm, 531-532 
Rijndael algorithm, 531-532 
summary of, 548 
triple data encryption standard, 530, 
551 
uses of, 534 
Endpoint-based network access control, 
512 
Entrapment, 465-466 
Environment 
air quality, 624-625,662 
definition of, 623 
description of, 622-623 
electrostatic discharge, 624-625 
fire suppression considerations, 
629-630 
geographic location considerations, 626 
location considerations, 626-627 
restricted access policies, 677 
temperature concerns, 623-624 
Equipment. See also specific equipment 
destruction of. See Destruction 
devaluation of, 607 
disposal of. See Disposal 
due care policies for use of', 685-687 
location for 
centralized, 608, 615 
geographical considerations, 
626-627 
raised, 626 
maintenance of, 686 
personal, 678-679 
photographing of, 646-647 
replacement costs for, 650 
temperature concerns for, 623-624 
Escrow, key, 583-585 
ESI). See Electrostatic discharge 
Ettercap, 13-16 
Evidence 
at-scene management of, 640-641 
chain of custody for, 639-641 
collection of, 639, 645-647 
copying of data, 643 
disk imaging, 642 
gathering of, 632 
log of, 641 
photographing of, 646 
preservation of, 637-638, 641-645 
procedures for, 643-644 
sealing of, 639 
storage of, 640-641 
tagging of, 641 
transportation of, 639-640, 663 
volatile data. See Volatile data 
Evidence file, 642 
Evidence log, 641 
Expiration of certificate, 574, 579, 585, 
586f, 595 
Extended access lists, 371 
Extended TACACS. See XTACACS 
Extended-certificate syntax standard, 577 
Extensible authentication protocol 
description of, 381 
over LAN, 189-19(t 
over wireless, 189-190 
per-packet authentication supported 
by, 192 
Extensible authentication protocol- 
transport layer security, 109, 111 
Extensible authentication protocol- 
tunneled transport layer security, 
109 
Extranet 
description of, 443-445,471 
Internet vs., 473-474 
intranet vs., 473-474 
F 
Facility site, alternate, 738-740 
False positives and negatives, from 
intrusion detection systems, 
468-469 
Fault tolerance, 744-746 
Fax servers, 378 
Feedback forms, 326 
Feistel cycles, 529 
Fiber-optic cabling, 407,416,419, 629 
File servers, 506-508 
File systems, 410, 485-487 
File transfer protocol. See FTP 
File traversal, 5()3 
Financial processing segment, 438 
Fingerprints 
biometric identification using, 26,618 
digital, 539 
Fire suppression, 629-63{i 
Firewalls 
access control lists as, 498 
applet filtering using, 305 
application layer gateways, 360, 
367-368,414, 418 
auditing uses of, 711 
circuit level, 36() 
Cisco PIX, 433 
configuration of, 276 
"deep packet inspection," 360 
definition of, 359,428 
demilitarized zone, 433-434 
denial of service attack susceptibility 
of, 363 
installation of, 430 
intranet, 442 
intrusion detection systems with, 430 
limitation of, 452 
NAT, 449 
packet-filtering 
advantages and disadvantages of, 366 
"allow by default," 361 
"deny by default," 361 
description of, 360 
summary of, 414 
port. See Port 
purpose of, 359,430 
script filtering using, 305 
server protecnon using, 398 
spoofing prevention using, 69 

834 
Index 
stateful inspection, 369, 414 
summary of, 414 
virtual private network, 116, 430 
web site monitoring using, 688-689 
worm protection using, 95 
Firmware updates, 490 
First responder, to incident, 637-638 
Fixed media, 75. See also specific media 
Flashcards, 411-412, 417 
Flooding 
definition of, 59 
protecting against, 227-228 
SYN floods, 60-61 
wireless network, 225-228 
Floppy disks. See Diskettes 
Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir attack, 112, 
202 
Forensically sterile media, 643-644 
Forensics. See also Incident(s) 
components of, 634 
definition of, 631 
description of, 630-631,634 
documentation involved in, 635 
employee awareness of, 632-634 
procedures for, 631,643-644 
summary of, 659-661 
Forensics investigation 
chain of command at, 639 
crime scene technician, 639-640 
evidence used in. See Evidence 
first responder, 637-638 
investigator, 638-639,661-662 
persons involved in, 636-640 
Fork bomb, 58 
Fortezza algorithms, 278 
Forward confirmed reverse domain name 
system, 147 
Frequency hopping spread spectrum, 
172-173,241 
Fresnel zone, 170 
FTP 
active, 330,347 
anonymous connections, 332-333 
blind, 332-333 
definition of, 330 
demilitarized zone, 435,504 
description of, 8, 11,254 
modes of, 364 
packet sniffing, 335-338 
passive, 330-331,347 
ports for, 333,363-364 
proxy, 334 
security concerns, 350 
S/FTR 331 
summary of, 347-348 
trivial, 366 
FTP servers 
description of, 334, 435 
hardening of, 504-505 
FTP sharing, 333-334 
Full backup, 732, 734-737,752 
Function calls, 312 
G 
Gateways, 322 
Global key, 191 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 687 
Grandfather-Father-Son rotation scheme 
for backups, 733-734, 752 
Graphical user interface, 115 
"Gray-hat" hackers, 119 
Groups 
privilege management using, 704-705 
users added to, 706-708 
Groups concept, 7 
Guest account, 704 
Guest books, 326 
Guidelines, 722-723 
H 
H SCR 254 
Halon, 629-630 
Handshake 
definition of, 129 
secret, 11 
secure sockets layer, 278 
Hard drives 
description of, 410-411,416 
destruction of, 696 
Hardening 
application 
description of, 482, 499-500 
hotfixes, 500 
patches, 501 
service packs, 501 
summary of, 516 
updates, 500-501 
databases, 512-514 
description of, 314 
directory services, 510-511 
DNS servers, 505-506 
dynamic host control protocol servers, 
508-509 
e-mail server, 503-504 
file servers, 506-508 
FTP server, 504-505 
network 
concepts of, 483-485 
configuration, 490-492 
description of, 482,489-490 
enabling and disabling of services 
and protocols, 492-498 
firmware updates, 490 
summary of, 515-516 
tasks involved in, 483-485 
vulnerability scanning, 494-498 
network access control, 511-512 
NNTP servers, 506 
print servers, 506-508 
system 
concepts of, 483-485 
description of, 482 
file system, 485-487 
summary of, 515 
tasks involved in, 483-485 
updates, 487-489 
web server, 501-503 
Hardware key storage, 580-583,597 
Hardware storage modules, 582 
Hardware-based network access control, 
512 
Hash function, 538 
Hash value, 538 
Hashed password, 8;0 
Hashing, 539-540 
Hashing algorithms, 534, 538-540 
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act, 105,687 
Heptafluoropropane, 630 
Hermes chipset, 196 
High availability, 744-746, 753 
Hijacking 
network, 223-225 
session, 67-68 
TCP/IE 67-68 
HINFO records, 505 
Hoaxes, e-mail, 152, 159 
Honeynets 
characteristics of, 466 
definition of, 390, 464, 467 
information resources about, 467 
Honeypots 
benefits of, 473 
characteristics ot, 466 
definition of, 39.0, 464, 467 
indications for, 4-67 
information resources about, 467 
installation of, 4t58 
schematic diagram of, 465 
Hostile work environment, 683 
Hot site, 738 
Hot swapping, 746, 754 
Hotfixes, 488, 500 
HTML, 136, 503 
HTTP/S, 279-280 
Human resources policies, 697-699,749 
Hunt, 67 
Hyperlink spoofing, 272-273 
I 
ICMP. See Internet control messaging 
protocol 
Identification card, 609 
Identity spoofing, 134-135 
IDS. See Intrusion detection systems 
IEEE 
description of, 108, 722-723 
802.3 standard, 174, 176 
802.11 standard. See 802.11 
IETE 130, 722-723 
IGMR See Internet group management 
protocol 
Incident(s). See also Forensics 
awareness of, 632-634 
business reputation effects, 648-649 
contingency plan for, 633-634 
definition of, 700 
employee understanding of, 634-636 
investigation after occurrence of. See 
Forensics investigation 
Incident response 
description of, 469 
first responder, 637-638 
persons involved in, 636-640 
policies for, 632, 699-704, 750 
Incident response team 
investigator, 638-639, 661-662 
IT staff assigned, to, 636 
notification of, .532-633 
Incremental backup, 732, 737,752 
Inergen, 630 
Informed spoofing, 69 
Infrastructure-based network access 
control, 511 

Index 
835 
Initialization vector, 112 
Instant messaging 
features of, 282 
file transfer capability with, 282 
growth of, 281 
packet sniffers, 283 
security issues for, 282-283 
software for monitoring, 283 
tools used for, 281-282 
Insurance policies, 655 
Integrity 
data 
Message Digest 5 for, 540 
reasonable efforts to maintain, 686 
web server, 263 
Intermediate certificate authority, 564 
International data encryption algorithm, 
531-532 
Internet, 473-474 
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, 
362 
Internet control messaging protocol 
in amplification attacks, 6() 
description of, 37,493 
Internet Exploder, 310 
Internet Explorer 
ActiveX default setting, 292 
securing of, 316-322 
Internet group management protocol, 37, 
493 
Internet information services, 263, 275 
Internet key exchange, 132 
Internet message access protocol, 503 
Internet relay chat, 361 
Internet security association and key 
management protocol, 133 
Internet server application programming 
interface script, 261 
Internetwork packet exchange, 493 
Internetwork packet exchange/sequenced 
packet exchange, 37 
Intranet 
definition of, 44{)-44l, 471 
example of', 441 
extranet vs., 473-474 
Internet vs., 473-474 
security issues, 441-443 
Intrusion detection systems 
anomaly-based, 455-456 
application-based, 454-455 
attack signatures, 389-39{) 
attacker goals, 460 
characteristics of, 454-458 
commercial types of, 461-464 
definition of, 262,452-453 
in demilitarized zone, 436 
description of, 389,426 
false positives and negatives, 468-469 
firewalls with, 430 
host-based, 454-455 
information resources, 458 
ISP-Planet, 464 
mechanism of operation, 452-453 
network, 390-392,454 
-- 
operating states for, 455 
selection of, 474 
signature-based, 455-456, 459-461 
software-based, 453 
sources for, 461-464 
summary of, 415,470, 472-473 
system, 390 
techniques used with, 458 
wireless network attacks detected by, 
113 
Intrusion prevention system, 460-461 
Inventories 
creation of, 725-726 
description of, 726-727,751 
Investigation. See Forensics investigation 
Investigator, 638-639,661-662 
IP addresses 
description of, 447-448 
network address translation, 447-448 
private, 450 
public, 450 
IP spoofing, 68-71 
IPSec 
authentication, 132-133 
definition of, 130, 133 
description of, 384 
implementation of, 130-131,201 
layer 2 tunneling protocol with, 
127-128 
network layer implementation of, 130 
security protocols used with, 132 
summary of, 156-157 
in transport mode, 130-131 
in tunnel mode, 131 
virtual private network, 116 
IPX. See Internetwork packet exchange 
IPX/SPX. See Internetwork packet 
exchange/sequenced packet 
exchange 
ISAKMR See Internet security association 
and key management protocol 
ISP-Planet, 464 
J 
J ava 
ActiveX vs., 290-292 
description of, 286-289 
preventing problems with, 303-306 
sandboxing, 292 
Java virtual machine, 286-287,397 
JavaScript 
description of, 301-302 
preventing problems with, 303-306 
K 
KI)C. See Key distribution center 
Kerberos, 18-21 
Key(s) 
definition of, 527,558 
pre-shared, 132 
private. See Private key 
public, 536, 559, 566 
session, 129,536 
usage of, 593 
wired equivalent privacy protocol, 
206-2 l 0 
Key distribution center, 16, 18 
Key escrow, 583-585 
Key exchange 
Diffie-Hellman 
description of, 25 
man-in-the-middle attack 
vulnerabilities, 545 
mechanism of operation, 536 
Key management 
centralized, 579-580, 594 
decentralized, 579-580, 594 
RA1)IUS for, 245 
summary of, 595 
Key pairs 
destruction of, 592, 596-597 
dual, 593 
nmltiple, 593 
Key recovery 
description of, 589 
M of N control, 590, 596 
Key recovery agent, 589 
Key recovery information, 589-590 
Key ring, 140 
Key update, 591 
Keyloggers, 79 
Keypads, 615 
Keystream, 534 
Knowledge bases, 721 
Known plaintext attacks, 176, 188 
L 
Layer 2 tunneling protocol, 127-128, 
161,384, 676 
Leaf certificate authority, 564 
Least privilege rule, 483,485 
Lightweight directory access protocol 
anonymous connections, 344 
authentication, 344 
data interchange format, 343 
definition of, 339 
description of, 254, 510-511 
directories 
attributes, 342-343 
description of, 340-341 
domain name system, 341 
objects in, 342 
organizational units of, 341-342 
schema, 342-343 
security risks, 341 
over secure sockets layer, 344 
packet sniffing, 344 
scripts used with, 344-345 
securing of, 343-345 
summary of, 348 
Web servers, 345 
Line printer daemon, 64 
Link virus, 83 
Local denial of service attack, 58 
Log(s) 
access, 610 
audit, 28 
backup, 727 
evidence, 641 
purpose of, 726-727,751 
Log files 
audit, 28 
reading of, 34 
Logging, 35-36 
Logic bombs, 89,260-261 
Logical ports, 363 
Logoff auditing, 713 
Logon auditing, 713 
Loopback UP.L, 264 
Lucifer algorithm, 529 
Lunchtime attacks, 581-582 
M 
M of N control, 590,596 
MAC 
authentication, 113-114 
description of, 6-7, 714, 750, 754 
MAC address 

836 
Index 
description of, 374 
spoofing of, 222, 243 
wireless network use of, 198-199 
MAC layer, of wireless networks, 174 
Macro virus, 83 
Magnetic tape, 408-409,416 
mailsnarf, 71 
Malware 
adware, 89-90 
definition of, 81,198 
logic bombs, 89, 260-261 
protection against, 81 
rootkits, 86, 94 
spyware, 89-90, 94 
Trojan horse, 6-7, 85-86, 93 
viruses, 82-83, 93 
worms, 84-85 
Managed security services providers, 
461-462 
Management only documents, 728 
Mandatory access control. See MAC 
Mandatory callback, 381-382 
Man-in-the-Middle attacks 
address resolution protocol spoofing, 
375 
asymmetric algorithm resistance to, 
544 
data modification, 134 
description of, 66, 542 
Diffie-Hellman key exchange 
susceptibility to, 545 
examples of, 545 
mutual authentication protection 
against, 25 
summary of, 92 
Web spoofing as, 272 
wireless networks, 199-200 
Mapping drives, 257 
Masters, 62-63 
Media 
data transmission, 400-408 
destruction of, 75 
forensically sterile, 643-644 
removable. See Removable media 
Melissa virus, 149 
Message Digest 4, 540 
Message Digest 5 
data integrity using, 540 
description of, 12, 80, 540 
Message integrity, 542,550 
Message integrity code, 233-234 
Metasploit attack, 394-396 
Metric, 651 
Michelangelo virus, 89 
Microsoft challenge handshake 
authentication protocol, 381 
Microsoft Exchange 2003, 144 
Microsoft Internet Explorer. See Internet 
Explorer 
Microsoft Internet Information Server, 
84, 502 
Microsoft Management Console, 29, 258 
Microsoft Security Baseline Analyzer, 77 
Microsoft Windows. See Windows 
MIME, 138-139, 158,622 
MITM attacks. See Man-in-the-Middle 
attacks 
Mixed mode authentication, 513 
Mixed-threat attacks, 57, 92 
Mobile devices, 399-400, 416, 625 
Modems, 378-381,414 
Modulus, 539 
MSN Sniffer 2,283 
Multi-factor authentication, 26-27 
Multi-partite viruses, 83 
Multipath interference, 170-171 
Multi-purpose Internet mail extensions. 
See MIME 
Mutual authentication, 27-28, 191-192, 
566 
MyDoom worm, 56 
hi 
NAT. See Network address translation 
"Need to know" policies, 485,690-691, 
749 
Nessus, 77 
NetBEUI. See NetBIOS extended user 
interface 
NetBIOS, 493-494, 507 
NetBIOS extended user interface, 37, 
493 
Netstat, 491-492 
NetStumbler, 195-197, 211-215 
Network. See also specific network 
access requests by employees, 691 
as asset, 649 
configuration of, 490-492 
diagnostic routine for, 392-393 
eavesdropping on, 79, 134, 221, 
245-246 
hijacking of, 223-225 
monitoring of, 392-393,415 
multi-zone, 440 
ports, testing of, 78 
redundancy in, 744 
sniffing of, 79, 217-221,393 
wireless. See Wireless network 
Network access control, 511-512 
Network adapter, 170 
Network address translation, 447-449, 
470-471 
Network attached storage, 509-510 
Network bandwidth, 59-60 
Network hardening 
concepts of, 483-485 
configuration, 490-492 
description of, 482, 489-490 
enabling and disabling of services and 
protocols, 492-498 
firmware updates, 490 
summary of, 515-516 
tasks involved in, 483-485 
vulnerability scanning, 494-498 
Network intrusion detection systems, 
390-392 
Nikto, 328-329 
Nimda worm, 84 
Nmap, 77-78,494-496 
NNTP servers, 506 
Non-disclosure agreement, 691 
Non-essential protocols 
description of, 39 
disabling of, 39-43 
Non-essential services 
definition of, 38 
disabling of, 39-43, 44-45 
example of, 38 
Non-repudiation, 4, 19, 132, 134, 547 
Not to be copied documents, 728 
Notification 
of certificate revocation, 574-575 
of incident, 632--633, 729 
Novell Directory Services, 709 
NT Directory Services, 339 
N-tier arrangement, 427 
"Number of nines." 695,749 
O 
Object identifier, 573 
OCSR See Online certificate status 
protocol 
OFDM. See Orthogonal frequency 
division multiplexing 
128-bit key, 206, 245 
One-time pad, 54"5'-548, 551 
One-way hashes, 538 
Online certificate status protocol, 576, 
588 
Online resources fi)r education purposes, 
721 
Open authentication, 186-187,240 
Open Directory, 3139 
Open shortest path first, 373 
Open systems, 198 
Open systems interconnect model, 
173-174, 360 
Operating system. See System 
Orthogonal frequency division 
multiplexing, 180 
OSPE See Open shortest path first 
Overflows, 65, 95, 119, 122,282, 296, 
312-313 
P 
Packet(s) 
e-mail, 138 
spoofed, 372-3"5'3 
Packet collision, 3"74 
Packet filters, 430, 458 
Packet sequencing, 122 
Packet sniffers, 283 
Packet sniffing 
cleartext passwords, 13-16 
description of, 122 
FTP transmissions, 335-338 
lightweight directory access protocol, 
344 
Packet-filtering firewalls 
advantages and disadvantages of, 366 
"allow by default," 361 
"deny by default," 361 
description of, 360 
summary of, 414 
PAR See Password authentication 
protocol 
Parasitic viruses, 8:2 
Passenger protocol, 114 
Passive attacks 
description of, 56, 78-79, 93, 134 
on wireless networks, 193-198 
Passive FTP, 330-331,347 
Password(s) 
access control using, 610-611 
administrator, 694 
authentication uses of, 22, 24 
BIOS, 615 

Index 
837 
changing of, 692-693, 718 
cleartext 
demonstration of, 13-16 
packet sniffing, 13-16 
definition of, 618 
disabling of, 698 
encrypted, 539 
function of, 692 
Power-On, 615 
private keys protected by, 581 
purpose of, 691-692 
reusing of, 693 
screensavers protected with, 611-612 
security level of, 22 
strong, 692,749 
Password attacks 
brute force, 80-81 
description of, 56, 79 
dictionary-based, 81 
offline, 80 
online, 80 
prevention of, 79 
summary of, 93 
Password authentication protocol, 20, 381 
Password hashing, 80 
Password management, 691,749 
Password-based cryptography standard, 
577 
PAT. See Port address translation 
Patches, security, 135,314-316,489,501 
Payload, 130 
P-boxes, 530 
PDAs. See Personal digital assistants 
PEP, L, 307 
Permutation operations, 53{) 
Per-packet authentication, 192 
Persistent cookies, 27(i) 
Personal digital assistants, 1{)4, 399,678 
Personal information exchange file, 566 
Personal information exchange syntax 
standard, 578 
PGP, 140-142, 158, 162,559 
Phishing, 73-74, 152-155,273,622. See 
also Web spoofing 
Phishing filter, 153-155 
Phreakers, 384 
Physical barriers, 615-617 
Physical security 
access control. See also Access control 
alarms, 610 
identification card for, 609 
methods of, 609 
password protection, 610-615 
unauthorized starting up of 
machines, 615 
user account configurations, 
612-614 
assessments of, 608-609 
biometrics, 26, 618,659,693 
centralization vs. decentralization of 
servers, 709-710 
corporate theft, 608,648 
data, 617-618 
definition of, 606, 680 
design considerations for, 606-607 
dumpster diving concerns, 75, 92, 95, 
620, 697 
elements of, 606 
employee education about, 619-620 
environment. See Environment 
hard drives, 410-411 
internal threats, 608 
multifaceted approach to, 693 
policies for, 680-681 
servers, 607-608 
summary of, 659-660 
tailgating concerns, 619-620 
valuation considerations, 607 
workstations, 616 
Piggybacking, 619-620 
Ping flood, 225-226 
Pirated software, 688 
PKI. See Public key infrastructure 
Plaintext 
description of, 526 
wired equivalent privacy protocol 
vulnerability to attacks, 202 
Plenum cabling, 408 
Point-to-point protocol, 19 
Point-to-point tunneling protocol, 
122-127, 161-162, 384, 676 
Policies 
acceptable use, 682-685,699,749 
code of ethics, 699,750, 753 
creation of, 673-674, 701-703 
definition of, 673 
disposal/destruction, 695-697,749 
due care, 685-687,749 
human resources, 697-699,749 
ignoring of, 679-680 
incident response, 699-704, 750 
legal review of, 689 
management support for, 689 
"need to know," 690-691,749 
overview of, 672-675 
privacy, 687-689,749,753 
procedures vs., 682 
purpose of, 673 
security 
objective of, 675 
personal equipment, 678-679 
physical, 680-681 
restricted access, 676-677 
workstations, 677-680 
separation of duties, 689-690, 749 
storage, 729-730 
summary of, 747-750 
POP3. See Post office protocol 3 e-mail 
Pornography, 683 
Port 
definition of, 363 
FTE 333,363-364 
list of, 362, 514 
logical, 363 
open, 491-492 
physical, 363 
registered, 362 
well-known, 362-364 
Port access entity, 189 
Port address translation, 448 
Port numbers, 364-365 
PortalXpert Security, 345 
Post office protocol 3 e-mail 
description of, 11 
password protections, 12 
sniffing vulnerabilities, 134 
Power loss, 743-744 
Power-based attacks, 531 
Power-On password, 615 
PPTP, 123-127 
Presence aware applications, 147 
Pre-shared key, 132 
Pretty good privacy, 140-142, 559 
Print servers, 506-508 
Privacy policies, 687-689, 749,753 
Privacy-enhanced mail, 577 
Private addressing, 450 
Private branch exchanges, 383-384, 415 
Private documents, 728 
Private key 
definition of, 536, 559,566 
password-protected, 581 
protection of, 583 
storage of, 580-583,597 
Private-key information syntax standard, 
577-578 
Privilege management 
administrative accounts, 704-705 
auditing, 711-714 
definition of, 704 
groups, 7(14-7(15 
purpose of, 672 
single sign-ons, 708-709,750 
summary of, 747,750 
user accounts, 7{)4-705 
Privilege monitoring, 712 
Procedures 
creation of, 673-674 
definition of, 673,682 
ignoring of, 679-680 
notification, 729 
overview of, 672-675 
policies vs., 682 
purpose of, 673 
security, 682 
summary of, 747-750 
updating of, 682 
ProDiscover, 646 
Programming languages, 314 
Promiscuous mode, 218 
Protected extensible authentication 
protocol, 109 
Protected network, 433 
Protocols. See also spec~c protocol 
enabling and disabling of, 492-498 
RADIUS-supported, 118 
tunneling. See Tunneling protocols 
Proxy FTP, 334 
Proxy server, 443 
Public addressing, 450 
Public classification, of documents, 728 
Public information officer, 636 
Public key 
certificate used for, 573 
definition of, 536, 559,566 
Public key cryptolography, 133 
Public key distribution systems, 537 
Public key encryption, 537 
Public key infrastructure 
certificate authority 
intermediate, 564 
root, 563-564 
single models, 562-563,596 
subordinate, 563-564 
description of, 21,527 
hierarchical model 
intermediate certificate authority, 
564 
root certificate authority, 563-564 

838 
Index 
subordinate certificate authority, 
563-564 
non-Web uses of, 559 
principles of, 558-559 
registration authorities, 565-566 
single certificate authority model, 
562-563,596 
summary of, 595 
trust models 
description of, 559-560 
summary of, 596 
Web-of-trust model, 561-562, 596 
Public-key cryptography 
description of, 533 
standards, 576-578 
Q 
QAZ Trojan horse, 86 
Quadrature phase shift keying, 180 
R 
Radio frequency communications, 
170-171 
Radio frequency interference 
causes of, 627 
description of, 406 
shielding to prevent, 627 
RADIUS, 190 
authentication process, 118-119 
background of, 117-118 
distributed, 118 
key management using, 245 
protocols supported by, 118 
summary of, 157 
TACACS+ vs., 122 
vulnerabilities, 119 
RAID, 745-746,754 
RAS. See Remote access servers 
Rate doubling, 180 
RBAC 
definition of, 8 
description of, 9-10, 45,714-715,750 
example of, 8 
summary of, 8-9 
RC4 encryption algorithm 
description of, 111,185 
vulnerability of, 202-203,239 
RCP. See Remote copy protocol 
Realm, 16 
Record keeping, 681 
Recordable compact disks, 409-410,416 
Redundant arrays of inexpensive disks. 
See RAID 
Registered ports, 362 
Registration authorities, 565-566 
Remote access, 105 
Remote access security 
description of, 107-108 
limitations in, 107 
summary of, 135-136, 156-160 
vulnerabilities, 143-155 
Remote access servers 
authentication for, 381 
description of, 378,381,414-415 
mandatory callback, 381-382 
security of, 382-383 
virtual private network vs., 418 
Remote access virtual private network, 
117,385 
Remote authentication dial-in user 
service. See RADIUS 
Remote control, 105 
Remote copy protocol, 331 
Removable media 
definition of, 400, 408 
diskettes, 411, 417 
flashcards, 411-412, 417 
hard drives, 410-411, 416 
magnetic tape, 408-409,416 
physical security of, 616-617 
recordable compact disks, 409-410, 
416 
Smart Cards, 412-413,417,582 
summary of, 416 
types of, 408 
Renewal of certificate, 585,591,595 
Replacement costs, 650 
Replay, 19 
Replay attacks, 68, 121 
Resource consumption attack, 59-60 
Restricted access policies, 676-677 
Retention policies for data, 729-730 
Revocation of certificate 
list of, 575-576, 587-588 
notifications after, 574-575 
online certificate status protocol, 576, 
588 
reasons for, 574, 586 
request for, 587 
status checking, 587-588 
users alerted of, 596 
RFC 3127, 4 
RFI. See Radio frequency interference 
RG-58,401 
Rijndael algorithm, 531-532 
Risk 
annual loss expectancy calculations, 
652-654, 661 
annualized rate of occurrence 
calculations, 652, 661 
definition of, 647,659 
disaster as, 648,740 
external, 648 
internal, 648 
Risk assessment, 651-654 
Risk identification 
asset identification, 649-651,661 
definition of, 648 
summary of, 661 
Risk management, 659 
Risk mitigation, 432 
Rivest, Shamir, & Adleman 
algorithm, 536-537 
cryptography standard, 577 
RJ-11 connector, 405 
RJ-45 connector, 405 
Rogue access points, 224, 243 
Rogue web server, 263-268 
Role definition, 8 
Role-based access control, 9, 714. See also 
RBAC 
Roles, for access control, 705 
Root, 340 
Root certificate authority, 563-564, 591 
Root server, 340 
Rootkits, 86, 94 
Routers 
access control lists, 371 
Cisco, 371 
definition of, 138,371 
purpose of, 138 
security capabilities of, 372 
spoofed packets blocked using, 
372-373 
summary of, 414 
Routing information protocol, 373 
Routing protocols, 373 
Routing table, 371 
Rule of least privilege, 483, 485 
Rule-based access control, 9 
5 
SafeBack, 645-646 
Sandboxing, 292 
SAP. See Service advertising protocol 
Sasser worm, 65, 84-85 
SCP. See Secure copy protocol 
Screensavers, password-protected, 
611-612 
Script(s) 
common gateway interface 
description of; 323-325 
exploiting of, 326-328,350 
Nikto program for assessing, 
328-329 
uses for, 325-326 
weak, break-ins caused by, 326-328 
secure, 306-308 
server-side, 306--308 
"Script kiddies," 1(}6 
Scripting 
client-side, 302 
server-side, 302 
vulnerabilities, 260-261 
Secret handshake, 1 1 
Secret key, 11,528 
Secure checksums, 539 
Secure copy protocol, 331-332 
Secure FTP, 254 
Secure hash algorithm, 540 
Secure Internet protocol. See IPSec 
Secure scripts, 306--308 
Secure shell protocol 
definition of, 129 
implementation of, 537 
mechanism of operation, 129 
purpose of, 129 
SSH-1,545 
SSH-2, 545 
summary of, 1511 
Secure sockets layer 
applications of, 277 
banking industry use of, 25 
data transmission, 276-277 
description of, 12, 178,276-277 
handshake protocol, 278 
HTTP/S, 279-2,80 
lightweight directory access protocol 
over, 344 
mechanism of, 277 
protocols, 278 
record protocol, 278 
TCP/IP hijacking attacks prevented 
using, 67 
Secure/multi-purpose Internet mail 
extensions. See S/MIME 

Index 
839 
SecurlD tokens, 693 
Security. See Physical security; Remote 
access security; specific discussion 
Security levels for employees, 699 
Security patches, 135, 314-316 
Security policies 
objective of, 675 
personal equipment, 678-679 
physical, 680-681 
restricted access, 676-677 
workstations, 677-680 
Security procedures, 682 
Security topologies 
demilitarized zone. See I)emilitarized 
zone 
description of, 427-428 
summary of, 471-472 
Security zones 
data storage zone, 438 
definition of, 436 
description of, 297-300, 429-432 
financial processing segment, 438 
needs and, 436-439 
placement of, 439 
Self-signed certificate, 559-560, 564 
Sendmail, 144-145 
Separation of duties, 689-690, 749 
Sequenced packet exchange, 493 
Serial line Internet protocol, 19 
Servers 
attack focus on, 398 
authentication, 110 
centralizing of, 608,709-710, 750 
data encryption on, 399 
database, 512 
decentralization of, 71() 
definition of, 397 
domain name system, 147 
dynamic host control protocol, 
508-509, 517 
e-mail, 136-137,503-504 
environment considerations for, 624 
file, 506-508 
firewall protection for, 398 
FTR 334, 435,504-505 
key recovery, 589 
location for, 6(}8,626-627 
NNTR 506 
physical security considerations for, 
607-608 
print, 5(}6-508 
proxy, 443 
purpose of, 397-398 
remote access. Gee Remote access 
servers 
restricted access policies, 677 
SQL, 513 
storage considerations for, 624 
summary of, 415 
threat identification for, 655 
vulnerabilities of, 398 
web. See Web server 
workstations vs., 397 
Server-side scripting, 302,324 
Server-side scripts, 306-308 
Service advertising protocol, 493 
Service level agreements, 694-695,749 
Service packs, 488, 501,658,663 
Service set identifier, 182,236, 239, 246 
Session hijacking, 67-68 
Session keys, 129,536 
SFTP. See Simple file transfer protocol 
S/FTR 331 
Shared-key authentication, 187-188, 199, 
240 
Shared-secret encryption, 528 
Shielding, 627-629 
Short message service, 284-285 
Shredding of documents, 697 
S-HTTP, 280-28l 
Side-channel attacks, 531 
Signature 
attack, 389-390, 456 
definition of, 459 
digital, 132,543-544, 548 
e-mail, 717 
Signature algorithms, 534 
Signature files, 150 
Simple certificate revocation list, 575,587 
Simple file transfer protocol, 331 
Simple mail transfer protocol, 138-139 
Simple mail transfer protocol relay, 
143-146, 158 
Simple network management protocol, 
239 
Single certificate authority model, 
562-563,596 
Single loss expectancy, 652, 661 
Single sign-ons, 708-709,750 
Site surveys, 229,244, 246 
Site-to-site extranet-based virtual private 
network, 385 
Site-to-site intranet-based virtual private 
network, 385 
64-bit key, 206, 245 
SkipJack, 585 
SLIP. See Serial line Internet protocol 
Smart Cards, 24, 412-413,417,582 
S/MIME, 138-139, 158, 162 
SMS. See Short message service 
SMTE See Simple mail transfer protocol 
Snmrf attack, 60 
Sniffing 
definition of, 217 
description of, 79, 122,374, 393 
of wireless networks, 217-221 
packet 
cleartext passwords, 13-16 
description of, 122 
FTP transmissions, 335-338 
lightweight directory access 
protocol, 344 
protection against, 221 
Snort, 462 
Social engineering 
definition of, 620 
description of, 75-77, 92, 95 
methods used in, 621 
phishing, 73-74, 622 
protections against, 621 
Socket creep, 624 
Software 
anti-virus 
real-time scans by, 149 
updates, 657-658 
exploitation of, for attacks, 65-66 
intrusion detection systems, 453 
pirated, 688 
privacy policy-authorized audit of, 688 
secure storage of, 617-618 
wardriving, 195-196 
web server, 255 
Software key storage, 580-583,597 
Software patches, 135, 314-316 
Source routing, 69 
Spare 
definition of, 150 
as denial of service attack, 60, 151 
origins of, 150-15 l 
prevention methods for, 151 
SMTP relay, 146 
summary of, 159 
word origin of, 150 
Spare filters, 151, 159 
Spoofed packets, 372-373 
Spoofing 
address resolution protocol, 70-71, 
223,225,375-376 
authentication, 222,226 
blind, 69 
definition of, 68,221,272 
description of, 19 
e-mail, 71-73, 146-147 
hyperlink, 272-273 
identity, 134-135 
informed, 69 
Ip, 68-71 
MAC address, 113,222, 243 
prevention of, 69 
reasons for, 222 
summary of, 92 
Web, 272-275 
web site, 73 
wireless networks, 198,221-223 
Spread spectrum 
definition of, 171 
direct sequence, 173,238,242 
frequency hopping, 172-173,241 
Spreading ratio, 173 
SPX. See Sequenced packet exchange 
Spyware, 89-9(i), 94 
SQL server, 513 
SQL Slalnmer worm, 60, 84 
SSH. See Secure shell protocol 
Sshmitm, 134 
SSID. See Service set identifier 
SSL. See Secure sockets layer 
Standards, 722-723. See also specific 
standard 
Star topology, 4()5,406f 
Stateful inspection firewalls, 369,414 
Static electricity, 624-625 
Static network address translation, 447 
Static routes, 373 
Status checking 
for certificate revocation, 587-588 
for certificate suspension, 588 
Steganography, 541 
Storage 
of backups, 735,754 
of data, 729-73(t 
of evidence, 64(}-641 
of private keys, 580-583,597 
of software, 617-618 
offsite, of backups, 735,754 
policies regarding, 729-730 
Storage area network, 509-510 
Store-and-forward, 439 
STP cable. See UTP/STP cable 
Stream ciphers 

840 
Index 
definition of, 111,185,526, 534, 551 
vulnerability of, 203-205 
Strong passwords, 692, 749 
SubSeven Trojan, 88 
Substitution operations, 530 
Supplicant, 110 
Supplicant port access entity, 189 
Switched port analyzer, 374 
Switches, 374-376, 414 
Symmetric cryptography 
authentication issues, 546 
encryption algorithms 
abundance of, 528 
advanced encryption standard, 
531-532 
asymmetric algorithms vs., 534-535 
brute-force attack susceptibility of, 
528, 550-551 
data encryption standard, 529-530, 
551 
definition of, 528 
international data encryption 
algorithm, 531-532 
Rijndael algorithm, 531-532 
triple data encryption standard, 530, 
551 
summary of, 548 
SYN attacks, 56, 60-61, 92 
System 
architecture of, documentation about, 
724-726 
auditing of, 27-32 
definition of, 459 
security scanning of, 36-37 
vulnerability scanning of, 77 
System hardening 
concepts of, 483-485 
description of, 482 
file system, 485-487 
summary of, 515 
tasks involved in, 483-485 
updates, 487-489 
System intrusion detection systems, 390 
T 
TACACS, 2, 120 
TACACS+ 
description of, 120-121 
RADIUS vs., 122 
summary of, 157 
vulnerabilities, 121-122 
Tagging 
of assets, 650 
of evidence, 641 
Tailgating, 619-620 
T-connectors, 403 
TCP 
elements of, 60 
SYN/ACK, 60-61 
TCPDump, 79,462 
TCP/IP 
hijacking of, 67-68 
principles of, 66 
spoofing, 68-71 
three-way handshake used in, 66, 
workstation use of, 393-394 
Telecommunications, 383-384 
Telnet 
backdoor version of, 87 
cleartext transmissions, 372 
description of, 11 
disabling of, 38-41 
switch configuration, 376 
Temporal key integrity protocol, 108, 
232-233 
Temporary cookies, 270 
Terminator, 401 
Test server, 303-304 
Text messaging, 284-285 
Thick coax, 402 
Thin coax, 401 
Threads, 288 
Threat(s) 
identification of, 654-656 
insurance policies for, 655 
internal, 608 
vulnerabilities and, 656 
Ticket granting ticket, 18 
Timing-based attacks, 531 
Tokens 
description of, 25-26 
SecurlD, 693 
Tracking, 5 
Tracking cookies, 270 
Transaction log, 33 
Transitive trust, 561 
Transport layer security, 178, 272, 
277-280 
Trifluromethane, 630 
Triple data encryption standard, 530, 551 
Trivial file transfer protocol, 366 
Trojan horse 
accidental, 292 
definition of, 688 
description of, 6-7, 85-86, 93 
firewall protection against, 361-362 
SubSeven, 88 
Trust anchor, 563-564 
Trusted authority, 569-570 
Tunnel, 114 
Tunneling, 450-451, 471-472 
Tunneling protocols 
carrier, 114 
layer 2, 127-128, 161,384, 676 
point-to-point, 122-127, 161-162, 
384, 676 
for site-to-site virtual private network, 
116 
Two-factor authentication, 243, 676 
U 
Unclassified documents, 728 
Uninterruptible power supplies, 743 
Unsolicited bulk e-mail, 60, 150 
Updates 
anti-virus software, 657-658 
application, 500-501 
firmware, 490 
hotfixes, 488, 500 
network, 490 
operating system, 488-489 
patches, 489 
purpose of, 487 
service packs, 488 
Upgrades, 315 
URL 
loopback, 264 
spoofing of, 273 
Usage patterns, auditing of, 713 
User(s) 
adding of, to groups, 706-708 
awareness by, 717-719 
communication with, 716-718 
network events communicated to, 718 
password change policies, 718 
vulnerabilities, 135 
wireless, 110 
User accounts 
auditing of, 713 
description of, 6,12-614 
escalation of use, 713-714 
privilege management using, 704-705 
web, 256-257 
User datagram protocol, 120 
User-level authentication, 128 
Username 
access control using, 612-614 
authentication uses of, 24-25 
UTP/STP cable, 404-407,416, 627-628 
V 
Valuation 
of assets, 650 
physical security considerations, 607 
Vampire tap, 402-403 
VBScript, 302 
VeriSign, 309 
Vernam cipher, 547,551 
Virtual directories.. 257 
Virtual local area networks 
characteristics of, 447 
description of, 4-45-447 
example of, 446 
network segmentation using, 445 
reasons for using, 474 
segmenting of networks using, 
374-375 
switch splitting into, 446 
Virtual network computing, 87 
Virtual private dial-up network, 117 
Virtual private network 
benefits of, 114 
conceptual understanding of, 388-389 
creation of, 385 
definition of, 384 
description of, 1.14 
firewalls, 116, 430 
IPSec, 116 
protocols used by 
description of, 384 
tunneling, 384-385 
remote access, 117,385 
remote access server vs., 418 
restricted access policies, 676 
security considerations for, 386 
setting up, 451 
site-to-site 
establishing of, 115-116 
extranet-based, 385 
intranet-basecl, 385 
tunneling protocol for, 116 
summary of, 156 
tunneling, 451-452 
types of, 385 
wireless network access using, 230-232 

Index 
841 
Virus(es) 
anti-virus software for, 149,657-658 
cell phone, 285 
description of, 82-83, 93 
e-mail attachment transport of, 
148-149, 158-159 
Melissa, 149 
text messaging device, 285 
Virus hoaxes, 152 
VLANs. See Virtual local area networks 
Voicemail, 384 
Volatile data 
definition of, 642 
from memory, 644-645 
preservation of, 642,644-645,647 
VPN. See Virtual private network 
Vulnerabilities 
acceptance of, 656-657 
ActiveX, 293-296 
administrator, 135 
coax cabling, 403 
code signing, 311 
common gateway interface, 322 
countermeasures tbr, 743 
data modification, 134 
definition of, 656 
eavesdropping, 79, 134,221,245-246 
802.1x, 111-113,228 
e-n-Lail, 143-155 
failure to fix, 657-658 
identification of, 742-743 
PGR 142 
RADIUS, 119 
RC4 encryption algorithm, 202-203 
scanning for, 77, 92 
scripting, 260-261 
server, 398 
service packs for repair of, 658,663 
TACACS+, 121-122 
threat and, 656 
user, 135 
wired equivalent privacy protocol, 
2()1-206 
wireless application protocol, 200-201 
wireless network, 200-206 
wireless technology, 418 
workstations, 393-394 
W 
WAP. See Wireless application protocol 
War chalking, 377 
War dialing 
definition of, 74, 211 
dial-in numbers identified through, 
382 
exercise involving, 378-381 
Wardriving 
description of, 193-195, 211,377 
software used for, 195-196 
Warm site, 739 
Web browsers 
content filtering by, 306 
cookies. See Cookie 
description of, 268-269 
exploitation of, 268-276,349 
Internet Explorer, 316-322 
programming language restrictions, 314 
security recommendations, 313-316, 
347 
spoofing prevention, 273 
Web root, 257 
Web server 
access control, 256-257 
authorization concerns, 5(}2-503 
backups, 261 
bugs in, 275 
directories, 257-259 
exploitation of, 275-276 
hardening of, 501-503,517 
integrity of, 263 
lightweight directory access protocol- 
enabled, 345 
lockdown of, 255-256 
logging activity, 261 
operating system lockdown, 502 
rogue, 263-268 
scripting vulnerabilities, 260-261 
securing of, 349 
software, 255 
vulnerabilities, 260-261,501-503,517 
Web sites 
acceptable use policies for, 683 
backup of, 3()5 
education-based uses of, 721 
privacy policies regarding visits to, 
688-689 
restricted access policies for, 676 
spoofing, 73 
Web spoofing, 272-275. See also Phishing 
Web user accounts, 256-257 
Web-based security 
overview of, 254-255 
summary of, 346-347 
Web-based vulnerabilities 
ActiveX. See ActiveX 
description of, 286 
Java, 286-289 
Web-of-trust model, 561-562, 596 
Well-known ports, 362-364 
WEE See Wired equivalent privacy 
protocol 
WEPCrack, 113 
WepLab, 112-113 
"White-hat" hackers, 119 
WiFi protected access, 108-109 
WiFi-complaint access points, 207-210 
Winamp, 394-396 
Windows 2(t03 
auditing in, 28-33 
disabling non-essential services in, 
38-41 
Windows Vista 
address space layout randomization, 65 
client connection in, 124-127 
user accounts in, 612 
Windows XP 
auditing in, 28-33 
disabling non-essential services in, 
38-41 
full backup procedure, 734-735 
inventory creation, 725-726 
static wired equivalent privacy protocol 
keys, 2(}7-21 () 
user accounts in, 612 
WinI)ump, 463-464 
Wired equivalent privacy protocol 
authentication uses of, 183 
benefits of, 184, 2()5 
collisions effect on, 175 
description of, 108, 183-184 
disadvantages of, 201 
encryption process, 185 
information resources, 205 
insecurity of, 238-239,247 
IV reuse, 204, 239 
keys, 206-210 
128-bit, 206, 245 
plaintext attack vulnerabilities, 202 
privacy created with, 184-186 
1KC4 encryption algorithm, 202-203, 
239 
shared-key authentication, 199 
64-bit, 2(}6, 245 
stream ciphers used by 
description of, 111 
vulnerability of, 203-205 
summary of, 240-241 
vulnerabilities of 
description of, 201-206, 233 
information sources for, 245 
tools for exploiting, 112-113 
wireless application protocol vs., 184 
Wireless access points 
definition of, 377 
placement of, 377-378 
rogue, 224, 243 
Wireless application protocol 
description of, 168, 177,242 
vulnerabilities of, 200-2{}i 
Wireless cells, 625-626 
Wireless connectivity, 1()7 
Wireless devices 
connectivity between, 176 
description of, 147-148 
Wireless local area networks 
description of, 108, 168, 176 
8(t2.11 standard. See 802.11 
insecurity of, 238 
summary of, 238 
wired equivalent privacy protocol, 108 
Wireless markup language, 147 
Wireless network 
access points, 175 
ad-hoc configuration of, 181-182, 241 
architecture of, 173-176 
attacks on 
active, 198-199 
denial of service, 225-228 
eavesdropping, 221,245-246 
flooding, 225-228 
hijacking, 223-225 
identifying weaknesses, 215-217 
NetStumbler, 195-197, 211-215 
passive, 193-198 
selection of network for, 211-215 
sniffing, 217-221 
spoofing, 198,221-223 
Bluetooth, 172,399 
carrier sense multiple access with 
collision avoidance, 174-176 
communication in, 169-I 73 
control flames, 182 
data encryption, 175-176 
data flames, 182 
data link layer of, 173-174 
demilitarized zone, 230, 237 
802.3, 174 
8(t2.11, 174-176 

842 
Index 
infrastructure configuration of, 
181'-182 
MAC filtering used on, 198-199 
MAC layer, 174 
management frames, 182 
message integrity code, 233-234 
MITM attacks on, 199-200 
monitoring of, by hackers, 218 
overview of, 168-169 
physical layer of, 173-174 
security of 
best practices for implementing, 
235-237 
measures for, 229-234 
signal loss, 170-171 
site surveys for, 229, 244, 246 
spread spectrum technology used by, 
171-173 
subnet used for, 230 
temporal key integrity protocol for, 
232-233 
virtual private networks used for access 
to, 230-232 
vulnerabilities of, 200-206,242-244 
weaknesses in, 215-217 
Wireless network cams, 377 
Wireless technology 
acceptable use policy applicability to, 
683-684 
data encryption, 625 
description of, 376-377,414 
security concerns for, 625-626 
vulnerability concerns, 418 
Wireless telephony application, 177 
Wireless transport layer security, 178, 
200-201 
WireShark, 79 
WLAN. See Wireless local area networks 
Work environment, hostile, 683 
Workstations 
changing settings on, 677 
configuration of, 678 
definition of, 393,677 
end users, 397 
metasploit attack, 394-396 
physical security of, 616 
security policies for, 677-680 
servers vs., 397 
summary of, 415 
vulnerability of, 393-394 
Worm 
Blaster, 84 
Code Red, 84 
definition of, 84 
examples of, 84-85 
firewall protection against, 95 
MyDoom, 56 
Nimda, 84 
Sasser, 65, 84-85 
SQL Slammer, 60, 84 
summary of, 93 
Zotob, 85,275,657 
Wrappers, 328 
WTLS. See Wireless transport layer 
security 
 
X.509 certificate standard, 569-570 
XOR, 203 
XTACACS, 120 
Z 
Zero-day attack, 82 
Zombies, 61-63,363 
Zones 
demilitarized 
bastion host, 434 
definition of, 432 
description of, 230, 257,398,426 
domain name services, 436 
e-commerce and, 436 
e-mail relaying, 435 
firewalls, 433-434 
FTP services, 435,504 
hosts in, 434 
intrusion detection system in, 436 
layered, 433 
multiple interface, 433-434 
need for, 473 
protections using, 433-434 
services hosted by, 435-436 
summary of, 470 
word origin of, 432 
description of, 317 
security 
data storage zone, 438 
definition of, 436 
description of, 297-300, 429-432 
financial processing segment, 438 
needs and, 436-439 
placement of, 439 
Zotob worm, 85,275,657 

