
Computer Forensics
Second Edition

LIMITED WARRANTY AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
THE CD-ROM THAT ACCOMPANIES THE BOOK MAY BE USED ON A SINGLE PC
ONLY. THE LICENSE DOES NOT PERMIT THE USE ON A NETWORK (OF ANY
KIND). YOU FURTHER AGREE THAT THIS LICENSE GRANTS PERMISSION TO USE
THE PRODUCTS CONTAINED HEREIN, BUT DOES NOT GIVE YOU RIGHT OF
OWNERSHIP TO ANY OF THE CONTENT OR PRODUCT CONTAINED ON THIS CD-
ROM. USE OF THIRD-PARTY SOFTWARE CONTAINED ON THIS CD-ROM IS LIM-
ITED TO AND SUBJECT TO LICENSING TERMS FOR THE RESPECTIVE PRODUCTS.
CHARLES RIVER MEDIA, INC. (“CRM”) AND/OR ANYONE WHO HAS BEEN IN-
VOLVED IN THE WRITING, CREATION, OR PRODUCTION OF THE ACCOMPANY-
ING CODE (“THE SOFTWARE”) OR THE THIRD-PARTY PRODUCTS CONTAINED
ON THE CD-ROM OR TEXTUAL MATERIAL IN THE BOOK, CANNOT AND DO NOT
WARRANT THE PERFORMANCE OR RESULTS THAT MAY BE OBTAINED BY USING
THE SOFTWARE OR CONTENTS OF THE BOOK. THE AUTHOR AND PUBLISHER
HAVE USED THEIR BEST EFFORTS TO ENSURE THE ACCURACY AND FUNCTION-
ALITY OF THE TEXTUAL MATERIAL AND PROGRAMS CONTAINED HEREIN. WE
HOWEVER, MAKE NO WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARD-
ING THE PERFORMANCE OF THESE PROGRAMS OR CONTENTS. THE SOFTWARE
IS SOLD “AS IS” WITHOUT WARRANTY (EXCEPT FOR DEFECTIVE MATERIALS USED
IN MANUFACTURING THE DISK OR DUE TO FAULTY WORKMANSHIP).
THE AUTHOR, THE PUBLISHER, DEVELOPERS OF THIRD-PARTY SOFTWARE,
AND ANYONE INVOLVED IN THE PRODUCTION AND MANUFACTURING OF
THIS WORK SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES OF ANY KIND ARISING OUT
OF THE USE OF (OR THE INABILITY TO USE) THE PROGRAMS, SOURCE CODE, OR
TEXTUAL MATERIAL CONTAINED IN THIS PUBLICATION. THIS INCLUDES, BUT
IS NOT LIMITED TO, LOSS OF REVENUE OR PROFIT, OR OTHER INCIDENTAL OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THE PRODUCT.
THE SOLE REMEDY IN THE EVENT OF A CLAIM OF ANY KIND IS EXPRESSLY LIM-
ITED TO REPLACEMENT OF THE BOOK AND/OR CD-ROM, AND ONLY AT THE
DISCRETION OF CRM.
THE USE OF “IMPLIED WARRANTY” AND CERTAIN “EXCLUSIONS” VARIES FROM
STATE TO STATE, AND MAY NOT APPLY TO THE PURCHASER OF THIS PRODUCT. 

Computer Forensics:
Computer Crime
Scene Investigation
Second Edition
John R. Vacca 
CHARLES RIVER MEDIA, INC.
Boston, Massachusetts

Copyright 2005 Career & Professional Group, a division of Thomson Learning, Inc.
Published by Charles River Media, an imprint of Thomson Learning Inc.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any way, stored in a retrieval system of any
type, or transmitted by any means or media, electronic or mechanical, including, but not
limited to, photocopy, recording, or scanning, without prior permission in writing from the
publisher.
Cover Design: Tyler Creative
CHARLES RIVER MEDIA
25 Thomson Place
Boston, Massachusetts 02210
617-757-7900
617-757-7969 (FAX)
crm.info@thomson.com
www.charlesriver.com
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
John R. Vacca. Computer Forensics: Computer Crime Scene Investigation, Second Edition.
ISBN: 1-58450-389-0
ISBN-13: 978-1-58450-389-7
All brand names and product names mentioned in this book are trademarks or service marks
of their respective companies. Any omission or misuse (of any kind) of service marks or trade-
marks should not be regarded as intent to infringe on the property of others. The publisher
recognizes and respects all marks used by companies, manufacturers, and developers as a
means to distinguish their products.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vacca, John R.
Computer forensics : computer crime scene investigation / John R. Vacca.-- 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-58450-389-0 (pbk. with cd-rom : alk. paper)
1.  Computer security. 2.  Computer networks--Security measures. 3.  Forensic sciences.  I. Title.
QA76.9.A25V33 2005
005.8--dc22
2005007521
Printed in the United States of America
07 7 6 5 4 3
CHARLES RIVER MEDIA titles are available for site license or bulk purchase by institutions, user 
groups, corporations, etc. For additional information, please contact the Special Sales Depart-
ment at 800-347-7707.
Requests for replacement of a defective CD-ROM must be accompanied by the original disc,
your mailing address, telephone number, date of purchase and purchase price. Please state the
nature of the problem, and send the information to CHARLES RIVER MEDIA, 25 Thomson Place,
Boston, Massachusetts 02210. CRM’s sole obligation to the purchaser is to replace the disc,
based on defective materials or faulty workmanship, but not on the operation or functionality
of the product.
eISBN: 1-58450-637-7

In memory of Giacchi and Agrippina.

This page intentionally left blank 

Acknowledgments
xix
Foreword
xxi
Introduction
xxv
Part I
Overview of Computer Forensics Technology
1
1
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
3
Introduction to Computer Forensics
4
Use of Computer Forensics in Law Enforcement
8
Computer Forensics Assistance to Human Resources/
Employment Proceedings
9
Computer Forensics Services
10
Benefits of Professional Forensics Methodology
17
Steps Taken by Computer Forensics Specialists
18
Who Can Use Computer Forensic Evidence?
18
Case Histories
24
Case Studies
27
Summary
28
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
31
Hands-On Projects
33
References
34
Contents
vii

2
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
35
Types of Military Computer Forensic Technology
36
Types of Law Enforcement: Computer Forensic Technology
38
Types of Business Computer Forensic Technology
52
Specialized Forensics Techniques
57
Hidden Data and How to Find It
61
Spyware and Adware
61
Encryption Methods and Vulnerabilities
63
Protecting Data from Being Compromised
64
Internet Tracing Methods
65
Security and Wireless Technologies
69
Avoiding Pitfalls with Firewalls
71
Biometric Security Systems
72
Summary
73
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
77
Hands-On Projects
79
References
81
3
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
83
Internet Security Systems
84
Intrusion Detection Systems
91
Firewall Security Systems
99
Storage Area Network Security Systems
108
Network Disaster Recovery Systems
112
Public Key Infrastructure Systems
113
Wireless Network Security Systems
115
Satellite Encryption Security Systems
118
Instant Messaging (IM) Security Systems
125
Net Privacy Systems
126
Identity Management Security Systems
129
Identity Theft
137
viii
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Biometric Security Systems
141
Homeland Security Systems
143
Summary
145
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
148
Hands-on Projects
150
References
151
4
Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
153
Occurrence of Cyber Crime
154
Cyber Detectives
155
Fighting Cyber Crime with Risk-Management Techniques
156
Computer Forensics Investigative Services
162
Forensic Process Improvement
167
Course Content
176
Case Histories
180
Summary
182
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
184
Hands-On Projects
186
References
186
Part II
Computer Forensics Evidence and Capture
189
5
Data Recovery
191
Data Recovery Defined
191
Data Backup and Recovery
192
The Role of Backup in Data Recovery
200
The Data-Recovery Solution
203
Hiding and Recovering Hidden Data
206
Case Histories
209
Summary
212
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
214
Hands-On Projects
216
References
216
Contents
ix

6
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
217
Why Collect Evidence?
217
Collection Options
218
Obstacles
218
Types of Evidence
219
The Rules of Evidence
220
Volatile Evidence
223
General Procedure
224
Collection and Archiving
224
Methods of Collection
225
Artifacts
226
Collection Steps
226
Controlling Contamination: The Chain of Custody
228
Reconstructing the Attack
229
Summary
229
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
231
Hands-on Projects
232
References
233
7
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
235
Preserving the Digital Crime Scene
238
Computer Evidence Processing Steps
240
Legal Aspects of Collecting and Preserving Computer Forensic Evidence
247
Summary
252
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
254
Hands-on Projects
255
References
256
8
Computer Image Verification and Authentication
257
Special Needs of Evidential Authentication
258
Practical Considerations
264
x
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Practical Implementation
265
Summary
268
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
271
Hands-on Projects
273
References
273
Part III
Computer Forensics Analysis
275
9
Discovery of Electronic Evidence
277
Electronic Document Discovery: A Powerful New Litigation Tool
278
Summary
281
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
283
Hands-on Projects
285
References
285
10
Identification of Data
287
Timekeeping
288
Forensic Identification and Analysis of Technical Surveillance Devices
291
Summary
297
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
299
Hands-on Projects
300
References
301
11
Reconstructing Past Events
303
How to Become a Digital Detective
304
Useable File Formats
305
Unusable File Formats
305
Converting Files
306
Summary
309
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
310
Hands-on Projects
312
References
313
Contents
xi

12
Networks
315
Network Forensics Scenario
316
A Technical Approach
316
Destruction of Email
319
Damaging Computer Evidence
321
Tools Needed for Intrusion Response to the Destruction of Data
323
System Testing
324
Summary
326
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
328
Hands-on Projects
330
References
331
Part IV
Countermeasures: Information Warfare
333
13
Fighting Against Macro Threats: Defensive Strategies
for Governments and Industry Groups
335
Is the U.S. Government Prepared for Information Warfare?
335
Are Other Governments Prepared for Information Warfare?
339
What Industry Groups Have Done to Prepare for Information Warfare
341
Strategic Diplomacy and Information Warfare
344
The Role of International Organizations
354
The Role of Global Military Alliances
359
Marshall Law and Cyberspace
361
The Super Cyber Protection Agencies
363
Summary
365
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
367
Hands-on Projects
370
References
370
14
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
371
Overview of Military Tactics
376
Offensive Ruinous IW Tools and Tactics
378
Offensive Containment IW Tools and Tactics
380
xii
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Defensive Preventive IW Tools and Tactics
384
Defensive Ruinous IW Tools and Tactics
385
Defensive Responsive Containment IW Tools and Tactics
386
Countering Sustained Terrorist IW Tactics
389
Dealing with Random Terrorist IW
394
Summary
407
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
410
Hands-on Projects
412
References
413
15
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists 
and Rogues
415
The Terrorist Profile
421
Why Terrorists and Rogues Have an Advantage in IW
424
The Dark World of the Cyber Underground
430
The Criminal Café in Cyberspace
433
The Super Computer Literate Terrorist
438
The New Security Professionals
440
The Middle East Cyberwar
441
The New Tools of Terrorism
444
Why Tools Are Easy to Get and Use
452
Why Nasty People Are So Hard to Track Down and Capture
453
The IW Games
459
Summary
462
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
465
Hands-on Projects
467
References
468
16
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
469
Surviving Offensive Ruinous IW
476
Surviving Offensive Containment IW
478
Participating in Defensive Preventive IW Planning
480
Contents
xiii

Benefiting from and Surviving Defensive Ruinous IW
482
Benefiting from and Surviving Defensive Responsive Containment IW
484
Protection Against Random Terrorist IW Tactics
487
What to Do When Terrorists Keep Attacking
490
Countering Sustained Rogue IW
492
Protection Against Random Rogue IW
493
Keeping the Amateur Rogue out of the Cyberhouse
501
Summary
501
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
503
Hands-on Projects
505
References
506
17
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
507
Weapons of the Future
509
The Global Positioning System
522
Snoop, Sniff, and Snuff Tools
527
Email Wiretaps Like Carnivore Can Steal Sensitive Correspondence
529
IW Weapons of the Future
532
Nanotechnology
538
Summary
543
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
545
Hands-on Projects
547
References
547
18
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
549
Monitoring Everything
549
Cyber Surveillance
552
The Cyber Footprint and Criminal Tracking
553
The Implications of Cookies and Integrated Platforms
564
Wintel Inside, or How Your Computer Is Watching You
566
Data Mining for What?
569
The Internet Is Big Brother
577
xiv
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The Wireless Internet: Friend or Foe?
579
Summary
580
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
582
Hands-on Projects
583
References
584
19
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of 
Information Warfare
585
What the Cyber Masses Have to Lose
587
The Destruction of Personal Assets in IWs
597
Short- and Long-Term Personal Economic Impact on Cyber Citizens
601
The Violation of Privacy During Information Wars
602
The Individual Exposed
604
Identity Theft
606
Monitoring Private Affairs in Cyberspace
609
The New Order and State Medical ID Cards
613
Big Brother Is Here and Is Staying
616
Summary
618
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
620
Hands-on Projects
622
References
623
Part V
Advanced Computer Forensics Systems and Future Directions
625
20
Advanced Computer Forensics
627
Advanced Encryption: The Need to Conceal
628
Advanced Hacking
640
Advanced Tracker Hackers
647
The Problems of the Present
663
Summary
666
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
669
Hands-on Projects
670
References
671
Contents
xv

21
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
673
Summary
674
Conclusions
681
Recommendations
684
Final Word: Computer Forensic Needs and Challenges
699
Chapter Review Questions and Exercises
700
References
703
Appendix A
Frequently Asked Questions
705
What Is Computer Forensics?
705
Why Computer Forensics?
705
What Is Data Recovery?
705
Are There Instances When Data Cannot Be Recovered?
706
Appendix B
Computer Forensics Resources
709
General Forensics Resources
709
Computer Crime
711
File Formats and Extensions
711
Cryptography and Steganography
712
Appendix C
Links to Computer Forensics and Related Law 
Enforcement Web Pages
713
Law Enforcement Links
713
Organizations
714
Mailing Lists
714
USDOJ Guidelines for Searching and Seizing Computers
715
Computer Forensic and Security Software Available Free of
Charge to Law Enforcement Agencies
715
Miscellaneous
715
xvi
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Appendix D
More Computer Forensics Cases
717
Case Study 1: Lost Files
717
Case Study 2: Corrupted Files
718
Case Study 3: Disappearing Files
718
Case Study 4: Computer Forensics
718
Case Study 5: Forensic Accounting
719
Case Study 6: Corporate Investigation into PC Pornography
719
Case Study 7: Data Recovery
719
Case Study 8: Industrial Espionage
720
Case Study 9: Family Members Bolt
720
Case Study 10: Former Employer
720
Case Study 11: Goods Left to Rot
721
Case Study 12: Managers Start New Company
721
Case Study 13: Family Member Steals Clients
721
Case Study 14: Erased Email
721
Case Study 15: Bank Suspects
722
Case Study 16: Former Managers
722
Case Study 17: Former Catalog Designers
722
Case Study 18: Model Pursued
722
Case Study 19: Encrypted Mail
723
Case Study 20: Two Attorneys Can’t Speak Civilly
723
Case Study 21: Big Real Estate Deal
723
Case Study 22: Doctor Accused
723
Case Study 23: Former Employee Claims
724
Case Study 24: Ex-Partner Claims
724
Case Study 25: Former Manager
724
Contents
xvii

Appendix E
Answers to Review Questions and Exercises, 
Hands-on Projects, Case Projects, and 
Optional Team Case Projects by Chapter
725
Appendix F
Checklists by Chapter
747
Appendix G
About the CD-ROM
781
Appendix H
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
791
Index
819
xviii
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

T
here are many people whose efforts on this book have contributed to its
successful completion. I owe each a debt of gratitude and want to take this
opportunity to offer my sincere thanks.
A very special thanks to my publisher, David Pallai, without whose initial
interest and support this book would not have been possible, for his guidance and
encouragement over and above the business of being a publisher. Thanks also to
Bryan Davidson, Ania Wieckowski, and Jennifer Blaney of Charles River Media,
whose many talents and skills are essential to a finished book. Thanks to my copy-
editor, Ruth Saavedra, whose fine editorial work has been invaluable. Thanks also
to my marketing manager, Meg Dunkerley, whose efforts on this book have been
greatly appreciated. Finally, a special thanks to Michael Erbschloe, who wrote the
Foreword for this book. 
Thanks to my wife, Bee Vacca, for her love, her help, and her understanding of
my long work hours.
Finally, I wish to thank the organizations and individuals who granted me per-
mission to use the research material and information necessary for the completion
of this book.
Acknowledgments
xix

This page intentionally left blank 

C
omputer crime and computer-supported criminal activities are booming
businesses. Criminals, fraudsters, and terrorists seem to strike whenever
there is an opportunity. In January of 2005 the FBI alerted the public to a
variety of scams being facilitated online involving the solicitation of additional re-
lief funds for the victims of the recent tsunami disaster. The FBI, through the In-
ternet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), had received reports of Web sites being
established purportedly to assist with collection and relief efforts. Complaints iden-
tified several schemes that involved both unsolicited incoming emails (SPAM), as
well as reports of responses to posted email addresses, to assist for a fee in locating
loved ones who may have been victims of the disaster. A fraudulent relief donation
Web site has also been detected containing an embedded Trojan exploit which can
infect the user’s computer with a virus if accessed. 
There have been several major inter-agency computer crime investigations
conducted during the last several years including WEB-SNARE, which, on August
26, 2004, was characterized by the Attorney General as the most successful cyber
crime initiative to date. In WEB-SNARE, more than 150 investigations were suc-
cessfully advanced, in which more than 150,000 victims lost more than $215 mil-
lion. This initiative included 150 subjects who were charged, and the execution of
170 search and/or seizure warrants. Many of the investigations included in WEB-
SNARE could potentially be characterized as Identity Theft, or related to Identity
Theft.
Prior to WEB-SNARE, the IC3 coordinated the development and execution of
Operations E-Con and Cyber Sweep with our law enforcement and industry part-
ners. In those initiatives, more than 200 investigations were coordinated among the
various law enforcement agencies, resulting in arrests and/or charges of more than
250 individuals for engaging in a variety of cyber crimes including Identity Theft.
The FBI has also observed a continuing increase in both volume and potential
impact of cyber crime with significant international elements. Identifying such
Foreword
xxi

trends, as well as formulating an aggressive and proactive counter-attack strategy,
remains a fundamental objective of the FBI’s Cyber Division. In a growing number
of cases, Eastern European subjects solicit victims though job postings, email solic-
itations, and chat-rooms to provide detailed personal information. Once that in-
formation is obtained, they use their identities to post auctions on well-known
auction sites. Funds obtained through the auction are transferred through several
shell accounts, both in the U.S and abroad, and the items sold are never delivered.
In one FBI investigation initiated in 1999, the computer network of a now de-
funct software e-commerce company was compromised, and credit card informa-
tion for approximately eight million accounts was obtained by the hackers. The
compromised e-commerce company was contacted via email by the hackers who
demanded money to keep them from publicly posting the obtained information on
the Internet. The FBI became aware of this crime when numerous field offices re-
ceived complaints from citizens who were all incorrectly charged for similar small
amounts on their credit card statements. Through investigative efforts, these com-
plaints were all linked to the hacking of the e-commerce company's system. This
case has expanded into a major FBI initiative in which field offices across the coun-
try have opened approximately 50 spin-off investigations in the network compro-
mise and extortion of over 100 United States banks and e-commerce providers by
Eastern European hacking groups. 
Computer crimes are impacting society in numerous ways and there is a lot of
work for the good guys. Computer forensics is one of the largest growth professions
of the twenty-first century. The soaring increase in the number of Internet users
combined with the constant computerization of business processes has created new
opportunities for computer criminals and terrorists. Study after study has consis-
tently revealed that cyber attacks, hacking, and computer-based criminal activities
are costing businesses and government organizations billions of dollars each year. 
We need to train at least 100,000 more computer crime fighters in order to
stem the global tide of computer attacks. Many computer professionals have asked
me how they can get started in security and crime-fighting careers. My response has
constantly been learn, study, train, and move forward. Computer Forensics, by John
Vacca, is an excellent place to start establishing the required knowledge base to
move into this fascinating new career field. 
Computer Forensics is an excellent book for trained law enforcement personnel
who desire to learn more about investigating and fighting computer crimes. Com-
puter Forensics is also an excellent book for computer professionals who want to
move into the rapidly growing security field and who are considering shifting their
career focus to law enforcement and criminal investigation. 
xxii
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

It is also important that computer security personnel expand their under-
standing of forensic processes and keep their understanding of investigative and
prevention procedures up to date. Computer Forensics is an excellent book for all
levels of computer security personnel to further their professional development. 
John Vacca had made an excellent contribution to the computer forensics field.
I highly recommend Computer Forensics and congratulate John Vacca on a job ex-
tremely well done. 
Michael Erbschloe
Security Consultant and Author
St. Louis, Missouri
Foreword
xxiii

This page intentionally left blank 

Introduction
xxv
C
yber criminals are wreaking havoc on computer systems and are capturing
front-page headlines in the bargain. It has made little difference that the Bush
administration pledged billions in additional federal funding to combat se-
curity breaches after the 9-11 terrorists attacks. The problem just keeps getting worse.
Fortunately, the computer security field is also progressing at a brisk rate. In
particular, the field of computer forensics brings new ways of preserving and ana-
lyzing evidence related to cyber crime. 
GROWING PROBLEM
The numbers are chilling. According to a recent industry survey, 94% of the survey
respondents detected cyberattacks on their companies, and 617 organizations re-
ported $609,923,384 in financial losses.
So what’s going on? It doesn’t take a computer engineer or computer scientist
to learn hacking fundamentals. After spending a few nights on the Internet, high
school students discover they can master hacking fundamentals by simply down-
loading software. Corporations and the federal government are just beginning to
realize that securing their computer networks is critical. Equally frightening is that
our national security has already been compromised. Colleges have finally started
to offer courses and concentrations in computer security and forensics, but it re-
mains difficult to find degree programs in these disciplines.
COMPUTER FORENSICS
Computer forensics involves the preservation, identification, extraction, and docu-
mentation of computer evidence stored as data or magnetically encoded information.

The fascinating part of the science is that the computer evidence is often transparently
created by the computer’s operating system without the knowledge of the computer
operator. The information may actually be hidden from view. To find it, special
forensic software tools and techniques are required.
Emerging Field–But a Shortage of Experts
Most law enforcement agencies, especially those in large cities, are understaffed when
it comes to having trained computer forensics experts. Industry, on the other hand, has
been taking computer forensics seriously for several years. Sadly, it took a number of
embarrassing computer break-ins by teenage hackers to put the spotlight on it. The
problem is, industry doesn’t know which computer forensics issues to focus on.
The biggest issue surrounding the computer forensics conundrum is a shortage of
technologists who have a working knowledge of computer forensics. Academics are
teaching the subjects, but most lack real-world experience, which is critical when train-
ing students. Also, many academics are not current with forensics trends and tools.
Times Are Changing
There’s an old saying, “If you wait long enough, it’s bound to change.” The same
can be said for computer forensics training. Not only will more techies be concen-
trating on computer forensics, but also attorneys and judges will be taking courses
in the subject. Learning forensics basics will help attorneys especially to determine
the kinds of evidence that can be found by probing a computer’s operating system
and what techniques can be used to legally obtain it.
On the academic front, full-fledged degree tracks in computer forensics are
being developed. Certification programs already exist.
Where are the jobs? Government agencies, such as the Department of Defense,
FBI, CIA, NSA, and U.S. Postal Service need computer forensics specialists. State
and local law enforcement departments are also hiring computer forensics special-
ists. On the corporate front, all companies (especially large and mid-size ones with
a Web presence) will have serious computer forensics needs. Job titles differ, but,
typically, these positions are advertised as junior computer forensics analysts for
entry-level jobs and senior computer forensics analysts if you have a few years of ex-
perience in the field.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this book is to show experienced (intermediate to advanced) com-
puter forensics, security, and law enforcement professionals how to analyze and con-
xxvi
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Introduction
xxvii
duct a computer forensics examination and report the findings that will lead to the in-
carceration of the perpetrators. This book also provides the fundamental knowledge
you need to analyze risks to your system and implement a workable security and
forensics policy that protects your information assets from potential intrusion, dam-
age, or theft. Through extensive hands-on examples (field and trial experiments) and
case studies, you will gain the knowledge and skills required to master the deployment
of information warfare countermeasures to thwart potential attacks.
SCOPE
Throughout the book, extensive hands-on examples presented at the end of each
chapter in the form of exercises, case studies, projects, and checklists (located in
Appendix F), will provide you with practical experience in computer forensics ev-
idence capture, analysis, and reporting, as well as information warfare counter-
measures and future directions. In addition to advanced computer forensics
technology considerations in commercial organizations and governments, the book
addresses, but is not limited to, the following line items as part of the discovery of
electronic evidence:
The CD-ROM that accompanies this book contains the latest and best com-
puter forensics software tools and documentation.
You will learn how to analyze your exposure to security threats and protect
your organization’s systems and data; manage risks emanating from inside the
organization and from the Internet and extranets; protect network users from
hostile applications and viruses; reduce your susceptibility to an attack by de-
ploying firewalls, data encryption, decryption, and other information warfare
countermeasures; and identify the security risks that need to be addressed in se-
curity and computer forensics policy.
Chapters on how to gain practical experience in analyzing the security risks and
information warfare countermeasures that need to be addressed in your orga-
nization also include maintaining strong authentication and authenticity, pre-
venting eavesdropping, retaining integrity of information, evaluating the
strength of user passwords, selecting a firewall topology, and evaluating com-
puter and hacker ethics.
This book leaves little doubt that the new and emerging field of computer
forensics is about to evolve. This new area of knowledge is now being researched,
organized, and taught. No question, this book will benefit organizations and gov-
ernments, as well as their computer forensics and security professionals.

TARGET AUDIENCE
With regard to computer forensics, the book is primarily targeted at those in gov-
ernment and law enforcement who require the fundamental skills to develop and
implement security schemes designed to protect their organizations’ information
from attacks, including managers, network and systems administrators, technical
staff, and support personnel. This also includes those involved in securing Web
sites, including Web developers, Webmasters, and systems, network, and security
administrators.
ORGANIZATION OF THIS BOOK
This book is organized into six parts, including the appendixes (which include a
glossary of computer forensic and information warfare terms).
Part I: Overview of Computer Forensics Technology
Part I discusses computer forensics fundamentals, types of computer forensics
technology, types of computer forensics systems, and vendor and computer foren-
sics services.
Chapter 1, Computer Forensics Fundamentals, provides an overview of com-
puter forensics types and techniques and their electronic evidence and capture.
Chapter 2, Types of Computer Forensics Technology, covers the basic issues
dealing with Windows NT, Windows XP, and 2003, and their use within law en-
forcement computer forensic technology. In other words, it covers security and
computer evidence issues associated with Windows NT, Windows XP, and 2003.
Chapter 3, Types of Computer Forensics Systems, covers different types of
computer forensics systems and identifies crucial questions for corporate planning
in support of computer forensics. Answering the questions raised in this chapter
will assist managers in creating sound corporate security policies and practices that
support the following computer forensics systems: Internet security, intrusion de-
tection, firewall security, storage area networks security, network disaster recovery,
public key infrastructure security, wireless network security, satellite encryption
security, instant messaging (IM) security, Net privacy, ID management security, ID
theft prevention, biometric security, and homeland security.
Chapter 4, Vendor and Computer Forensics Services, covers how a swift and
measured forensic incident response—drawing on sound policies, vendor tools,
xxviii
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

and support—allows an organization to contain the potential damage of an attack
and effectively seek compensation or prosecution. In addition, this chapter covers
the following computer forensic services: forensic incident response, evidence col-
lection, forensic analysis, expert witness, forensic litigation and insurance claims
support, training, and forensic process improvement.
Part II: Computer Forensics Evidence and Capture
The second part of this book discusses data recovery, evidence collection and data
seizure, duplication and preservation of digital evidence, and computer image ver-
ification and authentication.
Chapter 5, Data Recovery, answers many questions about the ins and outs of
data recovery as it relates to computer forensics.
Chapter 6, Evidence Collection and Data Seizure, points out the difficulties in
collecting evidence and seizing data and what must be done to overcome them. Not
everything is covered here—it should be used as a guide only, and you should seek
further information for your specific circumstances.
Chapter 7, Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence, is a discussion of
how to keep Murphy’s law from ruining your case. When it comes to computer ev-
idence processing, Murphy is always looking over your shoulder. He stands ready
to strike at just the wrong moment.
Chapter 8, Computer Image Verification and Authentication, discusses the
overall security of a computer image verification and authentication system and
how it rests with the combination of security measures.
Part III: Computer Forensics Analysis
Part III covers the discovery of electronic evidence, identification of data, recon-
structing past events, and networks.
Chapter 9, Discovery of Electronic Evidence, addresses the process of informa-
tion discovery. The fact that information discovery only deals with logical evidence
(electronic data) means you can avoid much of the tedium required by search and
seizure to ensure evidence integrity and the chain of custody.
Chapter 10, Identification of Data, specifically focuses on the long-recognized
value of deterrence—through threat of retaliation—as an effective means of de-
fense. The means for enabling deterrence in the cyberrealm will be introduced here.
Chapter 11, Reconstructing Past Events, illustrates the reconstruction of past
events with as little distortion or bias as possible.
Introduction
xxix

Chapter 12, Networks, introduces a solution to the dilemma of network forensics.
Network forensics is the principle of reconstructing the activities leading up to an
event and determining the answer to “What did they do?” and “How did they do it?”
Part IV: Countermeasures: Information Warfare
Part IV discusses how to fight against macro threats (defensive strategies for gov-
ernments and industry groups), the information warfare arsenal and tactics of the
military, the information warfare arsenal and tactics of terrorists and rogues, the
information warfare arsenal and tactics of private companies, the information
warfare arsenal of the future, surveillance tools for information warfare of the
future, and civilian causalities (the victims and refugees of information warfare).
Chapter 13, Fighting Against Macro Threats:  Defensive Strategies for Govern-
ments and Industry Groups, is an in-depth examination of the implications of in-
formation warfare for the U.S. and allied infrastructures that depend on the
unimpeded management of information that is also required in the fight against
macro threats (defensive strategies for governments and industry groups).
Chapter 14, The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military, fo-
cuses on two goals. First, you need to find a way to protect yourself against cata-
strophic events. Second, you need to build a firm foundation on which you can
make steady progress by continually raising the cost of mounting an attack and
mitigating the expected damage of the information warfare arsenal and tactics of
the military.
Chapter 15, The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and
Rogues, recommends a number of specific steps that could better prepare the U.S.
military and private companies to confront “the new terrorism” and its informa-
tion warfare arsenal and tactics.
Chapter 16, The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Compa-
nies, deals with the information warfare tools and strategies of private companies
and how they’re used against the aggressors. It will also help to realistically guide
the process of moving forward in dealing with the information warfare arsenal and
tactics of private companies.
Chapter 17, The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future, discusses how the
increasing dependence on sophisticated information systems brings with it an in-
creased vulnerability to hostile elements, terrorists among them, in dealing with the
information warfare arsenal of the future.
xxx
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Chapter 18, Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future, dis-
cusses the basic concepts and principles that must be understood and that can help
guide the process of moving forward in dealing with the surveillance tools for the
information warfare of the future.
Chapter 19, Civilian Casualities: The Victims and Refugees of Information
Warfare, considers the application of civilian information operations (CIOs) to the
conventional warfare environment. Although the array of CIO tools and techniques
has been presented as discrete elements in a schematic diagram, the CIO environ-
ment is complex, multidimensional, interactive, and still developing.
Part V: Advanced Computer Forensics Systems and Future Directions
Finally, Part V discusses advanced computer forensics, with a summary, conclu-
sions, and recommendations.
Chapter 20, Advanced Computer Forensics, introduces numerous solutions
for those of you who are in the process of conducting advanced computer forensics
through the use of encryption for protection and hacking back with advanced
hacker trackers.
Chapter 21, Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations. No summary
chapter on computer forensics would be complete without an examination of costs
involved. This final chapter is concerned with how to conduct a relevant and mean-
ingful review of computer forensic analysis software tools. It is also the intent of this
chapter to initiate discussions to solidify the various computer forensics require-
ments. Finally, this chapter recommends the establishment of computer forensics
standards for the exchange of digital evidence between sovereign nations and is in-
tended to elicit constructive discussions regarding digital evidence. 
Appendixes
Eight appendixes provide additional resources that are available for computer
forensics. Appendix A is a list of frequently asked questions. Appendix B is a list of
computer forensic resources. Appendix C contains links to computer forensics and
related law enforcement Web pages. Appendix D contains more computer foren-
sics case studies. Appendix E contains answers to review questions and exercises,
hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case projects by chapter. Ap-
pendix F contains checklists by chapter. Appendix G contains all of the files that are
on the CD-ROM. The book ends with Appendix H—a glossary of computer foren-
sics and information-warfare-related terms.
Introduction
xxxi

CONVENTIONS
This book uses several conventions to help you find your way around and to help
you find important sidebars, facts, tips, notes, cautions, and warnings. You see eye-
catching icons in the left margin from time to time. They alert you to critical infor-
mation and warn you about problems.
John R. Vacca
jvacca@hti.net
xxxii
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

P
art One discusses computer forensics fundamentals, types of computer
forensics technology, types of computer forensics systems, and vendor and
computer forensics services.
I
Overview of Computer
Forensics Technology
Part

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Computer Forensics
Fundamentals
1
E
lectronic evidence and information gathering have become central issues in
an increasing number of conflicts and crimes. Electronic or computer evi-
dence used to mean the regular print-out from a computer—and a great deal
of computer exhibits in court are just that. However, for many years, law enforce-
ment officers have been seizing data media and computers themselves, as they have
become smaller and more ubiquitous.
In the very recent past, investigators generated their own printouts, sometimes
using the original application program, sometimes specialist analytic and exami-
nation tools. More recently, investigators have found ways of collecting evidence
from remote computers to which they do not have immediate physical access, pro-
vided such computers are accessible via a phone line or network connection. It is
even possible to track activities across a computer network, including the Internet.
These procedures form part of what is called computer forensics, though some
people also use the term to include the use of computers to analyze complex data
(for example, connections between individuals by examination of telephone logs or
bank account transactions). Another use of the term is when computers are em-
ployed in the court itself, in the form of computer graphics, to illustrate a complex
situation such as a fraud or as a replacement for large volumes of paper-based ex-
hibits and statements.
So, what actually is computer forensics? Computer forensics is about evidence
from computers that is sufficiently reliable to stand up in court and be convincing.
You might employ a computer forensics specialist to acquire evidence from com-
puters on your behalf. On the other hand, you may want one to criticize the work
of others. The field is a rapidly growing one, with a solid core but with many con-
troversies at its edges.

4
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER FORENSICS
Computer forensics, also referred to as computer forensic analysis, electronic dis-
covery, electronic evidence discovery, digital discovery, data recovery, data discov-
ery, computer analysis, and computer examination, is the process of methodically
examining computer media (hard disks, diskettes, tapes, etc.) for evidence. A thor-
ough analysis by a skilled examiner can result in the reconstruction of the activities
of a computer user.
In other words, computer forensics is the collection, preservation, analysis, and
presentation of computer-related evidence. Computer evidence can be useful in
criminal cases, civil disputes, and human resources/employment proceedings.
Far more information is retained on a computer than most people realize. It’s
also more difficult to completely remove information than is generally thought. For
these reasons (and many more), computer forensics can often find evidence of, or
even completely recover, lost or deleted information, even if the information was
intentionally deleted.
Computer forensics, although employing some of the same skills and software
as data recovery, is a much more complex undertaking. In data recovery, the goal
is to retrieve the lost data. In computer forensics, the goal is to retrieve the data and
interpret as much information about it as possible.
The continuing technological revolution in communications and informa-
tion exchange has created an entirely new form of crime: cyber crime or com-
puter crime. Computer crime has forced the computer and law enforcement
professions to develop new areas of expertise and avenues of collecting and ana-
lyzing evidence. This is what has developed into the science of computer foren-
sics. The process of acquiring, examining, and applying digital evidence is crucial
to the success of prosecuting a cyber criminal. With the continuous evolution of
technology, it is difficult for law enforcement and computer professionals to stay
one step ahead of technologically savvy criminals. To effectively combat cyber
crime, greater emphasis must be placed in the computer forensic field of study,
including but not limited to financial support, international guidelines and laws,
and training of the professionals involved in the process, as well as the following
subject matter:
Computer crime
The computer forensic objective
The computer forensic priority
The accuracy versus speed conflict
The need for computer forensics
The double tier approach

Requirements for the double tier approach
The computer forensics specialist
Computer Crime
According to industry analysts, there are currently 657 million people online world-
wide. That figure is expected to rise to 794 million by 2009. This represents a lot of
data interchange. Unfortunately many small businesses, and even large organiza-
tions, do not know how to properly protect their sensitive data, thus leaving the
door open to criminals.
Computers can be involved in a wide variety of crimes including white-collar
crimes, violent crimes such as murder and terrorism, counterintelligence, eco-
nomic espionage, counterfeiting, and drug dealing. A 2003 FBI survey reported
that the average bank robbery netted $6,900, whereas the average computer crime
netted $900,000 [1]. The Internet has made targets much more accessible, and the
risks involved for the criminal are much lower than with traditional crimes. A per-
son can sit in the comfort of his home or a remote site and hack into a bank and
transfer millions of dollars to a fictitious account, in essence robbing the bank,
without the threat of being gunned down while escaping. One hears of such tech-
nological crimes almost daily, thus creating a perception of lawlessness in the cyber
world. The same FBI survey revealed that both public and private agencies face se-
rious threats from external as well as internal sources. Out of the 849 organizations
that responded to the survey, 30% claimed theft of proprietary information, 23%
reported sabotage of data or their networks, 35% experienced system penetration
from an outside source, and 12% claimed financial fraud. More alarming is the ease
of access to sensitive data employees have within the organization. Fifty-nine percent
of the organizations involved in the survey reported employees having unautho-
rized access to corporate information.
Recently a survey was conducted to determine where the FBI was focusing their
computer forensic efforts. An alarming 74% of their workload is centered on white-
collar crime. This type of crime includes health care fraud, government fraud in-
cluding erroneous IRS and Social Security benefit payments, and financial
institution fraud. These are high-dollar crimes made easy by technology. The other
26% of the workload is split equally among violent crime (child pornography, in-
terstate theft), organized crime (drug dealing, criminal enterprise), and counter-
terrorism and national security. As shown by this survey, computer crime is
widespread and has infiltrated areas unimaginable just a few years ago. The FBI
caseload has gone from near zero in 1985 to nearly 10,000 cases in 2003. It is no
doubt considerably higher today. They have gone from two part-time scientists to
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
5

6
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
899 personnel in regional field offices throughout the country. Technology has
brought this field of study to the forefront.
Roles of a Computer in a Crime
A computer can play one of three roles in a computer crime. A computer can be the
target of the crime, it can be the instrument of the crime, or it can serve as an evi-
dence repository storing valuable information about the crime. In some cases, the
computer can have multiple roles. It can be the “smoking gun” serving as the in-
strument of the crime. It can also serve as a file cabinet storing critical evidence. For
example, a hacker may use the computer as the tool to break into another computer
and steal files, then store them on the computer. When investigating a case, it is im-
portant to know what roles the computer played in the crime and then tailor the in-
vestigative process to that particular role.
Applying information about how the computer was used in the crime also
helps when searching the system for evidence. If the computer was used to hack
into a network password file, the investigator will know to look for password crack-
ing software and password files. If the computer was the target of the crime, such
as an intrusion, audit logs and unfamiliar programs should be checked. Knowing
how the computer was used will help narrow down the evidence collection process.
With the size of hard drives these days, it can take a very long time to check and an-
alyze every piece of data a computer contains. Often law enforcement officials need
the information quickly, and having a general idea of what to look for will speed the
evidence collection process.
The Computer Forensic Objective
The objective in computer forensics is quite straightforward. It is to recover, ana-
lyze, and present computer-based material in such a way that it is useable as evidence
in a court of law. The key phrase here is useable as evidence in a court of law. It is es-
sential that none of the equipment or procedures used during the examination of
the computer obviate this.
The Computer Forensic Priority
Computer forensics is concerned primarily with forensic procedures, rules of evi-
dence, and legal processes. It is only secondarily concerned with computers. There-
fore, in contrast to all other areas of computing, where speed is the main concern, in
computer forensics the absolute priority is accuracy. One talks of completing work
as efficiently as possible, that is, as fast as possible without sacrificing accuracy.

Accuracy Versus Speed
In this seemingly frenetic world where the precious resource of time is usually at a
premium, pressure is heaped upon you to work as fast as possible. Working under
such pressure to achieve deadlines may induce people to take shortcuts in order to
save time.
In computer forensics, as in any branch of forensic science, the emphasis must
be on evidential integrity and security. In observing this priority, every forensic prac-
titioner must adhere to stringent guidelines. Such guidelines do not encompass the
taking of shortcuts, and the forensic practitioner accepts that the precious resource
of time must be expended in order to maintain the highest standards of work.
The Computer Forensics Specialist
A computer forensics specialist is the person responsible for doing computer foren-
sics. The computer forensics specialist will take several careful steps to identify and
attempt to retrieve possible evidence that may exist on a subject computer system:
1.
Protect the subject computer system during the forensic examination from
any possible alteration, damage, data corruption, or virus introduction.
2.
Discover all files on the subject system. This includes existing normal files,
deleted yet remaining files, hidden files, password-protected files, and en-
crypted files.
3.
Recover all (or as much as possible) of discovered deleted files.
4.
Reveal (to the extent possible) the contents of hidden files as well as temporary
or swap files used by both the application programs and the operating system.
5.
Accesses (if possible and if legally appropriate) the contents of protected or
encrypted files.
6.
Analyze all possibly relevant data found in special (and typically inaccessible)
areas of a disk. This includes but is not limited to what is called unallocated
space on a disk (currently unused, but possibly the repository of previous
data that is relevant evidence), as well as slack space in a file (the remnant
area at the end of a file, in the last assigned disk cluster, that is unused by cur-
rent file data but once again may be a possible site for previously created and
relevant evidence).
7.
Print out an overall analysis of the subject computer system, as well as a
listing of all possibly relevant files and discovered file data. Further, provide
an opinion of the system layout; the file structures discovered; any discov-
ered data and authorship information; any attempts to hide, delete, pro-
tect, or encrypt information; and anything else that has been discovered
and appears to be relevant to the overall computer system examination.
8.
Provide expert consultation and/or testimony, as required [2].
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
7

Who Can Use Computer Forensic Evidence?
Many types of criminal and civil proceedings can and do make use of evidence re-
vealed by computer forensics specialists.
Criminal Prosecutors use computer evidence in a variety of crimes where in-
criminating documents can be found: homicides, financial fraud, drug and
embezzlement record-keeping, and child pornography.
Civil litigations can readily make use of personal and business records found on
computer systems that bear on fraud, divorce, discrimination, and harassment
cases. Insurance companies may be able to mitigate costs by using discovered
computer evidence of possible fraud in accident, arson, and workman’s com-
pensation cases.
Corporations often hire computer forensics specialists to find evidence relating
to sexual harassment, embezzlement, theft or misappropriation of trade se-
crets, and other internal/confidential information.
Law enforcement officials frequently require assistance in pre-search warrant
preparations and post-seizure handling of the computer equipment. The use of
computer forensics in law enforcement is discussed in detail in the next section
and throughout the book.
Individuals sometimes hire computer forensics specialists in support of possible
claims of wrongful termination, sexual harassment, or age discrimination [2].
USE OF COMPUTER FORENSICS IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
If there is a computer on the premises of a crime scene, the chances are very good that
there is valuable evidence on that computer. If the computer and its contents are ex-
amined (even if very briefly) by anyone other than a trained and experienced computer
forensics specialist, the usefulness and credibility of that evidence will be tainted.
Choosing a Computer Forensics Specialist for a Criminal Case
When you require the services of a computer forensics specialist, don’t be afraid to
shop around. There are an increasing number of people who claim to be experts in the
field. Look very carefully at the level of experience of the individuals involved. There is
far more to proper computer forensic analysis than the ability to retrieve data, espe-
cially when a criminal case is involved. Think about computer forensics just as you
would any other forensic science and look for a corresponding level of expertise.
The bottom line is that you will be retaining the services of an individual who
will likely be called to testify in court to explain what he or she did to the computer
8
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

and its data. The court will want to know that individual’s own level of training and
experience, not the experience of his or her employer. Make sure you find someone
who not only has the expertise and experience, but also the ability to stand up to the
scrutiny and pressure of cross-examination.
COMPUTER FORENSICS ASSISTANCE TO HUMAN
RESOURCES/EMPLOYMENT PROCEEDINGS
Computer forensics analysis is becoming increasingly useful to businesses. Comput-
ers can contain evidence in many types of human resources proceedings, including
sexual harassment suits, allegations of discrimination, and wrongful termination
claims. Evidence can be found in electronic mail systems, on network servers, and on
individual employee’s computers. However, due to the ease with which computer
data can be manipulated, if the search and analysis is not performed by a trained com-
puter forensics specialist, it could likely be thrown out of court.
Employer Safeguard Program
As computers become more prevalent in businesses, employers must safeguard crit-
ical business information. An unfortunate concern today is the possibility that data
could be damaged, destroyed, or misappropriated by a discontented individual.
Before an individual is informed of their termination, a computer forensic spe-
cialist should come on-site and create an exact duplicate of the data on the indi-
vidual’s computer. In this way, should the employee choose to do anything to that
data before leaving, the employer is protected. Damaged or deleted data can be re-
placed, and evidence can be recovered to show what occurred. This method can
also be used to bolster an employer’s case by showing the removal of proprietary in-
formation or to protect the employer from false charges made by the employee.
Whether you are looking for evidence in a criminal prosecution or civil suit or
determining exactly what an employee has been up to, you should be equipped to
find and interpret the clues that have been left behind. This includes situations
where files have been deleted, disks have been reformatted, or other steps have
been taken to conceal or destroy the evidence. For example, did you know
What Web sites have been visited
What files have been downloaded
When files were last accessed
Of attempts to conceal or destroy evidence
Of attempts to fabricate evidence
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
9

That the electronic copy of a document can contain text that was removed
from the final printed version
That some fax machines can contain exact duplicates of the last several hundred
pages received
That faxes sent or received via computer may remain on the computer indefinitely
That email is rapidly becoming the communications medium of choice for
businesses
That people tend to write things in email that they would never consider writ-
ing in a memorandum or letter
That email has been used successfully in criminal cases as well as in civil litigation
That email is often backed up on tapes that are generally kept for months or years
That many people keep their financial records, including investments, on
computers [3]
COMPUTER FORENSICS SERVICES
No matter how careful they are, when people attempt to steal electronic informa-
tion (everything from customer databases to blueprints), they leave behind traces
of their activities. Likewise, when people try to destroy incriminating evidence con-
tained on a computer (from harassing memos to stolen technology), they leave be-
hind vital clues. In both cases, those traces can prove to be the smoking gun that
successfully wins a court case. Thus, computer data evidence is quickly becoming a
reliable and essential form of evidence that should not be overlooked.
A computer forensics professional does more than turn on a computer, make
a directory listing, and search through files. Your forensics professionals should be
able to successfully perform complex evidence recovery procedures with the skill
and expertise that lends credibility to your case. For example, they should be able
to perform the following services:
Data seizure
Data duplication and preservation
Data recovery
Document searches
Media conversion
Expert witness services
Computer evidence service options
Other miscellaneous services
10
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Data Seizure
Federal rules of civil procedure let a party or their representative inspect and copy
designated documents or data compilations that may contain evidence. Your com-
puter forensics experts, following federal guidelines, should act as this representative,
using their knowledge of data storage technologies to track down evidence [3]. Your
experts should also be able to assist officials during the equipment seizure process. See
Chapter 6, “Evidence Collection and Data Seizure,” for more detailed information.
Data Duplication and Preservation
When one party must seize data from another, two concerns must be addressed: the
data must not be altered in any way, and the seizure must not put an undue burden
on the responding party. Your computer forensics experts should acknowledge
both of these concerns by making an exact duplicate of the needed data. Because
duplication is fast, the responding party can quickly resume its normal business
functions, and, because your experts work on the duplicated data, the integrity of
the original data is maintained. See Chapter 7, “Duplication and Preservation of
Digital Evidence,” for more detailed information.
Data Recovery
Using proprietary tools, your computer forensics experts should be able to safely
recover and analyze otherwise inaccessible evidence. The ability to recover lost ev-
idence is made possible by the expert’s advanced understanding of storage tech-
nologies. For example, when a user deletes an email, traces of that message may still
exist on the storage device. Although the message is inaccessible to the user, your
experts should be able to recover it and locate relevant evidence. See Chapter 5,
“Data Recovery,” for more detailed information.
Document Searches
Your computer forensics experts should also be able to search over 200,000 electronic
documents in seconds rather than hours. The speed and efficiency of these searches
make the discovery process less complicated and less intrusive to all parties involved.
Media Conversion
Some clients need to obtain and investigate computer data stored on old and un-
readable devices. Your computer forensics experts should extract the relevant data
from these devices, convert it into readable formats, and place it onto new storage
media for analysis.
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
11

Expert Witness Services
Computer forensics experts should be able to explain complex technical processes in
an easy-to-understand fashion. This should help judges and juries comprehend how
computer evidence is found, what it consists of, and how it is relevant to a specific
situation (see sidebar, “Provide Expert Consultation and Expert Witness Services”).
PROVIDE EXPERT CONSULTATION AND
EXPERT WITNESS SERVICES
COMPUTERS
Expert Testimony
Has testified multiple times as an expert witness in computers and computer
forensics in circuit court
Regularly testify as an expert witness in computers and computer forensics in
federal court for U.S. attorney’s offices
Computer Expertise
Belongs to the Computer Crime Investigators Association
Trained in the forensic examination of computers (PC & Mac), having con-
ducted examinations in countless cases including child exploitation, homicide,
militia, software piracy, and fraud
Has testified in state and federal courts as an expert in computers, computer
forensics, the Internet, and America Online; often as an expert witness for U.S.
attorney’s offices
Is thoroughly familiar with both computer hardware and software, having writ-
ten software and repaired and assembled computers
Teaches computer crime investigation, including computer search and seizure,
for the Institute of Police Technology and Management
Regularly consults with law enforcement officers in the search and seizure of
computers
Has provided forensic training to numerous law enforcement officers and corpo-
rate security officers
Regularly consulted by other forensic examiners for advice in difficult cases
Training Given as Expert in Computer Crimes
Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Symposium and Exhibition
Bureau of Justice Statistics/Justice Research Statistics Association
12
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE
Theft by employees or others
Time
Property
Propriety information and trade secrets
Embezzlement
Inappropriate employee actions
Burglary
Your computer forensics expert’s experience should include installing cameras in every
imaginable location (indoors and outdoors, offices, homes, warehouses, stores, schools,
or vehicles) for every conceivable crime (theft, burglaries, homicides, gambling, nar-
cotics, prostitution, extortion, or embezzlement) under every conceivable circumstance
(controlled settings, hostage crisis, or court-ordered covert intrusion).
If you need to know what your employees are doing on your time and on your
premises, your computer forensics experts should be able to covertly install video
monitoring equipment so that you can protect your interests. This even includes sit-
uations where employees may be misusing company computers. By using video sur-
veillance to document employees who are stealing time, property, or secrets from
you, you should protect yourself if you plan to take appropriate action against the
employees.
CHILD EXPLOITATION
Child sexual exploitation
Child pornography
Manufacture
Use
Sale
Trading
Collection
Child erotica
Use of computers in child exploitation
Search and seizure
Victim acquisition
Behavior of preferential and situational offenders
Investigation
Proactive
Reactive [4]
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
13

Computer Evidence Service Options
Your computer forensics experts should offer various levels of service, each de-
signed to suit your individual investigative needs. For example, they should be able
to offer the following services:
Standard service
On-site service
Emergency service
Priority service
Weekend service
Standard Service
Your computer forensics experts should be able to work on your case during nor-
mal business hours until your critical electronic evidence is found. They must be
able to provide clean rooms and ensure that all warranties on your equipment will
still be valid following their services.
On-Site Service
Your computer forensics experts should be able to travel to your location to per-
form complete computer evidence services. While on-site, the experts should
quickly be able to produce exact duplicates of the data storage media in question.
Their services should then be performed on the duplicate, minimizing the disrup-
tion to business and the computer system. Your experts should also be able to help
federal marshals seize computer data and be very familiar with the Federal Guide-
lines for Searching and Seizing Computers.
Emergency Service
After receiving the computer storage media, your computer forensics experts should
be able to give your case the highest priority in their laboratories. They should be
able to work on it without interruption until your evidence objectives are met.
Priority Service
Dedicated computer forensics experts should be able to work on your case during
normal business hours (8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M., Monday through Friday) until the
evidence is found. Priority service typically cuts your turnaround time in half.
Weekend Service
Computer forensics experts should be able to work from 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.,
Saturday and Sunday, to locate the needed electronic evidence and will continue
14
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

working on your case until your evidence objectives are met. Weekend service de-
pends on the availability of computer forensics experts.
Other Miscellaneous Services
Computer forensics experts should also be able to provide extended services. These
services include
Analysis of computers and data in criminal investigations
On-site seizure of computer data in criminal investigations
Analysis of computers and data in civil litigation.
On-site seizure of computer data in civil litigation
Analysis of company computers to determine employee activity
Assistance in preparing electronic discovery requests
Reporting in a comprehensive and readily understandable manner
Court-recognized computer expert witness testimony
Computer forensics on both PC and Mac platforms
Fast turnaround time
Recover Data You Thought Was Lost Forever
Computers systems may crash. Files may be accidentally deleted. Disks may acci-
dentally be reformatted. Computer viruses may corrupt files. Files may be acciden-
tally overwritten. Disgruntled employees may try to destroy your files. All of these
can lead to the loss of your critical data. You may think it’s lost forever, but com-
puter forensics experts should be able to employ the latest tools and techniques to
recover your data.
In many instances, the data cannot be found using the limited software tools
available to most users. The advanced tools that computer forensics experts utilize
allow them to find your files and restore them for your use. In those instances
where the files have been irreparably damaged, the experts’ computer forensics ex-
pertise allows them to recover even the smallest remaining fragments.
Advise You on How to Keep Your Data and Information Safe from
Theft or Accidental Loss
Business today relies on computers. Your sensitive client records or trade secrets are
vulnerable to intentional attacks from, for example, computer hackers, disgruntled
employees, viruses, and corporate espionage. Equally threatening, but far less con-
sidered, are unintentional data losses caused by accidental deletion, computer hard-
ware and software crashes, and accidental modification.
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
15

Computer forensics experts should advise you on how to safeguard your data
by such methods as encryption and back-up. The experts can also thoroughly clean
sensitive data from any computer system you plan on eliminating.
Your files, records, and conversations are just as vital to protect as your data.
Computer forensics experts should survey your business and provide guidance for
improving the security of your information. This includes possible information
leaks such as cordless telephones, cellular telephones, trash, employees, and an-
swering machines.
Examine a Computer to Find Out What Its User Has Been Doing
Whether you’re looking for evidence in a criminal prosecution, looking for evidence
in a civil suit, or determining exactly what an employee has been up to, your com-
puter forensics experts should be equipped to find and interpret the clues that have
been left behind. This includes situations where files have been deleted, disks have
been reformatted, or other steps have been taken to conceal or destroy evidence.
As previously mentioned, your computer forensics experts should provide com-
plete forensic services. These include electronic discovery consultation, on-site seizure
of evidence, thorough processing of evidence, interpretation of the results, reporting
the results in an understandable manner, and court-recognized expert testimony.
Your computer forensics experts should also be able to regularly provide train-
ing to other forensic examiners, from both the government and private sectors.
When other forensic examiners run into problems, they should turn to your ex-
perts for solutions.
Sweep Your Office for Listening Devices
In today’s high-tech society, bugging devices, ranging from micro-miniature trans-
mitters to micro-miniature recorders, are readily available. Automatic telephone-
recording devices are as close as your nearest Radio Shack store. Your computer
forensics experts should have the equipment and expertise to conduct thorough
electronic countermeasures (ECM) sweeps of your premises.
High-Tech Investigations
Your computer forensics experts should have high level government investigative
experience and the knowledge and experience to conduct investigations involving
technology, whether the technology is the focus of the investigation or is required
to conduct the investigation. The experts should be uniquely qualified to conduct
investigations involving cellular telephone cloning, cellular subscription fraud, soft-
ware piracy, data or information theft, trade secrets, computer crimes, misuse of
computers by employees, or any other technology issue.
16
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

So, what are your employees actually doing? Are they endlessly surfing the
Web? Are they downloading pornography and opening your company to a sexual
harassment lawsuit? Are they emailing trade secrets to your competitors? Are they
running their own business from your facilities while they are on your clock?
Your computer forensics experts should be uniquely qualified to answer these
questions and many more. Don’t trust these sensitive inquiries to companies that
don’t have the required expertise. Trust no one!
For a detailed discussion of the preceding computer forensics services, see Chap-
ter 4, “Vendor and Computer Forensics Services.” Now, let’s examine how evidence
might be sought in a wide range of computer crime or misuse, including theft of
trade secrets, theft or destruction of intellectual property, and fraud. Computer
specialists can draw on an array of methods of discovering data that resides in a
computer system or for recovering deleted, encrypted, or damaged file information.
Any or all of this information may help during discovery, depositions, or litigation.
BENEFITS OF PROFESSIONAL FORENSICS METHODOLOGY
The impartial computer forensics expert who helps during discovery will typically
have experience on a wide range of computer hardware and software. It is always
beneficial when your case involves hardware and software with which this expert is
directly familiar, but fundamental computer design and software implementation
is often quite similar from one system to another. Experience in one application or
operating system area is often easily transferable to a new system.
Unlike paper evidence, computer evidence can often exist in many forms, with
earlier versions still accessible on a computer disk. Knowing the possibility of their
existence, even alternate formats of the same data can be discovered. The discovery
process can be served well by a knowledgeable expert identifying more possibilities
that can be requested as possibly relevant evidence. In addition, during on-site
premises inspections, for cases where computer disks are not actually seized or
forensically copied, the forensics expert can more quickly identify places to look,
signs to look for, and additional information sources for relevant evidence. These
may take the form of earlier versions of data files (memos, spreadsheets) that still
exist on the computer’s disk or on backup media or differently formatted versions
of data, either created or treated by other application programs (word processing,
spreadsheet, email, timeline, scheduling, or graphic).
Protection of evidence is critical. A knowledgeable computer forensics profes-
sional should ensure that a subject computer system is carefully handled to ensure that
No possible evidence is damaged, destroyed, or otherwise compromised by the
procedures used to investigate the computer
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
17

No possible computer virus is introduced to a subject computer during the
analysis process
Extracted and possibly relevant evidence is properly handled and protected
from later mechanical or electromagnetic damage
A continuing chain of custody is established and maintained
Business operations are affected for a limited amount of time, if at all
Any client-attorney information that is inadvertently acquired during a foren-
sic exploration is ethically and legally respected and not divulged [2].
Steps Taken by Computer Forensics Specialists
The computer forensics specialist needs to complete an Evidence Identification and
Retrieval Checklist (as shown in Table F1.1 in Appendix F) [2]. He or she should
take several careful steps to identify and attempt to retrieve possible evidence that
may exist on a subject’s computer system.
WHO CAN USE COMPUTER FORENSIC EVIDENCE?
Many types of criminal and civil proceedings can and do make use of evidence re-
vealed by computer forensics specialists. These are as follows:
Criminal prosecutors use computer evidence in a variety of crimes where in-
criminating documents can be found, including homicides, financial fraud,
drug and embezzlement record-keeping, and child pornography.
Civil litigations can readily make use of personal and business records found on
computer systems that bear on fraud, divorce, discrimination, and harassment
cases.
Insurance companies may be able to mitigate costs by using discovered com-
puter evidence of possible fraud in accident, arson, and workman’s compensa-
tion cases.
Corporations often hire computer forensics specialists to find evidence relating
to sexual harassment, embezzlement, and theft or misappropriation of trade
secrets, and other internal and confidential information.
Law enforcement officials frequently require assistance in pre-search warrant
preparations and post-seizure handling of the computer equipment.
Individuals sometimes hire computer forensics specialists in support of possi-
ble claims of wrongful termination, sexual harassment, or age discrimination.
18
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

However, there are concerns and problems with computer forensic evidence. Let’s
examine some of those problems.
Problems with Computer Forensic Evidence
Computer evidence is like any other evidence. It must be
Authentic
Accurate
Complete
Convincing to juries
In conformity with common law and legislative rules (i.e., admissible) [5]
There are also special problems:
Computer data changes moment by moment.
Computer data is invisible to the human eye; it can only be viewed indirectly
after appropriate procedures.
The process of collecting computer data may change it—in significant ways.
The processes of opening a file or printing it out are not always neutral.
Computer and telecommunications technologies are always changing so that
forensic processes can seldom be fixed for very long [5].
The Forensic Technician
Contrary to what is often thought, in many cases it is possible to produce reliable
computer-derived evidence without recourse to specialist tools. The general prin-
ciples are:
The scene of crime has to be frozen; that is, the evidence has to be collected as
early as possible and without any contamination.
There must be continuity of evidence, sometimes known as chain of custody;
that is, it must be possible to account for all that has happened to the exhibit be-
tween its original collection and its appearance in court, preferably unaltered.
All procedures used in examination should be auditable; that is, a suitably qual-
ified independent expert appointed by the other side in a case should be able to
track all the investigations carried out by the prosecution’s experts [5].
Good results can be obtained by using the standard disk repair, network test-
ing, and other utilities; however, complete records need to be kept. Even so, for
some purposes these may not be enough, for example, where it is hoped to recover
previously deleted material or where a logic bomb or virus is suspected. In these
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
19

circumstances, specialist tools are needed. Special training is also required. The
tools themselves don’t address all of the problems of producing evidence that will
stand up in court. Thus, the key features of the forensic technician are
Careful methodology of approach, including record keeping
A sound knowledge of computing, particularly in any specialist areas claimed
A sound knowledge of the law of evidence
A sound knowledge of legal procedures
Access to and skill in the use of appropriate utilities [5]
Legal Tests
The rules vary from legislation to legislation, but one can give a broad outline of
what happens in those countries with a common law tradition—the U.K., U.S., and
the so-called old Commonwealth. The law makes distinctions between real evi-
dence, testimonial evidence, and hearsay. Real evidence is that which comes from
an inanimate object that can be examined by the court. Testimonial evidence is that
which a live witness has seen and upon which he or she can be cross-examined. The
hearsay rule operates to exclude assertions made other than those made by the wit-
ness who is testifying as evidence of the truth of what is being asserted. The pure
hearsay rule is extremely restrictive and has been extensively modified by various
statutory provisions. Thus, there are rules about the proving of documents and
business books. Bankers’ books have separate legislation. Some of the rules apply
explicitly to computers, but many do not, although they can be (and have been) in-
terpreted to cover many situations in which computers are involved.
For example, in the U.K. there have been situations where legal rules presum-
ably designed to help the court may in fact hinder it. In practice, these issues may
be circumvented. For instance, in a criminal case, evidence may be obtained by in-
admissible methods. This evidence, however, then points investigators to admissi-
ble sources of evidence for the same sets of circumstances. An example of this could
occur during a fraud investigation. In other words, computer search methods are
often used to identify allegedly fraudulent transactions, but the evidential items
eventually presented in court are paper-based invoices, contract notes, dockets, or
other documents. In this manner, the prosecution can demonstrate to the jury the
deception or breach of the Companies Act or other specific fraudulent act. Again,
in civil litigation the parties may decide to jointly accept computer-based evidence
(or not to challenge it) and instead concentrate on the more substantive elements
in the dispute. A defendant may prefer to have a substantive defense rather than a
technical one based on inadmissibility. Or, again, the legal team may not feel suffi-
ciently competent to embark on a technical challenge.
20
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

In the U.S., many practical problems exist around the actual seizure of com-
puters containing evidence. Law enforcement officers must comply with the Fourth
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Subject Matter of Computer Forensics
The subject matter of computer forensics can, thus, not be solely concerned with
procedures and methods of handling computers, the hardware from which they are
made up, and the files they contain. The ultimate aim of forensic investigation is its
use in legal proceedings. At the same time, an obsession with common law and ju-
dicial rules is likely to inhibit many investigations. It might be a mistake for in-
quiries not to be commenced simply because of fear of possible inadmissibility.
Furthermore, as we have already seen, a number of computer-investigatory meth-
ods may turn out not to be directly admissible but may nevertheless be useful in lo-
cating noncomputer evidence that is admissible.
One may have to take a somewhat pragmatic view of the precise bounds of the
subject matter, but it should still be possible to define its core activities. It might
help to explore the way in which forensic science in general has developed and
then see what expectations one might reasonably have of computer forensics.
Although forensic science was already well established, and indeed forms a cen-
tral feature of many of Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes stories published from
1892 onwards, up until the 1970s, each forensic scientist tended to develop his or
her own methods and present them ad hoc to juries. Obviously, reliance was placed
on descriptions of methods used by others, but for courts, the tests of whether to
believe the forensic evidence were the manner of presentation—the supposed em-
inence of the forensic scientist and the skill of the opposition lawyer (or rival expert
who might be called). During the 1970s, a more formal checklist-based approach
was introduced. This was partly to bring about standardization as between differ-
ent laboratories and partly in response to the criticism (in the U.K.) that arose over
such controversial cases as the Birmingham Six. In the U.K. Home Office Forensic
Service, these checklists were devised by senior staff. Obviously, such checklists are
revised in the light of experience—the publication of new specialist research or ad-
verse experience during a trial. An increasingly used feature of modern practice is
quality control, which involves work being checked by an otherwise uninvolved
coworker before being offered to external scrutiny. In any event, the broad tests for
evidence include
Authenticity: Does the material come from where it purports?
Reliability: Can the substance of the story the material tells be believed and is
it consistent? In the case of computer-derived material, are there reasons for
doubting the correct working of the computer?
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
21

Completeness: Is the story that the material purports to tell complete? Are
there other stories that the material also tells that might have a bearing on the
legal dispute or hearing?
Freedom from interference and contamination: Are these levels acceptable as
a result of forensic investigation and other post-event handling [5]?
Any approach to computer forensics would, thus, need to include the elements of
Well-defined procedures to address the various tasks
An anticipation of likely criticism of each methodology on the grounds of fail-
ure to demonstrate authenticity, reliability, completeness, and possible conta-
mination as a result of the forensic investigation
The possibility for repeat tests to be carried out, if necessary, by experts hired
by the other side
Checklists to support each methodology
An anticipation of any problems in formal legal tests of admissibility
The acceptance that any methods now described would almost certainly be
subject to later modification [5]
Divergences from Conventional Forensic Investigation
There will be divergences from the expectations of more traditional areas of foren-
sic investigation. The main reason is the rate of change of computer technology.
The devisor of a test for the presence of a prohibited drug, an explosive, fabric
fibers, bodily tissues, and the like, can expect that over a period of time, the test may
be improved or shown to be defective, but, the need for the test and most of its es-
sential details will probably not change. However, in computers, newness and ob-
solesce is the norm.
For example, a key feature of computer forensics is the examination of data
media: new forms and methods of data storage occur at intervals of less than 
4 years. The floppy disk of 13 years ago was in 5.25 inch format and held 360 k. The
current equivalent is 3.5 inches and holds 1.44 MB, and much higher densities are
expected soon. A typical hard-disk size on a PC of the same date was 20-30 MB, was
in 5.25 inch form, and used modified frequency modulation (MFM) controller
technology. Today most PCs have hard disks in excess of 1750 MB in 2.5 inch or
even 1.5 inch form using integrated development environment (IDE) or run length
limited (RLL) technology. On minis and mainframes, data may be held on redun-
dant array of independent (or inexpensive) disks (RAID), where individual files
may be split and spread over eight or more separate disk surfaces. Similar changes
have taken place in tape technology and the use of erasable programmable read-
only memory (EPROMs).
22
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Computer architectures have gone through profound changes in the same
short period. PCs have become much more powerful, the large central mainframe
is now a rarity, and large companies are now served by a multiplicity of smaller
computers that all interact via a complex network.
Computer peripherals keep changing as well. Modems and network routers
have become intelligent, and digitizing scanners are fairly common devices. They
can be subverted, for example, for forgery.
Wide-area telecom methods are being used more and more. These provide op-
portunities for both high-tech criminals and forensic investigators. The protocols
they use also keep changing.
The foregoing simply lists technological changes. Similar changes have taken
place in computer applications; these, in turn, have affected the type of information
one might expect to find held in a computer. For example, over the same 13 years,
the following technological changes have taken place:
The growth of email, both locally within large organizations and worldwide.
The growth of client/server applications.
The software outcome of the more complex hardware architectures.
The client/server situation (software on).
The ability of a PC or small local machine to interact with software and data
held on other nonlocal machines and large mainframes in a way that appears to
be seamless to the user. One key effect of this is that a computer document
often does not exist in some computer equivalent of a filing cabinet, but, rather,
is assembled on demand by the activity of one computer drawing information
from many others. 
The evidence of a transaction or event may, therefore, only be provable by the
presentation of all the records from all the computers involved, plus an expla-
nation of how the assembly of the report relied on took place.
The greater use of Electronic Data Interchanges (EDIs) and other forms of
computer-based orders, bills of lading, payment authorizations, etc. EDIs have
very complex structures, with some evidence being held in computers owned
by the counter-parties and some by the EDI supplier/regulator.
Computer graphics: computer-aided design (CAD) methods, particularly those
that provide an element of autocompletion or filling-in of basic design ideas.
More extended, easier-to-use databases.
The greater use of computer-controlled procedures (sales, dispatch, and emergency
services; computer-controlled processes; traffic control; and manufacturing).
The methods of writing and developing software. There is much greater use
of libraries of procedures (of new computer language models). For example,
object-oriented programming environments and new, more formal methods
of program development; standards and methods of testing have also
changed [5].
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
23

As a result, computer forensic methods may not have the time in which to es-
tablish themselves, or the longevity, that more traditional chemistry- and physics-
based forensics enjoy. Nevertheless, the usual way in which specific forensic
methods become accepted is via publication in a specialist academic journal. For
example, a forensic scientist seeking to justify a methodology in court can do so by
stating that it is based on a specific published method that had not up to the point
of the hearing been criticized.
The rule of best practice refers to the use of the best practice available and known
at the time of the giving of evidence.
CASE HISTORIES
One of the fundamental principles of computer investigation is the need to follow
established and tested procedures meticulously and methodically throughout the
investigation. At no point of the investigation is this more critical than at the stage
of initial evidence capture. Reproducibility of evidence is the key. Without the firm
base of solid procedures, which have been strictly applied, any subsequent antire-
pudiation attempts in court will be suspect, and the case as a whole will likely be
weakened.
There have been several high-profile cases recently where apparently solid cases
have been weakened or thrown out on the basis of inappropriate consideration
given to the integrity and reproducibility of the computer evidence. This may hap-
pen for several reasons. Lack of training is a prime culprit. If the individuals in-
volved have not been trained to the required standards, or have received no training
at all, then tainted or damaged computer evidence is the sad but inevitable result.
Another frequent cause is lack of experience. Not only lack of site experience,
but also inappropriate experience of the type of systems, might be encountered.
One of the most difficult on-site skills is knowing when to call for help. It is essen-
tial that a sympathetic working environment is created such that peer pressure or
fear of loss of status and respect does not override the need to call for help. Easier
said than done, perhaps, but no less essential for that reason.
Finally, sloppiness, time pressure, pressure applied on-site, fatigue, and care-
lessness have all been contributory factors in transforming solid computer evidence
into a dubious collection of files. These totally avoidable issues are related to indi-
vidual mental discipline, management control and policy, and selecting appropri-
ate staff to carry out the work. There are issues with which one cannot sympathize.
This is bad work, plain and simple.
24
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Ultimately, any time the collection of computer evidence is called into ques-
tion, it is damaging to everyone who is a computer forensic practitioner; it is in
everyone’s best interest to ensure that the highest standards are maintained.
To use a rather worn phrase from an old American police series (Hill Street
Blues): “Let’s be careful out there!”
Taken for a Ride
A sad, but all too frequent story, from prospective clients: I’ve just spent $15,000 on
a Web site and got taken for a ride. I cannot find the con man now and all I have is
an alias and a pay-as-you-go mobile number. Can you help me please?
What Can You Do?
It is strongly recommended that people dealing with entities on the Internet need to
make sure they know who they are dealing with before they enter into any transaction
or agreement. If you cannot obtain a real-world address (preferably within the juris-
diction in which you live), then think twice about going any further. Always question
the use of mobile phone numbers—they should set alarm bells ringing! This task is
made easier in the U.K., as all mobile numbers [6] start with 077xx, 078xx, or 079xx.
Pagers start with 076xx. From April 28, 2001, on, all old mobile, pager (those that do
not begin 07), special rate, and premium rate numbers stopped working.
If you do want to proceed with the transaction, then use a credit card rather
than a debit card or other type of money transfer; then at least you will have some
protection and only be liable for $50 rather than having your entire bank account
cleaned out. In terms of tracing a suspect like the one in the preceding, your com-
puter forensic experts should be able to trace emails around the world; and, by act-
ing quickly and in conjunction with legal firms, they should be able to track
individuals down to their homes. An application for a civil search order can then
allow entry and the experts will be able to secure all electronic evidence quickly and
efficiently. Internet cafés are sometimes more of a problem, but it is remarkable
how many users go to the trouble of trying to disguise their tracks only to end up
sitting in exactly the same seat every time they visit the same Café. So, yes, your
computer forensic experts can help, but by taking the proper precautions, you
would not need to call them in the first place.
Abuse of Power and Position
This message is by no means new; in fact, it could be said that it has been repeated so
many times in so many forums that it is amazing that management still falls foul of
the following circumstances. In recent months, investigators at Vogon International
Limited [7] have been asked to examine computer data for evidence of fraud. On one
occasion, the client was a charity, and on the second, a multinational company.
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
25

In both cases, fraud, totaling hundreds of thousands of dollars was uncovered.
The modus operandi of the suspects was very similar in both cases. Bogus compa-
nies were set up and invoices were submitted for payment. The fraudsters were in
a position to authorize the payment of the invoices and had the power to prevent
unwelcome scrutiny of the accounts.
In addition, one of the fraudsters was paying another member of the staff to
turn a blind eye to what was happening. On further investigation, this member of
the staff was obviously living beyond his means.
The message is simple: whether you are a multinational company or a small
business, the possibility of fraud is ever present. While not wishing to fuel paranoia,
traditional checks and balances must be in place to ensure that those trusted mem-
bers of the staff who have power cannot abuse their positions.
Secure Erasure
Now, let’s touch on this “old chestnut” again, because it appears to be the source of
considerable confusion and misinformation. Vogon’s customer base seems to be
polarized into two main camps [7]: those who desperately want to retain their data
and fail, often spectacularly, to do so and those who wish to irrevocably destroy
their data, and frequently fail in a similarly dramatic manner.
The latter may be criminals who wish to cover their tracks from the police or
legitimate business organizations who wish to protect themselves from confidential
information falling into the wrong hands. Fundamentally, the issues are the same.
The legitimate destruction of data is ultimately a matter of management responsi-
bility, which requires a considered risk analysis to be carried out.
To the question, Can data be securely erased?, the answer is, self-evidently, yes.
If you were to ask, Is it straightforward or certain?, it depends, would be the answer.
Many systems are in use for securely erasing data from a wide range of media.
Some are effective, some completely ineffective, and some partially effective. It is
the latter situation that causes concern and, frequently, not an inconsiderable
amount of embarrassment.
Those systems that absolutely destroy data do so in a manner that is total, un-
equivocal, and final; there can exist no doubt as to their effectiveness. Systems that
are sold as being completely effective but that are fundamentally flawed are obvi-
ously flawed. With only cursory analysis, this is evident, so these are (or should be)
swiftly disregarded.
Vogon is regularly asked to verify the destruction of data by many of their large
clients [7]. What they find is that frequently only a fraction of a sample sent is cor-
rectly or accurately deleted. RAID systems are a prime candidate for chaos. Certain
revisions of drive firmware can present special challenges; in some cases, even the
software used defeats the eraser. The list of such software is long and growing.
26
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vogon is often asked for advice on this issue [7]. The answer is always the
same. If the destruction of data has more value than the drive, physically destroy the
drive. Crushing is good; melting in a furnace is better. If the drive has more value
than the data, what are you worrying about?
CASE STUDIES
Over the years, Vogon’s data-recovery laboratories have seen pretty much every-
thing that can happen to a computer, no matter how incredible, whether it is a ge-
ologist who, in testing for minerals, inadvertently blew up his own laptop, or the
factory worker who covered the computer running the production line in maple
syrup. The list is now so long that the incredible has become almost mundane. For-
tuitously, two in the latest of a long line of incredible recoveries recently occurred,
so, it seemed appropriate to include them as case studies.
Case Study One: The Case of the Flying Laptop
Picture the scene: police rushing into premises on the ninth floor of a building. Al-
most immediately thereafter, a laptop accelerates rapidly groundward out of the
window of the aforementioned premises.
As long ago as 1687, Sir Isaac Newton predicted with uncanny accuracy the in-
evitable conclusion to this action: namely, the laptop (or to be strictly accurate,
large number of pieces of a former laptop) coming to rest with a singular lack of
grace on the ground. Luckily, no one was injured by the impact. The resultant bag
of smashed laptop components arrived at Vogon’s laboratory for a forensically
sound data recovery [7].
The laptop computer had impacted the ground across its front edge at an angle,
forcing the hard disk drive assembly to go completely through the screen of the lap-
top. The highly delicate spatial relationship between heads, flexures, platters, and
spindle had become disturbed, and the bed of the drive unit was not concave. This
imparted an oscillation in two dimensions during drive operation. The drive elec-
tronics were destroyed in the impact. After an evening’s work by a highly skilled
hardware engineer, it was determined that a full fix was possible, and a perfect
image was taken. Vogon had no knowledge of whether the chap was guilty, but they
bet he was in shock when the evidence was presented [7].
Case Study Two: The Case of the Burned Tapes
This case does not involve true forensic investigation, but it does highlight the fact that
it is important never to give up on a job, no matter how seemingly hopeless it appears.
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
27

Sets of digital audio tape (DAT) tapes were sent to Vogon from a loss ad-
juster [7]. The DAT tapes were caught in a fire, which had engulfed a company’s
head office and wiped out the primary trading infrastructure. The company’s IT
systems had been at the center of the blaze, and this had unfortunately raised the
magnetic media on the surface of the servers hard drives past its curie point. The
DAT tapes had, rather inadvisably as it turned out, not been stored off-site. They
were, however, stored a little way from the center of the blaze.
Despite this, the DAT tapes arrived in a rather sorry condition. The plastic cas-
ing had melted to, around, and onto the tapes, and the whole mechanism was fused
into a homologous glob. It is fair to say the tapes were sent to Vogon with the full
expectation that they would be declared unrecoverable and used as the basis from
which to make a loss settlement [7].
This recovery involved hours of work from both hardware and tape recovery
engineers. The tapes were carefully cut away from the molten mass and treated for
fire damage. The next stage was to rehouse the tapes and pass them forward to the
tape recovery team. Following a number of complex stages, the recovery team was
able to extract a stream of data from the tapes that accounted for some 95% of the
original data stored on the company’s tape backups.
The result was a company up and running in a matter of days rather than weeks,
or, more likely, never. It also resulted in a significant reduction in the claims settle-
ment by the loss adjuster and business continuity for the unfortunate company.
SUMMARY
Computers have appeared in the course of litigation for over 28 years. In 1977,
there were 291 U.S. federal cases and 246 state cases in which the word computer ap-
peared and which were sufficiently important to be noted in the Lexis database. In
the U.K., there were only 20. However, as early as 1968, the computer’s existence
was considered sufficiently important for special provisions to be made in the En-
glish Civil Evidence Act.
The following description is designed to summarize the issues rather than at-
tempt to give a complete guide. As far as one can tell, noncontentious cases tend not
to be reported, and the arrival of computers in commercial disputes and in crimi-
nal cases did not create immediate difficulties. Judges sought to allow computer-
based evidence on the basis that it was no different from forms of evidence with
which they were already familiar: documents, business books, weighing machines,
calculating machines, films, and audio tapes. This is not to say that such cases were
without difficulty; however, no completely new principles were required. Quite
soon, though, it became apparent that many new situations were arising and that
28
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

analogies to more traditional evidential material were beginning to break down.
Some of these were tackled in legislation, as with the English 1968 act and the U.S.
Federal Rules of Evidence in 1976, but many were addressed in a series of court
cases. Not all of the key cases deal directly with computers, but they do have a bear-
ing on them as they relate to matters that are characteristic of computer-originated
evidence. For example, computer-originated evidence or information that is not
immediately readable by a human being is usually gathered by a mechanical count-
ing or weighing instrument. The calculation could also be performed by a me-
chanical or electronic device.
The focus of most of this legislation and judicial activity was determining the
admissibility of the evidence. The common law and legislative rules are those that
have arisen as a result of judicial decisions and specific law. They extend beyond
mere guidance. They are rules that a court must follow; the thought behind these
rules may have been to impose standards and uniformity in helping a court test au-
thenticity, reliability, and completeness. Nevertheless, they have acquired a status of
their own and in some cases prevent a court from making ad hoc common sense
decisions about the quality of evidence. The usual effect is that once a judge has de-
clared evidence inadmissible (that is, failing to conform to the rules), the evidence
is never put to a jury, for a variety of reasons that will become apparent shortly. It
is not wholly possible for someone interested in the practical aspects of computer
forensics (that is, the issues of demonstrating authenticity, reliability, completeness,
or lack thereof) to separate out the legal tests.
Now let’s look at some of the more common questions that computer forensics
may be able to answer. The following conclusions are not exhaustive, nor is the
order significant.
Conclusions
Documents: To prove authenticity; alternatively, to demonstrate a forgery. This
is the direct analogy to proving the authenticity of a print-based document.
Reports: Computer generated from human input. This is the situation where a
series of original events or transactions are input by human beings, but where
after regular computer processing, a large number of reports, both via print-out
and on-screen can be generated. Examples would include the order, sales, and in-
ventory applications used by many commercial organizations and retail banking.
Real evidence: Machine-readable measurements and the like (weighing, count-
ing, or otherwise recording events) and the reading of the contents of magnetic
stripes and bar codes and smart cards.
Reports generated from machine-readable measurements: Items that have
been counted, weighed, and so on and the results then processed and collated.
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
29

Electronic transactions: To prove that a transaction took place or to demon-
strate a presumption was incorrect. Typical examples include money transfers,
ATM transactions, securities settlement, and EDIs.
Conclusions reached by search programs: These are programs that have
searched documents, reports, and so on, for names and patterns. Typical users
of such programs are auditors and investigators.
Event reconstruction: To show a sequence of events or transactions passing
through a complex computer system. This is related to the proving of electronic
transactions, but with more proactive means of investigation event recon-
struction—to show how a computer installation or process dependent on a
computer may have failed. Typical examples include computer contract dis-
putes (when a computer failed to deliver acceptable levels of service and blame
must be apportioned), disaster investigations, and failed trade situations in se-
curities dealing systems.
Liability in a situation: This is where CAD designs have relied on autocom-
pletion or filling-in by a program (in other respects, a CAD design is a straight-
forward computer-held document). Liability in a situation is also where a
computer program has made a decision (or recommendation) based on the ap-
plication of rules and formulae, where the legal issue is the quality and reliabil-
ity of the application program, and the rules with which it has been fed.
The following occasions could arise in any of a number of forms of litigation:
Civil matters
Breach of contract
Asset recovery
Tort, including negligence
Breach of confidence
Defamation
Breach of securities industry legislation and regulation or companies acts
Employee disputes
Copyright and other intellectual property disputes
Consumer protection law obligations (and other examples of no-fault liability)
Data protection legislation
Criminal matters such as
Theft acts, including deception
Criminal damage
Demanding money with menaces
Companies law, securities industry, and banking offenses
Criminal offenses concerned with copyright and intellectual property
30
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Drug offenses
Trading standards offenses
Official secrets
Computer Misuse Act offenses
Pornography offenses
As mentioned earlier, the most likely situations are that computer-based evidence
contributes to an investigation or to litigation and is not the whole of it.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Principle Forensic Activities Checklist (as shown in Table F1.2
of Appendix F), the computer forensics specialist should adhere to the provisional list
of actions for some of the principle forensic methods. The order is not significant;
however, these are the activities for which the researcher would want to provide a de-
tailed description of procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use and admissi-
bility. A number of these methods have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and an optional team case
project. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Criminal prosecutors use computer evidence in a variety of
crimes where incriminating documents can be found: homicides, financial
fraud, drug and embezzlement record-keeping, and child pornography.
2.
True or False? Civil litigations cannot make use of personal and business
records found on computer systems that bear on fraud, divorce, discrimina-
tion, and harassment cases.
3.
True or False? Insurance companies may be able to mitigate costs by using dis-
covered computer evidence of possible fraud in accident, arson, and work-
man’s compensation cases.
4.
True or False? Corporations often hire computer forensics specialists to find evi-
dence relating to sexual harassment, embezzlement, theft or misappropriation
of trade secrets, and other internal and confidential information.
5.
True or False? Law enforcement officials frequently require assistance in pre-
search warrant preparations and post-seizure handling of computer equipment.
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
31

Multiple Choice
1.
When handling computers for legal purposes, investigators increasingly are
faced with four main types of problems, except:
A. How to recover data from computers while preserving evidential integrity
B.
How to keep your data and information safe from theft or accidental loss
C. How to securely store and handle recovered data
D. How to find the significant information in a large volume of data
E.
How to present the information to a court of law and to defense during dis-
closure
2.
In order for a double tier approach to work it is necessary to have:
A. A defined methodology
B.
Civil control
C. A breach of contract
D. Asset recovery
E.
Tort, including negligence
3.
Criteria for equipment in the double tier approach results in the following
except:
A. Simple to use
B.
Quick to learn
C. Totally reliable
D. Robust and durable
E.
Legally operable
4.
A computer forensics specialist is the person responsible for doing computer
forensics. The computer forensics specialist will take several careful steps to
identify and attempt to retrieve possible evidence that may exist on a subject
computer system. This results in the following steps except:
A. Protects the subject computer system during the forensic examination from
any possible alteration, damage, data corruption, or virus introduction
B.
Discovers all files on the subject system. This includes existing normal files,
deleted yet remaining files, hidden files, password-protected files, and en-
crypted files
C. Recovers all (or as much as possible) of discovered deleted files
D. Reconstructs system failure
E.
Reveals (to the extent possible) the contents of hidden files as well as tem-
porary or swap files used by both the application programs and the oper-
ating system
32
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

5.
A computer forensics professional does more than turn on a computer, make
a directory listing, and search through files. Your forensics professionals should
be able to successfully perform complex evidence recovery procedures with the
skill and expertise that lends credibility to your case. For example, they should
be able to perform the following services, except:
A. Data seizure
B.
Data duplication and preservation
C. Data recovery
D. Document searches
E.
Data dump
Exercise
When senior officials of a Fortune 500 company found out that certain employees
were operating internal slush funds totaling about $286 million dollars, they called
in a computer forensics professional to find out why and to assess the impact.
Please explain how the computer forensics professional went about resolving the
problem.
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A major hotel and casino needed to preserve legacy client digital linear tape (DLT)
tapes and recover, extract, and host over 260 gigabytes of electronic data for attor-
ney review. How would your computer forensics team go about preserving and re-
covering the electronic data?
Case Project
Let’s look at a real-world scenario and how computer forensics plays into it. Late
one night, a system administrator (sysadmin) troubleshoots a network problem.
She captures several minutes worth of network traffic to review with a protocol an-
alyzer. While conducting this review, she notices some odd traffic. A user’s desktop
has sent a well-formed packet to an obscure port on an unfamiliar IP address out-
side the company’s firewall. Shortly thereafter, one of the company’s research and
development database servers transmits a packet that does not conform to any of
the formats the company uses to the same IP address. This intrigues the sysadmin,
who does a lookup of the IP address; it comes back as one of the firm’s competitors.
Now, she’s not merely curious, she’s concerned. She picks up the phone and calls
her boss. The boss could say, “Just block that port,” and then go back to bed, but
Computer Forensics Fundamentals
33

there’s a far better way to handle this situation. Please explain how you would han-
dle this situation.
Optional Team Case Project
A major energy services provider was faced with a request from the Securities and
Exchange Commission to provide copies of all electronic correspondence within
the company and its subsidiaries worldwide relating to key projects. How do you as
a computer forensics specialist handle this?
REFERENCES
[1] “2003 Computer Crime and Security Survey,” Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation, J. Edgar Hoover Building, 935 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Wash-
ington, D.C. 20535-0001, 2003.
[2] Robbins, Judd, “An Explanation of Computer Forensics,” National Foren-
sics Center, 774 Mays Blvd. #10 143, Incline Village, NV 89451, 2004 [The
Computer Forensics Expert Witness Network, 472 Scenic Drive, Ashland,
OR] (©2004, National Forensics Center. All rights reserved), 2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[4] “Computer Forensics,” Rehman Technology Services, Inc., 18950 U.S.
Highway 441, Suite 201, Mount Dora, Florida 32757, 2001. (©2002,
Rehman Technology Services, Inc. All rights reserved), 2001. 
[5] Sommer, Peter, “Computer Forensics: An Introduction,” Virtual City As-
sociates, PO Box 6447, London N4 4RX, United Kingdom, 2001.
http://csrc.lse.ac.uk.
[6] Vacca, John R., i-mode CrashCourse, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
[7] Vogon Forensics Bulletin, Vol. 3, Issue 3, Vogon International Limited, Tal-
isman Business Centre, Talisman Road, Bicester, Oxfordshire, OX26 6HR
United Kingdom, 2001. 
34
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

35
Types of Computer
Forensics Technology
2
D
efensive information technology will ultimately benefit from the availabil-
ity of cyber forensic evidence of malicious activity. Criminal investigators
rely on recognized scientific forensic disciplines, such as medical pathology,
to provide vital information used in apprehending criminals and determining their
motives. Today, an increased opportunity for cyber crime exists, making advances
in the law enforcement, legal, and forensic computing technical arenas imperative.
As previously explained, cyber forensics is the discovery, analysis, and reconstruc-
tion of evidence extracted from any element of computer systems, computer net-
works, computer media, and computer peripherals that allow investigators to solve
a crime. Cyber forensics focuses on real-time, online evidence gathering rather than
the traditional offline computer disk forensic technology.
Two distinct components exist in the emerging field of cyber forensics technol-
ogy. The first, computer forensics, deals with gathering evidence from computer
media seized at the crime scene. Principal concerns with computer forensics involve
imaging storage media, recovering deleted files, searching slack and free space, and
preserving the collected information for litigation purposes. Several computer
forensic tools are available to investigators. The second component, network foren-
sics, is a more technically challenging aspect of cyber forensics. It involves gathering
digital evidence that is distributed across large-scale, complex networks. Often this
evidence is transient in nature and is not preserved within permanent storage media.
Network forensics deals primarily with in-depth analysis of computer network in-
trusion evidence, because current commercial intrusion analysis tools are inade-
quate to deal with today’s networked, distributed environments.
Similar to traditional medical forensics, such as pathology, today’s computer
forensics is generally performed postmortem (after the crime or event occurred). In

36
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
a networked, distributed environment, it is imperative to perform forensic-like ex-
aminations of victim information systems on an almost continuous basis, in addi-
tion to traditional postmortem forensic analysis. This is essential to continued
functioning of critical information systems and infrastructures. Few, if any, forensic
tools are available to assist in preempting the attacks or locating the perpetrators. In
the battle against malicious hackers, investigators must perform cyber forensic func-
tions in support of various objectives. These objectives include timely cyberattack
containment, perpetrator location and identification, damage mitigation, and re-
covery initiation in the case of a crippled, yet still functioning, network. Standard in-
trusion analysis includes examination of many sources of data evidence (intrusion
detection system logs, firewall logs, audit trails, and network management informa-
tion). Cyber forensics adds inspection of transient and other frequently overlooked
elements such as contents or state of memory, registers, basic input/output system,
input/output buffers, serial receive buffers, L2 cache, front side and back side system
caches, and various system buffers (drive and video buffers).
Now let’s briefly look at specific types of computer forensics technology that
are being used by military, law enforcement, and business computer specialists. It
is beyond the scope of this chapter to cover in detail every type of computer foren-
sic technology. The following chapters of the book as well as the appendixes have
been designed and created to do that specific task.
TYPES OF MILITARY COMPUTER FORENSIC TECHNOLOGY
The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) cyber forensics includes evaluation and in-
depth examination of data related to both the trans- and post-cyberattack periods.
Key objectives of cyber forensics include rapid discovery of evidence, estimation of
potential impact of the malicious activity on the victim, and assessment of the in-
tent and identity of the perpetrator. Real-time tracking of potentially malicious ac-
tivity is especially difficult when the pertinent information has been intentionally
hidden, destroyed, or modified in order to elude discovery. The information direc-
torate’s cyber forensic concepts are new and untested. The directorate entered into
a partnership with the National Institute of Justice via the auspices of the National
Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center (NLECTC) located in
Rome, New York, to test these new ideas and prototype tools. The Computer
Forensics Experiment 2000 (CFX-2000) resulted from this partnership. This first-
of-a-kind event represents a new paradigm for transitioning cyber forensic tech-
nology from military research and development (R&D) laboratories into the hands
of law enforcement. The experiment used a realistic cyber crime scenario specifi-
cally designed to exercise and show the value added of the directorate-developed
cyber forensic technology.

The central hypothesis of CFX-2000 is that it is possible to accurately determine
the motives, intent, targets, sophistication, identity, and location of cyber criminals
and cyber terrorists by deploying an integrated forensic analysis framework. The
execution of CFX-2000 required the development and simulation of a realistic,
complex cyber crime scenario exercising conventional, as well as R&D prototype,
cyber forensic tools.
The NLECTC assembled a diverse group of computer crime investigators from
DoD and federal, state, and local law enforcement to participate in the CFX-2000
exercise hosted by the New York State Police’s Forensic Investigative Center in Al-
bany, New York. Officials divided the participants into three teams. Each team re-
ceived an identical set of software tools and was presented with identical initial
evidence of suspicious activity. The objective of each team was to uncover several
linked criminal activities from a maze of about 30 milestones that culminated in an
information warfare crime (Figure 2.1) [1].
The cyber forensic tools involved in CFX-2000 consisted of commercial off-
the-shelf software and directorate-sponsored R&D prototypes. The Synthesizing
Information from Forensic Investigations (SI-FI) integration environment, devel-
oped under contract by WetStone Technologies, Inc. [2], was the cornerstone of
the technology demonstrated. SI-FI supports the collection, examination, and
analysis processes employed during a cyber forensic investigation. The SI-FI pro-
totype uses digital evidence bags (DEBs), which are secure and tamperproof con-
tainers used to store digital evidence. Investigators can seal evidence in the DEBs
and use the SI-FI implementation to collaborate on complex investigations. Au-
thorized users can securely reopen the DEBs for examination, while automatic
audit of all actions ensures the continued integrity of their contents. The teams used
other forensic tools and prototypes to collect and analyze specific features of the
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
37
FIGURE 2.1 CFX-2000 schematic (© 2002, Associated
Business Publications. All rights reserved).

38
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
digital evidence, perform case management and timelining of digital events, auto-
mate event link analysis, and perform steganography detection. The results of CFX-
2000 verified that the hypothesis was largely correct and that it is possible to
ascertain the intent and identity of cyber criminals. As electronic technology con-
tinues its explosive growth, researchers need to continue vigorous R&D of cyber
forensic technology in preparation for the onslaught of cyber reconnaissance
probes and attacks.
TYPES OF LAW ENFORCEMENT COMPUTER 
FORENSIC TECHNOLOGY
As previously defined, computer forensics involves the preservation, identification,
extraction, and documentation of computer evidence stored in the form of mag-
netically encoded information (data). Often the computer evidence was created
transparently by the computer’s operating system and without the knowledge of the
computer operator. Such information may actually be hidden from view and, thus,
special forensic software tools and techniques are required to preserve, identify, ex-
tract, and document the related computer evidence.
Computer forensics tools and techniques have proven to be a valuable resource
for law enforcement in the identification of leads and in the processing of computer-
related evidence. Computer forensics tools and techniques have become important
resources for use in internal investigations, civil lawsuits, and computer security
risk management.
Forensic software tools and methods can be used to identify passwords, logons,
and other information that is automatically dumped from the computer memory
as a transparent operation of today’s popular personal computer operating systems.
Such computer forensic software tools can also be used to identify backdated files
and to tie a diskette to the computer that created it.
Law enforcement and military agencies have been involved in processing com-
puter evidence for years. This section touches very briefly on issues dealing with
Windows NT®, Windows® 2000, XP and 2003 and their use within law enforcement
computer forensic technology.
Windows XP and Windows 2003 are operating systems that are often used on
notebook and desktop computers in corporations and government agencies. Thus,
they are currently the operating systems most likely to be encountered in computer
investigations and computer security reviews. Be advised that this chapter does not
cover the use of black box computer forensics software tools. Those tools are good
for some basic investigation tasks, but they do not offer a full computer forensics
solution. Furthermore, such approaches are all but useless in computer security risk
assessments. Such assessments usually require that searches and file listings be con-
ducted overtly or even covertly from a single floppy diskette.

Computer Evidence Processing Procedures
Processing procedures and methodologies should conform to federal computer ev-
idence processing standards. Computer processing procedures have also been de-
veloped for the U.S. Treasury Department.
Training and certification programs have also been developed for the Interna-
tional Association of Computer Investigation Specialists (IACIS). For these reasons,
computer forensic trainers and instructors should be well qualified to teach the cor-
rect computer-processing methods and procedures.
Preservation of Evidence
Computer evidence is fragile and susceptible to alteration or erasure by any num-
ber of occurrences. Computer forensic instructors should expose their trainees to
bit stream backup theories that ensure the preservation of all storage levels that may
contain evidence. For example, SafeBack software overcomes some of the evidence
weaknesses inherent in black box computer forensics approaches (see sidebar,
“Mirror Image Backup Software”). SafeBack technology can be purchased from
New Technologies, Inc. [3] and has become a worldwide standard in making mir-
ror image backups since 1990, when it was developed based on requirements then
established by the U.S. Treasury Department and the IACIS.
MIRROR IMAGE BACKUP SOFTWARE
SafeBack is used to create mirror-image (bit-stream) backup files of hard disks or to
make a mirror-image copy of an entire hard disk drive or partition. The process is
analogous to photography and the creation of a photo negative. Once the photo neg-
ative has been made, several exact reproductions can be made of the original. Unlike
a photo, SafeBack image files cannot be altered or modified to alter the reproduc-
tion. This is because SafeBack is an industry standard self-authenticating computer
forensics tool that is used to create evidence-grade backups of hard drives.
With the release of SafeBack version 3.0 or higher, the integrity of SafeBack files is
maintained through the use of two separate mathematical hashing processes that rely
upon the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)-tested Secure Hash
Algorithm256 (SHA256). Users of prior versions of SafeBack are encouraged to
upgrade to take advantage of the greater levels of accuracy achieved with version 3.0.
Information about upgrades can be found on the Internet at http://www.forensics-
intl.com/. The upgrade of SafeBack has new and added features and it takes into account
the last sector error finding by NIST concerning the older SafeBack version 2.0.
URLs are subject to change without notice.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
39
q

Backup image files created with SafeBack can be written to any writable magnetic
storage device, including small computer system interface (SCSI) tape backup units.
SafeBack preserves all the data on a backed-up or copied hard disk, including inactive
or deleted data. Backup image files can be restored to another system’s hard disk.
Remote operation via a parallel port connection allows the hard disk on a remote PC
to be read or written by the master system. A date- and time-stamped audit trail
maintains a record of SafeBack operations during a session, and when the default is
used an SHA256 hash is recorded in the output audit file. This hash can be used to
cross-validate the accuracy of the process with any other software utility that relies
upon the NIST-tested SHA256 algorithm. To avoid possible claims that the SafeBack
image file may have been altered after the fact, SafeBack now safeguards the internally
stored SHA256 values. Any alterations of computer data are quickly brought to the
attention of the operator of the program when the SafeBack image file is restored.
Simply put, SafeBack is a DOS-based utility used to back up and restore hard
disks. SafeBack picks up every last bit of data-unused and erased data included—on
the original disk and stores it in a tape or disk file (or series of files). SafeBack can
take that same backup file and recreate the original disk on your own system.
SafeBack does not write or otherwise modify the original system and can (and
should) be started from a boot diskette.
SafeBack also has a couple of derivative operating modes. The first is Verify
mode, where restoring from a backup disk is done, but the data is thrown away. This
is more useful than it first appears to be because it allows the operator of the pro-
gram to scan his or her backups to make sure that they will read back without errors,
without having to go through the setup required by a standard SafeBack restore
procedure. The other derivative operation is Copy, which feeds the Restore function
directly with the output of the Backup function, with no intermediate files. This is
less useful than it first appears to be. If the operator of SafeBack is considering mak-
ing a copy, he might as well make a backup image file and then restore it as needed.
PRIMARY USES
The primary uses of SafeBack are as follows:
Used to create evidence-grade backups of hard disk drives on Intel-based com-
puter systems
Used to exactly restore archived SafeBack images to another computer hard
disk drive of equal or larger storage capacity
Used as an evidence preservation tool in law enforcement and civil litigation
matters
Used as an intelligence gathering tool by military agencies
40
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

PROGRAM FEATURES AND BENEFITS
The program features and benefits of SafeBack are as follows:
DOS based for ease of operation, for speed, and to eliminate the problems cre-
ated by a separate operating system concerning the potential alteration of data.
No software dongle. Software dongles get in the way and they restrict your
ability to process several computers at the same time.
Incorporates two separate implementations of the NIST-tested SHA256 algorithm
to ensure the integrity of all data contained on the target computer storage device.
Provides a detailed audit trail of the backup process for evidence documenta-
tion purposes, and the SafeBack default outputs an SHA256 hash value that can
be compared with other utilities when cross-validation of findings are deemed
to be important.
Checks for possible data hiding when sector cyclic redundancy checks (CRCs)
do not match on the target hard disk drive. These findings are automatically
recorded in the SafeBack audit log file.
Accurately copies all areas of the hard disk drive.
Allows the archive of non-DOS and non-Windows hard disk drives (Unix on
an Intel-based computer system).
Allows for the backup process to be made via the printer port.
Duplicate copies of hard disk drives can be made from hard disk to hard disk
in direct mode.
SafeBack image files can be stored as one large file or separate files of fixed sizes.
This feature is helpful in making copies for archive on CDs.
Uses tried and proven evidence preservation technology with a long-term
legacy of success in government agencies.
Does not compress relevant data to avoid legal arguments that the original com-
puter evidence was altered through data compression or software translation.
It is fast and efficient. In spite of the extensive mathematical validation, the lat-
est version of SafeBack runs as fast or faster than prior versions. Processing
speeds are much faster when state-of-the-art computer systems are used to
make the backup.
Makes copies in either physical or logical mode at the option of the user.
Copies and restores multiple partitions containing one or more operating systems.
Can be used to accurately copy and restore most hard disk drives including
Windows NT, Windows 2000, and Windows XP configured drives.
Accuracy is guaranteed in the backup process through the combination of
mathematical CRCs that provides a level of accuracy that far exceeds the accu-
racy provided by 128-bit CRCs (RSA MD5).
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
41
q

Writes to SCSI tape backup units or hard disk drives at the option of the user.
The current version of SafeBack compresses unused and unformatted sections
of the hard disk drive to increase processing speeds and to conserve storage
space concerning the writing of the SafeBack image file [3].
Trojan Horse Programs
The need to preserve the computer evidence before processing a computer should
be clearly demonstrated by the computer forensic instructor through the use of
programs designed to destroy data and modify the operating systems. The partici-
pant should be able to demonstrate his or her ability to avoid destructive programs
and traps that can be planted by computer users bent on destroying data and evi-
dence. Such programs can also be used to covertly capture sensitive information,
passwords, and network logons.
Computer Forensics Documentation
The documentation of forensic processing methodologies and findings is impor-
tant. This is even true concerning computer security risk assessments and internal
audits, because without proper documentation, it is difficult to present findings. If
the security or audit findings become the object of a lawsuit or a criminal investi-
gation, then documentation becomes even more important. Thus, the computer
forensic instructor should also teach the participant the ins and outs of computer
evidence processing methodology (which facilitates good evidence-processing doc-
umentation and good evidence chain of custody procedures). The benefits will be
obvious to investigators, but they will also become clear to internal auditors and
computer security specialists.
File Slack
The occurrence of random memory dumps in hidden storage areas should be dis-
cussed and covered in detail during workshops. Techniques and automated tools
that are used to capture and evaluate file slack should be demonstrated in a train-
ing course. Such data is the source of potential security leaks regarding passwords,
network logons, email, database entries, and word processing documents. These se-
curity and evidence issues should also be discussed and demonstrated during the
training course. The participants should be able to demonstrate their ability to deal
with slack and should demonstrate proficiency in searching file slack, documenting
their findings, and eliminating the security risk.
42
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Data-Hiding Techniques
Trade secret information and other sensitive data can easily be secreted using any
number of techniques. It is possible to hide diskettes within diskettes and to hide
entire computer hard disk drive partitions. These issues should be discussed in any
computer forensics training course from a detection standpoint, as well as from a
security risk standpoint. Tools that help in the identification of such anomalies
should be demonstrated and discussed (like AnaDiskTM [see sidebar, “AnaDisk
Diskette Analysis Tool”]) in the training course. Participants should be required to
demonstrate their understanding of such issues. This aspect of the training be-
comes especially important during the last day of the course when the participants
are called on to extract their Certificate of Completion from a special floppy
diskette. Data-hiding courses are only open to classified government agencies and
businesses that have a demonstrated need to know about this kind of information
as outlined in a company’s training policies. This is because the information cov-
ered in a data-hiding course can be used to defeat government computer security
review processes and techniques.
ANADISK DISKETTE ANALYSIS TOOL
AnaDisk turns your PC into a sophisticated diskette analysis tool. The software was
originally created to meet the needs of the U.S. Treasury Department in 1991. It is
primarily used to identify data storage anomalies on floppy diskettes and generic
hardware in the form of floppy disk controllers; bios are needed when using this
software. It works at a very low level and makes maximum use of the floppy diskette
hardware. The software also has limited search capabilities and can be used to copy
abnormal diskettes. It can also be used to write data at a physical sector level and to
format diskettes using any number of combinations.
AnaDisk has the capability to duplicate floppy diskettes, but this feature is used
primarily with odd diskette formats (in cases like the FBI Russian mole case of sus-
pected spy Robert Phillip Hanssen). However, standard duplication of floppy
diskettes is more easily accomplished with New Technology Inc.’s  CopyQM (see
sidebar “CopyQM: Diskette Duplication Software”), which has been upgraded and
certified by the U.S. DoD for making copies of diskettes used in classified computer
security risk reviews.
In other words, AnaDisk can be used to analyze floppy diskettes when doing
computer evidence consulting work, which involves abnormal floppy diskettes or
data storage issues tied to floppy diskettes. It can also be used in data-hiding courses
to create data-hiding areas by adding extra sectors and tracks to floppy diskettes and
in writing data to unformatted floppy diskettes.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
43
q

PRIMARY USES
Security reviews of floppy diskettes for storage anomalies
Duplication of diskettes that are nonstandard or that involve storage anomalies
Editing diskettes at a physical sector level
Searching for data on floppy diskettes in traditional and nontraditional storage
areas
Formatting diskettes in nontraditional ways for training purposes and to illus-
trate data-hiding techniques
PROGRAM FEATURES AND BENEFITS
DOS-based for ease of operation and speed.
No software dongle.  Again, software dongles get in the way and they are 
restrictive.
Keyword searches can be conducted at a very low level and on diskettes that
have been formatted with extra tracks. This feature is helpful in the evaluation
of diskettes that may involve sophisticated data-hiding techniques.
All DOS formats are supported, as well as many non-DOS formats (Apple
Macintosh, Unix TARTM, and many others. If the diskette will fit in a PC floppy
diskette drive, it is likely that AnaDisk can be used to analyze it.
Allows custom formatting of diskettes with extra tracks and sectors.
Scans for anomalies will identify odd formats, extra tracks, and extra sectors.
Data mismatches, concerning some file formats, are also identified when file
extensions have been changed in an attempt to hide data.
This software can be used to copy almost any diskette, including most copy-
protected diskettes [4].
COPYQM: DISKETTE DUPLICATION SOFTWARE
CopyQM Plus essentially turns a personal computer into a diskette duplicator. In a
single pass, diskettes are formatted, copied, and verified. This capability is useful for
computer forensics specialists and computer security specialists who need to pre-
configure floppy diskettes for specific uses and duplicate them.
Classified government agencies and government contractors are required to
perform periodic examinations of government computer systems to determine if
44
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

classified data may reside on nonclassified computer systems. Programs like New
Technology Inc.’s TextSearch Plus (see sidebar, “Text Search Plus”) and TextSearch
NT were designed specifically for this purpose and they are both certified by the U.S.
DoD for use in classified government risk assessments. CopyQM is also certified by
the U.S. DoD for use in the duplication of “search disks” used in classified U.S. gov-
ernment computer risk reviews.
CopyQM Plus can also create self-extracting executable programs that can be
used to duplicate specific diskettes. This feature makes CopyQM an ideal tool for use
in security reviews because once a CopyQM disk-creation program has been created,
it can be used by anyone to create pre-configured security risk assessment diskettes.
When the resulting program is run, the diskette image of the original diskette will be
restored on multiple diskettes automatically.
This process requires little technical knowledge and it allows computer special-
ists to delegate more of the security risk assessment responsibilities to employees
with minimal technical knowledge. The diskette images can also be password pro-
tected when the diskette images are converted to self-extracting programs. This is
helpful when you want to keep computer forensic and computer security software
tools away from curious hands.
PRIMARY USES
The program is used to archive the image of a floppy diskette and to create one
or more duplicate copies of the master diskette when desired.
It can be used to make one or more copies of all areas of a normal floppy diskette.
Thus, it basically turns your PC into a diskette duplication machine. This can be
helpful when you need to repeatedly make copies of diskettes for training classes.
It is also helpful for making multiple copies of evidence diskettes.
It can be used to automatically create and serialize software stored on floppy
diskettes. This type of branding can be helpful in creating copies of diskettes
that will be shared among several lawyers or with the court.
CopyQM Plus can be used to password protect the contents of an entire floppy
diskette. This is helpful when diskettes are shared over the Internet and when
security is a concern.
CopyQM Plus can be used to create virus-scanned floppy diskette tool kits con-
figured for repeated tasks performed by computer forensics specialists, electronic
data personnel (EDP), auditors and computer security specialists. The software is
particularly helpful in creating computer incident response tool kit diskettes.
CopyQM Plus can be used to send a normal diskette over the Internet.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
45
q

PROGRAM FEATURES AND BENEFITS
DOS-based for ease of operation and speed.
No software dongle. Again, software dongles get in the way.
It converts diskettes into self-contained programs that, when executed, recre-
ate the original master diskette as many times as desired.
All DOS formats are supported as well as many non-DOS formats (Apple Mac-
intosh, Unix TAR, and many others).
Images may be optionally password protected through the use of built-in en-
cryption.
Diskette images can be serial numbered anywhere in the copy of the diskette.
When this feature is selected, a log of the process is maintained for reference.
The software can be used to create copy protection (tied to software), making
it impossible for a casual pirate to make illegal copies of the software.
CopyQM Plus is significantly faster than DOS DiskCopy and it automatically
copies the subject diskette, verifies the copy, and formats the target diskette
during the restoration process.
It converts one diskette format to another (720 Kbps to 1.44 MB). This feature
deals with 360 Kbps, 720 Kbps, 1.2 MB, 1.44 MB, 1.68 MB, and 2.88 MB formats.
CopyQM Plus can be used to duplicate and restore any number of copies of a
given master diskette.
It copies files, file slack, and unallocated storage space (erased files). It does not
copy all areas of copy protected diskettes (extra sectors added to one or more
tracks on a floppy diskette). AnaDisk software should be used for this purpose [8].
E-Commerce Investigations
A new Internet forensic tool has recently been introduced that aims to help educa-
tors, police, and other law enforcement officials trace the past World Wide Web ac-
tivity of computer users. Net Threat AnalyzerTM, from Gresham, Oregon-based
New Technology Inc. (NTI), can be used to identify past Internet browsing and
email activity done through specific computers. The software analyzes a computer’s
disk drives and other storage areas that are generally unknown to or beyond the
reach of most general computer users.
Kids can figure out ways to prevent their parents from finding anything on
their machine, but Net Threat Analyzer goes back in after the fact where things
46
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

are easier to detect. New Technology Inc. has made its Net Threat Analyzer avail-
able free of charge to computer crime specialists, school officials, and police.
The program is booted from a floppy disk and uses filtering tools to collect data
on users’ basic browsing and email history. It flags possible threats, such as any-
thing dealing with drugs, bombs, country codes, or pornography. Web sites change
so often that it’s difficult to keep up with which ones are porn or drug sites.
For example, http://www.whitehouse.gov, is the official White House Web site,
and www.whitehouse.com is a pornography site. If Junior’s been to whitehouse.com
500 to 700 times, it will make it through most net nanny software, but it will raise
a red flag with the Net Threat Analyzer.
The software was designed to help prevent situations like the tragedies at
Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, and Thurston High School in
Springfield, Oregon, where weapons were made by teenagers who had downloaded
the instructions from the Internet.
New Technology Inc., which specializes in computer forensics tools and train-
ing, has posted order forms for its software on its Web site at http://www.forensics-
intl.com. The tool is not available to the public, but a special version can be
purchased by Fortune 500 companies, government agencies, military agencies, and
consultants who have a legitimate need for the software.
Dual-Purpose Programs
Programs can be designed to perform multiple processes and tasks at the same
time. They can also be designed for delayed tasking. These concepts should be
demonstrated to the training participants during the course through the use of spe-
cialized software. The participant should also have hands-on experience with these
programs.
Text Search Techniques
New Technology Inc. has also developed specialized search techniques and tools
that can be used to find targeted strings of text in files, file slack, unallocated file
space, and Windows swap files. Each participant will leave their training class with
a licensed copy of their TextSearch PlusTM software and the necessary knowledge
to conduct computer security reviews and computer related investigations (see
sidebar, “Text Search Plus”).
This search tool is approved for use in security reviews by some U.S. government
classified agencies.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
47

TEXT SEARCH PLUS
TextSearch Plus was specifically designed and enhanced for speed and accuracy in
security reviews. It is widely used by classified government agencies and corpora-
tions that support these agencies. The software is also used by hundreds of law
enforcement agencies throughout the world in computer crime investigations.
This software is used to quickly search hard disk drives, zip disks, and floppy
diskettes for key words or specific patterns of text. It operates at either a logical or
physical level at the option of the user. TextSearch Plus has been specifically designed
to meet the requirements of the government for use in computer security exit
reviews from classified government facilities. The current version is approximately
25% faster than prior versions. It is also compatible with FAT 12, FAT 16, and FAT
32 DOS-based systems. As a result, it can be used on Windows 98, 2000, XP, and
2003 systems. Tests indicate that this tool finds more text strings than any other
forensic search tool. It is sold separately and is also included in several of the New
Technology Inc. tool suites. As a stand alone tool, it is ideal for security risk assess-
ments. When security spills are identified, they can easily be eliminated with New
Technology Inc.’s M-SweepTM program.
PRIMARY USES
Used to find occurrences of words or strings of text in data stored in files, slack,
and unallocated file space
Used in exit reviews of computer storage media from classified facilities
Used to identify data leakage of classified information on nonclassified com-
puter systems
Used in internal audits to identify violations of corporate policy
Used by Fortune 500 corporations, government contractors, and government
agencies in security reviews and security risk assessments
Used in corporate due diligence efforts regarding proposed mergers
Used to find occurrences of keywords strings of text in data found at a physical
sector level
Used to find evidence in corporate, civil, and criminal investigations that in-
volve computer-related evidence
Used to find embedded text in formatted word processing documents (Word-
PerfectTM and fragments of such documents in ambient data storage areas)
48
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

PROGRAM FEATURES AND BENEFITS
DOS-based for ease of operation and speed.
No software dongle. Software dongles get in the way and they restrict your
ability to process several computers at the same time.
Small memory foot print (under 60 KB), which allows the software to run on
even the original IBM PC.
Compact program size, which easily fits on one floppy diskette with other
forensic software utilities.
Searches files, slack, and erased space in one fast operation.
Has logical and physical search options that maintain compatibility with gov-
ernment security review requirements.
User-defined search configuration feature.
User configuration is automatically saved for future use.
Embedded words and strings of text are found in word processing files.
Alert for graphic files (secrets can be hidden in them).
Alert for compressed files.
High speed operation. This is the fastest tool on the market, which makes for
quick searches on huge hard disk drives
Screen and file output.
False hits don’t stop processing.
Government tested—specifically designed for security reviews in classified 
environments.
Currently used by hundreds of law enforcement computer crime units.
Currently in use by all of the Big 5 accounting firms.
Currently used by several government military and intelligence agencies.
Currently used by numerous Fortune 500 corporations.
The current version allows for up to 120 search strings to be searched for at one
time [5].
Fuzzy Logic Tools Used to Identify Unknown Text
New Technology Inc. has also developed a methodology and tools that aid in the
identification of relevant evidence and unknown strings of text. Traditional com-
puter evidence searches require that the computer specialist know what is being
searched for. However, many times not all is known about what may be stored on
a given computer system. In such cases, fuzzy logic tools can provide valuable leads
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
49

as to how the subject computer was used. The training participants should be able
to fully understand these methods and techniques. They should also be able to
demonstrate their ability to use them to identify leads in file slack, unallocated file
space, and Windows swap files. Each training participant should also leave the class
with a licensed copy of New Technology Inc.’s Filter_GTM software (see sidebar,
“Intelligent Forensic Filter”).
INTELLIGENT FORENSIC FILTER
This forensic filter utility is used to quickly make sense of nonsense in the
analysis of ambient data sources (Windows swap/page files, file slack, and data
associated with erased files). Filter_G is a unique fuzzy logic filter that was
awarded patent number 6,345,283 by the U.S. Patent Office. It is used to quickly
identify patterns of English language grammar in ambient data files. Such an
analysis can be helpful in making quick assessments about how a specific com-
puter was used and the nature of prior English language communications that
were involved in the past uses of a subject computer. The program can be used
as a sampling tool and it is particularly useful when used to evaluate Windows
swap/page files.
Be aware that the functionality of this software was contained in New Technol-
ogy Inc.’s Filter_I prior to March, 2003. Since that time the functionality was sub-
stantially enhanced and incorporated into this program as a stand-alone utility.
PRIMARY USES
Used as an intelligence gathering tool for quick assessments of a Windows
swap/page file to identify past communications on a targeted computer
Used as a data sampling tool in law enforcement, military, and corporate in-
vestigations
Used to quickly identify patterns of English language grammar in ambient data
sources
Used to identify English language communications in erased file space
PROGRAM FEATURES AND BENEFITS
DOS-based for speed.
No software dongle.
50
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Automatically processes any data object (a swap file, a file constructed from
combined file slack, a file constructed from combined unallocated space, or a
Windows swap/page file.
Provides output in an ASCII text format that is ready for import into any word
processing application, Windows NotePad, or even the DOS Edit program.
Can be operated in batch mode with other forensic tools and processes.
Operates at a high rate of speed, and depending upon the CPU involved the soft-
ware has the capability of processing more than 2 million bytes of data per second.
Capable of quickly processing ambient data files that are up to 2 gigabytes in size.
Free upgrades for one year from the date of purchase.
Quantity discounts and site licenses are available [6].
Disk Structure
Participants should be able to leave a training course with a good understanding of
how computer hard disks and floppy diskettes are structured and how computer
evidence can reside at various levels within the structure of the disk. They should
also demonstrate their knowledge of how to modify the structure and hide data in
obscure places on floppy diskettes and hard disk drives.
Data Encryption
A computer forensics course should cover, in general, how data is encrypted; it
should also illustrate the differences between good encryption and bad encryption.
Furthermore, demonstrations of password-recovery software should be given re-
garding encrypted WordPerfect, Excel, Lotus, Microsoft Word, and PKZIP files.
The participant should become familiar with the use of software to crack security
associated with these different file structures.
Matching a Diskette to a Computer
New Technology Inc. has also developed specialized techniques and tools that make
it possible to conclusively tie a diskette to a computer that was used to create or edit
files stored on it. Unlike some special government agencies, New Technology Inc. re-
lies on logical rather than physical data storage areas to demonstrate this technique.
Each participant is taught how to use special software tools to complete this process.
Data Compression
The participant should be shown how compression works and how compression
programs can be used to hide and disguise sensitive data. Furthermore, the participant
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
51

should learn how password-protected compressed files can be broken; this should
be covered in hands-on workshops during the training course.
Erased Files
The training participant should be shown how previously erased files can be recov-
ered by using DOS programs and by manually using data-recovery techniques.
These techniques should also be demonstrated by the participant, and cluster
chaining will become familiar to the participant.
Internet Abuse Identification and Detection
The participant should be shown how to use specialized software to identify how a
targeted computer has been used on the Internet. This process will focus on com-
puter forensics issues tied to data that the computer user probably doesn’t realize
exists (file slack, unallocated file space, and Windows swap files).
The Boot Process and Memory Resident Programs
The participant should be able to take part in a graphic demonstration of how the op-
erating system can be modified to change data and destroy data at the whim of the per-
son who configured the system. Such a technique could be used to covertly capture
keyboard activity from corporate executives, for example. For this reason, it is impor-
tant that the participants understand these potential risks and how to identify them.
TYPES OF BUSINESS COMPUTER FORENSIC TECHNOLOGY
Finally, let’s briefly look at the following types of business computer forensics
technology:
Remote monitoring of target computers
Creating trackable electronic documents
Theft recovery software for laptops and PCs
Basic forensic tools and techniques
Forensic services available
Remote Monitoring of Target Computers
Data Interception by Remote Transmission (DIRT) from Codex Data Systems
(CDS), Inc. [7] is a powerful remote control monitoring tool that allows stealth
monitoring of all activity on one or more target computers simultaneously from a
remote command center. No physical access is necessary. Application also allows
52
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

agents to remotely seize and secure digital evidence prior to physically entering
suspect premises.
Creating Trackable Electronic Documents
There are so many powerful intrusion detection tools that allow the user to create
trackable electronic documents that it is beyond the scope of this chapter to
mention them all. See “Intrusion Detection Systems” in Chapter 3 for a detailed
explanation of some of these tools.
In general, most of these tools identify (including their location) unauthorized
intruders who access, download, and view these tagged documents. The tools also
allow security personnel to trace the chain of custody and chain of command of all
who possess the stolen electronic documents.
Theft Recovery Software for Laptops and PCs
If your PC or laptop is stolen, is it smart enough to tell you where it is? According
to a recent FBI report, 98% of stolen computers are never recovered. According 
to Safeware Insurance, 1,201,000 PCs and laptops were stolen in 2002 and 2003,
costing owners $7.8 billion dollars [9]. According to a recent joint Computer 
Security Institute/FBI survey, 72% of the Fortune 1000 companies experienced 
laptop theft [9].
Nationwide losses to computer component theft cost corporate America over
$11 billion a year. So if your company experiences computer-related thefts and
you do nothing to correct the problem, there is a 92% chance you will be hit again.
What Is the Real Cost of a Stolen Laptop or PC?
When you lose your wallet, the last thing you think of is how much it is going to
cost to replace your wallet. The same is true when equipment (especially a com-
puter) is stolen.
Our mothers always told us, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
They were right. Think about what it really costs to replace a stolen computer.
The price of the replacement hardware.
The price of replacing the software.
The cost of recreating data. If possible at all, do you keep perfect back-ups?
The cost of lost production time or instruction time.
The loss of customer goodwill (lost faxes, delayed correspondence or billings,
problems answering questions and accessing data).
The cost of reporting and investigating the theft, filing police reports and in-
surance claims.
The cost of increased insurance.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
53

The cost of processing and ordering replacements, cutting a check, and the like.
If a thief is ever caught, the cost of time involved in prosecution [7].
So, doesn’t it make sense to use an ounce of prevention? You don’t have to be
a victim.
With that in mind, SecurityKit.com has a solution: PC PhoneHomeTM [9] is a
software application that will track and locate a lost or stolen PC or laptop any-
where in the world. It is easy to install. It is also completely transparent to the user.
If your PC PhoneHome-protected computer is lost or stolen, all you need to do is
make a report to the local police. In other words, PC PhoneHome is a transparent
theft protection and recovery software system that you install on your laptop or PC.
Once installed, it sends an stealth email message to your address every time the
computer connects to the Internet. Let’s look at the following scenario [9].
PC PhoneHome Scenario
Imagine you’re a small business owner and you just went out and invested several
thousand dollars in the latest laptop computer, fully loaded with all the bells and
whistles. On your first business trip with your new computer you leave it (you
think) safely hidden in your hotel room while you entertain a client. Later that
night you return to your room and your laptop, with all your work in it, has disap-
peared without a trace. The financial loss is bad enough, but the hours of work
you’ve lost is worse, and the sensitivity of the information in your laptop, if it gets
into the hands of the wrong people, could be a disaster [9].
Now imagine a simple, inexpensive software system that offers real hope of
tracking your laptop and pinpointing its location anywhere in the world. Is this re-
ally possible or is it just another fanciful hi-tech gimmick from the imagination of
the writers of the latest James Bond movie? It’s no gimmick. It’s PC PhoneHome,
the latest in computer theft recovery software [9].
PC PhoneHome is a software application that, when installed in your laptop or
desktop computer, secretly transmits an electronic message to an email address of
your choice. This allows you to track and locate your computer, thus providing the
potential for its ultimate recovery as well as apprehension of the thief [9].
How Does PC PhoneHome Work?
It’s simple. First, you install PC PhoneHome on your computer, configuring it to
send its recovery information to an email address of your choosing. PC PhoneHome
sends a stealth email to your designated email address once a day, or every time you
connect to the Internet and are assigned an IP address different from your previous
IP address. If your computer is lost or stolen, you report the loss to the police and
continue to monitor (with the additional help of the PC PhoneHome Recovery Cen-
ter) your designated email address. When your stolen computer accesses the Internet
54
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

by any method, your lost or stolen computer will send you its stealth email message,
informing you of its location [9].
If you are a registered user of PC PhoneHome, you may seek the PC Phone-
Home technical service center’s assistance in locating your computer’s exact coor-
dinates and alerting the local police to recover it. As a side benefit, any other items
of your property (like expensive jewelry) that might have been taken at the same
time may also be recovered [9].
A success story, PC PhoneHome has been enthusiastically embraced by police
forces, insurance companies, and the computer industry. The product is a natural fit
for the security monitoring and Internet service provider (ISP) industry. PC Phone-
Home is compatible with all Windows and Macintosh operating systems [9].
Basic Forensic Tools and Techniques
Today, many computer forensics workshops have been created to familiarize in-
vestigators and security personnel with the basic techniques and tools necessary for
a successful investigation of Internet and computer-related crimes. So many work-
shops have been created that it is beyond the scope of this chapter to mention them
all. However, throughout the book, a number of them will be mentioned in detail.
Workshop topics normally include: types of computer crime, cyber law basics, trac-
ing email to its source, digital evidence acquisition, cracking passwords, monitor-
ing computers remotely, tracking online activity, finding and recovering hidden
and deleted data, locating stolen computers, creating trackable files, identifying
software pirates, and so on.
Forensic Services Available
Through computer forensic evidence acquisition services, forensic experts for com-
panies like Capitol Digital Document Solutions [10] can provide management with
a potent arsenal of digital tools at its disposal. They have the necessary software and
hardware to travel to designated sites throughout the world to acquire an exact
image of hard drives, tapes, etc. This image is an exact duplication of the source
media and allows evaluation within their laboratories with minimal disruption to
others. Services include but are not limited to
Lost password and file recovery
Location and  retrieval of deleted and hidden files
File and email decryption
Email supervision and authentication
Threatening email traced to source
Identification of Internet activity
Computer usage policy and supervision
Remote PC and network monitoring
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
55

Tracking and location of stolen electronic files
Honeypot sting operations
Location and identity of unauthorized software users
Theft recovery software for laptops and PCs
Investigative and security software creation
Protection from hackers and viruses (see sidebar, “Virus/Trojan/Worm
Protection”) [10]
VIRUS/TROJAN/WORM PROTECTION
The following are tips to avoid a computer virus and trojan and worm programs:
Don’t open attachments sent with junk email or emails from persons you do
not know.
Don’t open any files attached to an email if the subject line is questionable or
unexpected. If you need to open the file, always save it to your hard drive be-
fore doing so.
Disable the Windows Scripting Host. Recently, Microsoft introduced a
“macro” programming language into the core of Windows and IE browsers,
which allows Visual Basic scripts to run without the need for specialist soft-
ware. Although this can make your computer easier to use (being able to pro-
gram shortcuts, or use third-party Visual Basic scripts), it is also a security risk.
A typical PC does not need Windows Scripting Host to function correctly, and
it should be safe to disable it. To remove Windows Scripting Host from your
computer, open up your Control Panel and select the Add/Remove Programs
icon. Select the Windows Setup tab, double-click the Accessories section and
untick the box next to “Windows Scripting Host.”
Always download files from well-known established and trusted sites. Always
know the source of any attachment and file. Install an anti-virus program. This
program will scan any file or attachment you get over the Net for known
viruses. The program will warn you if any virus is detected.
Correctly configure the anti-virus software so that it performs as designed. An
improperly configured anti-virus software can be as good as no software.
If your anti-virus program has an automatic virus scanning feature, keep this
feature activated just in case you forget to scan for the virus.
Back up your files on a regular basis. If a virus destroys your files, at least you can
replace them with your backup copy. You should store your backup copy in a sep-
arate location from your work files, one that is preferably not on your computer.
56
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Get immediate protection. Configure your anti-virus software to boot auto-
matically on start-up and run at all times. In case you forget to boot up your
anti-virus software, configuring it to start by itself will ensure you are always
protected.
Educate yourself about the latest viruses. Many Web sites keep a list of all old
and new viruses.
Write-protect all system and software diskettes using the write-protect tab to
prevent any virus from spreading. Using the write-protect tab will prevent
viruses from being transmitted to those sensitive or critical system disks.
Don’t boot from a floppy disk. Floppies are a common way viruses are trans-
mitted. If you use a floppy while working on your computer, remove it when
you shut the machine off or the computer will automatically try to boot from
the floppy, perhaps launching any viruses on the disk.
Don’t share floppies. Even a well-meaning friend may unknowingly pass along
a virus, trojan horse, or worm.
Scan floppies before using them. This is always important, but especially if you
are using the disk to carry information between one computer and another.
You could easily pick up a virus from an insecure network and introduce it into
your system. Running a virus scan before launching any of the programs on the
disk will prevent infection.
If you are in a network environment and you get infected, report the virus to
your systems administrator, who can them determine the source of the infec-
tion. This will ensure that the virus will not spread.
If you use Microsoft Outlook (not Express) for email, make sure that the Auto-
matic preview feature is disabled. You can find this option under the View menu.
Outlook and Outlook Express users are the most targeted. Consider using a dif-
ferent email program.
If you must use one of the Outlooks, download all of Microsoft’s security
patches. Add your own address to your Outlook address book, so if it starts
sending out messages on its own, at least you’ll know about it.
Keep in mind that often computer viruses are spread by accident, so files you get
from a friend who would not purposely infect you still might give you a virus [12].
SPECIALIZED FORENSICS TECHNIQUES
Threats to the strategic value of your business almost always involve a computer or
network because that is where your company’s proprietary information and busi-
ness processes are located. A simple and virtually undetectable fraud that posts a
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
57

few cents to a phony account can reap a perpetrator thousands of dollars flowing
through accounts payable. A malicious change to an individual’s personnel records
could cost the person a job and a career. Divulging a company’s financial records
could damage it on Wall Street, in the marketplace, and before shareholders. Cor-
porate espionage can steal trade secrets. Posting libelous information on the Inter-
net about a company or individual can damage a reputation beyond recovery.
Employees of a company might be stealing from it or using company resources to
work for themselves, or they can be using excessive work time to surf pornographic
sites and play games [11].
Computer forensics investigators examine computer hardware and software using
legal procedures to obtain evidence that proves or disproves allegations. Gathering
legal evidence is difficult and requires trained specialists who know computers, the
rules of evidence gathering, and how to work with law enforcement authorities [11].
Computer forensics examiners should be called in when a threat to a company’s
business and reputation is serious. Any organization that does not have a way to de-
tect and stop malicious behavior can be victimized with no legal recourse. Preserv-
ing evidence according to Federal Rules of Evidence gives choices that otherwise
would not exist. When an intruder attacks or steals from an organization, the abil-
ity or threat to get law enforcement involved may be the only way to reduce the dam-
age or prevent future occurrences. Gathering computer evidence is also useful for
confirming or dispelling concerns about whether an illegal incident has occurred
and for documenting computer and network vulnerabilities after an incident [11].
Companies employ computer forensics when there is serious risk of informa-
tion being compromised, a potential loss of competitive capability, a threat of law-
suits, or potential damage to reputation and brand. Some companies regularly use
forensic investigations to check employee computers. In theory, employees are less
tempted to stray when they know they are being watched [11].
On the other hand, when the cost of a forensic investigation exceeds potential
gain, there is little reason to use it. Companies have used legal evidence gathering
to drive home points with employees and external intruders even though the cost
of investigations exceeded recovery. Usually, however, a full-scale investigation is
not needed to stop an inappropriate action such as surfing that wastes time. Com-
puter forensics also may not be needed when computers and networks play a minor
role in an incident or threat, but this may not always be clear. The relationship be-
tween the computer and an event under inquiry is critical, and sometimes until a
forensics examination has been done, one cannot know whether a computer was a
significant part of an event or not.
Legal Evidence
A computer forensics examiner always should gather and preserve evidence according
to Federal Rules of Evidence. The examiner has three basic tasks: finding, preserving,
58
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

and preparing evidence. Finding and isolating evidence to prove or disprove allegations
is as difficult as preserving it. Investigators can plow through thousands of active files
and fragments of deleted files to find just one that makes a case. Computer forensics has
been described as looking for one needle in a mountain of needles. Preserving computer
evidence is important because data can be destroyed easily. The 1s and 0s that make up
data can be hidden and vanish instantly with a push of a button. As a result, forensics
examiners assume every computer has been rigged to destroy evidence, and they pro-
ceed with care in handling computers and storage media [11].
Preparing evidence requires patience and thorough documentation so it can
withstand judicial scrutiny. For example, a hacking incident at a Web music store
was thrown out of court because examiners who prepared the case failed to follow
rules of evidence that documented where evidence had come from and that it had
not been changed [11].
Preserving computer evidence requires pre-incident planning and training of
employees in incident discovery procedures. System administrators sometimes
think they are helping a forensics examiner when they are actually destroying evi-
dence. Managers should make sure that there’s minimal disturbance of the com-
puter, peripherals, and area surrounding the machine. If a computer is turned on,
leave it on; if turned off, leave it off. Moreover, never run programs on a computer
in question. For example, running Windows to examine files destroys evidence in
the swap file. Finally, never let a suspect help open or turn on a machine [11].
Gathering computer evidence goes beyond normal data recovery. Unfortunately,
there are no certified procedures for safe evidence gathering, nor is there a single ap-
proach for every type of case. Examiners work in secure laboratories where they check
for viruses in suspect machines and isolate data to avoid contamination [11].
Examiners will, for example, photograph equipment in place before removing
it and label wires and sockets so computers and peripherals can be reassembled ex-
actly in a laboratory. They transport computers, peripherals, and media carefully to
avoid heat damage or jostling. They never touch original computer hard disks and
floppies. They make exact bit-by-bit copies and they store the copies on a medium
that cannot be altered, such as a CD-ROM. When suspects attempt to destroy
media, such as cutting up a floppy disk, investigators reassemble the pieces to read
the data from it. Nor do examiners trust a computer’s internal clock or activity logs.
The internal clock might be wrong, a suspect might have tampered with logs, or the
mere act of turning on the computer might change a log irrevocably [11].
Before logs disappear, investigators are trained to capture the time a document
was created, the last time it was opened, and the last time it was changed. They then
calibrate or recalibrate evidence based on a time standard or work around log tam-
pering, if possible [11].
Investigators always assume the worst. It is a rule in computer forensics that
only the physical level of magnetic materials where the 1s and 0s of data are
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
59

recorded is real, and everything else is untrustworthy. A suspect might have cor-
rupted all of the software operating systems, applications, and communications in
a computer, or the software itself might erase evidence while operating, so forensic
examiners avoid it [11].
Examiners search at the bit level of 1s and 0s across a wide range of areas inside
a computer, including email, temporary files in the Windows operating system and
in databases, swap fields that hold data temporarily, logical file structures, slack and
free space on the hard drive, software settings, script files that perform preset activ-
ities, Web browser data caches, bookmarks, and history and session logs that record
patterns of usage. They then correlate evidence to activities and sources [11].
Investigators have many tricks that help them get around the clever suspect.
For example, they often do not attempt to decode encrypted files. Rather, they look
for evidence in a computer that tells them what is in the encrypted file. Frequently,
this evidence has been erased, but unencrypted traces remain to make a case. For
data concealed within other files or buried inside the 1s and 0s of a picture, an in-
vestigator can tell the data is there even though it is inaccessible. Nearly identical
files can be compared to see their minute differences [11].
When forensic examiners find computer evidence, they must present it in a
logical, compelling, and persuasive manner that a jury will understand and a de-
fense counsel cannot rebut. This requires step-by-step reconstructions of actions
with documented dates and times, charts and graphs that explain what was done
and how, testimony that explains simply and clearly what a suspect did or did not
do, and exhibits that can withstand scrutiny [11].
Case presentation requires experience, which only can be gained through
courtroom appearances. This is why lawyers and managers should retain computer
forensics examiners who have a record of successful expert testimony on computer
evidence. An experienced examiner knows the questions that opposing attorneys
will ask and the ways to provide answers that withstand challenge. A skilled litiga-
tor can defeat an inexperienced examiner for failing to collect evidence in a proper
manner and failing to show that evidence supports allegations. Not long ago, at-
torneys knew little about computers and how they operated, but today they do and
they are increasingly skilled at challenging examiners’ methods [11].
A Growing Service
With the growth of computers and networks comes the growth of crime commit-
ted through or with computers and networks. It is a fast-growing field because
computers and networks have moved to the heart of business and societal opera-
tions. However, it is not a service that most corporations will or should establish in-
ternally. Because investigations are so specialized, few organizations have the
human or technical resources to gather and compile evidence that withstands court
challenges. Large multinational corporations have or may develop the capability,
60
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

but most organizations will purchase computer forensics as needed or keep a com-
puter forensics firm on retainer. It’s important that managers and lawyers remem-
ber that computer evidence is fragile and that the best way to handle an incident is
to isolate it until examiners take over [11].
HIDDEN DATA AND HOW TO FIND IT
As if you didn’t have enough to worry about, today’s technology presents your
business with as many problems as it does solutions. Computers that work miracles
in your day-to-day operations often malfunction—and you lose valuable data. The
email that makes communicating so simple, carries deadly viruses that infect your
machines and spread, causing massive data losses throughout your network. Hack-
ers, both inside and outside your company, can access your information, manipu-
late it, hide it, steal it, and cause huge losses of data [14].
In many cases, documents and files deleted from a computer can be found and
recovered using the methods of computer forensics. When files or documents are
deleted from a computer, the majority of the actual information is typically left be-
hind. Although the user may think the deleted document has been eradicated, this
is usually not the case [14]. 
Documents and files deleted or hidden even years ago may be recovered
through a computer investigation. Deleted or hidden files are one of the prime tar-
gets of the computer forensic technician searching for evidence [14].
What can you do about it right away? You should turn to computer forensic tech-
nicians or specialists (like Kessler International) for hard drive data recovery and other
data recovery services [14]. These technicians specialize in professional data recovery
and will restore your data quickly—right when you need it. These teams of data re-
covery experts know how to retrieve your lost data from damaged and corrupt storage
media including hard drives, back-up systems, temporary storage units, and more.
They can also restore individual corrupt files back to their original condition [14].
SPYWARE AND ADWARE
Spyware is Internet jargon for advertising supported software (adware). It is a way
for shareware authors to make money from a product, other than by selling it to the
users. There are several large media companies that approach shareware authors to
place banner ads in their products in exchange for a portion of the revenue from
banner sales. This way, you don’t have to pay for the software, and the developers
are still getting paid. If you find the banners annoying, there is usually an option to
remove them by paying the regular licensing fee.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
61

Why Is It Called Spyware?
While this may be a great concept, the downside is that the advertising companies
also install additional tracking software on your system, which is continuously call-
ing home, using your Internet connection to report statistical data to the “mother-
ship.” While according to the privacy policies of the companies, there will be no
sensitive or identifying data collected from your system and you shall remain
anonymous, the fact still remains that you have a live server sitting on your PC that
is sending information about you and your surfing habits to a remote location.
Are All Adware Products Spyware?
No, but the majority are. There are also products that display advertising but do not
install any tracking mechanism on your system.
Is Spyware Illegal?
Even though the name may indicate so, spyware is not an illegal type of software in
any way. However, there are certain issues that a privacy-oriented user may object
to and therefore prefer not to use the product. This usually involves the tracking
and sending of data and statistics via a server installed on the user’s PC and the use
of your Internet connection in the background.
What’s the Hype About?
While legitimate adware companies will disclose the nature of data that is collected
and transmitted in their privacy statement (linked from their database, there is al-
most no way for the user to actually control what data is being sent). The technol-
ogy is in theory capable of sending much more than just banner statistics and this
is why many people feel uncomfortable with the idea.
On the Other Hand
Millions of people use advertising supported spyware products and could not care
less about the privacy hype. In fact, some spyware programs are among the most
popular downloads on the Internet.
Real Spyware
There are also many PC surveillance tools that allow a user to monitor all kinds of
activity on a computer, ranging from keystroke capture, snapshots, email logging,
chat logging, and just about everything else. These tools are often designed for par-
ents, businesses, and similar environments but can be easily abused if they are in-
stalled on your computer without your knowledge. Furthermore, these tools are
62
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

perfectly legal in most places, but, just like an ordinary tape recorder, if they are
abused, they can seriously violate your privacy.
ENCRYPTION METHODS AND VULNERABILITIES
The use of encryption provides a different kind of challenge for the forensic inves-
tigator. Here, data recovery is only half the story, with the task of decryption pro-
viding a potentially greater obstacle to be overcome. Encryption, whether built into
an application or provided by a separate software package, comes in different types
and strengths.
Some of the most commonly used applications provide encryption protected
by passwords that can be readily defeated by investigators with the right tools and
the time to use them. Other types of encryption, readily available to the general
public, can be configured and used to create encrypted data that goes beyond the
ability of the professional investigator to decrypt it using software. Nevertheless, in
these cases it may still be possible to decrypt data by widening the scope of the in-
vestigation to include intelligence sources beyond the computer under investiga-
tion. For example, public key encryption can be used to create highly secure,
encrypted data. To decrypt data encrypted in this fashion, a private key and
passphrase is needed. The private key may be found on the suspect’s machine or
backed up to removable media. Similarly, the passphrase may be recorded some-
where on the computer in case it is forgotten or may be written down somewhere
and kept in a nearby location.
For example, three recent developments have added to the remarkable insecu-
rity of the Net. One affects email. The other two affect network systems. First, a
weakness has been discovered in the world’s most popular encryption program
that, in some circumstances, allows the encryption program to be completely by-
passed. People using this program to encrypt email to protect its privacy and con-
fidentiality may be thwarted despite their efforts. Second, hackers have recently
discovered a cloaking program that allows them to blow past firewalls on servers
and networks without being detected. Third, a flaw has been announced that affects
networks around the globe regarding the file transfer protocol (FTP) used on the
Internet. These three revelations taken together are seriously bad news for Internet
privacy, confidentiality, and security.
The Fallacies of Encryption and Password Protection
How serious is the problem? Very. If a snoop can gain physical access to your com-
puter or floppy disk where you store your secret key, he can modify it and wait for you
to use it. When you do, he or she is secretly notified. From that point on, he has access
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
63

to the rest of your encrypted personal information and you never know it. In effect,
the snoop bypasses a user’s password and bypasses the effects of encryption entirely.
In this instance, the protection offered by encryption is illusory. Likewise, if a hacker
can electronically break into your computer, and you have your secret key stored
there, the security of your digital signature or your encrypted files is worthless.
Internet and Email Encryption and Security
For several years lawyers have been advised to use encryption programs to scramble
sensitive email messages before sending them. The most popular encryption program
is called PGP, or Pretty Good Privacy, invented by Phil Zimmerman a decade ago.
PGP is a dual key, algorithm-based code system that makes encrypted data practically
impossible to decipher. PGP is now owned by Network Associates, Inc. Of the 800
million people using the Internet, about 60 million use PGP to encrypt email.
In February 2001, Zimmerman went to work for Hushmail (an encrypted email
system), aiming to make the use of PGP simpler and user friendly. His second goal
was to work toward making PGP an international standard. To everyone’s surprise,
a month later, in March 2001, two engineers with a Czechoslovakian research group
announced that they had found a serious flaw in the open PGP format.
The flaw is serious for two reasons. First, open PGP is the most widely used en-
cryption system in the world. Until recently many systems that make e-commerce
available by credit card on the Internet have been based on PGP. These products are
still in use worldwide. Second, the theory behind PGP is essentially the same as that
used in the Rivest, Shamir and Adleman (RSA) standard for digital signatures. The
presumed security of this technique was what persuaded Congress to pass the Dig-
ital Signatures Act, which is based on RSA standards.
Next, let’s briefly look at how to protect data from being compromised. In other
words, to protect data from being compromised, experts use computer forensics.
PROTECTING DATA FROM BEING COMPROMISED
In the past 25 years, since the introduction of the personal computer, a great change
has taken place in the way people use computers. No longer are they an obscure rar-
ity, but are ubiquitous, and the business without a computer is now an exception.
They are used to assist with most tasks in the workplace. You communicate via
email and chat, and even voice and video communication uses computers. You
maintain financial records, schedule appointments, and store significant amounts
of business records, all electronically.
64
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

It should come as no surprise that with this newfound productivity comes a
class of individuals who exploit these benefits to commit crimes and civil wrongs.
Almost any type of investigation and litigation today may rely on protecting evi-
dence obtained from computer systems. Digital evidence can often make or break
a case. This evidence may be used to establish that a crime has been committed or
assert other points of fact in a court of law, such as identify suspects, defend the in-
nocent, prosecute the guilty, and understand individuals’ motives and intents.
As previously explained, computer forensics is the science whereby experts ex-
tract data from computer media in such a way that it may be used in a court of law.
In other words, computer forensics is used by experts to protect data from being
compromised. This evidence may include such things as deleted emails or files and
computer logs, spreadsheets, and accounting information.
It is not sufficient to merely have the technical skills to locate evidence on com-
puter media. Computer forensics experts recover the evidence and maintain a strict
chain of custody to ensure that the evidence is preserved in its original form. These
experts’ knowledge of what to look for and where to look is also important.
Now let’s look at what has become a very popular undertaking: Internet trac-
ing methods. How can you find out who is sending you email from a certain AOL
or Hotmail account? Well, that’s not what this next section is about is about. It is
about how you can find out whether someone faked his or her email address and
how you can find out from which account that mail really was sent [13].
INTERNET TRACING METHODS
If an email comes from a real, valid email account and you want to know who the
person behind that email account is, then you most likely will need to serve the In-
ternet provider who is hosting that email account a court-order. Another idea
would be to take that email address and search for it on the Web and usenet. Who
knows, he might have posted somewhere with his real name and address [13].
Sometimes people might send you information or hate mail from a fake address.
This can be done quite easily by simply changing the Sender and Return-to fields to
something different. You can do this, since these fields (your identity), are normally not
checked by the mailserver when you send mail, but only when you receive mail [13].
Every email has a so-called header. The header is the part in which the route the
email has taken is being described. Since the header is rather ugly, it is normally
hidden by the email program. Every email program can display them, though (look
into the Options or Preferences menu) [13].
The email text lines below are a typical, but not particularly sophisticated, ex-
ample of faked email. Fortunately, most people are not more sophisticated than
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
65

this. You should, however, be aware that there are much more sophisticated ways
to fake email. A message sent to the newsgroup alt.security (see Figure 2.2) [13] and
archived (http://catalog.com/mrm/security/trace-forgery.html) on the Web explains
one possible way to deal with some of these cases. But for now, back to the easy
cases, as shown by the following email lines [13]:
Received: from SpoolDir by IFKW-2 (Mercury 1.31);
13 May 98 15:51:47 GMT +01
Return-path: <kuno@seltsam.com>
Received: from bang.jmk.su.se by ifkw-2.ifkw.uni-muenchen.de (Mercury
1.31) with ESMTP;
13 May 98 15:51:44 GMT +01
Received: from [130.237.155.60] (Lilla_Red_10 [130.237.155.60]) by
bang.jmk.su.se (8.7.6/8.6.6) with ESMTP id PAA17265 for <luege-
ti@ifkw.uni-muenchen.de>; Wed, 13 May 1998 15:49:09 +0200 (MET DST)
X-Sender: o-pabjen@130.237.155.254
Message-Id: <v03020902b17f551e91dd@[130.237.155.60]>
Mime-Version: 1.0
66
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
FIGURE 2.2
A message sent to the newsgroup alt.security.

Content-Type: text/plain; charset=”us-ascii”
Date: Wed, 13 May 1998 15:49:06 +0200
To: luege-ti@ifkw.uni-muenchen.de
From: Kuno Seltsam <kuno@seltsam.com>
Subject: Important Information
X-PMFLAGS: 34078848 0
Now let’s go through the email line by line [13]:
Date: Wed, 13 May 1998 15:49:06 +0200
To: luege-ti@ifkw.uni-muenchen.de
From: Kuno Seltsam <kuno@seltsam.com>
Subject: Important Information
The preceding lines should look quite familiar. They describe who claims to
have sent the mail, to whom it was sent, and when. The following line is a number
that your email program (in this case Pegasus Mail) might add to the mail to keep
track of it on your hard disk [13]:
X-PMFLAGS: 34078848 0
The following lines state that the message contains normal, plain text without
any fancy letters like umlauts, etc. [13]:
Mime-Version: 1.0 Content-Type: text/plain;
charset=”us-ascii”
The following line contains a tracking number, which the originating host has
assigned to the message. The Message-Id is unique for each message and in this case
contains the IP number of the originating host. If you for some reason doubt that
the message really came from someone at seltsam.com, you can now take this num-
ber and have it translated into something more meaningful. For this task, you can,
for example, use TJPing (http://www.topjimmysoftware.com/), a small program that
tracks IP packages online and resolves IP numbers [13]:
Message-Id: <v03020902b17f551e91dd@[130.237.155.60]>
If you use TJPing, the real name of the originating computer is [13]:
Starting lookup on 130.237.155.60 - May 14, 1998
22:01:25
Official Name: L-Red-10.jmk.su.se
IP address: 130.237.155.60
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
67

This is the originating computer from which the message was sent, not the
mailserver. If the address was at a university, as in this case, this is not a great help,
since there are many students using the same computers all day. The situation is
very different within companies, though, since employees tend to have their own
computers, which no one else uses. If the header doesn’t show any further infor-
mation, you might use this information by calling the company’s system adminis-
tration and ask, “Say, who’s sitting at Node 60?” Amazingly, often you will get a
reply. It is comparatively easy to find out which company you are dealing with. Just
cut off the first set of digits from the Official Name (L-Red_10.), add www and type
it into your browser. You will see that www.jmk.su.se is the journalism department
of the University of Stockholm [13].
The following line is solid gold. This tells you who was logged on to the mail-
server when the message was sent. Not all email programs add this line, though. Eu-
dora (http://www.eudora.com/) does, whereas Pegasus Mail doesn’t [13].
X-Sender: o-pabjen@130.237.155.254
So now you know that the user who sent us the mail is o-pabjen. The IP 
number is that of the mailserver used (checking with TJPing [http://www.
topjimmysoftware.com/], you learn that it’s called bang.jmk.su.se). Now you could
actually reply to the message by sending a mail to o-pabjen@130.237.155.254 or 
o-pabjen@bang.jmk.su.se [13].
Maybe you want to know his or her real name. In this case, you can try to Fin-
ger the account. Finger is a command that reveals basic information about the ac-
count holder. Due to the increased attention to privacy online, more and more
servers have disabled it. It is always worth a try, though. Using WSfinger
(http://www.etoracing.com/wsfinger.htm), you’ll learn the following [13]:
Login name: o-pabjen In real life: Pabst Jens global
So, now you have a name: Jens Pabst. Global could be part of the name or be
some kind of code added by the system administration for internal purposes.
If you manage to obtain the information that’s been accumulated so far, then
you don’t actually have to look any further. You have what you want. “Kuno Selt-
sam <kuno@seltsam.com>” is really Jens Pabst <o-pabjen@bang.jmk.su.se>. But,
let’s go through the rest of the header anyway [13]:
Received: from [130.237.155.60] (Lilla_Red_10 [130.237.155.60]) by
bang.jmk.su.se (8.7.6/8.6.6) with ESMTP id PAA17265 for <luege-
ti@ifkw.uni-muenchen.de>; Wed, 13 May 1998 15:49:09 +0200 (MET DST)
68
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The preceding lines state which computer the mailserver has received the mes-
sage from, when, and that the message is supposed to be sent to luege-ti@ifkw.uni-
muenchen.de.
Similar to the last part of the header, the following lines tell you from where the
recipient’s mailserver (ifkw-2.ifkw.uni-muenchen.de) has received the message.
You know that this must be the recipient’s mailserver, since it is the last server that
receives anything [13].
Received: from bang.jmk.su.se by ifkw-2.ifkw.uni-muenchen.de (Mercury
1.31) with ESMTP; 13 May 98 15:51:44 GMT +01
It follows the fake return path:
Return-path: <kuno@seltsam.com>
and an internal message from the mailserver about where and how it distributed the
message within its system. You know that “SpoolDir” cannot be the recipient’s
mailserver, since it lacks an Internet address (something like server.somewhere.de) [13].
Received: from SpoolDir by IFKW-2 (Mercury 1.31); 13 May 98 15:51:47
GMT +01
This next section is intended to familiarize the computer forensic investigator
with various methodologies and tools available to perform a forensic examination of
a Research In Motion (RIM) wireless (BlackBerry) device. The procedures and tools
presented here are by no means all encompassing but are intended to elicit design of
custom tools by those more programmatically inclined. The methods have been tested
using an Exchange Edition RIM pager and an Exchange Edition RIM handheld.
SECURITY AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
There are two types of RIM devices within each model class. The Exchange Edition
is meant for use in a corporate environment, while the Internet Edition works with
standard POP email accounts. The Exchange Edition employs Triple-DES encryp-
tion to send and receive, but the Internet Edition communicates in clear text. Nei-
ther employs an encrypted files system.
Relevance of RIM Computer Forensics
A RIM device shares the same evidentiary value as any other personal digital assis-
tant (PDA). As the computer forensics investigator may suspect of most file systems,
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
69

a delete is by no means a total removal of data on the device. However, the RIM’s
always-on, wireless push technology adds a unique dimension to forensic examina-
tion. Changing and updating data no longer requires a desktop synchronization. In
fact, a RIM device does not need a cradle or desktop connection to be useful. The
more time a PDA spends with its owner, the greater the chance is that it will more
accurately reflect and tell a story about that person. Thus, the RIM’s currently un-
surpassed portability is the examiner’s greatest ally.
Evidence Collection: Gathering Logs
The first procedure of evidence collection violates the computer forensic method by
requiring the investigator to record logs kept on the unit that will be wiped after an
image is taken. The logs must be accessed on the original unit before the program-
mer software development kit (SDK) tool is applied. The logs are not accessed via
the standard user interface. Rather, they are reviewed using the following hidden
control functions.
Imaging and Profiling
An image should be taken of the file system as the very first step as long as the logs
are not required or a method of extracting the logs from the image is developed. An
image or bit-by-bit backup is acquired using an SDK utility that dumps the contents
of the Flash RAM into a file easily examined with a hex editor. The Program Loader,
which is used to perform most of the inspection in addition to taking the image, will
cause a reset each time it is run. A reset can mean a file system cleanup. This means
that to get a partition table, you risk changing the file system and spoiling the data.
Evidence Review
Two options are available for information review using the hex dump: manual re-
view of the Hex file using a hex editor and loading of the hex file into the BlackBerry
SDK simulator for review. The hex editor will provide access to the entire file sys-
tem including deleted or dirty records indicated by byte 3 of the file header. Using
the SDK will assist in decoding dates on extant records.
The File System
The RIM file system is abstracted to appear as a database to most available Appli-
cation Programming Interfaces (APIs) in order to simplify programming. This ab-
straction qualifies as a file translation layer (FTL), hiding what is really a quite
complicated system of file management. Under the hood of your RIM device is a
standard Flash RAM used to store all nonvolatile data.
70
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Flash is organized similarly to dynamic random access memory (DRAM) and has
the 65 ns read performance to match. However, write performance is slower by a
factor of nearly 1000 times. Writing flash is a binary AND or NAND, meaning each
1 in memory can be toggled to 0 but not back again without an erasure. However,
an erasure can only occur in blocks of 64 KB, while writing can occur in any inter-
val. An erasure costs more in terms of time than a write because of conditioning.
Conditioning means forcing every 1 to a 0 before resetting (erasing) all bits to 1
again in order to prolong the life of the Flash RAM
Data Hiding
Data hiding is accomplished in several ways on a RIM device. Hidden databases,
partition gaps, and obfuscated data are but a few. Presented here are a few ideas to
get the computer forensics investigator thinking in the right direction.
Custom databases with no icon in the Ribbon graphical user interface (GUI)
are capable of providing hidden data transport. A hacker may write a program that
utilizes a database accessible only through device synchronization. The average user
or uninformed investigator will never have knowledge of the hidden database. For
example, a database reader can thwart such an attempt, as it will provide access to
all databases on a unit. Unfortunately, it will need to be installed on the unit inves-
tigated for it to function.
Now let’s look at what the computer forensics specialist  sees in firewall logs, es-
pecially what port numbers mean. The computer forensics specialist can use this in-
formation to help figure out what hackers or worms are up to.
AVOIDING PITFALLS WITH FIREWALLS
All the traffic going through a firewall is part of a connection. A connection consists
of the pair of IP addresses that are talking to each other, as well a pair of port num-
bers that identify the protocol or service. The destination port number of the first
packet often indicates the type of service being connected to. When a firewall blocks
a connection, it will save the destination port number to its logfile. This section de-
scribes some of the meanings of these port numbers as well as avoiding some of the
pitfalls. Port numbers are divided into three ranges:
The well-known ports are those from 0 through 1023. These are tightly bound
to services, and usually traffic on this port clearly indicates the protocol for that
service. For example, port 80 virtually always indicates HTTP traffic.
The registered ports are those from 1024 through 49151. These are loosely
bound to services, which means that while there are numerous services
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
71

“bound” to these ports, these ports are likewise used for many other purposes
that have nothing to do with the official server.
The dynamic and private ports are those from 49152 through 65535. In theory,
no service should be assigned to these ports.
In reality, machines start assigning dynamic ports starting at 1024. However,
there are exceptions: for example, Sun starts their RPC ports at 32768.
Suppose you are seeing attempts on the same set of ports from widely varying
sources all over the Internet. Usually, this is due to a “decoy” scan, such as in
“nmap.” One of them is the attacker; the others are not.
Computer forensics and protocol analysis can be used to track down who this
is. For example, if you ping each of the systems, you can match up the time to live
(TTL) fields in those responses with the connection attempts. This will at least
point a finger at a decoy scan. The TTLs should match; if not, then they are being
spoofed. Newer versions of scanners now randomize the attacker’s own TTL, mak-
ing it harder to weed them out.
You can also attempt to go back further in your logs, looking for all the decoy
addresses or people from the same subnets. You will often see that the attacker has
actually connected to you recently, while the decoyed addresses haven’t. A detailed
discussion of firewall pitfalls comes up in Chapter 3.
Now let’s briefly look at how both government and commercial organizations
are implementing secure biometric personal identification (ID) systems to improve
confidence in verifying the identity of individuals seeking access to physical or vir-
tual locations for computer forensics purposes. In other words, a secure biometric
personal ID system is designed to solve the fundamental problem of verifying that
individuals are who they claim to be.
BIOMETRIC SECURITY SYSTEMS
The verification of individuals for computer forensics purposes is achieved using a
recognized ID credential issued from a secure and effective identity confirmation
process. A secure personal ID system design will include a complex set of decisions
to select and put in place the appropriate policies and procedures, architecture,
technology, and staff to deliver the desired level of security. A secure biometric ID
system can provide individuals with trusted credentials for a wide range of applica-
tions-from enabling access to facilities or secure networks, to proving an individ-
ual’s rights to services, to conducting online transactions.
With the preceding in mind, biometric security systems for computer forensics
purposes are defined as automated methods of identifying or authenticating the iden-
tity of a living person based on unique physiological or behavioral characteristics.
72
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Biometric technologies, when used with a well-designed ID system, can provide the
means to ensure that an individual presenting a secure ID credential has the absolute
right to use that credential. Smart cards have the unique ability to store large amounts
of biometric and other data, carry out their own on-card functions, and interact in-
telligently with a smart card reader. Secure ID systems that require the highest degree
of security and privacy are increasingly implementing both smart card and biometric
technology.
Finally, in an ID system that combines smart card and biometric technologies
for computer forensics proposes to verify the identity of individuals, a “live” bio-
metric image (scan of a fingerprint or hand geometry) is captured at the point of in-
teraction and compared to a stored biometric image that was captured when the
individual enrolled in the ID system. Smart cards provide the secure, convenient,
and cost-effective ID technology that stores the enrolled biometric template and
compares it to the live biometric template. A secure ID system using smart card and
biometric technology provides:
Enhanced privacy, securing information on the card, allowing the individual to
control access to that information, and removing the need for central database
access during identity verification
Improved security, protecting information and processes within the ID system
and actively authenticating the trust level of the environment before releasing
information
Improved ID system performance and availability through local information
processing and contactless ID card and reader implementations
Improved system return on investment through the flexibility and upgradabil-
ity that smart cards provide, allowing support of different authentication meth-
ods and multiple, evolving applications [15]
SUMMARY
Since the invention of the personal computer in 1981, new computer technologies
have provided unintended benefits to criminals in the commission of both tradi-
tional crimes and computer crimes. Today computers are used in every facet of life
to create messages, compute profits, transfer funds, access bank accounts, and
browse the Internet for good and bad purposes. Notebook computers provide com-
puter users with the benefits of portability as well as remote access to computer net-
works. Computer users today have the benefits of super computer speeds and fast
Internet communications on a worldwide basis. Computers have increased pro-
ductivity in business, but they also increase the likelihood of company policy
abuses, government security breaches, and criminal activity.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
73

In the past, documentary evidence was primarily limited to paper docu-
ments. Copies were made with carbon paper or through the use of a photocopy
machine. Most documents today are stored on computer hard disk drives, floppy
diskettes, zip disks, and other types of removable computer storage media. This
is where potential computer evidence may reside, and it is up to the computer
forensics specialist to find it using sophisticated computer forensics tools and
computer-evidence-processing methodologies. Paper documents are no longer
considered the best evidence.
Computer evidence is unique when compared with other forms of documen-
tary evidence. Unlike paper documentation, computer evidence is fragile, and a
copy of a document stored in a computer file is identical to the original. The legal
“best evidence” rules change when it comes to the processing of computer evi-
dence. Another unique aspect of computer evidence is the potential for unautho-
rized copies to be made of important computer files without leaving behind a trace
that the copy was made. This situation creates problems concerning the investiga-
tion of the theft of trade secrets (client lists, research materials, computer-aided de-
sign files, formulas, and proprietary software).
Industrial espionage is alive and well in the cyber age, and the computer foren-
sics specialist relies on computer evidence to prove the theft of trade secrets. Some-
times the unauthorized copying of proprietary files can also be documented
through the analysis of ambient computer data. The existence of this type of com-
puter evidence is typically not known to the computer user, and the element of sur-
prise can provide the computer forensics investigator with the advantage in the
interview of suspects in such cases. Because of the unique features associated with
computer evidence, special knowledge is required by the computer forensics spe-
cialist and the lawyers, who may rely on the computer evidence to support their po-
sition in civil or criminal litigation.
Computer evidence is relied on more and more in criminal and civil litigation
actions. It was computer evidence that helped identify the now infamous blue dress
in the Clinton impeachment hearings. Oliver North got into some of his trouble
with the U.S. Congress when erased computer files were recovered as computer ev-
idence. Computer evidence is also used to identify Internet account abuses. In the
past, much wasted government and company staff time was attributed to the play-
ing of the Windows Solitaire game on company time. Thanks to the popularity of
the Internet, Windows Solitaire has taken a backseat to employees’ unauthorized In-
ternet browsing of pornography Web sites. Internet access by employees has also
created new problems associated with employees operating side businesses through
the unauthorized use of company and government Internet accounts. These types
of problems are becoming more frequent as more businesses and government
agencies provide employees with Internet accounts. Computer forensics tools and
74
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

methodologies are used to identify and document computer evidence associated
with these types of computer abuses and activities.
Computer evidence is unique in other ways as well. Most individuals think that
computer evidence is limited to data stored only in computer files. Most of the rele-
vant computer evidence is found in unusual locations that are usually unknown to
the computer users. Computer evidence can exist in many forms. On Microsoft Win-
dows and Windows NT-based computer systems, large quantities of evidence can be
found in the Windows swap file. In Windows NT-based computer systems, the files
are called Page Files and the file is named PAGEFILE.SYS by the operating system.
Computer evidence can also be found in file slack and in unallocated file space.
These unique forms of computer data fall into a category of data called ambient
computer data. As much as 50% of the computer hard disk drive may contain such
data types in the form of email fragments, word processing fragments, directory
tree snapshots, and potentially almost anything that has occurred in past work ses-
sions on the subject computer. Ambient computer data can be a valuable source of
computer evidence because of the potentially large volume of data involved and be-
cause of the transparent nature of its creation to the computer user.
Timelines of computer usage and file accesses can be valuable sources of com-
puter evidence. The times and dates when files were created, last accessed, or mod-
ified can make or break a case.
Now let’s look at some of the more common conclusions that computer foren-
sics technology can hope to answer. The following conclusions are not exhaustive,
nor is the order significant.
Conclusions Drawn
The term computer forensics was coined in 1991 in the first training session
held by the International Association of Computer Specialists (IACIS) in Port-
land, Oregon. Since then, computer forensics has become a popular topic in
computer security circles and in the legal community.
Like any other forensic science, computer forensics deals with the application
of law to a science. In this case, the science involved is computer science, and
some refer to it as forensic computer science.
Computer forensics has also been described as the autopsy of a computer hard
disk drive because specialized software tools and techniques are required to an-
alyze the various levels at which computer data is stored after the fact.
Computer forensics deals with the preservation, identification, extraction, and
documentation of computer evidence. The field is relatively new to the private sec-
tor but it has been the mainstay of technology-related investigations and intelli-
gence gathering in law enforcement and military agencies since the mid-1980s.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
75

Like any other forensic science, computer forensics involves the use of sophis-
ticated technology tools and procedures that must be followed to guarantee the
accuracy of the preservation of evidence and the accuracy of results concerning
computer evidence processing.
Typically, computer forensic tools exist in the form of computer software.
Computer forensics specialists guarantee accuracy of evidence processing re-
sults through the use of time-tested evidence-processing procedures and
through the use of multiple software tools developed by separate and indepen-
dent developers.
The use of different tools that have been developed independently to validate
results is important to avoid inaccuracies introduced by potential software de-
sign flaws and software bugs.
It is a serious mistake for computer forensics specialists to put all of their eggs
in one basket by using just one tool to preserve, identify, extract, and validate
the computer evidence.
Cross-validation through the use of multiple tools and techniques is standard
in all forensic sciences. When this procedure is not used, it creates advantages
for defense lawyers who may challenge the accuracy of the software tool used
and, thus, the integrity of the results.
Validation through the use of multiple software tools, computer specialists, and
procedures eliminates the potential for the destruction of forensic evidence.
The introduction of the personal computer in 1981 and the resulting popular-
ity came with a mixed blessing.
Society in general benefited, but so did criminals who use personal computers
in the commission of crimes.
Today, personal computers are used in every facet of society to create and share
messages, compute financial results, transfer funds, purchase stocks, make air-
line reservations, access bank accounts, and access a wealth of worldwide in-
formation on essentially any topic.
Computer forensics is used to identify evidence when personal computers are
used in the commission of crimes or in the abuse of company policies.
Computer forensic tools and procedures are also used to identify computer se-
curity weaknesses and the leakage of sensitive computer data.
In the past, documentary evidence was typically stored on paper and copies
were made with carbon paper or photocopy machines.
Most documents are now stored on computer hard disk drives, floppy
diskettes, zip disks, and other forms of removable computer storage media.
Computer forensics deals with finding, extracting, and documenting this form
of electronic documentary evidence.
76
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

An Agenda for Action
When completing the Forensics Technology Types Checklist (Table F2.1 in Ap-
pendix F), the computer forensics specialist should adhere to the provisional list of
actions for some of the principle types of computer forensic technology. The order
is not significant; however, these are the activities for which the researcher would
want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review, and assessment for
ease of use and admissibility. A number of these technologies have been mentioned
in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and an optional team case
project. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Processing procedures and methodologies should not conform
to federal computer evidence processing standards.
2.
True or False? Computer evidence is fragile and susceptible to alteration or era-
sure by any number of occurrences.
3.
True or False? The need to preserve the computer evidence before processing a
computer should not be clearly demonstrated by the computer forensic
instructor through the use of programs designed to destroy data and modify
the operating systems.
4.
True or False? The documentation of forensic processing methodologies and
findings is not important.
5.
True or False? The occurrence of random memory dumps in hidden storage
areas should be discussed and covered in detail during workshops.
Multiple Choice
1.
The following are what it really costs to replace a stolen computer, except:
A. The price of the replacement hardware
B.
The price of replacing the software
C. The cost of creating data
D. The cost of lost production time or instruction time
E.
The loss of customer goodwill (lost faxes, delayed correspondence or
billings, problems answering questions and accessing data)
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
77

2.
Forensic services include but are not limited to the following, except:
A. Lost password and file recovery
B.
Location and retrieval of deleted and hidden files
C. File and email decryption
D. Email non-supervision and non-authentication
E.
Threatening email traced to source
3.
Port numbers are divided into three ranges, except for two of the following:
A. The well-known ports are those from 0 through 2134. These are loosely
bound to services, and usually traffic on this port clearly indicates the pro-
tocol for that service. For example, port 80 virtually always indicates HTTP
traffic.
B.
The well-known ports are those from 0 through 1023. These are tightly
bound to services, and usually traffic on this port clearly indicates the pro-
tocol for that service. For example, port 80 virtually always indicates HTTP
traffic.
C. The registered ports are those from 1024 through 49151. These are loosely
bound to services, which means that while there are numerous services
“bound” to these ports, these ports are likewise used for many other pur-
poses that have nothing to do with the official server.
D. The dynamic and private ports are those from 49152 through 65535. In
theory, no service should be assigned to these ports.
E.
The registered ports are those from 1024 through 76646. These are tightly
bound to services, which means that while there are numerous services
“bound” to these ports, these ports are likewise used for many other pur-
poses that have nothing to do with the official server.
4.
A secure ID system using smart card and biometric technology provides the
following, except:
A. Enhanced privacy, securing information on the card, allowing the individ-
ual to control access to that information, and removing the need for cen-
tral database access during identity verification
B.
Improved security, protecting information, and processes within the ID
system and actively authenticating the trust level of the environment before
releasing information
C. Improved ID system performance and availability through local informa-
tion processing and contactless ID card and reader implementations
D. Improved system return on investment through the flexibility and upgrad-
ability that smart cards provide, allowing support of different authentica-
tion methods and multiple, evolving applications
78
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

E.
Improved ID system return on investment through the unflexibility and
gradability that smart cards do not provide, thus allowing no support of
similar authentication methods and multiple, revolving applications
5.
The legal aspects of a computer forensics investigation center primarily on the
following two main issues:
A. The requirements that need to be met in order for evidence to be success-
fully presented in court and, of course, not considered legally admissible
B.
The requirements that need to be met in order for evidence to be success-
fully presented in court and, of course, considered legally admissible
C. The right of the investigator to avoid the possibility of not incurring legal
action against himself or the organization for whom he is conducting the
investigation
D. The acceptance of the investigator to avoid the possibility of incurring
legal action against himself or the organization for whom he is reviewing
the investigation
E.
The need for the investigator to avoid the possibility of incurring legal ac-
tion against himself or the organization for whom he is conducting the in-
vestigation
Exercise
An accounting company needed to review approximately 10 million pages of client
internal documents in the context of an audit. The data resided in email, text docu-
ments, and file attachments. The original plan was to deploy a team of professionals
at the client site for a three-month document review. How would your advanced
document management services center (DMSC) handle this document review?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A large real estate corporation retained an accounting firm to investigate allegations
of embezzlement. An employee was suspected of manipulating an online accounting
system to divert funds from the corporation’s accounts payable section. How would
the accounting firm’s computer forensics team go about investigating this case?
Case Project
Let’s look at a real-world scenario and see how computer forensics plays into it. It’s a se-
curity person’s worst nightmare. You’ve just inherited a large, diverse enterprise with
relatively few security controls when something happens. You try to detect malicious
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
79

activity at the perimeter of the network by monitoring your intrusion detection systems
and watching attackers bang futilely on your firewall. Even those attackers tricky enough
to slip through the firewall bounce harmlessly off your highly secured servers and trip
alarms throughout the network as they attempt to compromise it. Reality is usually
somewhat different: most people simply don’t have the tools, or at least do not have ex-
pensive, dedicated tools. You do have ways to stop the pain.
Although 2005 has been a relatively quiet year for network compromises, there
have been quite a few new attacks released and a fairly significant number of incidents
as a result. For the purposes of this discussion, a number of these incidents have been
blended together to create a hypothetical company, Webfile.com, to demonstrate
some of the techniques we have used this year in combating intrusions.
This case project discusses forensics in a Windows environment. It will offer a
brief overview of the detection and analysis of an attack incident. How would you,
as a computer forensics specialist, go about detecting potential incidents, identify-
ing the attack, and conducting host-based forensics?
Optional Team Case Project
This optional team case project discusses forensics in a Windows environment. It deals
with determining the scope of the compromise and understanding what the attacker
is trying to accomplish at the network level. Along the way, there will be a discussion
of some of the tools and techniques that are useful in this type of detective work.
As a computer forensics specialist, you have discovered the compromise (al-
though you have yet to identify the compromise method), identified the post-attack
“fingerprint” of this particular group, and begun to understand what was happen-
ing in the enterprise. Before you start with the eradication phase of your incident
response, you really need to complete the identification phase: you have yet to
identify the initial compromise method or to identify the scope of the compromise!
At this point in the investigation, you have reason to believe the attackers are
making illicit use of the victim network to serve content to their friends and neigh-
bors. While it is possible that any individual content provider might not mind serv-
ing some of this material (the kind that isn’t unlawful anyway), your victim network
isn’t getting paid for this service, and the attackers have a free ride. Of more concern,
the investigation so far has yielded information that indicates the attackers have
compromised both local and domain administrator accounts in your enterprise.
Your objectives are simple. You want to determine how widespread the at-
tacker’s control over the network is, what the initial compromise method was, and
who the attacker is (if possible). Please explain your solution in detail.
80
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

REFERENCES
[1]
Feldman, John, and Giordano, Joseph V., “Cyber Forensics,” Air Force
Research Laboratory’s Information Directorate, Associated Business
Publications, 317 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10017-5391, 2001
[2]
WetStone Technologies, Inc., 273 Ringwood Rd., Freeville, NY 13068,
2001.
[3]
“SafeBack 3.0 Evidence Grade Bitstream Backup Utility,” New Tech-
nologies, Inc., 2075 NE Division St., Gresham, Oregon 97030. (© 2002,
New Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved), 2004.
[4]
“AnaDisk Diskette Analysis Tool,” New Technologies, Inc., 2075 NE Di-
vision St., Gresham, Oregon, 2004. (© 2002. New Technologies, Inc. All
rights reserved), 2004. 
[5]
“Text Search Plus,” New Technologies, Inc., 2075 NE Division St., Gre-
sham, Oregon 97030, 2001. (© 2004, New Technologies, Inc. All rights
reserved), 2004. 
[6]
“FILTER_G: English Grammer Forensic Filter,” New Technologies,
Inc., 2075 NE Division St., Gresham, Oregon. (© 2004, New Technolo-
gies, Inc. All rights reserved), 2004. 
[7]
Codex Data Systems, Inc., 143 Main Street, Nanuet, NY 10954, 2001. 
[8]
“CopyQM Plus: Diskette Duplication Software,” New Technologies,
Inc., 2075 NE Division St., Gresham, Oregon 97030, 2001. (© 2004, New
Technologies, Inc. All rights reserved), 2004. 
[9]
“PC PhoneHomeTM” is a trademark of Brigadoon Software, 143 Main
St., Nanuet, New York. (PC PhoneHome Web site content: Copyright
2001-2005 Brigadoon Software, Inc. All rights reserved.) (Web site copy
Copyright 2000-2005 SecurityKit.com. All rights reserved.) 
[10]
Capitol Digital Document Solutions, 555 Capitol Mall, Suite 540, Sacra-
mento, California 95814, 2004. 
[11]
Walker, Don, “Computer Forensics: Techniques for Catching the ‘Perp’
Protect Company Data,” Enterprise Networks & Servers, Publications &
Communications, Inc. (PCI), 11675 Jollyville Rd., Suite 150, Austin, TX
78759, (© 2003-2004 by Publications & Communications Inc. [PCI]),
2004.
[12]
“Data Recovery,” Kessler International World Headquarters, 45 Rocke-
feller Plaza, Suite 2000, New York, NY 10111-2000, (© 1995-2004
Michael G. Kessler & Associates Ltd. All Rights Reserved), 2004.
Types of Computer Forensics Technology
81

[13]
Luege, Timo, “Tracing Email,” USUS, Baaderstr. 29, Munich, Germany
80469, (© 1998-2004 USUS], 2004.
[14]
“Tips to Avoid a Computer Virus,” TeCrime International, Inc., 683 N
Main St., Oshkosh, Wisconsin, 2004.
[15]
“Smart Cards and Biometrics in Privacy-Sensitive Secure Personal Iden-
tification Systems,” Smart Card Alliance, 191 Clarksville Rd., Princeton
Junction, NJ  08550, 2002.
[16]
“2003 Computer Crime and Security Survey,” Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation, J. Edgar Hoover Building, 935 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Wash-
ington, D.C. 20535-0001, 2003.
82
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

83
Types of Computer
Forensics Systems
3
C
omputer forensics has become a buzz word in today’s world of increased
concern for security. It seems that any product that can remotely be tied to
network or computer security is quickly labeled as a “forensics” system. This
phenomenon makes designing clear incident response plans and corporate security
plans that support computer forensics difficult. Today’s corporate climate of in-
creased competition, cutbacks and layoffs, and outsourcing makes it essential that
corporate security policy and practices support the inevitability of future litigation.
This chapter is intended to raise awareness of the different types of computer foren-
sics systems and to identify crucial questions for corporate planning in support of
computer forensics. Answering the questions raised in this chapter will assist man-
agers in creating sound corporate security policies and practices that support the
following computer forensics systems:
Internet security systems
Intrusion detection systems
Firewall security systems
Storage area network security systems
Network disaster recovery systems
Public key infrastructure security systems
Wireless network security systems
Satellite encryption security systems
Instant messaging (IM) security systems
Net privacy systems
Identity management security systems
Identity theft prevention systems

Biometric security systems
Homeland security systems
INTERNET SECURITY SYSTEMS
Internet and network security are topics that many executives and managers avoid
talking about. Many feel that discussing their security implementations and policies
will cause their companies to become vulnerable to attack. This lack of dialog has
resulted in some executives not being fully aware of the many advances and inno-
vations in security technology that enable companies to confidently take full ad-
vantage of the benefits and capabilities of the Internet and intranets [1].
Ironically, Internet security can provide a more secure solution, as well as one
that is faster and less expensive than traditional solutions to security problems of
employees photocopying proprietary information, faxing or mailing purchase or-
ders, or placing orders by phone. The purpose of this section is to demystify and in-
form the executive how Internet security can easily and effectively be implemented
in order to conduct computer forensics [1].
General Internet Security Principles and Architecture
The first step in defining a corporate Internet security policy is to draft a high-level
management policy statement establishing a framework and context for security
within an organization. This policy needs to define the adequate and appropriate
Internet security measures necessary to safeguard a company’s systems, networks,
transactions, and data [1].
The next step is to start a systematic analysis of the assets of an organization,
determining the value of information, or the possible damage to reputation should
it be disclosed, along with possible risks. This step is no more difficult than the risk
management that a corporation already exercises every day. Most businesses al-
ready have clearly established what information is valuable, who should have access
to it, and who has responsibility for protecting it, as the Internet security hierarchy
in Figure 3.1 illustrates [1].
Security Hierarchy
Information such as trade secrets, vault and authorization codes, and lock and key
information are clearly of a mission critical nature, and their unintended disclosure
could cause severe loss to a business or operation. In addition to Internet security,
84
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

attention should be given to physical security (restricting the use of modems and
removable media and controlling access to devices) [1].
Departmental information is typically data that is private to a particular de-
partment, such as payroll information in finance and medical records in personnel.
There may be legal requirements for securing this information [1].
Company private information varies from company to company but typically
consists of information that should only be disclosed to employees and partners of
a company, such as policy and procedure manuals. Of course, it’s possible to get a
bit carried away with what information is considered to be private [1].
Public information is information such as product literature, brochures, and
catalogs that needs to be freely available to anyone, but whose integrity needs to be
assured to prevent unauthorized alteration. This information is often provided to
customers and interested parties by means of the Internet [1].
A careful and systematic examination of risks is needed, since perceptions often
differ substantially from actual risks. Often the primary risk is found to be internal.
For example, system administrators often are among the lowest paid individuals in
an organization, yet they have access to sensitive information otherwise limited to
executives. In other cases, a remote dial-in line used for debugging could be used to
gain general access to internal systems, bypassing other Internet security safeguards.
Care needs to be taken to rationally evaluate risk. It is often helpful to examine how
existing situations are handled [1].
Implementing an Internet security policy has its price. The more security de-
sired, the greater the cost required to provide it. Similarly, care needs to be taken to
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
85
Misson
Critical
Departmental
Private
Company
Private
Public
Information
FIGURE 3.1 Internet security hierarchy.

ensure that the added security does not unduly reduce network performance or
employee productivity, or there will be considerable temptation to bypass or defeat
corporate security measures. Thus, establishing a corporate Internet security policy
involves the following:
High-level management policy statement
Systematic analysis of organizations assets
Examination of risks
Develop implementation strategy [1]
Public and Private Key Encryption
For many business and electronic commerce applications, it is necessary to
transmit information over communications lines and networks where there is
the potential for data to be altered, forged, or illicitly introduced. A powerful
technique for securely sending information is public key encryption or public
key infrastructure (which will be covered in detail later in the chapter). Two keys
exist, one public, the other private. The public key is freely distributed and is
used to encrypt the information to be sent. The private key is retained by the re-
cipient and is used to decrypt the received information. Messages encrypted
using long bit-length keys are currently regarded as essentially impossible to
crack [1].
To use public key encryption across the Internet, steps must be taken to ensure
the integrity of the public key and the identity of its owner. A trusted third party,
called a “certificate authority,” provides an unique “digital signature” for the pub-
lic key, which cannot be forged, and both identifies the owner of the key and certi-
fies that the key has not been altered [1].
To achieve secure, two-way communication across the Internet, without hav-
ing previously exchanged keys, the Diffie-Hellman scheme may be used as shown
in Figure 3.2 [1]. Each party obtains the public key for the other from a certificate
authority and performs a special calculation with their own private keys. The result
of the algorithm will be the same for both parties and may be used as the new se-
cret shared key for secure communications between the two parties [1].
Network Security
Firewalls are a basic means for providing network security (and will be covered in
greater detail later in this chapter). They act like the moat around a medieval cas-
tle, by restricting information to enter and leave at carefully controlled points and
preventing unacceptable attempts at accessing resources within the firewall. While
an important use of firewalls is to enable secure Internet access to corporate net-
works, they are also used to restrict access to departmental private and mission crit-
ical information [1].
86
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Secure Payment Solutions
Purchasing online may seem to be quick and easy, but most consumers give little
thought to the process that appears to work instantaneously. For it to work cor-
rectly, merchants must connect to a network of banks (both acquiring and issuing
banks), processors, and other financial institutions so that payment information
provided by the customer can be routed securely and reliably. The solution is a pay-
ment gateway that connects your online store to these institutions and processors.
Because payment information is highly sensitive, trust and confidence are essential
elements of any payment transaction. This means the gateway should be provided
by a company with in-depth experience in payment processing and security.
The Payment Processing Network
Here’s a breakdown of the participants and elements involved in processing payments:
Acquiring Bank: In the online payment processing world, an acquiring bank
provides internet merchant accounts. A merchant must open an internet mer-
chant account with an acquiring bank to enable online credit card authoriza-
tion and payment processing. Examples of acquiring banks include Merchant
eSolutions and most major banks.
Authorization: The process by which it is verified that a customer’s credit card
is active and they have the credit available to make a transaction. In the online
payment processing world, an authorization also verifies that the billing infor-
mation the customer has provided matches up with the information on record
with their credit card company.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
87
A Public
B Public
B Private
A Private
and
and
Key
Calculation
Engine
Secret Shared Key
FIGURE 3.2 Diffie-Hellman calculation.

Credit Card Association: A financial institution that provides credit card ser-
vices that are branded and distributed by customer issuing banks. Examples in-
clude Visa® and MasterCard®.
Customer: The holder of the payment instrument—such as credit card, debit
card, or electronic check.
Customer Issuing Bank: A financial institution that provides a customer with
a credit card or other payment instrument. Examples include Citibank and
Suntrust. During a purchase, the customer issuing bank verifies that the pay-
ment information submitted to the merchant is valid and that the customer has
the funds or credit limit to make the proposed purchase.
Internet Merchant Account: A special account with an acquiring bank that al-
lows the merchant to accept credit cards over the Internet. The merchant typ-
ically pays a processing fee for each transaction processed, also known as the
discount rate. A merchant applies for an Internet merchant account in a
process similar to applying for a commercial loan. The fees charged by the ac-
quiring bank will vary.
Merchant: Someone who owns a company that sells products or services.
Payment Gateway: A service that provides connectivity among merchants, cus-
tomers, and financial networks to process authorizations and payments. The
service is usually operated by a third-party provider such as VeriSign.
Processor: A large data center that processes credit card transactions and set-
tles funds to merchants. The processor is connected to a merchant’s site on be-
half of an acquiring bank via a payment gateway.
Settlement: The process by which transactions with authorization codes are
sent to the processor for payment to the merchant. Settlement is a sort of elec-
tronic bookkeeping procedure that causes all funds from captured transactions
to be routed to the merchant’s acquiring bank for deposit [2].
Controlling Access
One aspect of implementing a security policy is being able to control which users
have access to particular systems and the data that they can access. There are a va-
riety of security products for regulating the users allowed access to a system or pro-
viding the means to secure information by encryption. Some of these products will
be discussed in detail later in the chapter and throughout the book [1].
Authenticated Access
When an user logs into a system, what measures can be taken to ensure that he is a
valid user, as opposed to someone who has stolen a password? Within a company,
88
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

card keys and security personnel can ensure that only employees are accessing its
systems, but for remote users, there is a much higher perceived security risk. Many
companies provide each of their remote users with a digital token card (also called
hard tokens) to increase their assurance of the identity of each remote user [1].
Earlier in this chapter, mention was made of trusted third parties, called cer-
tificate authorities. Verisign is a commercial certification authority that issues dig-
ital certificates providing assurance of the identify of an individual. Typically a
Verisign digital certificate contains the owner’s public key, name, expiration date of
public key, name of issuer (Verisign), serial number of the certificate, and
Verisign’s digital signature. Additional information may also be included, depend-
ing on the type of certificate. Verisign has facilities in California and Japan that
issue digital certificates, provide digital identification for specific individuals, and
maintain lists of revoked digital certificates [1].
Verisign provides two types of digital certificates: personal certificates to pro-
vide assurance of the identity of an individual and secure server certificates to pro-
tect communications with a given server and allow verification of the identity of a
server. Its Class 1 personal certificates provide a unique name and email address
within its repository. A Class 2 personal certificate requires confirmation of name,
mailing address, and other personal information by an Equifax consumer database,
along with a physical mail-back process to ensure that the request was not gener-
ated by someone with access to an applicant’s personal information [1].
In the future, it is expected that there will be many certificate authorities avail-
able, ranging from banks to firms. The process of obtaining a certificate will be sim-
ilar to that shown in Figure 3.3 [1].
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
89
User
• Generate key pair
• Complete form
• Personally take form to bank
Bank / Certificate Authority
• Review form
• Verify identification
• Upon approval, generate cetificate
• Give diskette with certificate to signer
User
• Install certificate
• Create signed messages and records
FIGURE 3.3 Certification issuing process.

Privacy and Encryption
Another means of controlling access to information is to encrypt it. With a suffi-
ciently long encryption key, the cost and time required to break the key will greatly
exceed the value of the data. Encryption should only be used in a carefully thought
out manner, as part of a security policy, not as a substitute [1].
For example, Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) is a program for protecting the pri-
vacy of email and computer files. It runs on virtually every platform. PGP provides
the means for encrypting files and email, creating public and private keys, main-
taining a database of public keys, adding digital signatures to documents, and to
certifying keys and obtaining keys from key servers. In other words, PGP offers the
advantage of running on a wide variety of systems and providing individuals with
the ability to keep certain data confidential [1].
Secure Virtual Private Networks
Many corporate networks used for electronic data interchange (EDI) and funds
transfer have been implemented using either private networks or costly services from
specialized telecommunications network providers. Significant reduction in internal
corporate networking costs can be achieved by using secure, encrypted, Internet pro-
tocol (IP)-level network communications over less expensive public networks, called
secure virtual private networks (SVPN). Implementing such SVPNs requires authen-
tication of the sources of all data, privacy from competitors and intruders, and assur-
ance of the integrity of all data to minimize the possibility of fraud [1].
Security Futures: Smart Cards
Logically, a smart card is equivalent to an electronic safe deposit box. Implemented
as a credit-card-sized piece of plastic, a smart card contains a semiconductor chip
with logic and nonvolatile memory. The software within the card detects attempts
at intrusion and tampering and monitors abnormal usage. Billions of smart cards
have been made since their introduction in 1977. While smart cards are popular in
Asia and Europe, they are just beginning to become popular here in the United
States. Some of the many applications of smart cards include:
Stored value card: Minimizes the need to carry cash; can be used to purchase
items from merchants, vending machines and pay phones.
Health care: Portable, customized health care file with medical emergency data
and HMO and insurance information.
Access control in offices and hotels: Allows storage of time entered, exited, ac-
cess conditions, and identity.
90
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Contactless tickets for ski resorts and airlines: Increases speed, convenience,
and security and facilitates baggage checking [1].
Smart cards can be read using conventional contact readers or interrogated re-
motely by microwave or infrared signals. They offer superior security and lower life
cycle costs than alternatives such as coins, paper money, and magnetic stripe cards [1].
Security in smart cards is typically ensured by a combination of digital signa-
ture and public key technology. There are many different algorithms in use for
smart cards, but all act to verify the authenticity of cards and to prevent misuse or
fraud. Smart cards incorporate write-once memory that cannot be modified once
it has been programmed, allowing each card to contain a unique identification
number. Limits are typically placed on the number of erroneous attempts, pre-
venting brute-force attempts [1].
Regarding computer forensics systems, this section has briefly touched on a
wide variety of Internet security system topics involved with managing risk. Now
let’s move on to the next computer forensics system: intrusion detection systems.
INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS
Intrusion detection systems help computer systems prepare for and deal with at-
tacks. They collect information from a variety of vantage points within computer
systems and networks and analyze this information for symptoms of security prob-
lems. Vulnerability assessment systems check systems and networks for system
problems and configuration errors that represent security vulnerabilities. Both in-
trusion detection and vulnerability assessment technologies allow organizations to
protect themselves from losses associated with network security problems. This
section explains how intrusion detection and vulnerability assessment fits into the
overall framework of security products and techniques used in computer forensics.
Protecting critical information systems and networks is a complex operation,
with many tradeoffs and considerations. The effectiveness of any security solution
strategy depends on selecting the right products with the right combination of fea-
tures for the system environment one wishes to protect. This section also provides
the information one needs to be a savvy consumer in the areas of intrusion detec-
tion and vulnerability assessment.
Intrusion Detection Defined
Intrusion detection systems help computer systems prepare for and deal with attacks.
They accomplish this goal by collecting information from a variety of system and net-
work sources and then analyzing the information for symptoms of security problems.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
91

In some cases, intrusion detection systems allow the user to specify real-time re-
sponses to the violations. Intrusion detection systems perform a variety of functions:
Monitoring and analysis of user and system activity
Auditing of system configurations and vulnerabilities
Assessing the integrity of critical system and data files
Recognition of activity patterns reflecting known attacks
Statistical analysis of abnormal activity patterns
Operating system audit trail management, with recognition of user activity re-
flecting policy violations [3]
Some systems provide additional features, including
Automatic installation of vendor-provided software patches
Installation and operation of decoy servers to record information about in-
truders [3]
The combination of these features allows system managers to more easily han-
dle the monitoring, audit, and assessment of their systems and networks. This on-
going assessment and audit activity is a necessary part of sound security
management practice [3].
Vulnerability Assessment and Intrusion Detection
Vulnerability assessment products (also known as scanners) perform rigorous exam-
inations of systems in order to determine weaknesses that might allow security viola-
tions. These products use two strategies for performing these examinations. First,
passive, host-based mechanisms inspect system configuration files for unwise set-
tings, system password files for weak passwords, and other system objects for security
policy violations. These checks are followed, in most cases, by active, network-based
assessment, which reenacts common intrusion scripts, recording system responses to
the scripts [3].
The results of vulnerability assessment tools represent a snapshot of system se-
curity at a point in time. Although these systems cannot reliably detect an attack in
progress, they can determine that an attack is possible, and furthermore, they can
sometimes determine that an attack has occurred. Because they offer benefits that
are similar to those provided by intrusion detection systems, they are included in
the sphere of intrusion detection technologies and products [3].
Products Can Be Successfully Deployed in Operational Environments
The objective of intrusion detection and vulnerability assessment is to make com-
plex, tedious, and sometimes virtually impossible system security management
92
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

functions possible for those who are not security experts. Products are therefore de-
signed with user-friendly interfaces that assist system administrators in their in-
stallation, configuration, and use. Most products include information about the
problems they discover, including how to correct these problems, and provide
valuable guidance for those who need to improve their security skills. Many ven-
dors provide consulting and integration services to assist customers in successfully
using their products to achieve their security goals [3].
Network Security Management
Network security management is a process in which one establishes and maintains
policies, procedures, and practices required for protecting networked information
system assets. Intrusion detection and vulnerability assessment products provide ca-
pabilities needed as part of sound network security management practice [3].
Why Firewalls Aren’t Enough
A common question is how intrusion detection complements firewalls. One way of
characterizing the difference is provided by classifying security violations by source—
whether they come from outside the organization’s network or from within. Fire-
walls act as a barrier between corporate (internal) networks and the outside world
(Internet) and filter incoming traffic according to a security policy. This is a valuable
function and would be sufficient protection were it not for these facts:
Not all access to the Internet occurs through the firewall.
Not all threat originates outside the firewall.
Firewalls are subject to attack themselves [3].
Not All Access to the Internet Occurs Through the Firewall
Users, for a variety of reasons ranging from naiveté to impatience, sometimes set up
unauthorized modem connections between their systems connected to the internal
network and outside Internet access providers or other avenues to the Internet. The
firewall cannot mitigate risk associated with connections it never sees [3].
Not All Threats Originate Outside the Firewall
A vast majority of loss from security incidents is traced to insiders. Again, the fire-
wall only sees traffic at the boundaries between the internal network and the Inter-
net. If the traffic reflecting security breaches never flows past the firewall, it cannot
see the problems [3].
As more organizations utilize strong encryption to secure files and public net-
work connections, the focus of adversaries will shift to those places in the network in
which the information of interest is not as likely to be protected: the internal network.
Intrusion detection systems are the only part of the infrastructure that is privy to the
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
93

traffic on the internal network. Therefore, they will become even more important as
security infrastructures evolve [3].
Firewalls Are Subject to Attack Themselves
Attacks and strategies for circumventing firewalls have been widely publicized since
the first firewalls were fielded. A common attack strategy is to utilize tunneling to
bypass firewall protections. Tunneling is the practice of encapsulating a message in
one protocol (that might be blocked by firewall filters) inside a second message [3].
Trust and Intrusion Detection
Another area of discussion when considering the value of intrusion detection sys-
tems is the need to monitor the rest of the security infrastructure. Firewalls, iden-
tification and authentication products, access control products, virtual private
networks, encryption products, and virus scanners all perform functions essential
to system security. Given their vital roles, however, they are also prime targets of at-
tack by adversaries. On a less sinister note, they are also managed by mere mortals
and therefore subject to human error. Be it due to misconfiguration, outright fail-
ure, or attack, the failure of any of these components of the security infrastructure
jeopardizes the security of the systems they protect [3].
By monitoring the event logs generated by these systems, as well as monitoring
the system activities for signs of attack, intrusion detection systems provide an
added measure of integrity to the rest of the security infrastructure. Vulnerability
assessment products also allow system management to test new configurations of
the security infrastructure for flaws and omissions that might lead to problems [3].
System Security Management: A Process View
Securing systems is not a point fix. It is an ongoing process targeting a dynamic en-
vironment in which new threats arise daily [3].
Prevention covers those proactive measures taken by organizations to mitigate
risks to their system security. Much of the classic, government-sponsored work in
computer security addresses this area by focusing on the design and implementa-
tion of more secure operating systems and applications software. Prevention also
includes security policy formation, encryption, strong identification and authenti-
cation, and firewalls [3].
Functions in the detection phase are primarily provided by intrusion detection
systems, although virus scanners also fall into this category. Thus, detection in-
volves monitoring the targeted system(s), analyzing the information gathered for
problems, and then, based on the system settings, responding to the problems, re-
porting the problems, or both [3].
The results of the detection process drive the other two stages of managing se-
curity: (a) investigating problems that are discovered and documenting the cause of
94
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the problem and (b) either correcting the problem or devising a means of dealing
with it should it occur again. A common vision for future intrusion detection sys-
tems is that of performing these last two stages automatically, or else performing
the functions internal to detection so well that the need for the last two stages is vir-
tually eliminated [3].
The combination of the investigation and diagnosis/resolution phases is often
called incident response or incident handling. Organizations should specify policies,
procedures, and practices to address this area as it does the rest of security [3].
What Intrusion Detection Systems and Related Technologies Can and Cannot Do
Every new market suffers from exaggeration and misconception. Some of the
claims made in marketing materials are reasonable and others are misleading. Here
is a primer on how to read intrusion detection marketing literature [3].
Realistic Benefits
First of all, intrusion detection systems (IDSs) can lend a greater degree of integrity
to the rest of your security infrastructure. The reason for this is because they mon-
itor the operation of firewalls, encrypting routers, key management servers and
files critical to other security mechanisms, thus providing additional layers of pro-
tection to a secured system. Therefore, the strategy of a system attacker will often
include attacking or otherwise nullifying security devices protecting the intended
target. Intrusion detection systems can recognize these first hallmarks of attack and
potentially respond to them, mitigating damage. In addition, when these devices
fail, due to configuration, attack, or user error, intrusion detection systems can
recognize the problem and notify the right people [3].
Second, intrusion detection systems can also make sense of often obtuse system
information sources, telling you what’s really happening on your systems. Operating
system audit trails and other system logs are a treasure trove of information about
what’s going on internal to your systems. They are also often incomprehensible,
even to expert system administrators and security officers. Intrusion detection sys-
tems allow administrators and managers to tune, organize, and comprehend what
these information sources tell them, often revealing problems before loss occurs [3].
Third, intrusion detection systems can also trace user activity from the point of
entry to the point of exit or impact. Intrusion detection systems offer improve-
ments over perimeter protections such as firewalls. Expert attackers can often pen-
etrate firewalls; therefore, the ability to correlate activity corresponding to a
particular user is critical to improving security [3].
Fourth, intrusion detection systems can recognize and report alterations to
data files. Putting trojan horses in critical system files is a standard attack technique.
Similarly, the alteration of critical information files to mask illegal activity, damage
reputations, or commit fraud is common. File integrity assessment tools utilize
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
95

strong cryptographic checksums to render these files tamper-evident and, in the
case of a problem, quickly ascertain the extent of damage [3].
Fifth, intrusion detection systems can also spot errors of your system configu-
ration that have security implications, sometimes correcting them if the user
wishes. Vulnerability assessment products allow consistent auditing and diagnosis
of system configuration settings that might cause security problems. These prod-
ucts offer extensive vendor support and turnkey design so that even novice security
personnel can look for hundreds of problems by pushing a button. Some of these
product offerings even offer automated fixes for the problems uncovered [3].
Sixth, intrusion detection systems can recognize when your system appears to
be subject to a particular attack. Vulnerability assessment products also allow the
user of a system to quickly determine what attacks should be of concern to that sys-
tem. Again, strong vendor support allows novice security personnel to reenact
scores of hacker attacks against their system, automatically recording the results of
these attack attempts. These products also provide a valuable sanity check for those
installing and setting up new security infrastructures. It is far better for a system
manager to determine that his or her firewall is incorrectly configured immediately
than to discover this after an attacker has successfully penetrated it [3].
Seventh, intrusion detection systems can relieve your system management staff
of the task of monitoring the Internet, searching for the late hacker attacks. Many
intrusion detection and assessment tools come with extensive attack signature data-
bases against which they match information from your system. The firms develop-
ing these products have expert staffs that monitor the Internet and other sources for
reports and other information about new hacker attack tools and techniques. They
then use this information to develop new signatures that are provided to customers
for download from Web sites, downloaded to customers via encrypted email mes-
sages, or both [3].
Eighth, intrusion detection systems can make the security management of your
systems by nonexpert staff possible. Some intrusion detection and assessment tools
offer those with no security expertise the ability to manage security-relevant 
features of your systems from a user-friendly interface. These are window-based,
point-and-click screens that step users through setup and configuration in a logi-
cal, readily understood fashion [3].
Finally, intrusion detection systems can provide guidelines that assist you in the
vital step of establishing a security policy for your computing assets. Many intrusion
detection and assessment products are part of comprehensive security suites that in-
clude security policy building tools. These provide easy-to-understand guidance in
building your security policy, prompting you for information and answers that allow
you to articulate goals and guidelines for the use of your computer systems [3].
96
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Unrealistic Expectations
First, intrusion detection systems are not silver bullets. Security is a complex area
with myriad possibilities and difficulties. In networks, it is also a “weakest link”
phenomenon (it only takes one vulnerability on one machine to allow an adversary
to gain entry and potentially wreak havoc on the entire network). The time it takes
for this to occur is minuscule. There are no magic solutions to network security
problems, and intrusion detection products are no exception to this rule. However,
as part of a comprehensive security management they can play a vital role in pro-
tecting your systems [3].
Second, intrusion detection systems cannot compensate for weak identification
and authentication mechanisms. Although leading-edge research in intrusion detec-
tion asserts that sophisticated statistical analysis of user behavior can assist in identi-
fication of a particular person by observing their system activity, this fact is far from
demonstrated. Therefore, you must still rely on other means of identification and au-
thentication of users. This is best accomplished by strong authentication mechanisms
(including token-based or biometric schemes and one-time passwords). A security
infrastructure that includes strong identification and authentication and intrusion
detection is stronger than one containing only one or the other [3].
Third, intrusion detection systems cannot conduct investigations of attacks with-
out human intervention. In very secure environments, incidents happen. In order to
minimize the occurrence of incidents (and the possibility of resulting damage) one
must perform incident handling. One must investigate the attacks, determine, where
possible, the responsible party, and then diagnose and correct the vulnerability that
allowed the problem to occur, reporting the attack and particulars to authorities
where required. In some cases, especially those involving a dedicated attacker, find-
ing the attacker and pursuing criminal charges against the attacker is the only way to
make the attacks cease. However, the intrusion-detection system is not capable of
identifying the person at the other end of the connection without human interven-
tion. The best that it can do is identify the IP address of the system that served as the
attacker’s point of entry—the rest is up to a human incident handler [3].
Fourth, intrusion detection systems cannot intuit the contents of your organiza-
tional security policy. Intrusion-detection expert systems increase in value when they
are allowed to function as both hacker/burglar alarms and policy-compliance engines.
These functions cannot only spot the high-school hacker executing the “teardrop” at-
tack against your file server, but also spot the programmer accessing the payroll system
after hours. However, this policy compliance checking can exist only if there is a secu-
rity policy to serve as a template for constructing detection signatures [3].
Fifth, intrusion detection systems cannot compensate for weaknesses in trans-
mission control protocol (TCP)/IP, and many other network protocols do not per-
form strong authentication of host source and destination addresses. This means
that the source address that is reflected in the packets carrying an attack does not
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
97

necessarily correspond to the real source of the attack. It is difficult to identify who
is attacking one’s system; it is very difficult to prove the identity of an attacker in a
court of law—for example, in civil or criminal legal processes [3].
Sixth, intrusion detection systems cannot compensate for problems in the
quality or integrity of information the system provides. In other words, “garbage in
garbage out” still applies. System information sources are mined from a variety of
points within the system. Despite the best efforts on the part of system vendors,
many of these sources are software-based; as such, the data are subject to alteration
by attackers. Many hacker tools (for example “cloak” and “zap”) explicitly target
system logs, selectively erasing records corresponding to the time of the attack and
covering the intruders’ tracks. This argues for the value of integrated, sometimes re-
dundant, information sources; each additional source increases the possibility of
obtaining information not corrupted by an attacker [3].
Seventh, intrusion detection systems cannot analyze all of the traffic on a busy
network. Network-based intrusion detection is capable of monitoring traffic on a
network, but only to a point. Given the vantage point of network-based intrusion
detection sources that rely on network adapters set to promiscuous mode, not all
packets are visible to the systems. Also, as traffic levels rise, the associated process-
ing load required to keep up becomes prohibitive and the analysis engine either falls
behind or fails. In fact, vendors themselves characterized the maximum bandwidth
at which they had demonstrated their products to operate without loss with 100%
analysis coverage at 65 MB/sec [3].
Eighth, intrusion detection systems cannot always deal with problems involv-
ing packet-level attacks. There are weaknesses in packet-capture-based network in-
trusion detection systems. The heart of the vulnerabilities involves the difference
between the  intrusion detection systems’ interpretation of the outcome of a net-
work transaction (based on its reconstruction of the network session) and the des-
tination node for that network session’s actual handling of the transaction.
Therefore, a knowledgeable adversary can send series of fragmented and otherwise
doctored packets that elude detection but launch attacks on the destination node.
Worse yet, an adversary can use this sort of packet manipulation to accomplish a
denial of service attack on the intrusion detection systems itself by overflowing
memory allocated for incoming packet queues [3].
Finally, intrusion detection systems cannot deal with modern network hard-
ware and features. Dealing with fragmented packets can also be problematic. This
problem has serious ramifications when one considers modern high-speed asyn-
chronous transfer mode (ATM) networks that use packet fragmentation as a means
of optimizing bandwidth. Other problems associated with advances in network
technologies include the effect of switched networks on packet-capture-based net-
work intrusion detection systems. As the effect of switched networks is to establish
a network segment for each host, the range of coverage for a network intrusion
98
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

system is reduced to a single host. This problem can be mitigated in those switches
offering monitoring ports or spanning capability; however, these features are not
universal in current equipment [3].
The capabilities for intrusion detection are growing as new technologies enter the
marketplace and existing organizations expand their product offerings to allow addi-
tional sensor inputs, improved analysis techniques, and more extensive signature data-
bases. Thanks to government and military interest in information warfare (discussed
in Chapters 13 to 19), of which intrusion detection is a vital defensive component,
funding of research efforts has skyrocketed, with no end in sight. This increased activ-
ity will result in enhanced understanding of the intrusion detection process and new
features in future products. Intrusion detection products have now been embedded as
standard components of major governmental and financial networks [3].
As intrusion detection remains an active research area, look for future tech-
nologies to implement new techniques for managing data and detecting scenarios
of interest. Also look for products that function at application level and that inter-
operate with network management platforms. Finally, look for product features
that are integrated into a bevy of special purpose devices, ranging from bandwidth
management products to “black box” plug-ins for targeted environments [3].
FIREWALL SECURITY SYSTEMS
Today, when an organization connects its private network to the Internet, security
has to be one of primary concerns. In the past, before the widespread interest in the
Internet, most network administrators were concerned about attacks on their net-
works from within, perhaps from disgruntled workers. For most organizations now
connecting to the Internet and big business and big money moving toward elec-
tronic commerce at warp speed, the motive for mischief from outside is growing
rapidly and creating a major security risk to enterprise networks.
Reacting to this threat, an increasing number of network administrators are in-
stalling the latest firewall technology as a first line of defense in the form of a barrier
against outside attacks. These firewall gateways provide a choke point at which se-
curity and auditing can be imposed. They allow access to resources on the Internet
from within the organization while providing controlled access from the Internet to
hosts inside the virtual private network (VPN).
The threat of attack on your network increases proportionally with the contin-
ued exponential growth of the Internet. If it is necessary for you to connect your
network to the Internet, an appropriate security protocol should be decided on and
implemented. This book illustrates many reasons why this is necessary, as well as
many techniques to consider for your firewall solution. The bottom line is, do not
connect your network to the Internet without some sort of protection. Also, do not
put sensitive information in a place where it can be accessed over the Internet. The
firewall you decide to use will prevent most of the attacks on your network; however,
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
99

firewalls will not protect against dial-in modem attacks, virus attacks, or attacks
from within your company.
Nevertheless, a number of the security problems with the Internet can be reme-
died or made less serious through the use of existing and well-known techniques
and controls for host security. A firewall can significantly improve the level of site
security while at the same time permitting access to vital Internet services. This sec-
tion provides an overview of firewall technology, including how they protect
against vulnerabilities, what firewalls don’t protect against, and the components
that make up a firewall.
Firewall Defined
A firewall is a system or group of systems that enforces an access control policy be-
tween two networks. The actual means by which this is accomplished varies widely,
but in principle, the firewall can be thought of as a pair of mechanisms: one that
blocks traffic and one that permits traffic. Some firewalls place a greater emphasis on
blocking traffic, while others emphasize permitting traffic. Probably the most impor-
tant thing to recognize about a firewall is that it implements an access control policy.
If you don’t have a good idea what kind of access you want to permit or deny, or you
simply permit someone or some product to configure a firewall based on what they
or it think it should do, then they are making policy for your organization as a whole.
In other words, a firewall is a network security product that acts as a barrier be-
tween two or more network segments. The firewall is a system (which consists of
one or more components) that provides an access control mechanism between
your network and the network(s) on the other side(s) of the firewall. A firewall can
also provide audit and alarm mechanisms that will allow you to keep a record of all
access attempts to and from your network, as well as a real-time notification of
things that you determine to be important.
Perhaps it is best to describe first what a firewall is not: a firewall is not simply a
router, host system, or collection of systems that provides security to a network.
Rather, a firewall is an approach to security; it helps implement a larger security pol-
icy that defines the services and access to be permitted, and it is an implementation
of that policy in terms of a network configuration, one or more host systems and
routers, and other security measures such as advanced authentication in place of sta-
tic passwords. The main purpose of a firewall system is to control access to or from
a protected network (a site). It implements a network access policy by forcing con-
nections to pass through the firewall, where they can be examined and evaluated.
A firewall system can be a router, a personal computer, a host, or a collection
of hosts, set up specifically to shield a site or subnet from protocols and services that
can be abused from hosts outside the subnet. A firewall system is usually located at
a higher-level gateway, such as a site’s connection to the Internet. However, firewall
100
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

systems can be located at lower-level gateways to provide protection for some
smaller collection of hosts or subnets.
Why do we need firewalls? What can a firewall do for you? Why would you
want a firewall? What can a firewall not do for you? All of these burning questions
are answered next for those inquiring security minds that want to know.
The Reason for Firewalls
The general reasoning behind firewall usage is that without a firewall, a subnet’s
systems are exposed to inherently insecure services such as Network File System
(NFS) or Network Information Service (NIS) and to probes and attacks from hosts
elsewhere on the network.
In a firewall-less environment, network security relies totally on host security,
and all hosts must, in a sense, cooperate to achieve a uniformly high level of secu-
rity. The larger the subnet, the less manageable it is to maintain all hosts at the same
level of security. As mistakes and lapses in security become more common, break-
ins occur not as the result of complex attacks, but because of simple errors in con-
figuration and inadequate passwords.
The Need For Firewalls
As technology has advanced to greatly expand the information technology systems
capabilities of corporations, the threats to these systems have become numerous
and complex. In today’s world, corporations face a variety of information system
attacks against their local area networks (LANs) and wide area networks (WANs).
Many of these attacks are directed through the Internet. These attacks come from
three basic groups:
Persons who see attacking a corporation’s information system as a technolog-
ical challenge
Persons with no identified political or social agenda who see attacking a cor-
poration’s information system as an opportunity for high-tech vandalism
Persons associated with a corporate competitor or political adversary who see
the corporation’s information system as a legitimate strategic target
To combat this growing and complex threat to a corporation’s LAN and Inter-
net site, a series of protective countermeasures needs to be developed, continually
updated, and improved. Security services that are important to protecting a corpo-
ration’s strategic information include:
Data Integrity: Absolute verification that data has not been modified
Confidentiality: Privacy with encryption, scrambled text
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
101

Authentication: Verification of originator on contract
Non-Repudiation: Undeniable proof-of-participation
Availability: Assurance of service demand
It’s really the endpoints, like the servers, on your network you need to secure right?
After all, that’s where the sensitive data lives. You’ve got password protection on
your servers and you’ve implemented other security measures on your servers as
well. You may even have an administrator for your servers who is security-savvy;
however, are you willing to bet your company’s private information in this way?
The building and implementation of firewalls is an effective security countermea-
sure used to implement these security services. An external firewall is used to counter
threats from the Internet. An internal firewall is primarily used to defend a corpora-
tion’s LAN or WAN. The internal firewall is used to separate and protect corporate
databases (for example, financial databases can be separated from personnel data-
bases). In addition, internal firewalls can be used to separate different levels of infor-
mation being sent over a corporate LAN or WAN (for example, corporate proprietary
information dealing with research projects, financial data, or personnel records).
Firewalls, however, are just one element in an array of possible information
technology (IT) systems countermeasures. The most effective security counter-
measure is a good corporate security strategy. The effectiveness of this strategy will
have a direct bearing on the success of any firewall that a corporation builds or pur-
chases. For example, the two critical elements that form the basis of an effective cor-
porate security strategy are: least privilege and defense in depth.
Least Privilege
The principle of least privilege means that an object is given only the privileges it
needs to perform its assigned tasks. Least privilege is an important principle in
countering attacks and limiting damage.
Defense in Depth
Don’t depend on one security solution. Good security is usually found in layers.
These layers should consist of a variety of security products and services. The solu-
tions could be network security products (firewalls that could be both internal and
external) and information systems security (INFOSEC) training (employee educa-
tion through classes and threat and vulnerability briefings).
Do you want to let them even begin to work against your server’s security? Isn’t it
possible that your administrator might go home at night and miss the attack?
Can’t human errors in password security be made now and then? Firewalls are de-
102
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

signed to allow you a very important second layer of protection. Detection of secu-
rity problems can be made at this layer before any security breach can begin on any
of your data-sensitive servers.
A firewall approach provides numerous advantages to sites by helping to in-
crease overall host security. The following provides an overview of the primary
benefits of using a firewall.
Benefits of Firewalls
A firewall provides a leveraged choke point for network security. It allows the cor-
poration to focus on a critically vulnerable point: where the corporation’s informa-
tion system connects to the Internet. The firewall can control and prevent attacks
from insecure network services. A firewall can effectively monitor all traffic passing
through the system. In this manner, the firewall serves as an auditor for the system
and can alert the corporation to anomalies in the system. The firewall can also log ac-
cess and compile statistics that can be used to create a profile of the system.
Some firewalls, on the other hand, permit only email traffic through them,
thereby protecting the network against any attacks other than attacks against the
email service. Other firewalls provide less strict protections and block services that
are known to be problems.
Generally, firewalls are configured to protect against unauthenticated interac-
tive logins from the outside world. This, more than anything, helps prevent vandals
from logging into machines on your network. More elaborate firewalls block traf-
fic from the outside to the inside but permit users on the inside to communicate
freely with the outside..
Firewalls are also important since they can provide a single choke point where
security and audit can be imposed. Unlike in a situation where a computer system
is being attacked by someone dialing in with a modem, the firewall can act as an ef-
fective phone tap and tracing tool. Firewalls provide an important logging and au-
diting function. Often, they provide summaries to the administrator about what
kinds and amount of traffic passed through it, how many attempts there were to
break into it, etc. The following are the primary benefits of using a firewall:
Protection from vulnerable services
Controlled access to site systems
Concentrated security
Enhanced privacy
Logging and statistics on network use and misuse
Policy enforcement
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
103

Protection from Vulnerable Services
A firewall can greatly improve network security and reduce risks to hosts on the
subnet by filtering inherently insecure services. As a result, the subnet network en-
vironment is exposed to fewer risks, since only selected protocols will be able to
pass through the firewall.
For example, a firewall could prohibit certain vulnerable services such as NFS
from entering or leaving a protected subnet. This provides the benefit of prevent-
ing the services from being exploited by outside attackers, but at the same time per-
mits the use of these services with greatly reduced risk to exploitation. Services
such as NIS or NFS that are particularly useful on a LAN basis can thus be enjoyed
and used to reduce the host management burden.
Firewalls can also provide protection from routing-based attacks, such as source
routing and attempts to redirect routing paths to compromised sites via Internet
control message protocol (ICMP) redirects. A firewall could reject all source-routed
packets and ICMP redirects and then inform administrators of the incidents.
Controlled Access to Site Systems
A firewall also provides the ability to control access to site systems. For example,
some hosts can be made reachable from outside networks, whereas others can be ef-
fectively sealed off from unwanted access. A site could prevent outside access to its
hosts except for special cases such as email servers or information servers.
This brings to the fore an access policy that firewalls are particularly adept at
enforcing: do not provide access to hosts or services that do not require access. Put
differently, why provide access to hosts and services that could be exploited by at-
tackers when the access is not used or required? If, for example, a user requires lit-
tle or no network access to his or her desktop workstation, then a firewall can
enforce this policy.
ICMP is an extension to the IP defined by RFC 792. ICMP supports packets con-
taining error, control, and informational messages. The PING command, for ex-
ample, uses ICMP to test an Internet connection.
Concentrated Security
A firewall can be less expensive for an organization, in that all or most modified
software and additional security software could be located on the firewall systems
as opposed to being distributed on many hosts. In particular, one-time password
systems and other add-on authentication software could be located at the firewall
as opposed to on each system that needed to be accessed from the Internet.
104
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Other solutions to network security such as Kerberos involve modifications at
each host system. While Kerberos and other techniques should be considered for
their advantages and may be more appropriate than firewalls in certain situations,
firewalls tend to be simpler to implement in that only the firewall need run spe-
cialized software.
Kerberos is an authentication system developed at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT). Kerberos is designed to enable two parties to exchange private
information across an otherwise open network. It works by assigning a unique key,
called a ticket, to each user that logs on to the network. The ticket is then embed-
ded in messages to identify the sender of the message.
Enhanced Privacy
Privacy is of great concern to certain sites, since what would normally be considered
innocuous information might actually contain clues that would be useful to an at-
tacker. Using a firewall, some sites wish to block services such as finger and Domain
Name Service (DNS). Finger displays information about users such as their last login
time, whether they’ve read mail, and other items, but, finger could leak information
to attackers about how often a system is used, whether the system has active users
connected, and whether the system could be attacked without drawing attention.
Firewalls can also be used to block DNS information about site systems; thus,
the names and IP addresses of site systems would not be available to Internet hosts.
Some sites feel that by blocking this information, they are hiding information that
would otherwise be useful to attackers.
Logging and Statistics on Network Use and Misuse
If all access to and from the Internet passes through a firewall, the firewall can log
accesses and provide valuable statistics about network usage. A firewall with ap-
propriate alarms that sound when suspicious activity occurs can also provide details
on whether the firewall and network are being probed or attacked.
It is important to collect network usage statistics and evidence of probing for a
number of reasons. Of primary importance is knowing whether the firewall is with-
standing probes and attacks and determining whether the controls on the firewall
are adequate. Network usage statistics are also important as input into network re-
quirements studies and risk analysis activities.
Policy Enforcement
Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, a firewall provides the means for imple-
menting and enforcing a network access policy. In effect, a firewall provides access
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
105

control to users and services. Thus, a network access policy can be enforced by a
firewall, whereas without a firewall, such a policy depends entirely on the coopera-
tion of users. A site may be able to depend on its own users for their cooperation,
but it cannot and should not depend on Internet users in general.
There are also a number of disadvantages to the firewall approach, and there
are a number of things that firewalls cannot protect against. A firewall is not by any
means a panacea for Internet security problems.
Limitations of Firewalls
Firewalls can’t protect against attacks that don’t go through the firewall. Many cor-
porations that connect to the Internet are very concerned about proprietary data
leaking out of the company through that route. Unfortunately for those concerned,
a magnetic tape can just as effectively be used to export data. Many organizations
that are terrified (at a management level) of Internet connections have no coherent
policy about how dial-in access via modems should be protected. It’s silly to build
an 8-foot-thick steel door when you live in a wooden house. There are a lot of or-
ganizations out there buying expensive firewalls and neglecting the numerous other
back-doors into their networks. For a firewall to work, it must be a part of a con-
sistent overall organizational security architecture. Firewall policies must be realis-
tic and reflect the level of security in the entire network. For example, a site with top
secret or classified data doesn’t need a firewall at all: they shouldn’t be hooking up
to the Internet in the first place; or the systems with the really secret data should be
isolated from the rest of the corporate network.
Another thing a firewall can’t protect you against is traitors or idiots inside your
network. While an industrial spy might export information through your firewall,
he or she is just as likely to export it through a telephone, fax machine, or floppy
disk. Floppy disks are a far more likely means for information to leak from your or-
ganization than a firewall. Firewalls also cannot protect you against stupidity. Users
who reveal sensitive information over the telephone are good targets for social en-
gineering. An attacker may be able to break into your network by completely by-
passing your firewall if he or she can find a helpful employee inside who can be
fooled into giving access to a modem pool.
A firewall opens communications channels between two networks and has no
control over what users choose to transmit using these channels. It has no concept
of the value or sensitivity of the data it is transferring between networks and there-
fore cannot protect information on that basis. A firewall cannot control what a user
chooses to do with the data once he has received it. If a user chooses to modify or
propagate that information, the firewall has no effect.
A firewall can protect the integrity of information from the time that it receives
the information until it releases it on the other network. It cannot, however, test or
106
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

ensure information integrity before it receives it or after it releases it. It also cannot
prevent trusted users from disclosing (either accidentally or deliberately) informa-
tion if they chose to do so.
A firewall cannot provide access control on any of your inside systems from
someone already inside the firewall. If someone has already bypassed your firewall
or is physically located on your inside network, then access attempts to your inside
systems no longer need to go through the firewall, and the firewall will provide no
protection. Finally, a firewall cannot completely protect your systems from data-
driven attacks such as viruses.
Viruses
Firewalls can’t protect very well against things like viruses. There are too many
ways of encoding binary files for transfer over networks and too many different ar-
chitectures and viruses to try to search for them all. In other words, a firewall can-
not replace security-consciousness on the part of your users. In general, a firewall
cannot protect against a data-driven attack—attacks in which something is mailed
or copied to an internal host, where it is then executed. This form of attack has oc-
curred in the past against various versions of Sendmail and GhostScript, a freely
available PostScript viewer.
Data-driven attacks are those that are transferred as data to the target system by
user applications such as FTP, WWW, and email. This type of attack includes ma-
licious programs, viruses, and Web applets. A firewall cannot completely eliminate
the threat of this type of attack. Some restrictions may be put in place to limit the
types of data that are received; however, they cannot be completely eliminated by
a firewall, and user awareness and host-based virus scanning is important.
Organizations that are deeply concerned about viruses should implement
organization-wide virus control measures. Rather than trying to screen viruses out
at the firewall, make sure that every vulnerable desktop has virus scanning software
that runs when the machine is rebooted. Blanketing your network with virus scan-
ning software will protect against viruses that come in via floppy disks, modems, and
the Internet. Trying to block viruses at the firewall will only protect against viruses
from the Internet—and the vast majority of viruses are caught via floppy disks.
As previously discussed, a firewall is a system or group of systems that enforces
an access control policy between two networks. There are many ways to implement
firewalls on today’s corporate networks. Usually they can be thought of as two
mechanisms: one that permits traffic and one that blocks traffic. Whether a com-
pany wishes to place more emphasis on permitting or blocking traffic is up to the
individuals who set the security policies for that company. A company should not
leave this to the discretion of the service or product that will supply their security
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
107

because only the company knows what kind of protection it needs. If a company is
unsure about what kind of protection is necessary, there are numerous vendors
who will help in setting up a secure network.
Firewalls are designed to protect your network from attacks originating from
another network. An effective firewall will only allow authorized access to the pro-
tected network and will deny access to those who don’t have authorized access.
Some firewalls permit only email traffic through them, thereby protecting the net-
work against any attacks other than attacks against the email service. Other firewalls
provide less strict protections and block services that are known to be problems. A
more effective firewall will allow users on the protected network to communicate
freely with the outside world; this is the reason a company connects its LAN to the
Internet. If a company wants to monitor the types and amounts of traffic that are
directed at their network, a firewall can effectively supply this information to the
system administrator.
A firewall will not block attempts to break into a network that come from ex-
ternal modems or from internal attacks. In other words, a firewall will not protect
against any other attacks except for those originating from external networks. If a
company has top secret information that it wants to keep secret, it should not con-
nect any machines containing this information to the Internet. This is probably the
most effective firewall to implement. Most companies would like to have some
kind of Internet access available to their employees. If this is the case, then a firewall
implemented at the application level will be able to supply the amount of security
necessary to meet the company’s needs.
Finally, leaks of information are far more likely to walk out the front door of
the office on a floppy disk than over the Internet through your firewall.
STORAGE AREA NETWORK SECURITY SYSTEMS
In the aftermath of the devastation that occurred when the World Trade Center
collapsed, disaster recovery services used storage area networks (SANs) to restore
thousands of terabytes of business data and get hundreds of companies running. As
distasteful as the idea might be, with disaster comes opportunity, and the disasters
of September 11, 2001, provided a good opportunity for storage networks to show
their value by providing critically important business continuity. Rarely has tech-
nology demonstrated its value in a more demanding environment.
Today, organizations continue to expose their IT systems to a wide range of po-
tential security threats as they continue to broaden their reach to business partners
and customers around the globe. Furthermore, data theft, eavesdropping, fraud,
and hacker attempts increasingly threaten secure electronic information exchange
within the enterprise and across public networks (such as the Internet).
108
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Because IT systems are only as secure as the weakest link in the network, orga-
nizations need to consider outsourcing their data storage security needs to one
vendor, which will help them develop a comprehensive security plan and architec-
ture that helps ensure safe, reliable data processing throughout a SAN. In other
words, an organization needs an integrated solution that addresses a wide variety of
potential security threats—thus enabling a robust, mission-critical SAN infrastruc-
ture. Nevertheless, demand for high-availability SANs and disaster recovery tech-
nology is soaring as companies realize their IT dependency.
Storage Area Network Overview
SANs are a relatively new methodology for attaching storage, whereby a separate
network (separate from the traditional LAN) connects all storage and servers. This
network would be a high-performance implementation, such as a fiber channel,
that encapsulates protocols such as a small computer system interface (SCSI).
These are more efficient at transferring data blocks from storage and have hardware
implementations offering buffering and delivery guarantees. This is not available
using TCP/IP.
The SAN development areas have not yet been realized, but there is great po-
tential with regard to centralized storage SAN management and storage abstraction.
Storage abstraction refers to an indirect representation of storage that has also been
called virtualization. Together with these potential enhancements, SANs should be
able to generate greater functionality than has been possible previously. Thus, most
system vendors have ambitious strategies to change the way enterprise operations
store and manage data with new capabilities based on SANs.
As an alternative to the centralized arrays and tape libraries commonly deployed
in data center storage consolidation strategies today, SANs are a new paradigm that
allows the use of cost-effective modular arrays and tape libraries. Conversely, in
order to amortize the cost of the storage over many servers, SANs are also being used
to provide increased server connectivity to centralized arrays and tape libraries.
Due to the maturation of newer storage interconnect technologies like fibre
channels, SANs are evolving. This solution holds perhaps the greatest promise for
the storage-centric model of computing as shown in Figure 3.4.
SANs promise the ability to make any-to-any connections among multiple
servers and storage devices. They can create a shared “pool” of storage that can be
accessed by multiple servers through multiple paths, resulting in higher availabil-
ity—especially during a network disaster recovery (NDR).
SANs also promise to simplify backup procedures. Tape subsystems could still
be shared among numerous servers during backups—all transparent to the user. In
other words, SANs allow distributed servers to access a large centralized storage
subsystem for data-sharing applications during an NDR.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
109

Devices could also be distributed throughout a campus yet managed from a
central point though a single management tool. Since devices can be added or re-
configured transparently with location flexibility, scaling the SAN will be easy.
SAN Benefits
A SAN provides a perfect environment for clustering that can extend to dozens of
servers and storage devices—all the while having redundant links in a fibre channel
fabric. Servers will continue to function because their data is still available through
the SAN, even if storage devices fail during an NDR.
Centralized Management
When a disk or controller fails in a direct-attached environment, redundant systems
keep the redundant array of independent (or inexpensive) disks (RAID) array oper-
ating normally and generate an alarm. However, the redundant component may fail
as well, bringing the system down if the failed component isn’t replaced quickly. Also,
the chances are good that because of human error or inefficient management prac-
110
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
Centralized
Management
Tape Libraries
External Site
Centralized Disk
Subsystem
UNIX
NT
LAN
WAN/LAN
Just A Bunch of
Drivers (JBODs)
Fiber Channel
Hubs and Switches
FIGURE 3.4 Storage-centric model of computing

tices, an alarm will eventually be missed and a storage subsystem will fail in an enter-
prise with a large number of RAID subsystems managed in a decentralized fashion.
From one management console, a centralized pool of storage can be managed
more efficiently. Everyday administrative tasks can be centrally managed. This low-
ers the costs of storage management and significantly increases the consistency and
span of control of system administrators, as well as increasing the availability of
data during an NDR.
Scalability
A storage area network can lower acquisition and expansion costs, in addition to
lowering management costs. Even as new servers, disk arrays, and tape subsystems are
added, the SAN architecture supports access between all servers and all storage re-
sources in the network. Without disrupting data access, customers can add storage re-
sources and even servers online. For example, additional tape libraries can be added
to the SAN and will be available to all systems and the backup application, even if in-
creasing disk capacity makes backup times exceed the time window allotted.
Reliability
A SAN is a network that resides between the host bus adapter and the storage de-
vice. This position inherently creates a critical point at the physical level, but by im-
plementing multiple paths and redundant infrastructure devices, the SAN reduces
or eliminates single points of failure. Because monitoring of the network is much
easier now, centralization facilitates more rigorous, consistent management prac-
tices and thus increases the overall reliability.
Performance
In application environments that depend on bulk data transfer (such as data ware-
housing and data-mining applications), maximum bandwidth is of particular in-
terest. Current fibre channel connections can support 400 MB/sec and greater
data-transfer rates for faster access to more storage resources than they do for
server-attached or LAN-attached storage today. Backup and restore times can be
shortened dramatically by the high channel speed and low latency obtained by
using a SAN.
Making it possible to access more devices at one time is another way that a SAN
can improve performance. For example, the backup task can be accomplished even
more quickly if the SAN makes it possible to back up application data utilizing up
to eight tape drives simultaneously.
SANs aren’t the only alternative storage solution during an NDR, but they are
the best alternative available today. Let’s now look at NDR systems as part of com-
puter forensics systems.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
111

NETWORK DISASTER RECOVERY SYSTEMS
The high availability of mission-critical systems and communications is a major re-
quirement for the viability of the modern organization. A network disaster could
negate the capability of the organization to provide uninterrupted service to its in-
ternal and external customers.
How would your company respond in the event of a network disaster or emer-
gency? Network disaster recovery (NDR) is the ability to respond to an interruption
in network services by implementing a disaster recovery plan to restore an organi-
zation’s critical business functions. NDR is not a new idea. In recent years, data has
become a vitally important corporate asset essential to business continuity. A fun-
damental requirement of economic viability is the ability to recover crucial data
quickly after a disaster.
While the great majority of companies have plans for NDR in place, those with-
out an NDR plan indicate that they intend to create one. Is intend to create one good
enough to make sure the critical parts of your business will be able to continue to func-
tion in the event of a catastrophe? You will have to take the time to determine, in part-
nership with your executive committee, exactly what it means for your firm to be very
prepared. Staff training is clearly the greatest missing link in disaster recovery prepara-
tions. The next most important issue is backing up corporate data more frequently.
Many companies see their disaster recovery efforts as being focused primarily
on their IT departments. IT people are in the lead in sponsoring and managing
their disaster recovery plans, and relatively few companies involve line-of-business
staff and partners in designing and testing such plans at all. Not surprisingly, the
person most frequently cited as being responsible for the management of an NDR
plan is the company’s chief information officer (CIO) or another IT manager.
There’s general agreement on what should be covered in an NDR plan. Net-
work outages are the number-one issue for smaller companies and high on the list
for larger companies. This puts a premium on reliable networking hardware and
software. Natural disasters also ranked high. At the bottom of the list are attacks on
company Web sites, employee-initiated outages, and service provider failures.
Larger companies (those with $20 million or more in annual revenues) are
more likely than smaller companies to prepare for events such as hardware com-
ponent failure versus natural disasters and accidental employee-initiated outages.
The most frequent services include regular off-site data backups and virus detection
and protection.
As for components that are or will be part of their NDR plan, larger businesses
are more likely to perform or plan to perform a business impact analysis than
smaller firms. However, most companies cite components such as a process for ad-
ministering the NDR plan, setting out what individuals should do in the aftermath
of a disaster, and recovery strategies.
112
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

A majority of companies indicate they review their NDR plans every quarter,
but some companies haven’t reviewed their plans at all. Testing, however, appears
to be done less often. The data center is the most frequently tested plan component.
A few businesses are showing increased interest in testing their NDR plans more
often than they have in the past.
The impact of the loss of mission-critical systems naturally varies depending on
a company’s size. Companies with more than $30 million in annual revenues have
indicated they have losses in excess of $300,000 per day.
Major hardware component failure and a network failure are the most com-
mon problems. That provides strong support for the usual reported focus on the
kinds of problems companies are most intent on avoiding, but most of these can’t
have been major breaches. Most companies believe they don’t have to worry about
being offline for long. Most companies have their mission-critical systems back up
within 24 hours.
SANs offer the most promising solutions for storage problems today, comple-
menting the other solutions of direct storage, centralized storage, and network-attached
storage.
Even before the events of 9/11, most companies were taking NDR planning se-
riously. The majority seemed to be following reasonably good planning practices,
focusing on major potential sources of problems.
Large companies, certainly, have more incentive to plan and test more com-
pletely; as well as the resources to do so, but even smaller companies have given at
least some thought to the problem. Thus, there’s a potential disconnect in terms of
perception. IT organizations must focus far more on involving partners, suppliers,
and other members of the organization in any future plan.
PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS
To mitigate the security risks of conducting business in an open environment while
at the same time maintaining the cost advantages of doing so, enterprises are turn-
ing their attention to an emerging segment of the security market known as public
key infrastructure (PKI). The purpose of PKI is to provide an environment that ad-
dresses today’s business, legal, network, and security demands for trust and confi-
dentiality in data transmission and storage. PKI accomplishes these goals for an
enterprise through policy and technology components. These components deter-
mine and identify the roles, responsibilities, constraints, range of use, and services
available. This section briefly identifies the key concepts and issues surrounding the
technologies and policies required to implement and support an enterprise PKI.
In other words, PKI is a system for supporting digital signatures and document
encryption for an organization. It is fast becoming essential for effective, secure 
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
113

e-commerce and to fulfill general security and authentication requirements over
nonsecure networks (like the Net). The banking services are the most popular usage
of this technology, which is quickly spreading over all the applications that need se-
curity to be fully operational.
PKI Defined
A PKI enables users of an insecure public network such as the Internet to securely
and privately exchange data through the use of a public and a private cryptographic
key pair that is obtained and shared through a trusted authority. The PKI provides
for digital certificates that can identify individuals or organizations and directory
services that can store and, when necessary, revoke them. PKI is the underlying
technology that provides security for the secure sockets layer (SSL) and hyper text
transfer protocol secure sockets (HTTPS) protocols, which are used extensively to
conduct secure e-business over the Internet.
The PKI assumes the use of public key cryptography, which is the most common
method on the Internet for authentication of a message sender or encryption of a
message. Traditional cryptography involves the creation and sharing of a secret key
for the encryption and decryption of messages. This secret key system has the sig-
nificant flaw that if the key is discovered or intercepted by someone else, messages
can easily be decrypted. For this reason, public key cryptography and the PKI is the
preferred approach on the Internet. A PKI consists of
A certificate authority that issues and verifies digital certificates
A registration authority that acts as the verifier for the certificate authority be-
fore a digital certificate is issued to a requestor
One or more directories where the certificates (with their public keys) are held
A certificate management system
PKI is complicated but is a sound solution to a difficult problem, namely en-
abling two parties to exchange data securely over an insecure medium without the
benefit of prior communication. It has been adopted by the popular Web browsers
and is widely used for one-off business-to-customer (B2C) transactions. In general,
however, PKI still faces challenges in terms of application support, interoperability
between vendors, differing government legislation, and practical key management.
Large-scale PKI implementations therefore demand careful planning and man-
agement if goals are to be realized within the desired timescales. Where possible,
companies developing these large-scale implementations for the first time should
pilot the solution on an isolated, noncritical area of the business and always be re-
alistic about what they hope to achieve.
114
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

WIRELESS NETWORK SECURITY SYSTEMS
It’s an epidemic waiting to happen to many security experts. While most IT man-
agers today have their hands full securing wired networks, their companies have
been spending billions of dollars on wireless. Businesses will have spent $60 billion
on wireless communications services and wireless network security by the end of
2005. This also includes 70% of the U.S. work force using some sort of wireless de-
vice, including cell phones, pagers, and mobile computing devices. That’s good
news for employee productivity, but bad news for companies ill-prepared to head
off wireless network security breaches and debilitating viruses.
The only reason the wireless viruses of today have not been more damaging is
that there’s a lack of functionality and a lack of mature infrastructure globally.
That’s about to change. Industry analysts predict dramatic increases in wireless
handheld use and the proliferation of new mobile capabilities. They expect to see
3.7 billion handsets, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and Internet appliances
equipped with wireless capabilities by the end of 2006. With that, you get a full-
scale epidemic in the works. Simply put, “It’s coming.”
The wireless world, with its often-incompatible alphabet soup of standards,
may be new territory for many IT managers. Many enterprises have felt that pro-
tecting their wireless processes against viruses is one piece of the complicated puz-
zle they can afford to omit. They’ll soon need to think again or face threats that
could wreak havoc.
The good news is wireless network security vendors (even giants like IBM) are
busy developing products to fight the viruses and security breaches of the future.
Among them are those that head off problems on a wireless network level, within
applications and on devices.
Overview of Wireless Network Security
To date, most wireless attacks have happened outside the U.S., in markets where
wireless devices are more widely used. Nevertheless, one virus that did hit U.S. hand-
helds was known as the liberty virus. Some PDA users received what they thought was
a program that would allow them to play a certain game for free, but when they
double-clicked on the link, it launched a virus that erased all the data on the devices.
The virus wasn’t devastating for people who regularly back up their PDA information
on their PCs. Nevertheless, more serious problems have occurred overseas in the
form of viruses and malicious code that forced phones to dial particular numbers,
intercepted transmissions, and stole data. One virus was distributed in Scandinavia as
a short message. The virus rendered the buttons useless when a user received the
message. In order to get their phones fixed, users had to take them in to their service
providers.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
115

New types of malicious code have been written that force wireless devices to
make phone calls, because many of them also have telephony capabilities. One in-
cident in Japan caught the attention of wireless operators and software companies
around the globe. Users of NTT DoCoMo’s (http://www.nttdocomo.com/) popular
I-mode service received an email with what looked like an embedded Web site link.
When customers clicked on the link, their phones automatically dialed Japan’s
emergency response number. Luckily, they could stop it before it got too bad, but
such code could shut down a 911 system and have serious consequences. For ex-
ample, similar viruses could be unleashed that might flood a company’s call center
or cause phones to dial a 900 number. If a virus that spread to all its mobile work-
ers racked up significant charges, a corporation could be seriously affected.
The threat of data theft, perhaps, is more alarming to businesses. In order to
prevent the interception of information as it’s being transmitted, all wireless trans-
mission standards have security built in, but they’re known to be fallible. The de-
velopers of standards such as the wireless application protocol (WAP) and the
wireless LAN 802.11b standard have included encryption technology designed to
head off the threat of “sniffing.”
Because the wireless network is essentially everywhere, sniffing is an inherent
problem in wireless. Sniffers must have access to physical parts of the network in
order to break into the wired world. The problem is that with wireless, they don’t
even have to be in the network. They can be in a van outside with a transmitter.
The widely used wireless LAN standard, 802.11, came under fire recently when re-
searchers at the University of California at Berkeley figured out how to crack its built-
in encryption. Still, there is some hope, because developers addressed wireless network
security from the start and are working to beef it up before wireless LANs become
more pervasive. Companies will also have to secure wireless transactions. There will be
attacks on the devices themselves, but they quickly will be focused on transactions.
As devices develop more capabilities, these threats are expected to grow more
serious and frequent. Typically, you should look to the past to predict the future.
Every time there is a technology advancement, along with it comes new possible
threats. Each time software companies release popular technologies in the PC en-
vironment, people use them to write malicious code. The same is expected with re-
gard to wireless. For example, a Windows program can currently run on a
Windows Compact Edition (CE) device, but CE doesn’t yet support macros. Thus,
the ability for viruses to spread is nil, because the device doesn’t support macros.
Wireless devices are rapidly developing other capabilities. In the beginning the
PDA was just something used to store contacts, but today they are little computing
devices. There’s more of a chance of things being used improperly as you create
more functionality.
Most viruses have been regional so far, but the threat of viruses spreading
around the globe grows as regions of the world begin to standardize wireless tech-
116
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

nologies. NTT DoCoMo, for example, opened its wireless network globally in 2003.
Now, NTT DoCoMo threats can spread worldwide.
Also, the more capabilities supported by devices, the greater the potential for
viruses to spread between PCs and mobile devices, which could enable viruses to
spread very quickly. Windows CE will support Java script in the future so the same
applications can run on PCs and handheld devices. Then viruses can spread easily
via email or programs that synchronize PCs and handheld devices. Some wireless
phones (including versions Nextel Communications sells primarily to businesses)
already support a version of Java.
Thus, as 802.11 networks proliferate and mature, robust wireless network se-
curity solutions are required. The basic 802.11 wireless network security solutions
that are available “out of the box” (service set identifier [SSID], MAC address fil-
tering, and  wired equivalent privacy [WEP]) are suitable for small, tightly managed
wireless networks with low-to-medium security requirements. For wireless net-
works with high security requirements, the weaknesses in WEP encryption require
a more robust solution. In addition, the manual task of maintaining MAC ad-
dresses and WEP keys becomes overwhelming as the number of wireless network
clients increase. For larger wireless networks, or for networks with high security re-
quirements, a VPN solution based on currently available technology provides a
very scalable solution for 802.11 wireless networks. VPN for wireless is also a logi-
cal extension of the remote access VPN capability found in most large businesses
today. On the horizon is 802.1X, a standards-based solution for port-level authen-
tication for any wired or wireless Ethernet client system.
In addition, although distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks have been
recognized as a serious problem, there hasn’t been any other attempt to introduce
formal classification into the DDoS attack mechanisms. The reason might lie in the
use of fairly simple attack tools that have dominated most DDoS incidents. Those
tools perform full-force flooding attacks, using several types of packets. As defense
mechanisms are deployed to counter these simple attacks, they are expected to be
faced with more complex strategies.
The Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) Coordination Center is
currently undertaking the initiative to devise a comprehensive classification of
computer incidents as part of the design of common incident data format and ex-
change procedures. Unfortunately, their results are not yet available. Thus, as of
this writing, there have been no attempts to formally classify DDoS defense systems,
although similar works exist in the field of intrusion detection systems.
Nevertheless, DDoS attacks are a complex and serious problem, and conse-
quently, numerous approaches have been proposed to counter them. The multi-
tude of current attack and defense mechanisms obscures the global view of the
DDoS problem. This chapter is a first attempt to cut through the obscurity and
achieve a clear view of the problem and its solutions. The classifications described
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
117

here are intended to help the wireless network community think about the threats
they face and the information warfare (IW) measures they can use to counter those
threats.
One benefit of the development of DDoS classifications has been to foster eas-
ier cooperation among researchers on DDoS defense mechanisms. Attackers coop-
erate to exchange attack code and information about vulnerable machines and to
organize their agents into coordinated wireless networks to achieve immense power
and survivability. The Internet community must be equally cooperative to counter
this threat. Good classifications for DDoS attack and defense mechanisms will fa-
cilitate communications and offer the community a common language to discuss
their solutions. They will also clarify how different mechanisms are likely to work
in concert and identify areas of remaining weakness that require additional mech-
anisms. Similarly, the research community needs to develop common metrics and
benchmarks to evaluate the efficacy of DDoS defense mechanisms, and good clas-
sifications can be helpful in shaping these tasks, as well.
The preceding classifications are not necessarily complete or all-encompassing.
We should not be deceived by the simplicity of the current attacks; for the attack-
ers this simplicity arises more from convenience than necessity. As defense mecha-
nisms are deployed to counter simple attacks, we are likely to see more complex
attack scenarios. Many more attack possibilities exist and must be addressed before
we can completely handle the DDoS threat, and some of them are likely to be out-
side the current boundaries of the classifications presented here. Thus, these classi-
fications are likely to require expansion and refinement as new threats and defense
mechanisms are discovered.
Finally, the DDoS attack classification and DDoS defense classification outlined
in this chapter are useful to the extent that they clarify your thinking and guide you
to more effective solutions to the problem of DDoS. The ultimate value of the wire-
less network security technology described in this section will thus be in the degree
of discussion for the next computer forensics system, known as satellite encryption
security systems.
SATELLITE ENCRYPTION SECURITY SYSTEMS
The boom in satellite communications is changing the way we work and live, but it
is becoming a security nightmare for those organizations and governments whose
survival depends on the protection of intellectual property distribution, electronic
commerce, electronic battlefields and national security. The ability to securely ex-
change information between billions of users around the globe involving perhaps
trillions of transactions is vital to the continued growth and usefulness of satellite
communications as well as the Internet and intranets. Encryption—especially sev-
118
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

eral layers of encryption on top of compressed data that is to be transmitted (via a
highly directional microwave radio signal) to a satellite (uplink) from Earth and
then transmitted down to Earth (downlink) and decrypted—can effectively solve
the Internet’s confidentiality and authentication problems.
This section shows how governments and organizations around the world can
use satellite encryption to help preserve vital national secrets, limit attacks on a na-
tion’s information infrastructure, and eliminate security and authentication obsta-
cles to electronic commerce. Specifically, this part of the chapter provides a brief
overview of current satellite encryption technology, the threat from the Internet,
encrypted satellite data transmitting (downlink) and receiving (uplink), and en-
cryption cracking.
Current and Future Satellite Technology
A look at the potential threat to these orbiting systems from the Internet is of the
utmost importance before covering how to use encryption to best protect them. As
it stands today, the Internet is not secure, so the only option is to understand how
attacks occur and how best to protect against them.
High-Tech Mayhem
Attacks on satellite systems regularly fill plot lines of Hollywood movies. For in-
stance, in the James Bond thriller Tomorrow Never Dies terrorists steal an encryp-
tion decoder from the CIA and use it to transmit false longitude and latitude
coordinates from a U.S. military satellite to a U.S. ship carrying nuclear missiles to
make it appear that it is in international waters when the ship is actually within Chi-
nese waters, resulting in the imminent threat of World War III.
Such incidents could be all too real in the near future. That’s because as satellite-
connected networked computers expand their control over world governments, the
military, energy, power, water, finance, communications, and emergency systems,
the possibility of electronic attack and catastrophic terrorism becomes increasingly
possible. A serious threat is sure to evolve if the international community doesn’t
take steps now to protect these systems in the future.
High-Tech Highwaymen
Today’s electronic highway is threatened by a new breed of highwaymen, called
crackers, ranging from malicious pranksters to hardened terrorists. For the sake of
public trust in the Internet, an infrastructure must be designed to support the safe
use of land-based communication links or ground stations (called gateways, they
connect terrestrial networks with satellite systems) as shown in Figure 3.5. System-
atic mechanisms and protocols must be developed to prevent breaches of security
while transmitting data to (uplink) a satellite or receiving (downlink) data from it.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
119

Prevention versus Detection
Among the protection mechanisms are encryption for safeguarding the transmis-
sion of sensitive data (such as credit card numbers) to and from satellites, authen-
tication by a password, and access controls such as permission to access files. All of
these protection mechanisms are designed to ensure that only an authorized person
can gain access to systems and alter information. Audit mechanisms are investiga-
tive tools that detect and quantify malicious behavior. For instance, some tools
check the records (called audit logs) of system behavior, while others examine user
activities on the system as they occur.
Odd Person Out Attacks
Suppose that an attacker is competing with Lisa for Jeremiah’s business and wants
to intercept Lisa and Jeremiah’s email billet-doux. If the messages traveling over the
Internet via satellite connection can be modified en route, the message Jeremiah re-
ceives need not be the one Lisa sent. To do this, the attacker must change the router
tables so that all email messages between Lisa’s and Jeremiah’s computers are for-
warded to some intermediate satellite system to which the attacker has easy access.
The attacker can then read the messages on this intermediate satellite site, change
their contents, and forward them to the original destination as if the intermediate
site were legitimately on the message’s path—a so-called odd person out attack.
Using encryption to hide the contents of messages, while often seen as the ul-
timate answer to this problem, is merely part of the solution because of a simple yet
120
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
Digital mobile
phones
Solar powered
telephone booth
Data
communicator
Remote locations
Corporate
intranets
Public
switched
telephone
networks
Direct satellite
communications
Inter-satellite
networking
Cellular
systems
Internet
Home
PCs
Satellite in
low-earth orbit 
Land-based
communication
links
FIGURE 3.5 The low Earth orbit (LEO) network.

fundamental problem of trust: how do you distribute encrypted keys? Public-key
encryption systems provide each user with both a private key known only to that
user and a public key that the user can distribute widely. With this scheme, if Lisa
wants to send Jeremiah confidential mail, she enciphers a message using Jeremiah’s
public key and sends the enciphered message to him as shown in Figure 3.6. Only
Jeremiah, with his private key, can decipher this message; without that key, the at-
tacker cannot read or change Lisa’s message.
Suppose the attacker is able to fool Lisa into believing that the attacker’s pub-
lic key is Jeremiah’s, say by intercepting the unencoded email message that Jere-
miah sent giving Lisa the public key and substituting his own. Thus, Lisa would
encipher the message using the attacker’s public key and send that message to Jere-
miah. The attacker intercepts the message, deciphers it, alters it, and re-encrypts it
using Jeremiah’s real public key. Jeremiah receives the altered message, deciphers it,
and the business deal goes sour.
The situation becomes even more complicated with the World Wide Web.
Suppose Lisa uses a Web browser to view a Web site in Italy. The Italian Web page,
put up by an attacker, has a link on it that says, “Click here to view a graphic
image.” When she clicks on the link, an applet that scans her system for personal in-
formation (such as a credit card number) and invisibly emails it to the attacker is
downloaded along with the image. Here, Lisa trusted the implied promise of the
Web page that only an image would be downloaded. This trust in implied situations
(this program only does what it says it does) is violated by computer programs con-
taining viruses and trojan horses. PC users spread viruses by trusting that new pro-
grams do only what they are documented to do and have not been altered, so they
fail to take necessary precautions.
The ability to securely exchange information between two users or between a
service provider and a user via satellite connection is vital to the continued growth
and usefulness of satellite communications as we approach the next millennium.
How can we use encryption to best protect these systems?
Satellite Encryption Secure Exchange
For the sake of public trust in the Internet, an infrastructure must be designed to
support the safe use of land-based communication links or ground stations (gate-
ways) as shown in Figure 3.5. An encryption infrastructure can be effectively de-
signed to solve most of the confidentiality and authentication concerns of satellite
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
121
Lisa’s plaintext
email message
Encipher with
Jeremiah’s
public key
Internet Cloud
Decipher with
Jeremiah’s
private key
Lisa’s plaintext
email message
FIGURE 3.6 The path of a public-key-encrypted message. 

transmission with the Internet. However, secure exchange can be either a one-way
or a two-way encounter, and the satellite encryption requirements and strategies
are quite different for each.
A one-way transaction is typified by email transmissions to and from satellites
over the Internet. Although email messages are frequently answered, each message
transmission is a unique, stand-alone event. A message sender may want assurance
that the message can only be read by the intended recipient (confidentiality); a re-
cipient may want assurance that the message came from the alleged sender without
being altered en route (authenticity).
Client/server applications, Web exchanges, and many other online applications
typify the second class of satellite communications and Internet exchange: two-way
transactions. A two-way transaction first involves some sort of a logon function, in
which a user connects to a service, and then an exchange of information between the
user and the service occurs. For these two-way transactions, there are again two main
security concerns: first, the service wants assurance that the user is not an impostor but
actually the person claimed (authenticity). Then, once the service has accepted a user
as legitimate and authorized, both the user and the service may wish to ensure that all
information exchange between them is safe from eavesdropping (confidentiality).
Although these concerns seem similar, the solutions are quite different. Al-
though many cryptographic tools can provide satellite communications and Inter-
net security services, the best way to learn how they work is to look at two
representative packages: PGP and Kerberos. PGP is a widely used email security
package for one-way transactions, while Kerberos is a widely used client/server se-
curity package for two-way transactions. Between them, they incorporate the key
cryptographic techniques used for Internet and satellite communications.
Pretty Good Privacy
PGP uses the RSA (Rivest, Shamir, Adelman) public key encryption scheme and the
MD5 (Message Digest 5) one-way hash function to form a digital signature, which
assures the recipient that an incoming satellite transmission or message is authen-
tic—that it not only comes from the alleged sender but also has not been altered.
The sequence for this is as follows:
1.
The sender creates a private message.
2.
MD5 generates a 128-bit hash code of the message.
3.
The hash code is encrypted with RSA using the sender’s private key, and
the result is attached to the message.
4.
The receiver uses RSA with the sender’s public key to decrypt and recover
the hash code.
122
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

5.
The receiver generates a new hash code for the message and compares it to
the decrypted hash code. If the two match, the message is accepted as au-
thentic.
The combination of MD5 and RSA provides an effective digital-signature
scheme. Because of the strength of RSA, the recipient is assured that only the posses-
sor of the matching private key can generate the signature. Because of the strength of
MD5, the recipient is also assured that no one else could have generated a new mes-
sage that matched the hash code and, hence, the signature of the original message.
PGP also solves the confidentiality problem by encrypting messages to be trans-
mitted via satellite or to be stored locally as files. In both cases, PGP uses the confi-
dential IDEA (international data encryption algorithm) encryption algorithm.
IDEA is a relatively new algorithm that is considered to be much stronger than the
widely used date encryption standard (DES).
In any conventional satellite encryption system, one must address the problem
of key distribution. In PGP, each conventional key is used only once. That is, a new
key is generated as a random 128-bit number for each message. This session key is
bound to the message and transmitted with it as follows:
1.
The sender generates a message and a random 128-bit number to be used
as a session key for this message only.
2.
The message is encrypted, using IDEA with the session key.
3.
The session key is encrypted with RSA using the recipient’s public key and
is prepended (to prefix a string or statement with another or to place a
word or set of numbers in front of an existing word or set of numbers; for
example, to prepend “sub” to “net” would yield “subnet”) to the message.
4.
The receiver uses RSA with its private key to decrypt and recover the ses-
sion key.
5.
The session key is used to decrypt the message.
Many people underestimate the difficulty of key distribution in a public key en-
cryption scheme. The common misconception holds that each user simply keeps
his or her private key private and publishes the corresponding public key. Unfor-
tunately, life is not this simple.
An impostor can generate a public and private key pair and disseminate the
public key as if it belonged to someone else. For example, suppose Ellen wishes to
send a secure message to Shawn. Meanwhile, Mark has generated a public and pri-
vate key pair, attached Shawn’s name and an email address that Mark can access, and
then published this key widely. Ellen picks this key up, uses it to prepare her message
for Shawn, and then uses the attached email address to send the message. The result
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
123

is that Mark receives and can decrypt the message, Shawn never receives the mes-
sage, and, even if he did, he could not read it without the required private key.
The basic tool that permits widespread use of PGP is the public key certificate.
The essential elements of a public key certificate are the public key itself, a user ID
consisting of the key owner’s name and email address, and one or more digital sig-
natures for the public key and user ID.
The signer in effect testifies that the user ID associated with the public key is
valid. The digital signature is formed using the private key of the signer. Then, any-
one in possession of the corresponding public key can verify the validity of the sig-
nature. If any change is made to either the public key or the user ID, the signature
will no longer compute as valid.
Certificates are used in a number of security applications that require the use of
public key cryptography. In fact, it is the public key certificate that makes distrib-
uted security applications using public keys practical.
As the need for security on the Internet and satellite transmissions increases,
new mechanisms and protocols are being developed and deployed, but a system’s se-
curity will always be a function of the organization that controls the system. Whether
the Internet or satellite communications become more secure depends entirely upon
the vendors who sell the systems and the organizations that buy them.
Ultimately, people will decide what and how much to trust, so satellite com-
munications security is a nontechnical, people problem, deriving its strength from
the understanding by specifiers, designers, implementers, configurers, and users of
what and how far to trust. To begin addressing this challenge, IT managers need to
Get to know the key emerging vendors in this field
Begin learning about how public key cryptography is being woven into the soft
infrastructure of the Internet and satellite communications—and by exten-
sion, into intranets as well
Prepare to respond to business requirements for detailed, real-time measure-
ment and reporting of document usage within the organization, as well as the
use by outsiders of documents created within the organization
Spend quality time with business unit managers, educating them on these new
technologies and brainstorming applications that make use of them
This section provided a brief overview of the current satellite encryption poli-
cies, the threat from the Internet, encrypted satellite data transmitting (downlink)
and receiving (uplink), and encryption cracking. Now let’s go on to the next com-
puter forensics system: instant messaging (IM) security systems.
124
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

INSTANT MESSAGING (IM) SECURITY SYSTEMS
The security threats from IM are straightforward. Since deployment isn’t controlled,
the enterprise can’t keep a rein on how the systems are used. With the public IM net-
works, the individual employee registers for service. If the employee leaves a company,
the firm has no (technology-based) way to prevent him from continuing to use the ac-
count, or from continuing to represent himself as still working for the company. Fur-
thermore, without additional tools, the company has no way of archiving IM messages
for legal or regulatory purposes, or of monitoring and controlling the content of mes-
sages to filter for inappropriate communications.
There are the obvious holes that IM opens up on the corporate network. Each
of the IM networks uses a well-known port that must either be left open on the cor-
porate firewall to allow traffic in or closed, which, at least in theory, bans that service
to end users.
Securing IM
Certainly the latter option has some appeal: 34% of all companies simply block all
IM traffic according to industry analysts. One downside to this strategy is that be-
cause workers find IM useful, blocking it isn’t popular or necessarily even a good
business move.
Another downside is that blocking might not work. If the IM port has been
blocked, all the popular clients today are designed to fall back to port 80, the Web
port, and that’s usually open. The administrator would have to block individual
URLs for the IM services to keep traffic from coming through port 80.
Given IM’s pervasiveness, enterprises can’t think about security in a vacuum; it
has to be part of a larger management structure. Policies may regulate what types
of files can and can’t be transferred via IM systems to limit the potential for intro-
duction of viruses; some may even do virus scanning. Products also can examine
message content much like existing email spam filters.
Thus, IM management and security systems act as proxies for IM traffic going into
the network, which imposes policies before letting traffic through. Besides addressing
security, this architecture puts the IM management and security vendors in a position
to deal with the pesky problem of the lack of interoperability among networks.
So, you’d think IM would be hot, but even the vendors that have made their
name in IM are trying to expand their focus to other real-time applications such as
voice over IP and conferencing. Vendor representatives are surprisingly open about
their reasons: IM as a stand-alone application gets commoditized pretty quickly.
Indeed, the tough thing about IM security and management isn’t that it’s tech-
nically hard to do; it’s that adoption is happening so quickly that network managers
are playing catch-up.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
125

NET PRIVACY SYSTEMS
The philosophical focus of a privacy management perspective is geared toward the
improvement of the bottom line for private companies and cost control and re-
source optimization for nonprofit and government organizations. All types of or-
ganizations need to develop privacy policies that maximize the benefit of reusing
information in as many ways as possible while minimizing the risks associated with
potential privacy violations. Although this balance is essential in an information in-
tensive world, it is clear that it is not going to be easy for organizations to achieve
the balance between privacy and the optimization of resources.
Privacy is a social, political, and economic issue. Privacy protection for the in-
dividual was born with democracy and was originally designed to keep oppressive
governments from intruding on individual freedoms. In a world of advanced in-
dustrial societies where most major countries are at peace with each other, the vio-
lation of privacy and civil liberties has come under new threats. People still have
every reason to keep a tight reign on snoopy governments (like the use of the Pa-
triot Act), but now they must also be concerned about the commercial violation of
individual privacy rights and desires.
Some private companies have made a business out of selling information about
individuals, groups, and organizations. This has raised considerable concern
among privacy advocates. Information brokers are only part of the commercial
privacy violation equation. Most for-profit companies, government agencies at all
levels, and even nonprofit organizations collect large amounts of information about
the people they serve or seek to serve. How this information is used and protected
has become a concern, and assuring the privacy of such information has turned
into a new management challenge.
Managing Privacy Is the Business Challenge of the 21st Century
Protecting the privacy of enterprise information, data on customers, and corporate
trade secrets has become a major concern for managers in all types and sizes of or-
ganizations. Laws are often ambiguous, social thought toward privacy is volatile,
emerging technologies present new and complex challenges, and political winds are
blowing hard from many directions. Surviving the chaos surrounding information
privacy requires a comprehensive company-wide privacy plan.
There is considerable debate in the U.S. as well as most industrial countries on
how to deal with privacy issues. It is not likely that this debate will end anytime
soon. Also uncertain are the direction of the debate and possible outcomes that will
impact legal and social requirements that enterprises will have to meet to protect
information privacy. The Internet has compounded the difficulties enterprises face
in managing privacy efforts. These difficulties will increase as more people around
126
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the world use the Internet. Industry analysts project that by 2008, there will be ap-
proximately one billion Internet users worldwide.
The Internet has contributed to people’s awareness of privacy issues in four
ways. First, the Internet has resulted in a huge increase in the number of people
using computers to seek information and make purchases. Second, there have been
several incidents that have resulted in considerable and less than favorable press
coverage for enterprises that have suffered from privacy problems. Notably, in late
1999 and early 2000, Web technology that tracks how people use the Internet came
under fire. Third, many organizations had their first experiences in dealing with
large-scale privacy issues. They range from small new Web-based companies to
large enterprises that started using the Internet for marketing, sales, or information
dissemination. Fourth, the global nature of the Internet has presented new chal-
lenges to governments and enterprises. The combination of these trends sets the
stage for potential privacy conflicts.
In many ways, privacy issues can be viewed as a clash of cultures. The global na-
ture of technology usage and thus international information exchanges, whether
they are voluntary, a result of technology architectures, or stem from out-and-out
deception, puts governments and international organizations in adversarial posi-
tions. The desire of new Web-based companies to build a viable enterprise by
capitalizing on information to develop marketing and sales approaches or even just
collecting information using Internet technology for the purpose of selling it,
throws the entrepreneur into conflict with governments, consumer groups, and
private individuals.
Beyond the commercial use of the Internet, global competition has contributed
to a wave of industrial spying and the theft of trade secrets. The desire of compa-
nies, and in some cases governments, to make their enterprises or societies more
competitive has resulted in numerous cases of international information theft. The
Internet plays a role in this process by enabling people to move information around
the world faster and to provide low cost communications methods for information
theft rings. The Internet can also provide a gateway into corporate information sys-
tems that hackers and information thieves can exploit to gain access to customer
data, trade secrets, or corporate processes.
In the information-intensive environment of the 21st century, politics is of
course a factor. In the U.S. everything can become political fodder. The Internet,
privacy, and consumer rights have historically been separate issues, but the dy-
namics of capitalism and cultural conflicts over privacy have fired rhetoric from
Washington, D.C. to San Francisco to Manila to Stockholm and around the world.
These issues make for great debates, at least on Sunday morning talk shows. These
issues also become content for the plethora of television news shows and pop cul-
ture news magazines. American politicians know their drills well. Politicians know
they must promise goodness, salvation, and protection of the family, community,
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
127

and country. What politicians do not know is how to address the complex issues of
privacy in a world connected by the Internet that is laden with greed and corrup-
tion and has hundreds of millions of relatively naive people blindly surfing into sit-
uations in which their privacy can be readily compromised.
In addition to their ineptness in the face of complex issues, politicians have a
fear of going against major trends. This is the age of the Internet boom. To be po-
litically correct one must agree that this is a great revolution and that it is something
that will make economies stronger and the world a better place. Of course, it is also
good politics to protect children from predators and old people from rip-off artists.
The issue of protecting children and their privacy on the Internet has become a per-
manent part of the political process. The inevitability of the child protection issue
is fueled by an increasing number of children using the Internet. According to in-
dustry analysts, by 2008 there will be over 130 million people under the age of 18
using the Internet. Politicians love such meaty issues, and the protection of 130 mil-
lion children is one that they will not be able to resist.
On the other hand, politicians prefer to avoid issues that are complex or that
require them to apply critical analysis to develop long-term solutions to major so-
cietal problems. It is unfortunate that when politicians try to deal with complex is-
sues they usually make a mess of things. This was painfully demonstrated by the
passage of the Communications Decency Act (CDA), which was rapidly ruled un-
constitutional by the U.S. District Court. Congress does not know how to deal with
the issue of privacy, and it is likely that any effort they put forth will be at least as
messy as the CDA. Another example of quickly shifting government positions is the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) first being reluctant to push for greater privacy
protection and then in late spring of 2000 making an about face and taking the po-
sition that Congress should pass new legislation.
Implementing an Enterprise-Wide Privacy Plan in a Chaotic World
It is expected that the chaos surrounding privacy issues will continue. For that reason,
having a comprehensive corporate privacy plan is of the utmost importance. Business
managers must develop and implement an enterprise-wide privacy plan. This is im-
portant because organizations are becoming more dependent on information sys-
tems to manage critical financial data as well as customer records and product data.
It is also important because of increasing regulatory and social pressures concerning
the protection of individual privacy and proprietary corporate information.
This author’s position on privacy is very straightforward. Enterprises need to
avoid potentially costly lawsuits and embarrassing public relations incidents that
may result from revealing information that is protected by law, that management
has determined could be detrimental to the enterprise if known by competitors or
the public, or that customers feel should be kept private.
128
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Also, this author’s view of privacy management is that it needs to be compre-
hensive and enterprise-wide. Thus, to develop a solid privacy plan all departments
and functions within the company need to be involved. This includes but is not
limited to the IT department, legal counsel, customer relations, public relations,
product development, manufacturing, and the accounting or financial manage-
ment department. In order to successfully implement a privacy plan all depart-
ments need to understand the plan and corporate policies and procedures
regarding the protection of privacy. In addition, the implementation and effective-
ness of the privacy plan needs to be evaluated on an ongoing basis.
The goal here is to provide you with a process to manage privacy in your en-
terprise. This is done by giving you basic building blocks to understand the process
of developing, implementing, and monitoring privacy plans, policies, and proce-
dures. With that in mind, let’s move on to the next computer forensics system: ID
management security systems.
IDENTITY MANAGEMENT SECURITY SYSTEMS
Identity management is the creation, management, and use of online, or digital, iden-
tities. Hundreds of millions of people around the world now use the Internet daily 
at home and at work, facing a multiplicity of corporate applications and e-business
interfaces. Many such applications and interfaces require a unique user name, and as
a result, an individual typically possesses not one but several digital identities.
Additionally, digital identities are not perpetual: they are created for new em-
ployees, and when those employees leave, their digital identity expires (or should
expire) as of their termination date. An employee moving from one part of an or-
ganization to another—or being promoted to a higher management level—may
need to have updated access rights and other information attached to his or her dig-
ital identity. Identity management is therefore also about being able to manage the
full life cycle of a digital identity from creation and maintenance to termination, as
well as enforce organizational policies regarding access to electronic resources. It is
not simply the ability to store or provision digital identities. While these are criti-
cal capabilities, they are just two components of an overall solution.
Ultimately, identity management will help organizations do business and get
things done. By authenticating and authorizing digital identities, an identity man-
agement system will improve administrative productivity while keeping enterprise
resources secure, as well as streamline e-business transactions. Users will enjoy a
more convenient experience, and organizations will benefit from more efficient
processes and expanded business opportunities.
In the absence of identity management, the staggering proliferation of identities
on the Internet—and the challenge of managing them securely and conveniently—
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
129

is threatening to inhibit the growth of e-business. Identity management will help or-
ganizations control access to enterprise systems and resources, facilitate efficient
and secure collaboration and commerce with business partners, and provide the
level of trust, convenience, and reliability needed to grow e-business revenues and
enhance profitability. In addition, an effective identity management solution will re-
duce the number of unique user identities, enable identities to transcend the online
boundaries of a single business, and include secure systems to create and manage
those identities.
The Challenges of Managing Digital Identities
The recent convergence of three events has created a sense of urgency around iden-
tity management. They will be discussed briefly, and then we will detail some of the
critical user concerns and business issues that must be addressed by any identity
management system.
Aggregation
There is an incalculable amount of content on the Internet. To help business and
home users find the sites and services they want, corporate portals and content ag-
gregators like Yahoo emerged.
In the process of providing more content and services, these aggregators have
developed relationships with users—including capturing their online identities.
When a user accesses content and services through these aggregators, his or her dig-
ital identity is captured. In an enterprise environment, this provides valuable track-
ing of information; for Web sites, each captured identity is an asset they can
leverage for their own—and their business partners’—marketing purposes.
Web Services
Web services are modular applications that enable the transformation from a soft-
ware purchasing and physical ownership model to a software subscription or
“rental” model with remote execution. Examples of Web services currently preva-
lent on the Internet include calendaring, supply chain management, customer 
relationship management, order fulfillment, sales force automation, music on
demand, and instant messaging. Businesses reduce IT costs with this zero-footprint
approach to software deployment. Consumers find Web services convenient and
cost-effective because they don’t need to go to a physical store and then purchase
and install software, and updates can be downloaded from the Internet. Software
companies appreciate Web services because they save packaging, inventory, and
distribution costs.
However, it is a significant challenge to verify a user’s identity and mitigate the
risk associated with providing high-value or sensitive services in an online business-
to-business (B2B) or business-to-consumer (B2C) environment. Also, there are
130
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

different levels of trust. A company can trust an employee’s identity more than that
of an external partner or customer because the company has more control over the
provisioning and maintenance of the employee’s identity. An identity management
solution provides that trust as it confirms that a user is authenticated and autho-
rized to access applications and services.
Online Partnerships
Many businesses are forging online partnerships with organizations that offer com-
plementary services, both internally (to improve productivity) and externally (to ex-
pand their customer reach). An example of the former would be a company’s
human resources department that allows its health plan and 401(k) vendors to cross-
market value-added services on the company’s intranet site. A B2C example would
be an airline that enables customers who have already logged in to its Web site to ac-
cess hotel, rental car, and other services online. This would be convenient for cus-
tomers and benefit the individual companies by driving traffic to their Web sites.
User Concerns and Business Issues
Beyond these three convergent events, there exist real concerns among the two au-
diences that would ultimately benefit from an identity management system: users
(employees, partners, and customers) and e-businesses. It is critical, therefore, to
understand their issues and to design a solution they will embrace. The challenges
that exist are making enterprise resources costly to manage and vulnerable to attack
and are impeding the growth of e-business because they create fear in consumers
and constrain the ability of businesses to operationalize their business models.
First, let’s explore user concerns. Recently, industry analysts conducted a study
in which users were asked what they found most bothersome about the Internet.
Their answers fell into three categories: security, convenience, and privacy. These
three issues are relevant to both consumer and business users, relate very strongly to
identity, and must be paramount in the design of any identity management system.
Security
According to the FTC, there were 108,000 cases of identity fraud in the U.S. in 2003,
including both electronic and real-world cases. The two most prevalent targets of
fraud were both Internet-based: online auctions and Internet service provider (ISPs).
Many online identity thefts are related to fraudulent credit card use made possible by
unauthorized access to customer databases, but they can also occur in enterprise set-
tings; all it takes is an unoccupied computer and the time needed to crack a password.
Identity fraud (which will be discussed in detail later in the chapter) affects
users negatively in both home and work environments. When a consumer’s digital
identity is stolen, the thief often has access to credit card numbers and can run up
huge bills for which the victim is responsible. On the enterprise side, if someone
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
131

uses another identity to obtain and release proprietary information, that usage
could be tracked and the innocent employee could be blamed—and probably
fired—for something he or she didn’t do. An identity management system can
guard against identity theft by standardizing and automating the provisioning,
maintenance, and revocation of digital identities.
Convenience
The point of security systems is to make it extremely inconvenient for unauthorized
users to gain access. To do that, however, many users with good will and honorable
intentions have been required to remember numerous complex passwords—and
because they invariably do not remember, high support and help desk costs due to
forgotten passwords often result.
Mindful that consumer and business users want convenience, many Web
browsers support password caching. This means that a user who has logged on to a
particular Web site in the past can easily (and sometimes automatically) log on
again without having to retype or even remember his or her password. Of course,
this means that anyone who sits down at that person’s computer can log on and il-
legally use an already authorized identity.
Clearly, a balance must be struck between convenience and security. If a single,
shared online identity that eliminates the need for multiple registrations and pass-
words represents convenience in an identity management system, then that system
must add strong security via authentication technologies (such as digital certificate-
based smart cards, tokens, and biometrics) as well as fine-grained authorization
through access management technologies. The goal is to make customers happy and
employees and partners productive, while keeping the enterprise secure and efficient.
Privacy
A key benefit of an identity management system is that a single user identity can be used
across multiple Web sites and electronic resources. This great convenience, however,
can pose significant privacy issues. For one thing, it would be possible for someone to
track which Web sites, applications, or databases a user had accessed, which could be in-
terpreted as a violation of privacy. Second, the collected preferences and purchasing his-
tory from different Web sites linked to the same identity could result in unwanted
electronic profiling and unauthorized surveillance of a user’s Internet habits.
Any identity management system must adequately protect sensitive user infor-
mation and adhere to the four key elements of a privacy policy:
Notice: Users receive prior notification of information practices.
Choice: Users are able to give specific consent to the gathering and use of in-
formation.
Access: Users have the ability to access their personal information.
132
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Security: Users have assurance that the organization has taken and is taking
measures to prevent unauthorized access to and use of personal information.
Business Issues: Trust, Control, and Accountability
In addition to these user concerns, there are three primary business issues that
must be addressed by an identity management system: trust, control, and account-
ability. A single example illustrates how these issues arise in a common enterprise
scenario.
Trust via Authentication
Consider an employee collaboratively developing a product in a virtual environ-
ment with a business partner. He or she will need access to internal resources, as
well as controlled access to the collaborative environment and to specific partner
resources. An identity management solution would enable the user to access these
varied distributed resources with single sign-on convenience—but the system falls
apart if the business partner can’t trust the authentication process the original com-
pany used to approve its employee’s credential. Strong authentication—in the form
of tokens, smart cards, digital certificates, or even biometrics— provides the requi-
site trust in the user’s digital identity.
Control via Access Management
Assuming the employee’s digital identity is trusted, policies should be applied to
control access to protected resources. A digital identity needs to have the proper ac-
cess profile attached to it in order for the employee to gain access to the partner’s re-
sources. Enforcement, then, ensures the effectiveness of online business processes.
Accountability via Audit
As the employee moves from resource to resource, both internal and external, an
audit trail must be kept of which resources are being accessed and what is being
done with them to ensure that policies are being honored and enforced. The em-
ployer and the business partner need to share this information to hold all parties ac-
countable for the integrity of the system and the success of their partnership.
These issues are significant because companies historically have been reluctant
to share customer and employee information with other organizations. Also, com-
panies have been advised to perform their own vetting and authentication on cus-
tomers and not rely on someone else’s prior approval. These are cultural and
business process issues that technology alone may not be able to address but that
must be considered within the larger framework of policies and regulations around
which an identity management system is built.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
133

Approaches to Identity Management
To date, there have been three distinct approaches to developing an identity man-
agement system, each appropriate to different circumstances and requirements. Each
also has its pros and cons. As presented, they represent a conceptual and technologi-
cal evolution from one-on-one and closed systems to more universal approaches that
seek to address the wide range of issues that have been discussed thus far. Respec-
tively, these approaches are known as silo, closed community, and federated.
Silo
In a silo model, each business creates a unique relationship with its customers, em-
ployees, and partners through Internet, intranet, and extranet sites, respectively.
The silo approach is the most prevalent today because it is simple to implement, al-
lows a business to maintain complete control of its users’ identities and preferences,
provides uncontested branding and messaging to users, and limits security and pri-
vacy risks.
The silo approach also has some significant drawbacks. Users are incon-
venienced when they have to interact with numerous silos (even within a single
organization), each requiring individual log-on processes and passwords. For busi-
nesses, the silo model inhibits cross-selling opportunities; it is also expensive to
maintain—and burdensome to administer—multiple silos.
Closed Community
A closed community is one in which a central business unit defines and brokers trust
to all member organizations in the community. An example would be any group of
companies, government agencies, or educational institutions that have banded to-
gether to serve a common user group or to establish an online B2B exchange. From
any member Web site, a user can gain access to the Web sites of other partners.
If a user wants to visit the Web site of a company outside the closed commu-
nity—say, a competitor of one of the members—he or she would have to go to that
site separately. The advantages of a closed community approach are that it provides
a reasonable degree of simplicity and control, can be economical for businesses when
all agree to pool resources and create a central infrastructure, and offers the ability
to delegate the creation and administration of user identities. The disadvantages are
that users have a limited choice of companies to deal with and would be inconve-
nienced if they needed to belong to multiple communities or leave a community be-
cause a preferred vendor is not a member. Further, most businesses don’t want to
cede authority to a central entity, and there exists a single point of failure in a closed
community that if compromised could undermine the entire infrastructure.
134
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Federated
In a federated model, each partner agrees to trust user identities issued or authen-
ticated by other organizations while maintaining control of the identity and pref-
erence information of its own users. A common example of a federated model is the
passport: each country independently issues passports that are trusted by all the
other countries.
The federated model promises consolidated authentication capabilities across
distributed computing resources. Users can log on to a range of participating Web
sites using a single email address and password. For businesses, benefits include
greater efficiency and security; better services for employees, partners, and customers;
and new revenue opportunities. The only drawback is that it requires businesses to
cooperate, adhere to best operating practices, and develop a high level of trust.
Overall, it appears that the federated model is emerging as the preferred next
step both for silo organizations looking to expand their reach and for closed com-
munities seeking to connect with other communities on the Internet. Clearly, the
design for federated identity will need to be attractive to both large and small orga-
nizations and offer the flexibility to adapt to existing identity management systems.
An identity management solution is about intelligently using the identities that
have been created to do e-business. In addition to creating, managing, and revoking
digital identities, it helps develop and enforce authentication and access management
policies as well as provide the accountability required in e-business today. The vision
of identity management, therefore, incorporates a broader definition, a technology-
neutral approach to integration and a flexible architecture that enables interoperabil-
ity with multiple identity systems inside and outside organizations. The components
of an identity management environment should include the following:
Data store: The more user information that is collected, centrally stored and
protected, the more layers of access and greater breadth of services an organi-
zation can provide to users.
User provisioning: Deploying digital identities and access rights based on busi-
ness policies for employees, business partners, and customers must be done ac-
curately and securely at the outset in order to reduce problems down the line.
Assigning, maintaining, and revoking these identities and rights should be a
centralized function.
Authentication policy management: Once someone steals a user’s digital iden-
tity, the whole system becomes vulnerable. Authentication policies help ensure
that organizations know who is using a digital identity, thus creating trust in
the system.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
135

Authorization policy management: Authorization policies are designed to en-
sure that only appropriate resources can be accessed by a given digital identity.
This helps ensure that the right people get the resources and information they
need, while enterprise systems are protected from unauthorized access.
Centralized audit: Organizations need to track what users are doing and make
sure there are no blatant inconsistencies that indicate a problem. Having an
audit trail of what digital identities are being used for holds users accountable.
Integration: Putting the individual pieces together in a technology-neutral ar-
chitecture enables sharing, ensures interoperability, and facilitates single sign-
on capabilities. It also makes the system scalable, easy to administer, and quick
to deploy. A single federated identity enables a user to be authenticated from all
other partners in the model.
As more and more enterprise applications and resources get pushed onto the
Internet—including a range of Web services that organizations deploy and procure
for employees, partners, and customers—companies need to be able to trust the
identities of users who seek to access them. Further, they need to manage and con-
trol authorized identities to ensure they are current and are being used in accor-
dance with established policies.
For this reason, organizations need to assess their own identity management
needs, engage in detailed discussions with business partners about their needs and
plans, and explore with a reliable vendor how to implement and integrate such a so-
lution in their IT environments. The challenges that have brought the issue of iden-
tity management to the fore will only grow and exacerbate the problems that have
stunted the growth of e-business and contributed to information security breaches
around the world.
An open standard for identity management—including authentication, single
sign-on, and Web access management capabilities—will help organizations lower
costs, accelerate commercial opportunities, and increase user productivity and cus-
tomer satisfaction. A federated approach will bring substantial benefits to users
and businesses alike. Users will appreciate
The convenience of a single identity and authentication for a wide range of en-
terprise resources, applications, and Web sites
The ability to specify under what conditions certain pieces of information can
and cannot be shared
Policies and standards on data storage, usage, and sharing designed to protect
their privacy and prevent fraud and identity theft
136
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Businesses will be able to
Trust the digital identities of employees, partners, and customers
Receive pre-authenticated users from business partners’ sites
Maintain their own user data
Introduce new services and identify new business opportunities
Reduce internal IT and system integration costs by embracing a technology-
neutral solution that is interoperable with major identity systems
With the preceding in mind, the aim of the next section is to help you begin the
process of guarding against and recovering from identity theft.
IDENTITY THEFT
Quite simply, identity theft is the appropriation of an individual’s personal infor-
mation in order to impersonate that person in a legal sense. Stealing someone’s
identity enables the thief to make a frightening number of financial and personal
transactions in someone else’s name, leaving the victim responsible for what may
turn out to be mind-boggling turmoil in his or her life.
Identity theft is not new. It has been around for a long time. There was a time
when an individual could flee his or her life, town, and mistakes and go somewhere
far away pretending to be someone else—and, no one knew better. The ramifica-
tions of stealing someone’s identity did not have the far-reaching implications that
they do today for the person whose identity is stolen. Those were the days before
credit reporting and high-tech methods of tracking and sharing information were
commonplace.
Identity theft can still be done by such low-tech means as knowing someone
else’s basic identifying information and initiating personal transactions in that per-
son’s name, but today, identities can also be stolen using highly technical and so-
phisticated means of obtaining the personal data of a stranger. However it is done,
whether the identity thief uses high- or low-tech means of getting your personal in-
formation, an individual can become someone else very easily. The difference today
is that what an identity thief does as someone else reflects very quickly on the vic-
tim’s reputation. An individual’s life can be devastated by the loss of good name
and the financial or personal mess that results.
Identity theft is always personal—after all, it is one’s own identity that is stolen!
Someone literally assumes your identity and leaves a damaging trail of credit card
abuse and exposed personal information all over the Internet (to your creditors and
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
137

possibly worse). Thieves could be roommates, relatives, friends, estranged spouses,
or household workers—with ready access to their victims’ personal papers.
Opportunistic Theft
The thief may be an opportunist—one who sees his chance and takes it. The thief’s
motive is to gain goods and services at someone else’s expense.
Living Large on Your Good Name
The sad part is that it is next to impossible to stop a determined identity thief. Who
is going to apprehend him? Occasionally law enforcement agencies, including the Se-
cret Service, bust up identity theft crime rings that involve many victims and millions
of dollars, but they don’t chase down single crooks that commit victimless crimes.
Professional Criminals
Identity thieves may be professionals. This could be individual hackers out to get
what they can or highly sophisticated crime rings that make a business out of fraud.
How Identity Theft Is Done
In the course of a normal day, you may write a check at the grocery store, charge
tickets to a ball game, rent a car, mail your tax returns, call home on your cell
phone, order new checks, or apply for a credit card. You may do any of a hundred
little things each of us does every day that involve someone knowing who we are.
Chances are, you don’t give these everyday transactions a second thought, but an
identity thief does. Those who make a profession of stealing identities give it a great
deal of thought, indeed.
Despite your best efforts to manage the flow of your personal information or to
keep it to yourself, skilled identity thieves may use a variety of methods (low- and
high-tech) to gain access to your data. The following are some of the ways im-
posters can get and use your personal information and take over your identity:
They steal wallets and purses containing your identification and credit and
bank cards.
They steal your mail, including your bank and credit card statements, pre-
approved credit offers, telephone calling cards, and tax information.
They complete a change of address form to divert your mail to another location.
They rummage through your trash, or the trash of businesses, for personal data
in a practice known as “dumpster diving.”
138
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

They fraudulently obtain your credit report by posing as a landlord, employer,
or someone else who may have a legitimate need for (and a legal right to) the
information.
They get your business or personnel records at work.
They find personal information in your home.
They use personal information you share on the Internet.
They buy your personal information from “inside” sources. For example, an
identity thief may pay a store employee for information about you that appears
on an application for goods, services, or credit.
They call your credit card issuer and, pretending to be you, ask to change the
mailing address on your credit card account. The imposter then runs up
charges on your account. Because your bills are being sent to the new address,
it may take some time before you realize there’s a problem.
They open a new credit card account, using your name, date of birth, and so-
cial security number. When they use the credit card and don’t pay the bills, the
delinquent account is reported on your credit report.
They establish phone or wireless service in your name.
They open a bank account in your name and write bad checks on that account.
They file for bankruptcy under your name to avoid paying debts they’ve in-
curred under your name or to avoid eviction.
They counterfeit checks or debit cards and drain your bank account.
They buy cars by taking out auto loans in your name.
How Your Personal Information Can Be Used Against You
Once the thief has basic information about you, there are a number of ways it can be
used. If the thief has seen your credit card, he or she now knows who issued it. It is
then a simple matter to call the financial institution and request a change of mailing
address. Now, the thief can run up charges on your account. You don’t realize what’s
happening for a while because you haven’t gotten a bill. By the time you wonder
what has happened to your bill and call the credit card company, it is too late.
An identity thief who has enough information about you can open a new credit
card account in your name. Using your personal data to get it approved, the thief
has at least a month (and maybe more, depending on the policy of the lender) be-
fore the account is closed for lack of payment. The balance on your new account by
that time could be devastating—not to mention that the late payments have been
reported to the credit bureau.
Then there are the counterfeit phone services that the identity thief can open in
your name with the right information. Huge long distance and service bills can be
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
139

charged to you because now the identity thief is getting the bill—not you. The
trouble is, the identity thief isn’t paying the bill. The end result is the same as with
a phony credit card—you are left with a monstrous bill and your delinquency is re-
ported to the credit bureau.
If an identity thief is able to steal your checkbook, or through some illegal
method, obtain new checks on your account, he or she may bleed your bank ac-
count dry before you know what’s happened. In other words, an identity thief can
hurt you by opening a bank account in your name, possibly with a cash advance
from your bogus credit card, and then write bad checks against that account as
often as possible before the bank reports your felonious conduct.
An identity thief with access to your personal data can take out loans in your
name: house loans, car loans, boat loans, etc. If the thief is good enough, he or she
gets the goods and you get the bill.
The ultimate dirty deed an identity thief may do is to file for bankruptcy under
your name. This would prevent the thief from having to pay debts incurred in your
name. If they’ve been living in a home or apartment as you, they might file for
bankruptcy to avoid eviction. Never forget the thief who has a personal agenda to
cause you harm—what could be better than bankruptcy?
These are just some of the ways that the theft of your identity can wreak havoc
in your life, and thinking about them is enough to scare the daylights out of you. It
definitely is enough to make a person start thinking about how to protect himself.
Once the thieves have some of your personal information, they can start ap-
plying for credit cards in your name—giving an address that is often different from
yours. Sloppy credit-granting procedures give thieves plenty of opportunities. A lot
of credit granters do not check records. They are more interested in new applicants
than in verifying the authenticity of the applicants.
Identity thieves may buy a car or rent an apartment in your name. Some may
even commit crimes in your name. For example, in one case, the impostor was a
major drug dealer using the identity of a highly ranked corporate executive. When
traveling overseas, the executive now has to carry an official letter that explains he
is not the drug dealer. Still, cops recently broke into the man’s house and into his
bedroom with guns drawn. While this is an extreme case, many identity theft vic-
tims have been denied student loans, mortgages, credit accounts, and even jobs.
Some have had their telephone service disconnected and their driver’s licenses sus-
pended or been harassed by collection agencies. So where can you get immediate
help if your identity has been stolen?
Help for Victims of Identity Theft
The FTC collects complaints about identity theft from consumers who have been vic-
timized. Although the FTC does not have the authority to bring criminal cases, they
can help victims of identity theft by providing information to assist them in resolving
140
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the financial and other problems that can result from this crime. The FTC also refers
victim complaints to other appropriate government agencies and private organiza-
tions for further action.
If you’ve been a victim of identity theft, file a complaint with the FTC by con-
tacting their Identity Theft Hotline by telephone: toll-free 1-877-IDTHEFT (438-
4338); TDD: 202-326-2502; by mail: Identity Theft Clearinghouse, Federal Trade
Commission, 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20580; or online:
http://www.consumer.gov/idtheft.
Other agencies and organizations also are working to combat identity theft. If
specific institutions and companies are not responsive to your questions and com-
plaints, you also may want to contact the government agencies with jurisdiction
over those companies.
Getting Serious About Identity Theft
Victims of identity theft are finally getting some respect—or at least some long-
deserved recognition. In 1998, when Congress made identity theft a federal crime,
it directed the FTC to establish a clearinghouse for identity-theft complaints and as-
sistance. That came on the heels of a General Accounting Office report document-
ing how widespread identity theft is becoming. The Secret Service, for example, says
victims and institutions in its identity-fraud investigations lost $4.01 billion in
2003, up from $1.78 billion in 2000.
Limited Resources
The FTC maintainsa a database of complaints, referring them to law enforcement
agencies at the state and federal levels. Consumers don’t have to call the FTC and
the Secret Service and the FBI. The FTC thinks identity theft is a significant, grow-
ing problem. Therefore, it is expected that there will be a significant increase in the
number of federal prosecutions.
The feds typically focus on large-scale scams. That leaves many cases in the
hands of local police. Most police departments don’t have the resources to investi-
gate many cases, as suspects are often unknown and located in other jurisdictions.
All the police can do in most instances is file a police report, but that still helps.
BIOMETRIC SECURITY SYSTEMS
While a biometric is the actual characteristic or trait, a biometric system is the
computer hardware and software used to recognize or verify an individual. Al-
though there are many variations in how specific products and systems work, there
are a number of common processing elements.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
141

Collection
As a first step, a system must collect or “capture” the biometric to be used. One es-
sential difference between the various techniques is the characteristic (body part or
function) being analyzed. Obviously, this will influence the method of capture. All
biometric systems have some sort of collection mechanism. This could be a reader
or sensor upon which a person places his finger or hand, a camera that takes a pic-
ture of his face or eye, or software that captures the rhythm and speed of his typing.
In order to “enroll” in a system, an individual presents his “live” biometric a
number of times so the system can build a composition or profile of his character-
istic, allowing for slight variations (different degrees of pressure when he places his
finger on the reader). Depending upon the purpose of the system, enrollment could
also involve the collection of other personally identifiable information.
Extraction
Commercially available biometric devices generally do not record full images of
biometrics the way law enforcement agencies collect actual fingerprints. Instead,
specific features of the biometric are “extracted.” Only certain attributes are col-
lected (particular measurements of a fingerprint or pressure points of a signature).
Which parts are used depends upon the type of biometric, as well as the design of
the proprietary system.
This extracted information, sometimes called “raw data,” is converted into a
mathematical code. Again, exactly how this is done varies among the different pro-
prietary systems. This code is then stored as a “sample” or “template.” The specific
configuration of a system will dictate what, how, and where that information is
stored. Regardless of the variations, all biometric systems must create and retain a
template of the biometric in order to recognize or verify the individual. While the
raw data can be translated into a set of numbers for the template, commercial bio-
metric systems are generally designed so that the code cannot be re-engineered or
translated back into the extracted data or biometric.
Comparison and Matching
To use a biometric system, the specific features of a person’s biometric characteris-
tic are measured and captured each time he presents his “live” biometric. This ex-
tracted information is translated into a mathematical code using the same method
that created the template. The new code created from the live scan is compared
against a central database of templates in the case of a one-to-many match, or to a
single stored template in the case of a one-to-one match. If it falls within a certain
statistical range of values, the match is considered to be valid by the system.
142
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

HOMELAND SECURITY SYSTEMS
Since 2000, terms such as “homeland security” and “homeland defense” have been
widely used to describe America’s response to the information warfare (IW) waged
by terrorists (IW will be discussed in greater detail in Chapters 13 through 19). Let’s
look further into this last computer forensics system: homeland security.
Homeland Security Defined
The terms homeland security and homeland defense have received increased atten-
tion since the tragic events of September 11, 2001. While these terms are relatively
new, the concepts behind them are not. Homeland security is defined as the deter-
rence, prevention, and preemption of and defense against aggression targeted at
U.S. territory, sovereignty, population, and infrastructure as well as the manage-
ment of the consequences of such aggression and other domestic emergencies.
Homeland defense on the other hand is a subset of homeland security. It is defined
as the deterrence, prevention, and preemption of and defense against direct attacks
aimed at U.S. territory, population, and infrastructure. In other words, you might
consider homeland security to encompass policies, actions, and structures designed
to protect the rights and freedoms inherent in the U.S. Constitution and homeland
defense a subset of homeland security with policies, activities, and actions designed
to defend against extra-territorial threats, including preemptive operations. Never-
theless, the homeland security space is still being defined. A homeland security in-
dustry is still emerging.
Homeland Security Today
In November 2002, President Bush signed the Homeland Security Act of 2002, cre-
ating the Department of Homeland Security. The new department absorbs respon-
sibilities from 22 agencies including the U.S. Coast Guard, Border Patrol, and
Secret Service.
This is the most significant transformation of the U.S. government in over a
half century. The creation of this cabinet-level agency is an important step in the
president’s national strategy for homeland security. The Department of Homeland
Security has the following organizational structure:
Border and transportation security
Emergency preparedness and response
Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear countermeasures
Information analysis and infrastructure protection
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
143

Emergency mangers had been pleased with Bush’s previous attention to emer-
gency management. He was the first president to give the FEMA director an office
in the West Wing. Now, emergency managers are concerned, as FEMA has been
swallowed up in a new organization with a broader mission. Time will tell, but
those who respond to and manage emergencies have much to do with the response
to terrorist events.
The first line of homeland defense in any emergency is the “first responders”—
local police, firefighters, and emergency medical professionals. Local first respon-
ders are the ones who will save lives and deal with the consequences of a terrorist
attack. Emergency management and health care capabilities are a critical second tier
to the first responders. While the U.S. is well prepared for “normal” emergencies,
it does not currently possess adequate resources to respond to the full range of ter-
rorist threats that are faced. Homeland security initiatives will likely focus on im-
proving our capability to respond to a terrorist attack.
Emergency Managers and Homeland Security
Homeland security includes management of the consequences of terrorist acts and
aggression and other domestic emergencies. This is the part of homeland security
where first responders and emergency mangers play a vital role.
Emergency management is defined as a process to reduce loss of life and prop-
erty and to protect assets from all types of hazards through a comprehensive, risk-
based, emergency management program of mitigation, preparedness, response,
and recovery. Emergency managers have been providing homeland security and
homeland defense services for decades. During the Cold War this was called “civil
defense” and the chief threat was a nuclear attack. Today, comprehensive emer-
gency management, homeland security, and terrorism preparedness are included in
an all-hazards comprehensive emergency management program (CEMP). Most
emergency managers believe that homeland security should be included in a CEMP
rather than developed as a separate program.
How Comprehensive Emergency Management Addresses Homeland Security
Finally, a CEMP is an overarching process that includes mitigation, preparedness,
response, and recovery. A good program will address homeland security issues as
well as continuity of operations, continuity of government, and related areas.
Sound emergency management practices are required to mitigate the impact of
day-to-day disruptions as well as managing response to and recovery from terror-
ist attacks and other disasters.
144
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

SUMMARY
During the past four years, management of enterprise businesses (and govern-
ments) has increased its expectations of IT security’s ability to provide advance
warning of electronic threats to organizations’ business operations and IT infra-
structure. These expectations are being made against a backdrop of external threats
that have grown in both number and sophistication, internal threats that could in-
volve terrorist and organized crime, and a rapid growth in the number and type of
threat data sources.
The requirements for IT security increasingly demand integration between
areas of physical security such as video surveillance and building access systems to
provide a correlation with IT security’s traditional tools of trade such as access logs
and intrusion detection systems. The latter also creates challenges within an orga-
nization’s personnel structure since an integrated security system now requires IT
and non-IT data inputs that extend far beyond the traditional scope of IT.
The integration and correlation of physical security inputs with traditional IT
security inputs creates requirements to improve the usefulness derived from analy-
sis of these significantly larger volumes of unstructured data. At the same time,
most enterprises are facing a difficult economic environment with infrastructure
capital and operating costs allowing minimal (if any) increases in expenditure.
The challenge faced by security personnel is to capture and analyze ever larger
volumes of unstructured data and provide as close to real-time as possible infor-
mation with regard to the escalation of prioritized and ranked threats that are rel-
evant to the organization. Just as enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems
provide enterprise management with financial reporting metrics that are increas-
ingly “real-time,” there is a demand that security systems quickly deliver relevant
information to enable a speedy reaction to a broad range of threats.
Perhaps for most organizations, up until 2001, IT security was focused on se-
curing the “perimeter,” typically via use of a firewall and perhaps with concern fo-
cused on machines that operated within the organization’s Internet de-militarized
zone (DMZ). It typically involved a small number of devices and log files. However,
in 2001, the Code Red and Nimda worms forcefully highlighted the deficiencies of
perimeter security and the need for “security in depth.” In parallel, the September
11 terrorist attack on New York’s World Trade Center led to growing demands for
improved correlation between widely disparate data sources. The U.S. govern-
ment’s national strategy for homeland security which was developed in 2002, has
outlined the intelligence and early warning expectations of just such a system. Im-
plementation of sophisticated capture and computer forensics analysis systems is
already underway to meet the goals of the homeland security strategy.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
145

Faced with increasing expectations from enterprise management and the grow-
ing sophistication of threats, the requirements upon security tools have risen dra-
matically during the past four years. The traditional distinctions between incident
response and forensic tools are blurring because of the growing expectations put
upon security tools. Hence, computer forensic systems like
Internet security systems
Intrusion detection systems
Firewall security systems
Storage area networks security systems
Network disaster recovery systems
PKI security systems
Wireless network security systems
Satellite encryption security systems
IM security systems
Net privacy systems
Identity management security systems
Identity theft prevention systems
Biometric security systems
Homeland security systems
are now expected to deliver near real-time analysis of threats with a view to pre-
vention and not just recovery. Thus, this chapter analyzed how computer forensics
technologies can be extended to address the future requirements of IT security and
computer forensics systems.
Now let’s look at some of the more common conclusions that computer foren-
sics systems can hope to answer. The following conclusions are not exhaustive, nor
is the order significant.
Conclusions
Internet security systems can provide a more secure solution, as well as one that
is faster and less expensive than traditional solutions compared to security
problems to employees photocopying proprietary information, faxing or mail-
ing purchase orders, or placing orders by phone.
Intrusion detection systems help computer systems prepare for and deal with
attacks.
Firewall security system gateways provide choke points at which security and
auditing can be imposed.
146
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Storage area network security systems offer the most promising solutions for
secure storage problems today, complementing the other solutions of direct
storage, centralized storage, and network-attached storage.
NDR systems have the ability to respond to an interruption in network services
by implementing a disaster recovery plan to restore an organization’s critical
business functions.
PKI security systems assume the use of public key cryptography, which is the
most common method on the Internet for authentication of a message sender
or encryption of a message.
Companies are still ill-prepared to head off wireless network security breaches
and debilitating viruses.
Governments and organizations around the world can use satellite encryption
security systems to help preserve vital national secrets, limit attacks on a na-
tion’s information infrastructure, and eliminate security and authentication
obstacles to electronic commerce.
IM management and security systems act as proxies for IM traffic going into
the network, which imposes policies before letting traffic through.
All types of organizations need to develop net privacy policies that maximize
the benefit of reusing information in as many ways as possible while minimiz-
ing the risks associated with potential privacy violations.
Identity management security systems are really about being able to manage the
full life cycle of a digital identity from creation and maintenance to termination,
as well as enforce organizational policies regarding access to electronic resources.
In today’s environment, it is next to impossible to stop a determined identity thief.
Regardless of the variations, all biometric security systems must create and re-
tain a template of the biometric in order to recognize or verify the individual.
Homeland security systems encompass policies, actions, and structures de-
signed to protect the rights and freedoms inherent in the U.S. Constitution.
Homeland defense is a subset of homeland security with policies, activities,
and actions designed to defend against extra-territorial threats, including pre-
emptive operations.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Forensics Systems Types Checklist (Table F3.1 in Appendix
F), the computer forensics specialist should adhere to the provisional list of actions
for some of the principle types of computer forensics systems. The order is not sig-
nificant; however, these are the activities for which the researcher would want to
provide a detailed description of procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
147

and admissibility. A number of these systems have been mentioned in passing 
already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions/exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case project.
The answers and/or solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Internet security can provide a more secure solution, as well as
one that is faster and less expensive than traditional solutions to security prob-
lems of employees photocopying proprietary information, faxing or mailing
purchase orders, or placing orders by phone.
2.
True or False? Intrusion detection systems prevent computer systems from
preparing for and dealing with attacks.
3.
True or False? The firewall you decide to use will not prevent most of the
attacks on your network; however, firewalls will protect against dial-in modem
attacks, virus attacks, or attacks from within your company.
4.
True or False? SANs are a relatively new methodology for attaching storage—
whereby a separate network (separate from the traditional LAN) connects all
storage and servers.
5.
True or False? NDR is the ability to respond to an interruption in network ser-
vices by implementing a disaster recovery plan to restore an organization’s crit-
ical business functions.
Multiple Choice
1.
Establishing a corporate Internet security policy involves the following, except:
A. High-level management policy statement
B.
Systematic analysis of organization’s assets
C. Examination of risks
D. Low-level management policy statement
E.
Developing an implementation strategy
2.
Some of the many applications of smart cards include the following, except:
A. Stored value card: minimizes the need to carry cash, can be used to pur-
chase items from merchants, vending machines, and pay phones
148
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

B.
Health care: portable, customized health care file with medical emergency
data and HMO and insurance information
C. Access control in offices and hotels: allows storage of time entered and ex-
ited, access conditions, and identity
D. Contactless tickets for ski resorts and airlines: increases speed, conve-
nience, and security and facilitates baggage checking
E.
Contact tickets for ski resorts and airlines: increases speed, convenience,
and security and facilitates baggage checking
3.
Intrusion detection systems perform a variety of functions, except:
A. Monitoring and analysis of user and system activity
B.
Deleting tightly bound services
C. Auditing of system configurations and vulnerabilities
D. Assessing the integrity of critical system and data files
E.
Recognition of activity patterns reflecting known attacks
4.
Firewalls act as a barrier between corporate (internal) networks and the outside
world (Internet) and filter incoming traffic according to a security policy. This
is a valuable function and would be sufficient protection were it not for the fol-
lowing facts, except two:
A. Improved firewall flexibility and upgradability.
B.
Not all access to the Internet occurs through the firewall.
C. Not all threats originate outside the firewall.
D. Firewalls themselves are subject to attack.
E.
Unflexibility and gradability that firewalls do not provide.
5.
In today’s world, corporations face a variety of information system attacks
against their LANs and WANs. Many of these attacks are directed through the
Internet. These attacks come from three basic groups, except two:
A. Persons who see attacking a corporation’s information system as a techno-
logical challenge
B.
Persons with no identified political or social agenda who see attacking a
corporation’s information system as an opportunity for high-tech vandal-
ism
C. Persons who investigate to avoid the possibility of incurring legal action
against themselves or the organization for whom they are reviewing the in-
vestigation
D. Persons who need to investigate to avoid the possibility of incurring legal
action against themselves or the organization for whom they are conduct-
ing the investigation
E.
Persons associated with a corporate competitor or political adversary who
see the corporation’s information system as a legitimate strategic target
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
149

Exercise
Larry deposits a stolen third-party check into his account. No problems are de-
tected during check clearance, and two days later cleared funds are available in
Larry’s account. Subsequently an ATM camera records Larry making a cash with-
drawal. The bank’s forensics system analyzes the video image and a match is found
against the latest police records of Larry, wanted in connection with illegal drug ac-
tivities. How would your forensic system continue to handle this analysis?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
At 9:36 A.M. William swipes his access card to level 20 and enters the secure staff
area. Two hours pass and the forensics system detects that Bill has yet not logged
into his computer. The system checks the company calendar and detects that Bill,
a member of the organization’s merger and acquisition unit, is scheduled for an off-
site training course and is not expected in the building at all that day. The system
reviews the video log files of level 20 for that day and cannot find any match for Bill
against the staff photo database; however, it has detected an unknown person en-
tering the floor at 9:36 A.M. The system rechecks the company calendar for other
staff members attending the same off-site training course and determines that one
other person, Jennifer, a team leader within the organization’s HR department was
logged by the building access system as entering the secure area on level 36 at 10:48
A.M. The system reviews the level 36 video log files and detects that the same
unidentified person has used Jennifer’s access card to enter the level 36 secure area.
The system review of related video log files confirms the same unidentified person
leaving level 20 at 9:54  A.M. and leaving level 36 at 10:50  A.M. At this point, how
would the company’s computer forensics team go about investigating this case?
Case Project
Karin enters a bank branch in the Chicago area and deposits a check for her
brother. The bank video camera captures an image of Karin entering the branch
and matches it against its database of customers. The image is time and date
stamped. Later that day, Karin’s savings account is accessed via Internet banking
from an IP address located in Turin, Italy. During a routine correlation of data, the
apparent discrepancy is detected by the bank’s forensics system. How would you as
a computer forensics specialist, go about investigating this incident?
150
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Optional Team Case Project
When a senior executive of a multimillion-dollar international organization sud-
denly resigned during an internal audit, the computer forensic technology team
was called in to find out why. Please explain your solution in detail regarding the
organization’s computer forensic technology team’s investigation into this matter.
REFERENCES
[1] Duncan, Mark, “Internet Security,” 610 Gilbert Avenue, Suite 19, Menlo
Park, CA 94025, 2002.
[2] “Online Payment Processing: What You Need to Know,” © 2003 VeriSign,
Inc. All rights reserved. VeriSign Worldwide Headquarters, 487 East Mid-
dlefield Road, Mountain View, CA 94043, 2003.
[3] Bace, Rebecca, “An Introduction to Intrusion Detection Assessment,” ICSA
Labs, Cybertrust, Corporation Headquarters, 13650 Dulles Technology
Drive, Suite 500, Herndon, VA 20171, 2004.
Types of Computer Forensics Systems
151

This page intentionally left blank 

153
Vendor and Computer
Forensics Services
4
C
yber crime costs U.S. businesses millions, if not billions, of dollars in unre-
alized profits and exposes organizations to significant risk. And it is on the
rise. In 2003, the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) reported a
sevenfold increase in the number of computer security incidents reported in 2002.
As information technology and the Internet become more integrated into
today’s workplaces, organizations must consider the misuse of technology as a real
threat and plan for its eventuality. When cyber crime strikes, the issue is not the in-
cident itself, but how the organization responds to the attack.
This chapter looks at how a swift and measured forensic incident response,
drawing on sound policies, vendor tools, and support, allows an organization to
contain the potential damage of an attack and effectively seek compensation or pros-
ecution. In addition, this chapter covers the following computer forensic services:
Forensic incident response
Evidence collection
Forensic analysis
Expert witness
Forensic litigation and insurance claims support
Training
Forensic process improvement

OCCURRENCE OF CYBER CRIME
Cyber crime occurs when information technology is used to commit or conceal an
offense. Computer crimes include:
Financial fraud
Sabotage of data or networks
Theft of proprietary information
System penetration from the outside and denial of service
Unauthorized access by insiders and employee misuse of Internet access privileges
Viruses, which are the leading cause of unauthorized users gaining access to
systems and networks through the Internet [1]
Cyber crimes can be categorized as either internal or external events. Typically,
the largest threat to organizations has been employees and insiders, which is why
computer crime is often referred to as an insider crime. For example, Ernst &
Young’s global research has found that 93% of all identified frauds were commit-
ted by employees, almost 44% of which were committed by management.
Internal events are committed by those with a substantial link to the intended
victim, for example, a bank employee who siphons electronic funds from a cus-
tomer’s account. Other examples include downloading or distributing offensive
material, theft of intellectual property, internal system intrusions, fraud, and in-
tentional or unintentional deletion or damage of data or systems.
However, as advances continue to be made in remote networks, the threat from
external sources is on the rise. For example, in the 2003 CSI/FBI Computer Crime
and Security Survey, 50% of respondents reported their internal systems as a
frequent point of attack, while 59% reported Internet connections as the most
frequent point of attack [2].
An external event is committed anonymously. A classic example was the 
Philippine-based 1999 “I Love You” email attack. Other types of external cyber
crime include computer system intrusion, fraud, and reckless or indiscriminate de-
liberate system crashes.
Internal events can generally be contained within the attacked organization, as
it is easier to determine a motive and therefore simpler to identify the offender.
However, when the person involved has used intimate knowledge of the information
technology infrastructure, obtaining digital evidence of the offense can be difficult.
An external event is hard to predict, yet can often be traced using evidence pro-
vided by, or available to, the organization under attack. Typically, the offender has
154
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
155
no motive and is not even connected with the organization, making it fairly
straightforward to prove unlawful access to data or systems.
CYBER DETECTIVES
Computer forensics, therefore, is a leading defense in the corporate world’s armory
against cyber crime. Forensic investigators detect the extent of a security breach,
recover lost data, determine how an intruder got past security mechanisms, and,
possibly, identify the culprit. Forensic experts need to be qualified in both inves-
tigative and technical fields and trained in countering cyber crime. They should also
be knowledgeable in the law, particularly legal jurisdictions, court requirements,
and the laws on admissible evidence and production.
In many cases, forensic investigations lead to calling in law enforcement agen-
cies and building a case for potential prosecution, which could lead to a criminal
trial. The alternative is pursuing civil remedies, for instance, pursuing breach of
trust and loss of intellectual property rights.
Legal Issues
The most common legal difficulty faced by organizations seeking to redress cyber
crime in the courts is having digitally based evidence accepted. Notwithstanding the
technical expertise of information technology (IT) teams, most companies are ill-
equipped to investigate cyber crime in a way that results in the collection of admis-
sible evidence. For example, data collected as evidence must be shown to not be
tampered with and be accounted for at every stage of its life from collection to pre-
sentation in court. In other words, it must meet the requirements of the jurisdic-
tion’s laws of evidence.
Another issue is the lag time between legislation and change and improvements in
technology. As a result, law enforcement organizations and computer forensic experts
are often forced to use archaic and nonspecific laws to fit unusual circumstances. 
For example, to commit theft, a person must permanently deprive the victim of
property. However, if a disgruntled employee copied an organization’s database
and sold it to a rival company, the organization is not permanently deprived of the
data; therefore, technically, no offense of theft has been committed. In addition, it
is unclear whether data fits into the legal definition of property. However, even in
cases where there is a clearly defined crime, corporations are often hesitant to pur-
sue a criminal conviction because of the time, cost, and reputation risk involved in
reaching a legal outcome.

FIGHTING CYBER CRIME WITH
RISK-MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES
The rate of technological change, the spread of computer literacy, and the growth
of e-commerce [3] collaboration, such as alliances and marketplaces, make the
challenge of restricting cyber crime damage daunting. With legislation lagging be-
hind technology, businesses have had no choice but to absorb the responsibility for
the security of their most valuable asset—their information. Risks range from ex-
pensive downtime, sales and productivity losses to corrupted data, damage to rep-
utation and consumer confidence and loyalty, and hefty compensation payments
or lawsuits for breaches of client information.
The best approach for organizations wanting to counter cyber crime is to apply
risk-management techniques. The basic steps for minimizing cyber crime damage
are creating well-communicated IT and staff policies, applying effective detection
tools, ensuring procedures are in place to deal with incidents, and having a foren-
sic response capability.
Effective IT and Staff Policies
Well-communicated and “plain English” IT policies educate staff about their rights
and obligations in the workplace. The goal of these policies is to create a security so-
lution that is owned by all staff, not only by those in the IT division. To be effective,
IT policies should make plain what an individual employee can and cannot do on
the organization’s systems and the legal implications of misuse. It is also vital to
make a continuing investment in policies, which must evolve and be supported by
ongoing training initiatives.
Effective policies diminish the risk of internal attack, particularly unintentional
attack. In addition, when attack does occur, these policies clearly define what con-
stitutes a breach of security, making it easier to prosecute or seek compensation
from the perpetrator.
Vendor Tools of the Trade
Although internal policies will not dissuade external cyber criminals, the right ven-
dor tools will detect an external attack and alert the organization to the threat.
These tools are programs that either analyze a computer system to detect anom-
alies, which may form the basis of an attack, or locate data that can be used as evi-
dence of a crime or network intrusion.
Choosing the right cyber crime detection tools is essential for risk management
in all organizations, but like most applications associated with an organization, the
156
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
157
question is, what is the right tool? The right tools are those that deliver appropriate
information that the forensic expert can interpret to achieve the best outcome. Ul-
timately, the evidence must withstand the rigors of legal proceedings. To deliver the
information needed, software tools should be probing (without compromising the
target of interrogation), concise, able to report findings fully, supported, and easy
to use. Such tools will save forensic experts valuable time and allow them to con-
centrate on data interpretation.
The 2003 CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey shows a significant in-
crease in companies using intrusion detection systems, from 58% in 2001 to 79%
in 2003 [2]. Although some attacks will not be prevented, damage such as financial
loss or negative publicity can be contained with early warning.
As with all of today’s technology, detection tools date quickly as new threats
emerge. Effective detection tools need to constantly evolve to counter these threats
and must be engineered around best-practice risk management associated with
vulnerabilities, system configurations, and viruses. Some online products and ser-
vices currently on the market provide efficient, cost-effective solutions by accessing
computer vulnerabilities specific to an organization’s IT environment.
Effective Procedures
Even in an organization that has implemented the hardware, installed the software,
produced the policies, and employed competent staff to run an effective IT envi-
ronment, it is not possible to prevent an incident from occurring. However, the at-
tack itself does not have the greatest impact on a company. How the business
responds to that attack has the greatest impact on a company. Without the appro-
priate procedures in place to counter detected attacks, an organization is exposed
to the risks of lost data, financial loss, network damage, and loss of reputation.
Although many different types of attacks may occur, the majority require the
same basic steps of response. For example, the simple process of ensuring that the
right people know about the incident when it happens enhances an organization’s
response, both in time and effective handling procedures.
Forensic Response Capability
When an incident occurs, an organization needs an appropriate forensic response
in place. By appointing a forensic expert to manage the response to an incident,
organizations ensure all avenues are canvassed, all evidence located and handled
correctly, and all those involved treated impartially (see sidebar, “Computer Foren-
sic Incident Response Procedures [CFIRP]”).

COMPUTER FORENSIC INCIDENT RESPONSE PROCEDURES
(CFIRP)
Let’s look at an incident that occurred at a well-known technical university that
clearly shows the need to have an enforceable and workable CFIRP:
Picture this: it is 1 A.M. and email comes into the security mailing list from an
outside source informing you that this site’s server has been compromised, and from
the logs two of the machines in your domain look to also have been compromised.
The only people on the mailing list who are up and awake and reading their mail are
the operations staff, but they know that sometimes in the wee hours, one of the more
nocturnal network staff come in. They take a chance and call his office. To their
delight, he is in his office, so they forward him the security email and consider their
part of this incident finished.
The nocturnal network person reads the email, looks at the time, and decides to
block those two hosts at the router from the Internet. He then sends an email to secu-
rity stating that the hosts are blocked and considers his part in this incident finished.
The next morning the rest of the security team trickles in and reads the security
mail along with about 500 other emails of various severities. The entire team
assumes that the nocturnal network person notified the owner of the machines of
the problem and that action has been taken. You all get on with other business, and
of course the nocturnal network person, being nocturnal, is not around to correct
your assumptions.
OUTCOME
The two servers that were blocked were two major servers for the math department.
They both had high-profile off-site collaborative projects going on . The math depart-
ment has their own system administrators, who were not on the security mailing list.
The system administrators spent all of that day and part of the next trou-
bleshooting their server and network, trying to figure out why they could not get to
the Internet. No one informed the owners of the alleged compromised hosts of the
network block of the alleged compromise until the problem was elevated to the
director of networking and the chair of the math department.
Where to start is the first question that comes to mind. You should start with an
outline of the key elements of a successful CFIRP but also include forms that can be
used to identify the incident contact personnel as well as forms for incident han-
dling, containment, and eradication.
Not having an incident response policy in place can lead to serious liabilities for
your company or university, as well as for the system administrator who is working
158
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
159
on the incident. There may be times when local law enforcement will pay you a visit.
It is a very good idea to know what information can be given out without a search
warrant, and in the case of a warrant, who in your organization should receive the
warrant. Knowing someone in your local computer crimes lab is a good idea. Hav-
ing good communications with them before you are responding to a critical incident
will make life much easier.
The FBI has developed a collaborative effort, named InfraGard. This description
of the organization is taken from their Web page: “InfraGard is a cooperative under-
taking between the Federal Bureau of Investigation and an association of businesses,
academic institutions, state and local law enforcement agencies, and other partici-
pants, that is dedicated to increasing the security of the critical infrastructures of the
United States of America” [3a]. 
It is also critical to have someone assigned to notify and report incidences to
CERT. This can be called out clearly in your CFIRP so everyone knows what they are
responsible for and you can cut down on redundant reporting.
Last but certainly not least, let’s not forget that an ounce of prevention is worth
a pound of cure. Educating your user community will help decrease the number of
security incidents you have. It’s been proven time and time again that most security
problems originate from inside organizations.
Having a clear and concise conditions of use policy as well as a policy for depart-
mental computers on your network will prove invaluable in resolving internal secu-
rity violations. When developing your policy, a lot will depend on the type of
organization. Government policies differ from private sector policies [4], and uni-
versity policies are in their own category, being even more specific, depending on
whether they are public or private institutions.
If you don’t think you need a CFIRP policy, try the following exercise: Do a
mock incident (with the permission of your management), but don’t let your secu-
rity people know it is an exercise.
The difficult part of creating a CFIRP is that it has to be tailored for your site. You
will need to take into consideration all the nuances of your site and get support and
buy-in from upper management. Best of luck to you; it will be well worth the work [5].
In other words, deterrence is the appropriate forensic response and the funda-
mental element of a defensive strategy for the organization. However, for deter-
rence to be effective, potential antagonists must be convinced that they will be
identified and punished swiftly and severely. This is the essence of the three key
causal variables of general deterrence theory: certainty, severity, and celerity. Un-
fortunately, while the methods for identifying perpetrators of crimes in the law en-
forcement context, and attackers in the military context, are well developed, similar

capabilities do not currently exist for the networked cyber realm. Thus, while de-
terrence is recognized as a highly effective defensive strategy, its applicability to de-
fense against attacks on our nation’s information infrastructures is not clear,
mainly because of our inability to link attackers with attacks.
A conceptual tool that can help visualize and understand the problem is to
think of a thread, or sequence, of steps (with requisite technologies) necessary to ef-
fect a deterrent capability. As with the “weak link” and “picket fence” analogies, if
any one of these steps is missing or ineffective, the ability to achieve the desired re-
sult is compromised.
Looking at this thread, you can see that current intrusion detection technology
is focused primarily on the first element in the sequence above. Any response is
generally limited to logging, reporting, and isolating or reconfiguring. What is
missing is the ability to accurately identify and locate attackers and to develop the
evidentiary support for military, legal, or other responses selected by decision mak-
ers. While defensive techniques are important, it’s critical not to “stovepipe” in
such a way that you can’t effectively link with the offensive component of an over-
all strategic cyber defense.
In addition to detecting the attacks, perhaps you should also develop a “foren-
sic,” or identification, capability to pass the necessary “targeting” information on to
the offensive components of the response team, regardless of whether the response
is through physical or cyber means. Such a capability is critical if your cyber de-
fenses are to transcend a merely reactive posture to one in which both offensive and
defensive techniques can be effectively applied in tandem. This is in line with the es-
tablished principles of war, which suggest that an offensive (and therefore deter-
rent) spirit must be inherent in the conduct of all defensive operations. Forensics
response capabilities could help provide the bridge between the defensive and of-
fensive elements of an overall cyber defense strategy. Accurate and timely forensic
response techniques would also enable the effective use of the three elements of de-
terrence. Otherwise, attackers can act with impunity, feeling confident that they
need not fear the consequences of their actions.
Forensics is a promising area of research that could help provide the identifica-
tion and evidence necessary to support an offensive response against attacks on your
information infrastructure, regardless of whether that response is executed through
physical, information warfare (IW), or other means. Although forensic response
techniques are highly developed for investigations in the physical realm and are
being developed for application to computer crime, what is needed is an analogous
capability for real-time, distributed, network-based forensic response analysis in the
cyber realm. It would seem appropriate to incorporate the collection of forensic re-
sponse data with the intrusion detection and response types of technologies cur-
rently being developed. Critical supporting technologies include those needed for
correlation and fusion of evidence data, as well as automated damage assessment.
160
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
161
The importance of solid identification and evidence linking an attacker with an
attack will be critical in the increasing complexity of the networked information en-
vironment. Cyber attacks against the U.S. and its allies may not have the obvious vi-
sual cues and physical impact typically associated with attacks in the physical realm.
In these cases, the available courses of action will be heavily influenced by various
political, legal, economic, and other factors. Depending on the situation, it may be
necessary to have irrefutable proof of the source of the attack, the kind of proof typ-
ically developed through forensic response methods.
For example, one suggested concept is for a “cyberspace hot pursuit” capabil-
ity to aid in the back-tracing of incidents to discover perpetrators. Use of such a ca-
pability implies the need for laws specifying authorization to conduct cyberspace
pursuits and cooperative agreements with foreign governments and organizations.
A second suggestion is for the development of a tamper-proof, aircraft-like “black
box” recording device to ensure that when an incident occurs and is not detected
in real time, the trail back to the perpetrator does not become lost.
Extending the aircraft analogy, the need for effective identification during cy-
berspace pursuits, and for coordinating offensive IW response actions through in-
termediary “friendly” networks, may necessitate a type of “network identification
friend or foe (IFF)” capability, just as the introduction of fast-moving aircraft in the
physical realm necessitated the need for secure IFF. Although the need for IFF has
traditionally been a concern at the tactical level of warfare, the failure to effectively
deal with such issues could certainly have strategic implications.
One issue of concern at the strategic level of IW is the distinction between the
military and private sector information infrastructures. It is clearly not feasible to re-
quire the private sector to secure its systems to the level required for military net-
works. The approach suggested in this section may be applicable regardless of
whether the networks attacked belong to the military. For example, in the physical
realm today, if a civilian target is struck, the FBI and other federal agencies are called
in to assist and investigate the incident, and when the identity of the attackers is de-
termined, appropriate legal, political, or military actions are taken in response. From
an organizational perspective, efforts are underway to develop the necessary coordi-
nation structures, such as the National Infrastructure Protection Center, between
the private and commercial sectors. From a technical perspective, major elements of
the commercial infrastructure could participate in a national-level monitoring sys-
tem, while private entities could maintain their own in-house capabilities with the
ability to provide necessary data to national authorities following an incident just as
would be the case with the FBI being called in to investigate a crime.
Another fundamental concern this approach may help address is the problem
of malicious insiders. The security paradigm of enclaves separated by boundary
controllers is most effective against attacks from the outside. Attacks initiated from
within the enclave, possibly even by a trusted insider, have traditionally been much

harder to defend against. Cyber forensics response techniques may provide the ca-
pability needed to deal with this problem, which simply cannot be addressed by tra-
ditional security techniques based on privileges. These systems simply check
whether a user is acting within the prescribed privileges while remaining in com-
plete oblivion regarding the abuse of these privileges.
In other words, as previously discussed, a deterrence-based approach is an ele-
ment of an overall cyber defense strategy. The need for timely and unequivocal
identification of attackers is essential for such an approach to be effective. Unfor-
tunately, the technical basis for such identification has not received much attention
from the research and development community. In addition, there may be some
complicating factors for the implementation of the type of identification and foren-
sics response capability discussed here, such as the widespread move to encryption.
However, until research and development resources are committed to investigation
of the relevant issues, the extent of the challenge cannot be fully understood.
COMPUTER FORENSICS INVESTIGATIVE SERVICES
There are without doubt some very knowledgeable experts in the field of computer
forensics investigations; however, there has been an increase in the number of peo-
ple purporting to be experts or specialists who produce flawed opinions or take ac-
tions that are just plain wrong. The reasons for these errors are manifold but range
from peer or management pressure, restricted timescales, and problems with soft-
ware, to sheer lack of knowledge. Most investigations are basically the same in that
they are either proving or disproving whether certain actions have taken place. The
emphasis depends on whether the work is for the accuser or the accused.
In many companies, forensic computer examiners are kings because they have
more knowledge of the subject than their peers. However, they are still subject to
management pressures to produce results, and at times this can color their judgment.
Time restrictions can cause them to take short cuts that invalidate the very evidence
they are trying to gather, and when they do not find the evidence that people are de-
manding (even if it isn’t there), they are subject to criticism and undue pressure.
Many of these specialists are well meaning, but they tend to work in isolation or
as part of a hierarchical structure where they are the computer expert. The special-
ists’ management does not understand what they are doing (and probably don’t
want to admit it), and often they are faced with the question, Can’t you just say
this.....? It takes a very strong-minded person to resist this sort of pressure, and it is
obvious that this has had an adverse effect in a number of cases.
This sort of pressure comes not only from within the organizations, but also
from external sources. When you reply with: “I’m sorry it’s just not there” or
“No, the facts do not demonstrate that,” you frequently end up with lengthy
162
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
163
high-pressure discussions with the client, which appear to be designed to make
you doubt your own valid conclusions.
Working in isolation is a major problem; apart from talking to yourself (first sign
of madness), many people have no one else to review their ideas and opinions. This
is where having recourse to a team of investigators, software engineers, hardware en-
gineers, and managers who understand (not always a good thing, depending on your
point of view) any doubts or unusual facts, is valuable for fully discussing and inves-
tigating to ensure that the correct answer is found.
Computer Intrusion Detection Services
Installing technical safeguards to spot network intruders or detect denial-of-service
attacks at e-commerce servers is prudent, but if your staff doesn’t have the time or
skills to install and monitor intrusion detection software, you might consider out-
sourcing the job.
Intrusion detection is the latest security service to be offered on an outsourced
basis, usually by the types of Internet service providers (ISPs) or specialized secu-
rity firms that have been eager to manage your firewall and authentication. Al-
though outsourcing security means divulging sensitive information about your
network and corporate business practices, some companies say they have little
choice but to get outside help, given the difficulty of hiring security experts [6].
For example, the Yankee Group reports that managed-security services (of
which intrusion detection is the latest phenomenon) more than tripled, from $450
million in 2000 to $1.5 billion in 2003. By 2009, the market is expected to reach $7.4
billion, fueled by the trend toward outsourcing internal local area network (LAN)
security to professional security firms as virtual employees.
Digital Evidence Collection
Perhaps one of the most crucial points of your case lies hidden in a computer. The
digital evidence collection process not only allows you to locate that key evidence,
but also maintains the integrity and reliability of that evidence. Timing during this
digital evidence collection process is of the essence. Any delay or continued use of
the suspect computer may overwrite data prior to the forensic analysis and result in
destruction of critical evidence (see sidebar, “Evidence Capture”). The following are
some helpful tips that you can follow to help preserve the data for future computer
forensic examination:
Do not turn on or attempt to examine the suspect computer. This could result
in destruction of evidence.
Identify all devices that may contain evidence:
Workstation computers

Off-site computers (laptops, notebooks, home computers, senders and re-
cipients of email, PDAs, etc.)
Removable storage devices (zips, Jaz, Orb, floppy diskettes, CDs, Sony Mem-
ory Sticks, Smart Media, Compact Flash, LS-120, optical disks, SyQuest,
Bernouli, microdrives, pocketdrives, USB disks, firewire disks, PCMICA)
Network storage devices (redundant array of independent [or inexpensive]
disks [RAIDs], servers, storage area networks [SANs], network attached
storage [NAS], spanned, remote network hard drives, back-up tapes, etc.)
Quarantine all in-house computers:
Do not permit anyone to use the computers.
Secure all removable media.
Turn off the computers.
Disconnect the computers from the network.
Consider the need for court orders to preserve and secure the digital evidence
on third party computers and storage media.
EVIDENCE CAPTURE
One of the fundamental principles of computer investigation is the need to follow
established and tested procedures meticulously and methodically throughout the
investigation. At no point of the investigation is this more critical than at the stage
of initial evidence capture. Reproducibility of evidence is the key. Without the firm
base of solid procedures that have been strictly applied, any subsequent antirepudi-
ation attempts in court will be suspect and the case as a whole likely to be weakened.
Another frequent problem with capturing evidence is lack of experience—not
only lack of site experience but also inappropriate experience of the type of systems
that might be encountered. One of the most difficult skills on-site is knowing when
to call for help. It is essential that a sympathetic working environment is created such
that peer pressure or fear of loss of status and respect does not override the need to
call for help. Easier said than done perhaps, but no less essential for that reason.
Finally, sloppiness, time pressure, pressure applied on-site, fatigue, or carelessness
have all been contributory factors in transforming solid computer evidence into a dubi-
ous collection of files. These avoidable issues come down to individual mental discipline,
management control and policy, and selecting appropriate staff to carry out the work.
They are issues for which there is no sympathy. This is bad work, plain and simple.
Ultimately, any time the collection of computer evidence is called into question, it
is potentially damaging to everyone who is a computer forensic practitioner; it is ulti-
mately in everyone’s best interest to ensure that the highest standards are maintained. 
164
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
165
Next, let’s briefly look at drafting a comprehensive and effective computer
forensics policy. This type of computer forensics service is used by countless orga-
nizations (banks, insurance companies, law firms, local governments, retailers,
technology firms, educational institutions, charitable organizations, manufactur-
ers, distributors, etc.).
Computer Policy
Often overlooked, detailed policies on the use of computers within an organization
are an ever-increasing necessity. Corporations and government agencies are racing
to provide Internet access to their employees. With this access, a Pandora’s box of
problems is opened. Paramount is loss of productivity; workers can easily spend
countless hours online entertaining and amusing themselves at their employer’s ex-
pense. A hostile workplace environment can be created through pornography, po-
tentially exposing the organization to civil liability.
Although protecting your organization from outside threats is clearly impor-
tant, protecting the organization from internal threats is at least as important, if
not more so. According to the 2003 Computer Crime and Security Survey con-
ducted by the Computer Security Institute and the FBI, 67% of the respondents
reported unauthorized access to information by persons inside the organization,
compared to just 42% who reported intrusions by outsiders. A quarter reported
theft of proprietary information, and 80% reported theft of laptop computers.
Virus contamination was reported by 92%, and a staggering 99% reported sys-
tems abuse by insiders (pornography, pirated software, inappropriate email
usage, etc.). According to Sextracker, an organization that tracks the online
pornography trade, 82% of online pornography viewing occurs during the 9–5
work day [2].
Your computer forensics policy manual should therefore address all manners
of computer-related policy needs. The content should be based on your corpora-
tion’s experience in employment-related investigations, computer crime investi-
gations, civil litigation, and criminal prosecutions. Approximately half of the
manual should consist of detailed discussions of each of the policy topic areas; the
other half should be sample policies that can be readily customized for your orga-
nization. The discussions should include topics such as why policies are needed,
potential liability, employee productivity considerations, and civil litigation. Safe-
guarding critical and confidential information should be discussed in detail. The
policies should directly address the problems that you would typically find in or-
ganizations of all sizes.
Now let’s look at another computer forensics service: litigation support and in-
surance claims. As the risk increases, so will the interest in policies and the cost of
premiums and litigation.

Litigation Support and Insurance Claims
Since its inception, cyberinsurance has been billed as a way for companies to un-
derwrite potential hacking losses for things technology cannot protect. The concept
of insuring digital assets has been slow in catching on because the risks and dam-
ages were hard to quantify and put a price tag on.
The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks quickly elevated corporate America’s
interest in cyberinsurance, as industry magnates looked for ways to mitigate their
exposure to cyberterrorism and security breaches. At the same time, it has become
harder to find underwriters willing to insure multimillion-dollar cyberspace poli-
cies. For carriers willing to sell such paper, the premiums have skyrocketed. Prior
to September 11,  2001, the focus of information security was on critical infra-
structure. After September 11,  2001, the focus has shifted to homeland defense and
trying to understand whether financial institutions and other critical infrastructure
such as telecommunications are vulnerable to cyberterrorism.
Insurance stalwarts such as Lloyd’s of London, AIG, and Zurich now offer poli-
cies for everything from hacker intrusions to network downtime. The breadth of
cyberinsurance policies is growing, from simple hacker intrusion, disaster recovery,
and virus infection to protection against hacker extortion, identity theft, and mis-
appropriation of proprietary data.
While the market was already moving to provide policies to cover these risks,
many executives viewed cyberinsurance as a luxury that yielded few tangible bene-
fits. Many risk managers buried their heads in the sand, believing they would never
need anything like cyberinsurance. There was a naiveté on the part of senior man-
agement. IT managers were not willing to admit they had to fix something of that
magnitude, because they were afraid to go ask for the money.
The aftermath of the 9-11-01 attacks illustrates the interconnectedness of all
systems: financial services, information and communications, transportation, elec-
trical power, fire, and police. They all relate in profound ways we are only now be-
ginning to understand. Businesses are starting to think about what type of recovery
position they would be in if something similar to the World Trade Center attack
happened to them.
While the cyberinsurance market may grow in the wake of the 9-11-01 tragedy,
carriers are tightening the terms and conditions of policies. Premiums are going up
significantly and underwriters are hesitating to sign big policies. In the past, compa-
nies seeking a $25 million policy could find someone to cover them. Now it’s much
more difficult. Underwriters who didn’t blink at $5 million or $10 million policies,
would now rather insure $1 million policies. The marketplace is in transition, and
there’s undoubtedly a hardening of trading conditions for both traditional property
and casualty insurance, as well as the emerging new e-commerce products.
166
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
167
Premiums on cyberinsurance are an easy mark for price hikes because there’s
little historical data on which to set them. It’s difficult to pinpoint the losses if data
is corrupted, a network is hacked, or system uptime is disrupted. The fear of bad
publicity keeps many companies mum on hacking incidents, which makes it more
difficult to collect data for projecting future losses.
To develop robust cyberinsurance, two major developments need to take place.
First, sufficient actuarial data needs to be collected. Second, insurance carriers need
to develop a better understanding of the IT systems in use and how they interact
with other information and automated systems.
Industry analysts predict that underwriters will push any changes in cyberin-
surance offerings and the systems used by policyholders. The first indication of
this trend came earlier in 2001, when an underwriting company tacked a 5 to 15%
surcharge on cyberinsurance premiums for users of Windows NT on Internet in-
formation services (IIS) servers, citing their poor security track record, which
makes them more expensive to insure. The underwriters are going to force the
issue by saying, “Look, if you lose your whole business, if things like that happen,
you can expect to pay a higher premium.”
FORENSIC PROCESS IMPROVEMENT
The purpose of this section is to introduce the reader to a process that will enable a
system administrator or information security analyst to determine the threat
against their systems and networks. If you have ever wanted to know more about
who might have attacked or probed your system than just the IP address that ap-
peared in the var/log/messages of your machine, then this section may help you. Al-
though it is rare, some of these simple techniques may help you identify the
perpetrator of an attack on your system. Although most system administrators are
rightly concerned with first securing their hosts and networks from attack, part of
doing that job correctly demands that you understand the threat against those sys-
tems and networks. The risk any system connected to the Net faces is a product of
vulnerability and threat. The techniques covered in this section will help you de-
termine possible actions and possible motivations of the attacker. If you can un-
derstand your attacker, than you can better defend against and respond to attacks
against your network. Of course, it is important to understand that hackers will
loop through several systems during the attack phase.
So why bother researching the apparent source of an attack? What if your sys-
tem is the first system of many that the hacker will use in his or her attack against
other systems? Could you be held liable for damage done by the attacker to some-
one else’s systems? What if the attacker is operating from within a country that has
no laws against hacking and can thus operate with impunity? Or what if the hacker

is unskilled and has left clues behind that a skilled researcher could use to identify
him or her? All of these reasons justify taking a small amount of time to research the
apparent source of a serious attack or intrusion. Of course, all of these techniques
should be used after you have secured your system and possibly consulted with law
enforcement personnel. This should be done if the level and seriousness of the at-
tack justify such an action. Next, let’s review the tools that are used in the threat
identification process.
The Tools
The tools discussed here outline a step-by-step process that will help you identify
the attacking host and possible actors that may have used that host to attack your
system. This section is not intended to be a tutorial for how to use each tool on its
own. There are many sources of information that cover each tool by itself in more
detail. Many of you are certainly familiar with or have used many of the tools dis-
cussed here at one time or another. Keep in mind that here we are talking about the
overall process of characterizing the threat from a domain. The first step in the
threat identification process is simply to know who owns the IP used in the attack.
For detailed switchology on the use of each tool, consult the main pages or other
sources for each tool listed.
It is advisable to find a Web proxy or gateway Web site for conducting any type of
intelligence collection operation against the attacking host. In this way, you do not
run the risk of further antagonizing or scaring off a potential intruder who might
be watching the connection logs from his or her victimized host. A good all-around
site that contains most of the tools discussed here is http://www.samspade.org. This
site also contains a brief description of each tool and its use. For instance, to learn
more about the Dig command, simply hit the More Information radio button
listed beside the tool. Another useful site is http://network-tools.com.
Dig –x /nslookup
The first step in the process is to reverse the offending IP address. The Dig -x ip
command will perform a reverse lookup on an IP address from its domain name
server. The “-x” option will ensure that you receive all records possible about your
host from the Domain Name Service (DNS) table. This might include nameservers,
email servers, and the host’s resolved name. The “nslookup” command, Nslookup
ip, will also perform a reverse lookup of the host IP address, but will only return the
resolved name.
168
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
169
Whois
The next step in the process is to perform a “whois” lookup on the IP address to see
who owns the offending IP or at least who it is registered to. This can be a tricky op-
eration. Use the resolved name previously mentioned to try to determine what
country or region the IP address might be based in and then be sure to use the
proper whois gateway for that region of the world. The main gateways are ARIN
(the American Registry), APNIC (the Asian Pacific Registry), and RIPE (the Euro-
pean Registry). There are dozens of others, but most addresses should be registered
in one of these. If your whois data does not match your resolved name, for exam-
ple the resolved name http://www.cnn.com and the whois database ARIN indicates
the registered owner is CNN network (a match), then you may have to do some
more digging. Whois databases can contain outdated information. You may want
to then research your IP with the country-specific whois database to determine the
correct registered owner. A good collection of country-specific whois databases can
be found at http://www.allwhois.com. For more information on conducting detailed
whois queries check out http://www.sans.org.
Ping
Conduct the Ping ip command to determine if your attacking IP is currently online.
Note that many administrators block ICMP traffic, so this is not conclusive evi-
dence either way.
Traceroute
The next step in the process is to conduct a Traceroute ip to determine possible
paths from your proxy site to the target system. Traceroute may help you in two
ways. If your IP does not resolve possible paths from your proxy site to the target
system, there may be a clue about its parentage. Look at the resolved host just be-
fore your target. This host’s name may be the upstream provider for the attacking
host and thus a point of contact or it may have the same domain as your attacking
host, although that is not always true. Also, a traceroute might give you an impor-
tant clue about the physical location of the attacking box. Carefully look at the
path the packets traveled. Do they tell you what city they are in? Often they will. If
you can determine what city the attack came from, you have just considerably nar-
rowed down the possible pool of candidates of who the attacker might be.
Finger
Conduct a finger@ip command to determine who is currently logged onto the sys-
tem that attacked you. Now, to be frank, this command will rarely work, because
most administrators wisely turn this service off. However, it does not hurt to try.

Keep in mind that many systems that are compromised and used as lily pads to at-
tack other hosts are poorly configured (that is why they were compromised in the
first place). They may also have the finger service running. If it is running, finger
root@ip sees the last time root was logged on and, more important, from where
root was logged on. You might be surprised to see root logged on from a third sys-
tem in another country. Keep following the trail as long as your commands are not
refused. You should be able to trace back hackers through several countries using
this simple, often-overlooked technique. Look for strange login names and for
users logged into the system remotely. This may indicate where the host was com-
promised from and is the next clue to where to focus your research.
Anonymous Surfing
Surfing anonymously to the domain where your attacking IP is hosted is the next
step in the threat identification process. You will know this domain name by look-
ing at the resolved name of the host and the whois data. One technique that is use-
ful is to use a search engine such as http://www.altavista.com with the specialized
advanced search option of “+host:domain name and hack*.” This query will return
the Web links of possible hackers who operate from the domain name you queried.
You can substitute warez or mp3 and the like to focus on terms of interest specific
to warez or mp3 dealers. The number of Web pages returned by the query, as well
as the details on those pages, gives you an indication of the level of threat to assess
to a certain domain. For example, if you were investigating a host registered to
demon.co.uk (Demon Internet), you would type “+host:demon.co.uk and hack*”
in the Altavista query box. You may be surprised to see a return of some 55,000-
plus hacking-related pages hosted on this domain. The Demon Internet seems to
harbor many hackers and, as a domain, represents a viable threat to any organiza-
tion. As a standard practice, you might want to block certain domains at your fire-
wall if you are not already blocking ALL:ALL. Another possibility to widen the
search is to use “+link:domain name” in the Altavista search. This will show all Web
pages that have a link to the domain in question listed on their Web page. In other
words, the ever-popular “here is list of my hacker friends and their c001 hacker
sites” pages will appear via this search. You will also want to keep in mind the tar-
get of the attack. What were the hackers going after? Can you tell? Conduct searches
for the resources targeted and combine these terms with Boolean operators such as
“and espionage.” Check newswires or other competitive intelligence sources to de-
termine, if possible, who might be going after your company’s resources. A good
site to use to conduct your searches anonymously is http://www.anonymizer.com.
170
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
171
USENET
The last step in the process of threat identification is to conduct a USENET traffic
search on your domain. Sites such as http://groups.google.com/ are excellent for this.
Search on the attacking IP address in quotes to see if other people are reporting ac-
tivity from this IP in any security newsgroups. Search on the domain name or
hacker aliases that you might have collected from your anonymous surfing, or from
the returns of your finger queries. You can expand the headers of the postings by
clicking on “view original posting.” This may show you the actual server that posted
the message, even if the hacker attempted to spoof his or her mailing address in the
visible header. This method can reveal the true location of your hacker. Clicking on
“author profile” can also give you valuable information. Look at the newgroups
your hacker posts to and look at the number and sophistication of those postings.
Pay attention to off-subject postings. A hacker will often let down his guard when
talking about his favorite band or hobby, for example. You can also search sites
such as http://www.icq.com if you have a hacker alias from a defaced Web page or
your Altavista search narrowed by the domain “+hacker” criteria previously noted.
Putting It All Together
Once you have completed the process previously outlined and gathered all the in-
formation from these tools, you should be able to make an educated guess about
the threat level from the domain you are analyzing. With luck, you were able to col-
lect information about the numbers and sophistication levels of the hackers who
operate from the attacking domain, possible candidates for the attack (through fin-
ger or specialized Altavista searches), and what other CERTs may be seeing from
that domain (via newsgroups or newswire searches). An excellent site to check for
archived postings of recently seen attacks is both http://www.sans.org and
http://www.securityfocus.com. Ask yourself, were there thousands of hacker pages
hosted on the domain that you were investigating? Likewise, did you find thou-
sands of postings concerning hacking on USENET? Did you run a search on your
organization’s name plus “hack*”? Were there postings from other administrators
detailing attacks from this domain? Were the attacks they mentioned similar to
yours or different? Now you might be able to determine if that FTP probe, for ex-
ample, was just a random probe that targeted several other companies as well as
yours or targeted your company specifically. Could you tell from the logs that the
attacker was attempting to find a vulnerable FTP server to perhaps set up a warez
or mp3 site? Being able to make an educated guess about the motivation of your
hacker is important. Knowing whether your company has been singled out for an
attack as opposed to being randomly selected will change the level of concern you

have about assessing the threat. The process previously outlined can be used to nar-
row down possible candidates or characterize the threat level from responsible do-
mains. As a byproduct, it will also provide you with all the necessary names, phone
numbers, and points of contact that may be useful when it comes time to notify the
pertinent parties involved.
Finally, let’s look at what is probably the most important computer forensics
service: training. It has now been expanded to support U.S. government and U.S.
corporate needs, which became more of a priority after September 11, 2001. It
places priority on computer incident responses and now covers computer forensic
binary data searches for foreign language (non-Latin based) computer data (Farsi,
Chinese, Japanese, etc.).
Training
As previously explained, computer forensics involves the preservation, identifica-
tion, extraction, and documentation of computer evidence stored in the form of
magnetically encoded information (data). Often the computer evidence was cre-
ated transparently by the computer’s operating system and without the knowledge
of the computer operator. Such information may actually be hidden from view
and, thus, special forensic software tools and techniques are required to preserve,
identify, extract, and document the related computer evidence. It is this informa-
tion that benefits law enforcement and military agencies in intelligence gathering
and in the conduct of investigations.
Today computer forensics software tools and processing techniques have be-
come important resources for use in internal investigations, legal electronic docu-
ment discovery, computer security risk management, and computer incident
responses. Computer forensic software tools and methods can be used to identify
passwords, computer network log-ons, and other information that is transparently
and automatically transferred from the computer’s memory to floppy diskettes,
Iomega Zip Disks, and computer hard disk drives. Such computer forensic software
tools and methods can also be used to identify backdated files and to tie a floppy
diskette to a specific computer. These techniques should be taught in your special-
ized training course.
Law enforcement and military agencies have been involved in processing com-
puter evidence for years. Therefore, computer forensics training courses should be
taught by certified instructors (see sidebar, “Computer Forensics Certified”) who
are experienced computer crime experts (retired federal law enforcement com-
puter evidence trainers and members of law enforcement computer crime units).
172
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
173
COMPUTER FORENSICS CERTIFIED
According to a Gartner Group study, certification of INFOSEC computer-forensic-
training professionals is becoming a common condition of employment. The
research firm predicts that by 2009, INFOSEC certification will be required for 90%
of CISOs (chief information security officers) and associated training staff positions
and for 70% of day-to-day technical operations positions in Global 2004 companies.
Security is the number one issue going forward in an online world, whether it’s
online voting or e-commerce.
THE DEMANDS OF SECURITY
It’s bad enough when a certified IT employee doesn’t possess claimed skills, but the
skills gap is doubly worse in the security realm. What was once the near-exclusive
purview of government agencies or companies involved in highly secret research is
now a mainstream discipline for the highly connected enterprise.
This market didn’t exist 13 years ago. The field has only matured in the past 6 years.
Protecting a company’s most cherished assets (not just IT systems, but especially
the digitally stored proprietary information on those systems) demands knowledge-
able personnel, something not always easy to assess. Anyone can hang out a shingle
and say: “I’m an INFOSEC professional.” Such people must be able to prove their
credentials with INFOSEC certification.
Good security demands a more proactive approach than the other traditional
functions of a system administrator. Security is the system administrator area that
requires the most constant learning and relearning.
Information security infrastructure, like the proverbial chain, is only as strong as
its weakest link. The breadth of skills and management ability required for strong
information security puts unusual demands on organizations and professionals.
ANOTHER GAME
A certified information systems security professional (CISSP) isn’t the only
game in town. There’s also Certified Internet Webmaster (CIW) professional certi-
fication, coming on strong.
Perhaps the best known security certification player is the System Administra-
tion, Networking, and Security (SANS) Institute, which sponsors the Global Infor-
mation Assurance Certifications (GIAC). This is where the line in the security sand
is drawn. The CISSP is a broad top-down certification, whereas the LevelTwo GIAC
is a series of specialized and technical certifications.
q

GIAC responds directly to the skills question. GIAC requires that candidates
demonstrate content mastery before they sit for the exam. In intrusion detection, for
example, a candidate must accurately analyze ten real-world intrusion attempts
before being allowed to take the exam. For firewalls, a candidate must design a
perimeter that solves specific problems.
When comparing CISSPs to GIAC, the metaphor is an MBA (CISSP) versus a
CPA (GIAC). You hire a CPA to do your accounting but not to do your strategic
business planning. Research indicates that strategic business planning is what the
industry desperately needs. The principal difference is in the target. An analogy sug-
gested by an International Steering Committee (ISC) board member is that GIAC is
for pilots and CISSP is for the managers who schedule the pilots.
SANS certification focuses on specific products. The product focus has limita-
tions, because security professionals need to take into account the whole picture.
The short-term need is for the techie approach. Believe it or not, issues such as
buffer overflows still form a large part of the action on security lists. In the long term,
though, you need the big-picture view.
You cannot really say the technical issues are more important than management
issues, but the technical issues are more solvable.
Indeed, whether approaching information security issues from a management
or technical perspective, no one can escape political issues. Even if you had the best
of the best techies on your payroll, you wouldn’t be going anywhere unless the issues
and policies around corporate standards, user awareness, remote and wireless access
policies [8], acceptable authentication methods, and so forth have been decided. The
critical success factors in most security jobs are being adept at the politics, possess-
ing business skills and aptitude, good relationship management, and sales and nego-
tiation skills, even in some lower-level jobs.
The product versus politics dilemma will eventually be moot with SANS’ Security
Essentials (LevelOne) certification. The basic GIAC certification now covers all the
key knowledge sets covered by CISSP as well as additional, more current skills sets.
GROWING A PROFESSION
The information security profession draws people from diverse backgrounds into a
cohesive group. Security pros may have backgrounds in law enforcement, the mili-
tary, or traditional IT, each bringing their own jargon and argot. How do we learn
to talk to each other? You need an agreed-on taxonomy, and that, certification advo-
cates indicate, is what certification does: it creates a shared body of knowledge to
encourage a cohesive professional body.
174
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
175
Such certification is also seen as a big asset to an employee’s resume. CISSP is the
gold standard of security management and program development, but a certification
should be the beginning of a learning process, not an end in itself. Security is one
area where yesterday’s knowledge does not help. The security threat is always chang-
ing, so security certification tests, more than any others, are out of date before the
person even begins to study for them.
There’s another problem: the SAT-prep-test phenomenon. Once certifications
become widely accepted, some of their value will be lost. The more popular some-
thing is, the more likely there will be a “for dummies” approach.
Although most computer forensics training courses do not answer all possible
questions regarding computer evidence and computer security, they should cover
most of the common issues and expose the participant to new state-of-the-art com-
puter forensics techniques and computer forensics tools. Training should consist of
a Windows NT computer forensics course and a restricted-data-hiding course. An
expert witness testimony on electronic evidence course should fill in the gaps when
the participant is ready for those advanced training courses. Training should not be
focused on one specific computer forensics software tool or set of tools. This should
not be a computer forensics paint by numbers training course. Quality computer
forensic software tools should be provided with the training course, but it should be
your company’s mission to teach methodologies and the more technical aspects of
computer evidence processing and computer incident responses.
The training course should be unique; the participants are expected to have a
high degree of computer proficiency, know the difference between clusters and sec-
tors, and have experience in the use of latest Microsoft Windows platforms. The
course should not be an overview of computer forensics. It should be a technical
hands-on training course that will tax your knowledge and computer skills. It
should provide you with more information about computer security risks and
evidence-processing information than can be found anywhere else.
Because the course should deal with computer security issues and computer
risk management as well as computer evidence issues, it should be well suited for
computer security specialists, computer incident response team members, and
computer crime investigators. Most of your participants should be challenged by
this course for it to be considered a success.
In special cases, a course like this should be taught at the training facilities of cor-
porate and government sponsors.

COURSE CONTENT
A typical computer forensics course should deal specifically with Windows 2000,
Windows XP, Windows 2003, and Windows ME. Concerning these operating sys-
tems, it should cover evidence preservation, evidence-processing methodologies,
and computer security risk assessments in detail. It should touch briefly on issues
dealing with Windows NT, Windows 2000, and Windows XP and 2003. However,
you should have an advanced Windows NT training course that covers computer
security and computer evidence issues associated with Windows NT, Windows
2000, Windows XP, and Windows 2003 in great detail.
Today, Windows XP and Windows 2003 are the predominant operating sys-
tems used on notebook and desktop computers. Thus, they are the most likely op-
erating systems to be encountered in computer investigations, internal audits, and
computer security reviews. Most computer forensics courses do not cover the use
of black box computer forensics software tools. Those tools are good for some basic
investigation tasks, but they do not offer a complete and accurate computer foren-
sics solution. Furthermore, such approaches are useless in computer security risk
assessments. Computer security risk assessments usually require that searches and
file listings be conducted overtly (or covertly) from a single floppy diskette.
Each participant in a computer forensics course who successfully completes the
course should receive some sort of certificate of completion that is suitable for fram-
ing. They should also leave the course with a good understanding of the following:
Computer evidence processing
Preservation of evidence
Trojan horse programs
Computer forensics documentation
File slack
Data-hiding techniques
Internet-related investigations
Dual-purpose programs
Text search techniques
Fuzzy logic tools used to identify previously unknown text
Disk structure
Data encryption
Matching a floppy diskette to a computer
Data compression
Erased files
Internet abuse identification and detection
The boot process and memory resident programs
176
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
177
Computer-Evidence-Processing Procedures
The processing procedures and methodologies taught in a computer forensics
course should conform to federal computer-evidence-processing standards. The
tools that are used in the course, as well as the methods and procedures taught,
should work with any computer forensics tools. The methods and many of the
software tools should conform specifically to the computer-evidence-processing
procedures followed by the FBI, U.S. Department of Defense, and the U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration.
Preservation of Evidence
Computer evidence is very fragile and it is susceptible to alteration or erasure by any
number of occurrences. The participant should be exposed to bit stream back-up pro-
cedures that ensure the preservation of all storage levels that may contain evidence.
Trojan Horse Programs
The need to preserve the computer evidence before processing a computer will be
clearly demonstrated through the use of programs designed to destroy data and
modify the operating systems. The participant should demonstrate his or her abil-
ity to avoid destructive programs and traps that can be planted by computer users
bent on destroying data and evidence. Such programs can also be used to covertly
capture sensitive information, passwords, and network logons. This should also be
demonstrated during the course.
Computer Forensics Documentation
The documentation of forensic-processing methodologies and findings is impor-
tant. This is even true for computer security risk assessments, computer incident
responses, and internal audits, because without proper documentation it is diffi-
cult to present findings in court or to others. If the computer security or internal
audit findings become the object of a lawsuit or a criminal investigation, then
accurate documentation becomes even more important. The participant should be 
taught computer-evidence-processing methodology that facilitates good evidence-
processing documentation and solid evidence chain of custody procedures. The
benefits will be obvious to investigators, but they will also become clear to internal
auditors and computer security specialists during the course.
File Slack
The occurrence of random memory dumps in hidden storage areas [9] should be
discussed and covered in detail during workshops. Techniques and automated tools
used to capture and evaluate file slack should be demonstrated in the course. Such

data is the source of potential security leaks regarding passwords, network logons,
email, database entries, and word processing documents. These security and evi-
dence issues should be discussed and demonstrated during the course. The partic-
ipants should be able to demonstrate their ability to deal with slack from both an
investigations and security risk standpoint. They should also be able demonstrate
their proficiency in searching file slack, documenting their findings, and eliminat-
ing security risks associated with file slack.
Data-Hiding Techniques
Trade secret information and other sensitive data can easily be secreted using any
number of techniques. It is possible to hide diskettes within diskettes and to hide
entire computer hard disk drive partitions. These issues should be discussed from
a detection standpoint as well as from a security risk standpoint. Tools that help 
in the identification of such anomalies should demonstrated and discussed
(AnaDisk). Participants should be required to demonstrate their understanding of
such issues. This aspect of the training becomes especially important during the last
day of the course when the participants are called on to identify and extract their
Certificate of Completion from a special floppy diskette.
Data-hiding issues should be covered in much more depth in a data-hiding course.
Internet-Related Investigations
Issues and techniques related to the investigation of Internet-related matters should
be covered in the course. This should include a demonstration of how Internet-
related evidence differs from more traditional computer evidence. Emphasis should
be placed on the investigation of Internet-based terrorist leads.
Dual-Purpose Programs
Programs can be designed to perform multiple processes and tasks at the same
time. They can also be designed for delayed tasks and processes. These concepts
should be demonstrated to the participants during the course through the use of
specialized software. The participants should also have hands-on experience with
such programs.
Text Search Techniques
Specialized search techniques and tools should be developed that can be used to
find targeted strings of text in files, file slack, unallocated file space, and Windows
swap files. Each participant should leave the class with the necessary knowledge to
178
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
179
conduct computer security reviews and computer-related investigations. Because
of the need to search for non-Latin words and word patterns tied to foreign lan-
guages, the course should also cover the search of such data tied to foreign lan-
guages (Farsi, Chinese, Japanese, etc.).
Fuzzy Logic Tools Used to Identify Previously Unknown Text
A methodology and special computer forensics tools should be developed that aid
in the identification of relevant evidence and unknown strings of text. Traditional
computer evidence searches require that the computer specialist know what is
being searched for. However, many times not all is known in investigations. Thus,
not all is known about what may be stored on a targeted computer system. In such
cases, fuzzy logic tools can assist and can provide valuable leads as to how the sub-
ject computer was used. The participants should fully understand these methods
and techniques. They should also be able to demonstrate their ability to use them
to identify leads in file slack, unallocated file space, and Windows swap files.
Disk Structure
Participants should leave the course with a solid understanding of how computer
hard disks and floppy diskettes are structured and how computer evidence can re-
side at various levels within the structure of the disk. They should also leave the
class with a good understanding of how easy it is to modify the disk structure and
to hide computer data in obscure places on floppy diskettes and hard disk drives.
Data Encryption
A computer forensics training course should also cover how data is encrypted and
illustrate the differences between good encryption and bad encryption. The partic-
ipants should become familiar with the use of software to crack security associated
with these different encryption file structures.
Matching a Floppy Diskette to a Computer
Specialized computer forensics techniques and computer forensics tools should
also be developed that make it possible to conclusively tie a floppy diskette to a
computer hard disk drive. Each participant should also be taught how to use spe-
cial software tools to complete a unique computer storage data-matching process.
Some computer forensics experts believe floppy diskettes are no longer popular.
They are wrong. Floppy diskettes are found to be a valuable source of computer
evidence in some civil litigation cases that involve the theft of trade secrets.

Data Compression
The participant should be shown how data compression programs can be used to
hide and disguise critical computer data. Furthermore, the participant should learn
how password-protected compressed files can be broken.
Erased Files
Participants should be shown how previously erased files can be recovered using
computer forensics processes and methods. Documentation of the process should
also be covered in detail.
Internet Abuse Identification and Detection
The participant should be shown how to use specialized software to identify how a
targeted computer has been used on the Internet. This process should focus on
computer forensics issues tied to data that the computer user probably doesn’t re-
alize exists (file slack, unallocated file space, and Windows swap files). Participants
should get hands-on experience in using this unique technology and they should be
given the opportunity to purchase the software for a nominal charge. Nevertheless,
it should be provided free of charge to law enforcement computer crime specialists
who attend the course. Law enforcement agencies are typically underfunded.
The Boot Process and Memory Resident Programs
Participants should be able to see how easy it is to modify the operating system to
capture data and to destroy computer evidence. Such techniques could be used to
covertly capture keyboard activity from corporate executives, government com-
puters, and the like. For this reason, it is important that the participants understand
these potential risks and how to identify them.
Finally, let’s look at computer forensics case study scenarios. These scenarios
will briefly cover planned forensics responses. Additional case studies and projects
may be found at the end of this chapter.
CASE HISTORIES
The following case study illustrates the organizational benefits of a planned foren-
sic response.
Scenario One
An IT manager reviews a detection tool report that indicates a company employee
is accessing restricted Internet sites and downloading objectionable material. After
180
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
181
discovering the activity, the IT manager remotely accesses the employee’s personal
computer to obtain evidence. The employee is then dismissed, based on the evi-
dence located and obtained.
Scenario Two
An IT manager reviews a detection tool report indicating a company employee is
accessing restricted Internet sites and downloading objectionable material. After
discovering this activity, the IT manager follows procedures, reporting his suspi-
cions to the nominated computer incident response contact, in this case the chief
information officer (CIO).
The CIO then invokes the company’s incident response plan by contacting the
incident response team, which includes computer forensics experts. This team iso-
lates the offending machine; conducts a forensic examination of the computer sys-
tem following methodologies known to be acceptable to criminal, civil, and
arbitration courts or tribunals; and establishes where the material came from, how
often, and who else knew about it. By following its effective policies and procedures,
the organization (via the CIO) is in an excellent position to take immediate legal
and decisive action based on all the available facts and evidence.
Which Scenario Works?
Only one of these scenarios illustrates a planned forensic response. In Scenario
One, the evidence was obtained remotely. This fact alone may put the obtained ev-
idence in doubt.
Any court of law would want to know whether there were policies and IT infra-
structure for ensuring the IT staff member knew the correct PC was accessed. Other
issues surround the need for evidence to prove that a particular employee’s PC was
responsible for downloading the objectionable material. Can it be proved that the
objectionable material was viewed on a particular PC? Who else had access to that
PC? It is likely that there is not adequate evidence in this scenario to answer these
questions.
The IT manager detecting activity is only the first step in forming grounds for
suspicion. If action is taken without proper policies, procedures, and processes in
place, it is nothing more than an unplanned knee jerk reaction.
Unplanned reactions potentially expose an organization to risk. Clearly, any in-
vestigation must not only be thorough and methodical, but also staffs need proce-
dures for reporting the activity, conducting the investigation, and appointing
investigators.
Finally, in Scenario Two, the established policies let the organization clearly
identify the incident and carry out appropriate immediate action. This places the or-
ganization in a comfortable position to resolve the situation, contain the potential

damage, and effectively seek compensation or prosecution. The bottom line here is
that without the appropriate procedures in place to counter detected attacks, an or-
ganization is exposed to the risks of lost data, financial loss, network damage, and
loss of reputation.
SUMMARY
Don’t react. Respond. Cyber crime is rapidly increasing and is striking at the heart
of many organizations. By ensuring measures such as effective policies and rapid re-
sponse capabilities, excellent information technology security positioning and
forensic support can exist. Businesses can respond quickly, minimizing the risks of
lost data, financial loss, network damage, and loss of reputation.
Organizations wanting to counter cyber crime need to apply risk management
techniques that allow a speedy response and minimize harm. Although organiza-
tions cannot prevent a cyberattack, they can have a planned response and even
turn e-crime preparedness, or effective security, into a new competitive advantage.
Conclusions
The technological revolution marches on at a frantic pace, providing the world
with an immense availability of resources. The same technological revolution
has also brought forth a new breed of investigative and legal challenges.
Computers are now at the core of people’s activities, and evidence contained in
them is being introduced with greater frequency in both civil and criminal ju-
dicial proceedings. Questions arise regarding location of evidence stored on
digital media, analysis of that evidence, and authentication of that evidence in
court. The field of computer forensics seeks to answer these questions and pro-
vide experts to introduce this digital evidence in court.
Computer forensic services include digital evidence collection, forensic analy-
sis of digital evidence (including analysis of hidden, erased, and password-
protected files), expert witness testimony. and litigation support.
Who can benefit from computer forensic services: attorneys involved in com-
plex litigation that deals with digital evidence; human resource professionals
involved in administrative proceedings such as wrongful termination claims,
sexual harassment, discrimination allegations, and employee violations of
company policies and procedures, where key evidence may reside in emails,
word processing documents, and the like; and company executives who are in-
terested in confidentially auditing their employees’ computer usage concerning
proprietary information, misuse of company resources, and trade secret issues.
182
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
183
Insurance companies are interested in reducing fraudulent claims by using dis-
covered digital evidence.
Documentary evidence has quickly moved from the printed or type-written
page to computer data stored on floppy diskettes, zip disks, CDs, and computer
hard disk drives.
Denial of service attacks have always been difficult to trace as a result of the
spoofed sources.
With the recent increasing trend toward using distributed denial of service at-
tacks, it has become near impossible to identify the true source of an attack.
ISPs need automated methods as well as policies in place to attempt to combat
the hacker’s efforts.
Proactive monitoring and alerting of backbone and client bandwidth with
trending analysis is an approach that can be used to help identify and trace at-
tacks quickly without resource-intensive side effects.
Subsequent detailed analysis could be used to complement the bandwidth
monitoring.
Timely communication between ISPs is essential in incident handling.
Deleted computer files can be recovered.
Even after a hard drive is reformatted or repartitioned, data can be recovered.
In many instances, encrypted files can be decrypted.
Forensic analysis can reveal what Web sites have been visited, what files have
been downloaded, when files were last accessed, when files were deleted, at-
tempts to conceal or destroy evidence, and attempts to fabricate evidence.
The electronic copy of a document can contain text that was removed from the
final printed version.
Some fax machines can contain exact duplicates of the last several hundred
pages received.
Faxes sent or received via computer may remain on the computer indefinitely.
Email is rapidly becoming the communications medium of choice for busi-
nesses. People tend to write things in email that they would never consider
writing in a memorandum or letter. Email has been used successfully in civil
cases as well as criminal cases, and email is often backed up on tapes that are
generally kept for months or years.
Many people keep their financial records, including investments, on computers.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Vender and Forensic Services Types Checklist (as shown in
Table F4.1 in Appendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere
to the provisional list of actions for some of the principle types of vendor and

computer forensics services. The order is not significant; however, these are the ac-
tivities for which the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of
procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of
these systems have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects and optional team case project.
The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Cyber crime occurs when information technology is used to
commit or reveal an offense.
2.
True or False? Forensic investigators detect the extent of a security breach,
recover lost data, determine how an intruder got past security mechanisms,
and, potentially, identify the culprit.
3.
True or False? The best approach for organizations wanting to counter cyber
crime is not to apply risk-management techniques.
4.
True or False? There are without doubt some very good experts in the field of
computer forensics investigations; however, there is a rise in the number of
people purporting to be experts or specialists who produce flawed opinions or
take actions that are just plain wrong.
5.
True or False? The risk any system connected to the Net faces is a product of
vulnerability and threat.
Multiple Choice
1.
Computer crimes include the following, except:
A. Financial information
B.
Sabotage of data and/or networks
C. Theft of proprietary information
D. System penetration from the outside and denial of service
E.
Unauthorized access by insiders and employee misuse of Internet access
privileges
184
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
185
2.
The following are some helpful tips that you can follow to help preserve data
for future computer forensic examination, except:
A. Do not turn on or attempt to examine the suspect computer. This could re-
sult in destruction of evidence.
B.
Identify all devices that may contain evidence.
C. Run all in-house computers.
D. Quarantine all in-house computers.
E.
Forensically image all suspect media.
3.
Each participant in a computer forensics course who successfully completes the
course should receive some sort of a certificate of completion that is suitable for
framing. They should also leave the course with a good understanding of the
following, except:
A. Computer evidence processing
B.
Preservation of evidence
C. Troy  horse programs
D. Computer forensics documentation
E.
File slack
4.
Internal events are committed by those with a substantial link to the intended
victim, for example, a bank employee who siphons electronic funds from a
customer’s account. Other examples include the following, except:
A. Downloading or distributing offensive material
B.
Theft of intellectual property
C. Internal system intrusions
D. Fraud
E.
Unintentional or intentional addition or damage of data or systems
5.
Forensic investigators perform the following, except:
A. Detect the extent of a security breach.
B.
Recover found data.
C. Recover lost data.
D. Determine how an intruder got past security mechanisms.
E.
Potentially, identify the culprit.
Exercise
Following a technical investigation of embezzlement at an insurance company, a CFS
was engaged by the company’s general counsel to perform data sweeping services to
help mitigate digital evidence liabilities. How would the CFS handle this analysis?

HANDS-ON PROJECTS
Data Recovery Services in Action
After two former employees left a high-quality large-format imaging firm to work
for a competitor, the defendants emailed the firm’s customer database to their
home computer in an attempt to steal intellectual property from the firm and pro-
vide it to their new employer. They firmly denied the allegations put forth by the
firm, believing that no one would find out since they had deleted the email and the
attachment containing the customer database from their home computer. How
would the firm’s CFS team go about investigating this case?
Case Projects
A large computer services corporation suspected an employee, who was a foreign
national, of hacking into other classified computer systems based on information
generated by the corporation’s external auditing software program. How would a
CFS team go about investigating this incident?
Optional Team Case Project
After finding pornography downloaded on its network server and a number of in-
dividual office computers, a company began to build a case for employee dismissal.
Explain the company’s solution in detail regarding the organization’s investigation
into this matter.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Computer Forensics: Response Versus Reaction,” Ernst & Young Aus-
tralia, The Ernst & Young Building, 321 Kent Street, Sydney NSW 2000,
Australia (Ernst & Young LLP, 787 Seventh Avenue, New York, New York,
10019), 2001, p.3.
[2]
“2003 Computer Crime and Security Survey,” Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation, J. Edgar Hoover Building, 935 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Wash-
ington, D.C. 20535-0001, 2003.
[3]
Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce: Online Ordering and Digital Money,
Charles River Media, Hingham, MA, 2001.
[3a] Federal Bureau of Investigation, J. Edgar Hoover Building, 935 Pennsylva-
nia Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C. 20535-0001, 2003.
186
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
187
[4] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill Professional, New York,
2001.
[5] Katherine Bursese, “Computer Security Incident Response Procedures: Do
You Need One? You Bet You Do!” Global Computer Operations, General
Electric Company, 2690 Balltown Road, Bldg. 610, Schenectady, NY 12345
(SANS Institute, 5401 Westbard Ave. Suite 1501, Bethesda, MD 20816),
2002.
[6] Vacca, John R., Planning, Designing, and Implementing High-Speed
LAN/WAN with Cisco Technology, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
[7] “Computers,” Rehman Technology Services, Inc., 18950 U.S. Highway
441, #201, Mount Dora, Florida 32757, 2001.
[8] Vacca, John R., Wireless Broadband Networks Handbook, McGraw-Hill
Professional, New York, 2001.
[9] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.

This page intentionally left blank 

T
he second part of this book discusses data recovery, evidence collection and
data seizure, duplication and preservation of digital evidence, and computer
image verification and authentication.
II
Computer Forensics
Evidence and Capture
Part

This page intentionally left blank 

191
Data Recovery
5
C
omputers systems may crash. Files may be accidentally deleted. Disks may
accidentally be reformatted. Computer viruses may corrupt files. Files may
be accidentally overwritten. Disgruntled employees may try to destroy your
files. All of these can lead to the loss of your critical data. You may think it’s lost for-
ever, but you should employ the latest tools and techniques to recover your data.
In many instances, the data cannot be found using the limited software tools
available to most users. The advanced tools should allow us to find your files and
restore them for your use. In those instances where the files have been irreparably
damaged, your computer forensics expertise should allow you to recover even the
smallest remaining fragments.
Data recovery is, of course, of potential interest to anyone who has lost data to
the ravages of time, malice, or carelessness, but in forensic computing or analysis,
it takes on a new meaning—suddenly what other people have thrown away can be-
come an important component in understanding what has happened in the past, as
burglary tools, data files, correspondence, and other clues can be left behind by
interlopers.
This chapter covers the ins and outs of data recovery as it relates to computer
forensics, but before delving into the ins and outs, what is data recovery?
DATA RECOVERY DEFINED
Data recovery is the process in which highly trained engineers evaluate and extract
data from damaged media and return it in an intact format. Many people, even
computer experts, fail to recognize data recovery as an option during a data crisis,

yet it is possible to retrieve files that have been deleted and passwords that have
been forgotten or to recover entire hard drives that have been physically damaged.
As computers are used in more important transactions and storage functions,
and more important data is stored on them, the importance of qualified data re-
covery experts becomes clear. Perhaps your information has been subjected to a
virus attack, suffered damage from smoke or fire, or your drive has been immersed
in water—the data recovery experts can help you. Perhaps your mainframe soft-
ware has malfunctioned or your file allocation tables are damaged—data recovery
experts can help you.
What would happen to the productivity of your organization in the event of a
system-wide data center failure? For most companies, the loss would be cata-
strophic. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of employees would be rendered unpro-
ductive. Sales transactions would be impossible to complete and customer service
would suffer. The cost of replacing this data would be extraordinary—if it could be
replaced at all.
DATA BACKUP AND RECOVERY
You live in a world that is driven by the exchange of information. Ownership of
information is one of the most highly valued assets of any business striving to
compete in today’s global economy. Companies that can provide reliable and
rapid access to their information are now the fastest growing organizations in the
world. To remain competitive and succeed, they must protect their most valuable
asset—data.
Fortunately, there are specialized hardware and software companies that
manufacture products for the centralized backup and recovery of business-
critical data. Hardware manufacturers offer automated tape libraries that can
manage millions of megabytes of backed up information and eliminate the need
for operators charged with mounting tape cartridges. Software companies have
created solutions that can back-up and recover dozens of disparate systems from
a single console.
Why then, do industry experts estimate that over 56% of the data in client/
server networks is still not backed up on a regular basis? It is often due to organi-
zations’ ever-shrinking back-up windows, inadequate network infrastructure, and
a lack of system administration. Compounding the problem is an overall lack of
experience in defining the proper features necessary for a successful; backup appli-
cation. Finally, there is often a shortage of in-house expertise needed to implement
sophisticated, enterprise-level backup applications.
192
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Backup Obstacles
The following are obstacles to backing up applications:
Backup window
Network bandwidth
System throughput
Lack of resources
Backup Window
The backup window is the period of time when backups can be run. The backup
window is generally timed to occur during nonproduction periods when network
bandwidth and CPU utilization are low. However, many organizations now con-
duct operations 7 days a week, 24 hours a day—effectively eliminating traditional
backup windows altogether.
Network Bandwidth
Many companies now have more data to protect than can be transported across ex-
isting local area networks (LANs) and wide area networks (WANs). If a network
cannot handle the impact of transporting hundreds of gigabytes of data over a short
period of time, the organization’s centralized backup strategy is not viable.
System Throughput
Three I/O bottlenecks are commonly found in traditional backup schemes. These are
1. The ability of the system being backed up to push data to the backup server
2. The ability of the backup server to accept data from multiple systems si-
multaneously
3. The available throughput of the tape device(s) onto which the data is
moved [1]
Any or all preceding bottlenecks can render a centralized backup solution unworkable.
Lack of Resources
Many companies fail to make appropriate investments in data protection until it is
too late. Often, information technology (IT) managers choose not to allocate fund-
ing for centralized data protection because of competing demands resulting from
emerging issues such as e-commerce [2], Internet and intranet applications, and
other new technologies.
Data Recovery
193

These are just a few of the impediments that make implementation of an en-
terprise backup and recovery solution a low priority for some organizations. For-
tunately, there have been major advances in hardware and software technologies
that overcome many or all of the traditional obstacles faced by IT professionals as
they attempt to develop a comprehensive data-protection plan. In addition, com-
panies such as StorNet [3] provide specialized expertise in the deployment of com-
plex, integrated storage solutions.
The Future of Data Backup
Successful data backup and recovery is composed of four key elements: the backup
server, the network, the backup window, and the backup storage device (or de-
vices). These components are highly dependent on one another, and the overall sys-
tem can only operate as well as its weakest link. To help define how data backup is
changing to accommodate the issues described earlier, let’s take a look at each ele-
ment of a backup and recovery design and review the improvements being made.
The Backup Server
The backup server is responsible for managing the policies, schedules, media catalogs,
and indexes associated with the systems it is configured to back up. The systems being
backed up are called clients. Traditionally, all managed data that was being backed up
had to be processed through the backup server. Conversely, all data that needed to be
restored had to be accessed through the backup server as well. This meant that the
overall performance of a backup or recovery was directly related to the ability of the
backup server to handle the I/O load created by the backup process.
In the past, the only way to overcome a backup server bottleneck was to in-
vest in larger, more powerful backup servers or data backup and recovery and di-
vide the backup network into smaller, independent groups. Fortunately,
backup-software developers have created methods to work around these bottle-
necks. The most common workaround is to create tape servers that allow admin-
istrators to divide the backup tasks across multiple systems while maintaining
scheduling and administrative processes on a primary or backup server. This ap-
proach often involves attaching multiple tape servers to a shared tape library,
which reduces the overall cost of the system. Figure 5.1 is an example of a backup
configuration such as this [3].
The newest backup architecture implements a serverless backup solution that
allows data to be moved directly from disk to tape, bypassing the backup server
altogether. This method of data backup removes the bottleneck of the backup server
completely. However, the performance of serverless backup is then affected by another
potential bottleneck—bandwidth. Figure 5.2 is an example of a serverless backup [3].
194
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Data Recovery
195
Tape Library
Tape Server
Backup Client
Backup Client
Metadata
Index
Backup Server
Index
FIGURE 5.1 A backup using a shared tape library. (© Copyright
2002, StorNet. All rights reserved.)
Tape Library
Disk Array
Disk Array
Network
Data
FIGURE 5.2 A serverless backup system. (© Copyright 2002, StorNet. All rights reserved.)

The Network Data Path
Centralization of a data-management process such as backup and recovery requires
a robust and available network data path. The movement and management of hun-
dreds or thousands of megabytes of data can put a strain on even the best-designed
networks. Unfortunately, many companies are already struggling with simply man-
aging the existing data traffic created by applications such as e-commerce, the In-
ternet, email, and multimedia document management. Although technology such
as gigabit Ethernet and asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) can provide relief, it is
rarely enough to accommodate management of large amounts of data movement.
If there is not enough bandwidth to move all the data, what are the options?
Again, it was the backup-software vendors who developed a remedy. An enterprise-
class backup solution can distribute backup services directly to the data source, while
at the same time centralizing the administration of these resources. For example, if
there is a 600-gigabyte database server that needs to be backed up nightly, a tape
backup device can be attached directly to that server. This effectively eliminates the
need to move the 600-gigabyte database across the network to a centralized backup
server. This approach is called a LAN-less backup, and it relies on a remote tape
server capability. Figure 5.3 demonstrates how this approach is configured [3].
Another option is the installation of a network path dedicated to the manage-
ment and movement of data. This data path can be SCSI, Ethernet, ATM, fiber dis-
tributed data interface (FDDI), or fibre channel. Creating a dedicated data path is
the beginning of a storage area network (SAN) [4]. SANs are quickly dominating
the backup landscape, and applications such as serverless and LAN-less backup
will continue to push this emerging technology forward. Figure 5.4 shows an ex-
ample of a dedicated SAN topology [3].
196
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
Tape Library
Backup Server
Policy Management
Index Metadata
600GB Database
Backup Clients
Tape Library
FIGURE 5.3 A LAN-less back-up using a remote tape server. (© Copyright 2002, StorNet.
All rights reserved.)

The Backup Window
Of all the parameters that drive the design of a backup application, one remains an
absolute constant, and that is time. A backup window defines how much time is
available to back up the network. Time plays an important role in choosing how
much server, network, and resource support needs to be deployed. Today, most
companies are managing too much data to complete backup during these ever-
shrinking backup windows.
In the past, companies pressured by inadequate backup windows were forced
to add additional backup servers to the mix and divide the backup groups into
smaller and smaller clusters of systems. However, the backup-software community
has once again developed a way to overcome the element of time by using incre-
mental backup, block-level backup, image backups, and data archiving.
Incremental Backup
Incremental backups only transfer data that has changed since the last backup. On
average, no more than 5% of data in a file server changes daily. That means an in-
cremental backup may only require 5% of the time it takes to back up the entire file
system. Even then, a full backup had to be made regularly, or restoration of the data
Data Recovery
197
100BaseT
LAN
Bridge
Server
Server
Server
Server
Server
Library
Server
FC-AL
SAN
FIGURE 5.4
A storage area network using serverless backup. (© Copyright 2002, StorNet. 
All rights reserved.)

would take too long. Fortunately, there are now backup applications that combine
incremental backups, thereby creating a virtual complete backup every night with-
out necessitating a full backup during the limited backup window.
Block-Level Incremental Backup
Block-level incremental backups provide similar benefits as incremental backups,
but with even more efficiency. Rather than backing up entire files that have been
modified since the last backup, only the blocks that have changed since the last
backup are marked for backup. This approach can reduce the amount of incre-
mental data requiring backup nightly by orders of magnitude.
However, this benefit comes at a price. Often the file system of the client must
be from the same vendor as the backup software. Also, there are databases such as
Oracle that allow block-level backups, but the CPU requirements to do so may ren-
der the approach ineffective. Nevertheless, block-level backups may be the only vi-
able option for meeting your backup window.
Image Backups
Image backups are quickly gaining favor among storage administrators. This type
of backup creates copies, or snapshots, of a file system at a particular point in time.
Image backups are much faster than incremental backups and provide the ability to
easily perform a bare bones recovery of a server without loading the operating sys-
tems, applications, and the like. Image backups also provide specific point-in-time
backups that can be done every hour rather than once a day.
Data Archiving
Removing infrequently accessed data from a disk drive can reduce the size of a
scheduled backup by up to 80%. By moving static, infrequently accessed data to
tape, backup applications are able to focus on backing up and recovering only the
most current and critical data. Static data that has been archived is easily recalled
when needed but does not add to the daily data backup requirements of the enter-
prise. This method also provides the additional benefit of freeing up existing disk
space without adding required additional capacity.
Backup Storage Devices
In many cases, the single most expensive item in a backup project is the backup
storage device itself. Therefore, it is important that the technical specifications of
the storage device provide adequate capacity and performance to accommodate ex-
isting and planned data. Determining the tape format, number of tape drives, and
how many slots are required is predicated on many variables. Backup windows,
198
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

growth rates, retention policies, duplicate tape copies, and network and server
throughputs all affect which backup storage device is best for your needs.
Tape libraries are sized using two variables: the number of tape drives and the
number of slots; manufacturers of tape libraries continue to improve each of these
elements. Tape libraries today are available with 5 to 50,000 slots and can support
anywhere from 1 to 256 tape drives. Additionally, there are tape libraries available
that support multiple tape formats.
When designing a centralized data backup, take particular care selecting the
right backup storage device. Make sure it can easily scale as your data rates in-
crease. Verify that the shelf life of the media meets your long-term storage needs.
Calculate the required throughput to meet your backup window and make sure you
can support enough tape drives to meet this window.
Recommended Backup Features
Today’s global economy means that applications such as email, relational data-
bases, e-commerce, and enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems must be ac-
cessible and online 24 hours a day. Therefore, these applications cannot be shut
down to perform administrative tasks such as backup. A backup vendor should
provide agents for the most common database and email applications that allow
these databases to be backed up without shutting down applications.
Data Interleaving
To back up multiple systems concurrently, the backup application must be able to
write data from multiple clients to tape in an interleaved manner. Otherwise, the
clients must be backed up sequentially, which takes much longer.
Remote Backup
Many remote systems are exposed to unrecoverable data loss. Off-site locations are
often not backed up at all because of the cost of deploying hardware and software
remotely and the lack of administrative support in these remote locations. Laptop
computers are especially vulnerable to data loss. A backup application should have
a method to back up systems across a WAN or over dial-up connections.
Global Monitoring
Companies are deploying applications that can be managed and monitored from
any location in the enterprise. Backup applications also need to be able to be ac-
cessed and administered from multiple locations. A robust backup application
should be able to support reporting and administration of any backup system, re-
gardless of location.
Data Recovery
199

Performance
An enterprise backup application should be able to benchmark backup data rates
exceeding one terabyte per hour. These benchmarks show that backup perfor-
mance is limited to the hardware and network and not to the application itself.
Now, let’s explore some of the issues concerning the role of backup in data re-
covery and some of the technologies that are available today. Then, let’s take a look
at what is still missing in the race to address fast recovery of these exponentially
growing data repositories.
THE ROLE OF BACKUP IN DATA RECOVERY
Many factors affect back-up:
Storage costs are decreasing.
Systems have to be online continuously.
The role of backup has changed.
Storage Costs Are Decreasing
The cost per megabyte of primary (online) storage has fallen dramatically over the
past several years and continues to do so as disk drive technologies advance. This
has a huge impact on backup. As users become accustomed to having immediate
access to more and more information online, the time required to restore data
from secondary media is found to be unacceptable.
Systems Have to Be Online Continuously
Seven/twenty-four (7 × 24) operations have become the norm in many of today’s
businesses. The amount of data that has to be kept online and available (opera-
tionally ready data) is very large and constantly increasing. Higher and higher lev-
els of fault tolerance for the primary data repository is a growing requirement.
Because systems must be continuously online, the dilemma becomes that you can
no longer take files offline long enough to perform backup.
The Role of Backup Has Changed
It’s no longer just about restoring data. Operationally, ready or mirrored data does
not guard against data corruption and user error. The role of backup now includes
the responsibility for recovering user errors and ensuring that good data has been
saved and can quickly be restored.
200
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Conventional Tape Backup in Today’s Market
Current solutions offered by storage vendors and by backup vendors focus on net-
work backup solutions. To effectively accomplish backup in today’s environment,
tape management software is generally bundled with several other components to
provide a total backup solution. A typical tape management system consists of a
dedicated workstation with the front-end interfaced to the network and the back-
end controlling a repository of tape devices. The media server runs tape manage-
ment software. It can administer backup devices throughout an enterprise and can
run continuous parallel backups and restores.
An alternative to tape backup is to physically replicate or mirror all data and
keep two copies online at all times. Because the cost of primary storage is falling,
this as not as cost-prohibitive as it once was. The advantage is that the data does not
have to be restored, so there are no issues with immediate data availability. There
are, however, several drawbacks to all the backup and data availability solutions on
the market today.
Issues with Today’s Backup
Network backup creates network performance problems. Using the production
network to carry backup data, as well as for normal user data access, can severely
overburden today’s busy network resources. This problem can be minimized by in-
stalling a separate network exclusively for backups, but even dedicated backup net-
works may become performance bottlenecks.
Offline backup affects data accessibility. Host processors must be quiescent
during the backup. Backup is not host-independent, nor is it nondisruptive to nor-
mal data access. Therefore, the time that the host is offline for data backup must be
minimized. This requires extremely high-speed, continuous parallel backup of the
raw image of the data. Even in doing this, you have only deferred the real problem,
which is the time needed to restore the information. Restoration of data needs to
occur at the file level, not the full raw image, so the most critical information can
be brought back into operation first.
Live backups allow data access during the backup process but affect performance.
Many database vendors offer live backup features. The downside to the live backup is
that it puts a tremendous burden on the host. Redirection lives on the host, and jour-
naling has to occur on the host. This requires consideration of local storage, host CPU
cycles, and host operating system dependencies. Up to 50% of all host CPU cycles
may be consumed during the backup process, severely impacting performance.
Mirroring doesn’t protect against user error and replication of bad data. Fully
replicated online data sounds great, albeit at twice the cost per megabyte of a single
copy of online data. However, synchronizing, breaking, and resynchronizing mirrors
is not a trivial process and influences data access speeds while they are occurring. Also,
Data Recovery
201

duplicating data after a user has deleted a critical file or making a mirrored copy of a
file that has been corrupted by a host process doesn’t help. Mirroring has its place in
backup and recovery but cannot solve the problem by itself.
New Architectures and Techniques Are Required
Backup at extremely high speed, with host-processor independence of the underly-
ing file structures supporting the data, is required. Recovery must be available at the
file level. The time that systems are offline for back-up must be eliminated.
Mirroring, or live data replication for hot recovery also has a role. For data that
must be always available, highly fault-tolerant primary storage is not enough, nor
is a time-consuming backup/restore. Remote hot recovery sites are needed for im-
mediate resumption of data access. Backup of critical data is still required to ensure
against data errors and user errors. Backup and mirroring are complementary, not
competing technologies.
To achieve effective backup and recovery, the decoupling of data from its stor-
age space is needed. Just as programs must be decoupled from the memory in
which they’re executed, the stored information itself must be made independent of
the storage area it occupies.
It is necessary to develop techniques to journal modified pages, so that jour-
naling can be invoked within the primary storage device, without host intervention.
Two separate pipes for file access must be created: one pipe active and the other dy-
namic. The primary storage device must employ memory-mapping techniques that
enable the tracking of all modified information. Two copies of each change must be
kept, with a thread composed of all old data stored in the journaled file.
Part of the primary storage area must be set aside for data to be backed up. This
area must be as large as the largest backup block (file, logical volume, etc.). The
point-in-time snapshot of changed data will be used for backup, while the file itself
remains in normal operation without impacting user access to data. To minimize
this reserve storage area for backups, the storage device must support the reuse of
this area by dynamically remapping.
Mechanisms must be put in place to allow for the backup of data to occur di-
rectly from the primary storage area to the backup area without host intervention.
Host CPU bottlenecks and network bottlenecks are then eliminated. The net result
will be faster user response times during live backup, normal network performance
levels throughout the process, and no backup downtime.
What about restore times? Fast, nonrandom restoration of critical data assumes
that the user can select at the file level exactly which information comes back online
first. Here again, the primary storage and its backup software must offload that bur-
den from the host and take on the responsibility for understanding the underlying
file structures of multiple heterogeneous hosts. The necessary indexing of file struc-
tures can be done in the background subsequent to a high-speed backup. Then, at
202
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the time of restore, the indices are accessible to allow selection at the file level for the
recovery of the information from the backup device.
How achievable is this scenario? Many backup tools are available today. What
has been missing are architectures that can support journaling within the primary
storage area, to enable direct, live backup with high-speed file-level restores. A few
storage vendors, mostly in the mainframe arena, provide some of these types of so-
lutions. Thanks to this kind of progress on the part of storage vendors and their
back-up partners, techniques to address continuous operations and fast data re-
covery in today’s 7 × 24 business environment are now becoming both more cost-
effective and more widely available.
THE DATA-RECOVERY SOLUTION
Availability once meant that an application would be available during the week,
from 9 to 5, regardless of whether customers needed anything. Batch processing
took over the evenings and nights, and most people didn’t care because they were
at home asleep or out having fun. But the world has changed. It’s now common to
offer extended service hours in which a customer can call for help with a bill, in-
quiry, or complaint. Even if a live human being isn’t available to help, many enter-
prise applications are Web-enabled so that customers can access their accounts in
the middle of the night while sitting at home in their pajamas.
Shrinking Expertise, Growing Complexity
Increased availability is good, except for one fact: many systems programmers,
database administrators (DBAs), and other mainframe experts are maturing. It
takes a lot of care and feeding to keep applications ready for work, and the people
who have maintained these environments for so long have other things they want
to do. Many are starting to shift their sights toward that retirement community in
Florida that they’ve heard so much about. Most of the bright youngsters who are
graduating from college this term haven’t had much exposure to mainframe con-
cepts in their course work, much less any meaningful grasp of the day-to-day re-
quirements for keeping mainframe systems running.
The complex systems that have evolved over the past 30 years must be moni-
tored, managed, controlled, and optimized. Batch windows are shrinking down to
almost nothing. Backups often take place while an application is running. Applica-
tion changes take place on the fly, under the watchful eye of the change-control po-
lice. If an outage occurs, the company stands to lose tens of thousands of dollars an
hour. In today’s gloomy economy, stockholders don’t want to hear that their fa-
vorite investment is having system availability problems.
Data Recovery
203

Failures
Certainly, hardware failures were once more common than they are today. Disk
storage is more reliable than ever, but failures are still possible. More likely to occur,
though, is a simple mistake made by an application programmer, system program-
mer, or operations person. Logic errors in programs or application of the wrong
update at the wrong time can result in a system crash or, worse, an undetected error
in the database—undetected, that is, until minutes, hours, or days later when a cus-
tomer calls, a reconciliation fails, or some other checking mechanism points out the
integrity exposure.
Finally, disasters do sometimes strike, and most often they occur without warn-
ing. Flooding doesn’t always occur when it’s convenient; tornadoes never do. Hur-
ricanes and earthquakes are big-ticket events that ruin everyone’s day. When they
strike your data center, wipe out your processing power, or even destroy your
basement-level backup power supply, you have a lot of recovering to do.
Budgets and Downtime
Does anyone need a reminder that budgets are tight? You have fewer resources
(people, processing power, time, and money) to do more work than ever before,
and you must keep your expenses under control. Shrinking expertise and growing
complexity cry out for tools to make systems management more manageable, but
the tools that can save resources (by making the most of the ones you have) also
cost you resources to obtain, implement, and operate.
Businesses today simply cannot tolerate availability problems, no matter what
the source of the problem. Systems must remain available to make money and
serve customers. Downtime is much too expensive to be tolerated. You must bal-
ance your data management budget against the cost of downtime.
Recovery: Think Before You Back Up
One of the most critical data-management tasks involves recovering data in the
event of a problem. For this reason, installations around the world spend many
hours each week preparing their environments for the possibility of having to re-
cover. These preparations include backing up data, accumulating changes, and
keeping track of all the needed resources. You must evaluate your preparations,
make sure that all resources are available in usable condition, automate processes
as much as possible, and make sure you have the right kind of resources.
Evaluate Your Preparations
Often the procedures that organizations use to prepare for recovery were designed
many years ago. They may or may not have had care and feeding through the years
204
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

to ensure that preparations are still sufficient to allow for recovery in the manner
required today.
Here is a simple example: say an organization has always taken weekly image
copies on the weekend and has performed change accumulations at mid-week. Will
this approach continue to satisfy their recovery requirements? Perhaps. If all of the
resources (image copies, change accumulations, and logs) are available at recovery
time, these preparations certainly allow for a standard recovery. However, if hun-
dreds of logs must be applied, the time required for the recovery may be many
hours—often unacceptable when the cost of downtime is taken into account.
This example illustrates the principle that, although your recovery strategy was
certainly adequate when it was designed, it may be dangerously obsolete given
today’s requirements for increased availability. What if a required resource is dam-
aged or missing? How will you find out? When will you find out? Finding out at re-
covery time that some critical resource is missing can be disastrous!
Don’t Let Your Resources Fall Through the Cracks
The previous example was unrealistically simplistic. Many organizations use com-
binations of batch and online image copies of various groups of databases, as well
as change accumulations, all staggered throughout the week. In a complex envi-
ronment, how do you check to make sure that every database is being backed up?
How do you find out whether you are taking image copies (either batch or online)
as frequently as you planned? How do you determine whether your change accu-
mulations are taken as often as you wanted? What if media errors occur? Identify-
ing these types of conditions is critical to ensuring a successful recovery.
Automated Recovery
Having people with the required expertise to perform recoveries is a major consid-
eration, particularly in disaster situations. For example, if the only person who un-
derstands your IBM Information Management System (IMS) systems (hierarchical
database system) and can recover them moved far away, you’re in trouble. How-
ever, if your recovery processes are planned and automated so that less-experienced
personnel can aid in or manage the recovery process, then you’re able to maximize
all your resources and reduce the risk to your business.
Automation takes some of the human error factor and “think time” out of the
recovery equation and makes the complexity of the environment less of a concern.
Creating an automated and easy-to-use system requires the right tools and some
planning for the inevitable, but compared to the possible loss of the entire business,
it is worth the investment. With proper planning and automation, recovery is made
possible, reliance on specific personnel is reduced, and the human-error factor is
nearly eliminated.
Data Recovery
205

Creating the recovery job control language (JCL) for your IMS systems is not
as simple as modifying existing JCL to change the appropriate names. In the event
of a disaster, the IMS recovery control (RECON) data sets must be modified in
preparation for the recovery. RECON backups are usually taken while IMS is up,
which leaves the RECONs in need of many clean-up activities before they can be
used to perform a recovery: deleting online log data sets (OLDS), closing logistics
supportability (LOGS), deleting subsystems (SUBSYS) records, and so on. This
process often takes hours to perform manually, with the system down, equating to
lost money. Planning for RECON clean-up is an important but often-overlooked
step of the preparation process; discovering a deficiency in this area at disaster-
recovery time is too late.
Make Recoveries Efficient
Planning for efficient recoveries is also critical. Multithreading tasks shorten the re-
covery process. Recovering multiple databases with one pass through your log data
certainly will save time. Taking image copies, rebuilding indexes, and validating
pointers concurrently with the recovery process further reduce downtime. Where
downtime is costly, time saved is money in the bank. Any measures you can take to
perform recovery and related tasks more quickly and efficiently allow your business
to resume faster and save money.
Take Backups
After you’ve thought about and planned for your recoveries, it’s time to think about
executing your plan. Clearly the first step to a successful recovery is the backup of
your data. Your goal in backing up data is to do so quickly, efficiently, and usually
with minimal impact to your customers. If you have a large window where systems
aren’t available, standard image copies are your best option. These clean copies are
good recovery points and are easy to manage. If, however, you need to take back-
ups while systems are active, you may need some help. You can take advantage of
recent technological changes in various ways. You might need only very brief out-
ages to take instant copies of your data, or you might have intelligent storage de-
vices that allow you to take a snapshot of your data. Both methods call for tools to
assist in the management of resources.
HIDING AND RECOVERING HIDDEN DATA
It is common knowledge that what is deleted from the computer can sometimes be
brought back. Recent analysis of security implications of “alternative datastreams”
on Windows NT has shown that Windows NTFS filesystem allows data hiding in
206
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

alternative datastreams connected to files. These datastreams are not destroyed by
many file wiping utilities that promise irrecoverable removal of information. Wip-
ing the file means “securely” deleting it from disk (unlike the usual removal of file
entries from directories), so that file restoration becomes extremely expensive or
impossible [5].
For example, Linux has no alternative data streams, but files removed using
/bin/rm still remain on the disk. Most Linux systems use the ext2 filesystem (or its
journaling version, ext3 by Red Hat). A casual look at the design of the ext2 filesys-
tem shows several places where data can be hidden [5].
Let’s start with the classic method to hide material on UNIX filesystems (not
even ext2 specific). Run a process that keeps the file open and then remove the file.
The file contents are still on disk and the space will not be reclaimed by other pro-
grams [5].
If an executable erases itself, its contents can be retrieved from /proc memory
image: command “cp /proc/$PID/exe /tmp/file” creates a copy of a file in /tmp.
If the file is removed by /bin/rm, its content still remains on disk, unless over-
written by other files. Several Linux unerase utilities including e2undel attempt
automated recovery of files. They are based on Linux Ext2fs Undeletion mini-
HOWTO that provides a nice guide to file recovery from Linux partitions. Recov-
ery can also be performed manually using debugfs Linux utility (as described in the
preceding HOWTO) [5].
Overall, if recovery is attempted shortly after file removal and the partition is
promptly unmounted, chances of complete recovery are high. If the system was
heavily used, the probability of successful data undeletion significantly decreases.
However, if you are to look at the problem from the forensics point of view, the
chances of recovering something (such as a small part of the illegal image for the
prosecution) is still very high. It was reported that sometimes parts of files from
several years ago are found by forensic examiners [5].
Thus, files can be hidden in free space. If many copies of the same file are saved
and then erased, the chance of getting the contents back becomes higher using the
preceding recovery methods. However, due to the intricacies of ext2 filesystem, the
process can only be reliably automated for small files [5].
A more detailed look at ext2 internals reveals the existence of slack space.
Filesystem uses addressable parts of disks called blocks, which have the same size.
Ext2 filesystems typically use 1-, 2-, or 4-KB blocks. If a file is smaller than the block
size, the remaining space is wasted. It is called slack space. This problem long
plagued early Windows 9x users with FAT16 filesystems, which had to use block
sizes of up to 32 K, thus wasting a huge amount of space if storing small files [5].
Data Recovery
207

On a 4-gigabyte Linux partition, the block size is typically 4 K (chosen auto-
matically when the mke2fs utility is run to create a filesystem). Thus, one can
reliably hide up to 4 KB of data per file if using a small file. The data will be invul-
nerable to disk usage, invisible from the filesystem, and, more exciting for some
people, undetectable by file integrity checkers using file checksumming algorithms
and MAC times. Ext2 floppy (with a block size of 1 KB) allows hiding data as well,
albeit in smaller chunks [5].
The obscure tool bmap exists to jam data in slack space, take it out and also
wipe the slack space, if needed. Some of the examples follow [5]:
# echo "evil data is here" | bmap —mode putslack /etc/passwd
puts the data in slack space produced by, /etc/passwd file
# bmap —mode slack /etc/passwd
getting from block 887048
file size was: 9428
slack size: 2860
block size: 4096
evil data is here
shows the data
# bmap —mode wipeslack /etc/passwd
cleans the slack space.
Data can be hidden in slack space to store secrets, plant evidence (forensics
software will find it, but the suspect probably will not), and maybe hide tools from
integrity checkers (if automated splitting of the larger file into slack-sized chunks is
implemented). Now let’s turn to discovering what is out there on the vast expanses
of the disk drive. If looking for strings of text, a simple “strings /dev/hdaX | grep
'string we need'” will confirm the presence of string on the partition (the process
will  take a long time). Using a hex editor on the raw partition can sometimes shed
some light on the disk contents, but the process is extremely messy. Thus, further
analysis puts us firmly in the field of computer forensics [5].
Next, let’s briefly review how to prevent adversaries from finding private data.
Several Linux file cleansing utilities exist. All but one can only be used to wipe files,
rather than empty disk space. Some use the multiple random passes and some sim-
ply overwrite the file with zeros once. Some do not work under certain circum-
stances or for specific filesystems. As reported in shred man page, “shred relies on a
very important assumption: that the filesystem overwrites data in place.” If this con-
dition is not met, no secure deletion will be performed (with no error message) [5].
208
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

To eliminate the traces of old removed files, one might want to wipe the empty
space. The simple method is to use a standard Linux “dd” utility. To wipe the empty
space on the /home partition use
1. dd if=/dev/zero of=/home/bigfile
2. sync
3. rm /home/bigfile
4. sync [5]
The commands will zero out the empty space on the partition. Doing the same for
the /tmp partition might cause some applications to crash, so one must be cautious [5].
Swap space can also contain pieces of private data and should be wiped as well if
additional security is desired.
The important fact is that when empty space is wiped, slack space for all files re-
mains intact. If a file is wiped (at least using the current version of GNU shred), the
associated slack space is NOT wiped with it [5].
This section briefly touched upon hiding, finding, and destroying data on
Linux filesystems. It should become clear that the area of computer forensics aimed
at recovering the evidence from captured disk drives has many challenges, requir-
ing knowledge of hardware, operating systems, and application software [5].
Finally, let’s look at some disk and tape data-recovery case studies. Additional
case studies are found at the end of this chapter.
CASE HISTORIES
If there is any data, anywhere on your disk or tape, it can be recovered. Let’s take a
look at some of the more interesting disk-recovery case studies.
A Dog’s Dinner
Late one afternoon, customer service received a phone call from a distraught cus-
tomer who required data recovery from a couple of diskettes. The data was related to
an important presentation. The customer was asked the nature of the problem and
eventually confessed that the diskettes had suffered some physical damage. The prob-
lem involved one of his four-legged canine friends who had chewed the diskettes.
The damage to the disk cases was severe, with large tooth marks evident on the
surface of the disks. Eventually both disks were imaged with only 15% sector
Data Recovery
209

damage, and the file allocation tables (FATs) were rebuilt. All the files were suc-
cessfully recovered and restored to the grateful customer.
Credit Card Monster
The customer was a well-known credit card company whose last few hours’ trans-
actions, for which there was no backup, were stored on a failed system. This was a
NetWare Server and RAID array in one large, very heavy metal box, containing 18
× 2.5–gigabyte wide SCSI drives and weighing nearly 200 kg.
There were three failed drives amongst the remaining batch of eight drives. One
of the drives had suffered component failure on its electronics assembly; the other
two had serious head/disk assembly (HDA) problems that needed work in a clean-
room. Using a database of drive components and technical knowledge, the system
administrator worked to correct the faults on the drives so he could take images.
When he finally finished, all 18 drives had been imaged, with a total sector loss
of just 7 bad sectors. The total good sectors imaged that night was just under 88
million! The customer’s valuable data was safe.
Flying Low
Having flown numerous times on business without a problem, one customer was sur-
prised to find that his Toshiba laptop wouldn’t boot. On contact with the system ad-
ministrator, he finally mentioned that it had traveled in the cargo hold of a plane. The
system administrator had a nagging suspicion that it had probably not only been
thrown around by the baggage handlers, but also bounced its way down the carousel.
Luckily for him, it had not been swipe-damaged by x-ray equipment at the air-
port. Hardware specialists opened the head disk assembly and found there was
some speckle damage, confirming that it had been bounced around, as the heads
had dented the actual platters. Following a successful headstack swap, the drive was
imaged and the system administrator found 112 bad sectors, of which he was finally
able to read only 86. The customer vowed always to take his laptop as carry-on lug-
gage from then on.
Accounts Critical
It was Easter Saturday and the system administrator had a critical tape data loss that
another data-recovery company had failed to rectify. Within about four hours of
receiving the first tape, the system administrator had several hundred megabytes of
data from it. The tape was poorly recorded and had many areas where the record-
ing had broken up.
The customer had a set of about 35 tapes in this condition, which the system
administrator also needed to look at. By 6 A.M. on Sunday, the system administra-
210
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

tor was recovering data from seven DAT tapes and had extracted images of each of
the disks in the RAID. A few hours later, most of the physical data had been recov-
ered. The areas of missing data were being reprocessed to attempt to extract addi-
tional data from the tapes. However, the data of major importance was from the
accounts system. About 48 hours later, the system administrator was still working
on reading data from the damaged areas of the tapes. By the end of the following
week, all the data had been successfully recovered—no mean feat considering the
huge amount of data involved.
Sinking Ship
A seismic survey ship far away in a distant sea sent a system administrator an IBM
3590 tape. It contained the results of a number of geological surveys as part of a
search for oil, but also contained a media flaw right at the start. If the data could not
be recovered, they would have to send the ship back out to sea to repeat the tests—
a rather costly operation.
At the time, the IBM 3590 drive was one of the fastest tape drives around. The
40 kg monster is capable of storing 10 gigabyte of uncompressed data on a single
cartridge and transferring that data at up to 9 MB per second. At the heart of this
mechanism is a read-write-head that records 16 data tracks at a time.
Gaining control of these various systems, finding the undamaged data on the
tape, and then persuading the drive to read it was complex. However, after much
perseverance, all the important data was safely on one of the systems, and the sys-
tem administrator could call for a courier to take the data back to Singapore.
All Flooded Out
A business continuity firm had a customer with a big problem. A firm of automo-
tive engineers had archived their important drawings and documents in a locked
fireproof safe in their basement. Sadly, a flood had filled the basement with water
and fine silt, and the engineers found that their archives and backups were soaked
through and the media was coated inside and out with a thin layer of sediment.
In total, over 40 tape and optical cartridges of various formats had been af-
fected, and some of the tapes had started to dry while still in the safe. Each tape was
extracted from its cartridge and installed in a special cleaning rig that removed any
sediment. Once clean, the tape was then placed in a brand new cartridge assembly
so that the data could be read. After a few hours, the system administrator was able
to return the recovered files and folders on a total of 26 CD-ROMs; the engineers
were grateful for the return of their archives.
Data Recovery
211

A Concluding Case Study Example
As an almost real-life example, XYZ Corporation is an IMS shop with headquarters
in Houston, Texas. Tropical Storm Allison visits the Texas Gulf coast and dumps
three feet of rain on the city. XYZ, with its state-of-the-art data center located in the
heart of the city, takes on a basement full of water. Their uninterruptible power
supply (UPS) system, network switches, and a portion of their direct access storage
devices (DASDs) are wiped out.
Preparations
Being good corporate citizens and experienced users of the biennial reporting system
(BRS), XYZ is in great condition to recover. They take weekly image copies, creating
dual copies concurrently so the second copy can be sent off-site. They run nightly
change accumulations to consolidate their updates and send secondary certification
authorities (CAs) off-site each morning at 6 A.M. Copies of logs are dispatched to off-
site storage at 6 P.M. Recovery Advisor jobs are scheduled to make sure that image
copies and change accumulations are performed at the specified intervals. They run
the Check Assets function regularly to ensure that required assets are cataloged. Reg-
ular disaster-recovery drills let them practice, so their people know what to do.
Proof
Finally, when disaster strikes, XYZ springs into action, and the validity of their
preparations is proved. They call their local disaster-recovery (DR) service
provider, arrange for shipment of their tapes, and rush to the hot site. They initial
program load (IPL) their system and bring up the Recovery Manager interface.
They use the RECON cleanup utility to prepare the IMS RECONs for restart. They
build the appropriate groups for their lost databases and build appropriate recov-
ery JCL. The recovery utility runs, calling in the appropriate image copy, change ac-
cumulation, and log data. Their data is restored without errors, their business
resumes quickly, and everyone lives happily ever after, all with minimal expense
and elapsed time.
SUMMARY
With ever-larger information sets being kept on-line, how quickly can data be re-
stored and brought back into production? It is in addressing this requirement that
the demand has arisen for new and more sophisticated data management and data-
recovery techniques.
Backup has never really been the problem. A variety of backup tools (both
hardware and software) have been available for a number of years. Although data
212
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

backups would seem to offer an effective shield against these threats, backups do
not always provide comprehensive data protection. That is because the data backup
plans developed by many companies are not fully realized or, worse yet, not fol-
lowed. What is more, individuals often fail to test the restore capabilities of their
backup media. If the backups are faulty, a simple data loss can quickly become a
data disaster. Finally, even if backups are successful, they only contain data col-
lected during the most recent backup session. As a result, a data loss can potentially
rob you of your most current data, despite your backup attempts.
Conclusions
Data backup and recovery has become the “killer application” of storage area
networking.
The ability to move data directly from disk to tape at 400 MB/second will offer
performance levels that are unprecedented by today’s standards.
SAN-based backup offers benefits such as higher availability, increased flexi-
bility, improved reliability, lower cost, manageability, improved performance,
and increased scalability.
IT professionals face a number of challenges in today’s marketplace. Whether
your business is retail, health care, banking, manufacturing, public utility, gov-
ernment agency, or almost any other endeavor, one thing is common: your
users expect more and more from your systems.
Computer systems have grown to manage much of the business world. How
does this growth affect your daily management of the data? What challenges do
you face? If a problem occurs, how do you get your applications back to nor-
mal in the most efficient manner possible?
Some files (especially on Linux systems) can and should be recovered with very
little effort or time. While it can take a great deal of time to actually recover
something, wizardly skill is not really required.
Ultimately, your odds of getting anything useful from the grave (dead storage)
is often a question of personal diligence—how much is it worth to you? If it’s
important enough, it’s quite possibly there.
The persistence of data, however, is remarkable. Contrary to the popular belief
that it’s hard to recover information, it’s actually starting to appear that it’s very
hard to remove something even if you want to.
Indeed, when testing forensic software on a disk that had been used for some
time on a Windows 2000, XP or 2003 machine, then reinstalled to be a firewall
using Solaris, and finally converted to be a Linux system, files and data from the
prior two installations are clearly visible. Now that’s data persistence.
Data Recovery
213

Forensic data is everywhere on computers. You need to continue the examina-
tion, for you have simply scratched the surface.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Data Recovery Checklist (Table F5.1 in Appendix F), the
computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional list of actions
for data recovery. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for
which the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures,
review, and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems
have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Data recovery is the process by which mediocre trained engineers
evaluate and extract data from damaged media and return it in an intact format.
2.
True or False? Fortunately, there are very few specialized hardware and soft-
ware companies that manufacture products for the centralized backup and
recovery of business-critical data.
3.
True or False? Operationally, ready, or mirrored data does guard against data
corruption and user error.
4.
True or False? One of the most critical data-management tasks involves recov-
ering data in the event of a solution.
5.
True or False? Wiping the file means “securely” adding it from disk (unlike the
usual removal of file entries from directories), so that file restoration becomes
extremely expensive or impossible.
Multiple Choice
1.
The following are obstacles to backing up applications, except:
A. Backup window
B.
Network bandwidth
C. Wireless bandwidth
214
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

D. System throughput
E.
Lack of resources
2.
There are three I/O bottlenecks commonly found in traditional backup schemes,
except for two:
A. The ability of the system being backed up to push data to the backup server
B.
The ability of the backup server to not accept data from multiple systems
simultaneously
C. The ability of the backup server to accept data from multiple systems si-
multaneously
D. The available throughput of the tape device(s) onto which the data is moved
E.
The available throughput of the tape device(s) onto which the data is stable
3.
Below, are three of many factors that affect backup, except:
A. Storage costs are increasing.
B.
Systems have to be online continuously.
C. The role of backup has changed.
D. Storage costs are decreasing.
E.
The role of backup has not changed.
4.
Successful data backup and recovery is composed of four key elements, except:
A. The backup server
B.
The hardware
C. The network
D. The backup window
E.
The backup storage device (or devices)
5.
Unfortunately, many companies are already struggling with simply managing
the existing data traffic created by applications such as the following, except one:
A. E-commerce
B.
Internet
C. Email
D. Snail mail
E.
Multimedia document management.
Exercise
A local lumber company went up in flames in late September. The fire safe where
they kept their backups had been left open that night after closing. How would the
CFS handle this problem?
Data Recovery
215

HANDS-ON PROJECTS
After being sued for negligence, a corporation was about to settle a multimillion
dollar suit and rewrite their entire software package because the plaintiff was charg-
ing that installation of the software in question had permanently damaged or erased
existing files, the irreplaceable data was not recoverable by any means, and he could
not access files in a specific software application critical to running his business.
How would the firm’s CFS team (CFST) go about investigating this case?
Case Project
Five fire-damaged UNIX server drives were literally shoveled out of the debris from
a large auto dealership fire. The (plastic-material) backup tapes had been co-located
with the server drives and were themselves destroyed. All financial data (inventory,
accounts payable and receivable, W-2s, customers and loan information) was de-
stroyed. How would a CFST go about investigating this incident?
Optional Team Case Project
In a breach of contract case, it was decided on a Friday to use the CFST to recover
company emails. The attorney immediately needed all of the plaintiff company’s
emails and attachments over a six-month time frame meeting keyword and time
and date criteria. Over 1,091,000 emails met the criteria. Emails and the system
were password protected and the passwords were not available. Explain the CFST’s
solution in detail regarding the organization’s investigation into this matter.
REFERENCES
[1] Gamradt, Derek, “Data Backup + Recovery,” StorNet, Corporate Head-
quarters, 7074 South Revere Parkway, Englewood, CO 80112, 2001. 
[2] Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce: Online Ordering and Digital Money,
Charles River Media, Hingham, MA, 2001.
[3] StorNet, Corporate Headquarters, 7074 South Revere Parkway, Engle-
wood, CO 80112, 2001.
[4] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[5] Chuvakin, Anton, “Linux Data Hiding and Recovery” (© 2000–2004 Anton
Chuvakin), Edison, NJ/Long Island, NY.
216
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

217
Evidence Collection and
Data Seizure
6
E
vidence is difficult to collect at the best of times, but when that evidence is
electronic, an investigator faces some extra complexities. Electronic evidence
has none of the permanence that conventional evidence has, and it is even
more difficult to form into a coherent argument. The purpose of this chapter is to
point out these difficulties and describe what must be done to overcome them. Not
everything is covered here. It should be used as a guide only, and you should seek
further information for your specific circumstances.
No legal advice is given here—different regions have different legislation. If in
doubt, always ask your lawyer—that’s what they’re there for.
This part of the chapter is not aimed at expert forensics analysts, as most of this
would be obvious to them. Nor is it to be seen as the correct answer to all investi-
gations on a computer system. The simple reason for this is that there never is one
correct answer that will guide you through all investigations. No two investigations
are the same, and the only thing you can ever be sure about when arriving at the
scene is that there is nothing you can be sure about.
WHY COLLECT EVIDENCE?
Electronic evidence can be very expensive to collect. The processes are strict and
exhaustive, the systems affected may be unavailable for regular use for a long period of
time, and analysis of the data collected must be performed. So, why bother collecting

the evidence in the first place? There are two simple reasons: future prevention and
responsibility.
Future Prevention
Without knowing what happened, you have no hope of ever being able to stop
someone else (or even the original attacker) from doing it again. It would be anal-
ogous to not fixing the lock on your door after someone broke in. Even though the
cost of collection can be high, the cost of repeatedly recovering from compromises
is much higher, both in monetary and corporate image terms.
Responsibility
There are two responsible parties after an attack: the attacker and the victim. The
attacker is responsible for the damage done, and the only way to bring him to jus-
tice (and to seek recompense) is with adequate evidence to prove his actions.
The victim, on the other hand, has a responsibility to the community. Infor-
mation gathered after a compromise can be examined and used by others to pre-
vent further attacks. The victim may also have a legal obligation to perform an
analysis of evidence collected, for instance if the attack on their system was part of
a larger attack.
COLLECTION OPTIONS
Once a compromise has been detected, you have two options: pull the system off
the network and begin collecting evidence or leave it online and attempt to moni-
tor the intruder. Both have their pros and cons. In the case of monitoring, you may
accidentally alert the intruder while monitoring and cause him to wipe his tracks
any way necessary, destroying evidence as he goes. You also leave yourself open to
possible liability issues if the attacker launches further attacks at other systems from
your own network system. If you disconnect the system from the network, you may
find that you have insufficient evidence or, worse, that the attacker left a dead man
switch that destroys any evidence once the system detects that it’s offline. What you
choose to do should be based on the situation. The “Collection and Archiving” sec-
tion later in the chapter contains information on what to do for either case.
OBSTACLES
Electronic crime is difficult to investigate and prosecute. Investigators have to build
their case purely on any records left after the transactions have been completed.
218
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Add to this the fact that electronic records are extremely (and sometimes transpar-
ently) malleable and that electronic transactions currently have fewer limitations
than their paper-based counterparts and you get a collection nightmare.
Computer transactions are fast, they can be conducted from anywhere (through
anywhere, to anywhere), can be encrypted or anonymous, and have no intrinsic
identifying features such as handwriting and signatures to identify those responsible.
Any paper trail of computer records they may leave can be easily modified or de-
stroyed, or may be only temporary. Worse still, auditing programs may automati-
cally destroy the records left when computer transactions are finished with them.
Because of this, even if the details of the transactions can be restored through
analysis, it is very difficult to tie the transaction to a person. Identifying information
such as passwords or PIN numbers (or any other electronic identifier) does not
prove who was responsible for the transaction. Such information merely shows
that whoever did it either knew or could get past those identifiers.
Even though technology is constantly evolving, investigating electronic crimes
will always be difficult because of the ease of altering the data and the fact that
transactions may be done anonymously. The best you can do is to follow the rules
of evidence collection and be as assiduous as possible.
TYPES OF EVIDENCE
Before you start collecting evidence, it is important to know the different types of
evidence categories. Without taking these into consideration, you may find that the
evidence you’ve spent several weeks and quite a bit of money collecting is useless.
Real evidence is any evidence that speaks for itself without relying on anything else.
In electronic terms, this can be a log produced by an audit function—provided that
the log can be shown to be free from contamination.
Testimonial Evidence
Testimonial evidence is any evidence supplied by a witness. This type of evidence is
subject to the perceived reliability of the witness, but as long as the witness can be
considered reliable, testimonial evidence can be almost as powerful as real evi-
dence. Word processor documents written by a witness may be considered testi-
monial—as long as the author is willing to state that he wrote it.
Hearsay
Hearsay is any evidence presented by a person who was not a direct witness. Word
processor documents written by someone without direct knowledge of the incident
are hearsay. Hearsay is generally inadmissible in court and should be avoided.
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
219

THE RULES OF EVIDENCE
There are five rules of collecting electronic evidence. These relate to five properties
that evidence must have to be useful.
1. Admissible
2. Authentic
3. Complete
4. Reliable
5. Believable
Admissible
Admissible is the most basic rule. The evidence must be able to be used in court or
otherwise. Failure to comply with this rule is equivalent to not collecting the evi-
dence in the first place, except the cost is higher.
Authentic
If you can’t tie the evidence positively to the incident, you can’t use it to prove anything.
You must be able to show that the evidence relates to the incident in a relevant way.
Complete
It’s not enough to collect evidence that just shows one perspective of the incident.
You collect not only evidence that can prove the attacker’s actions, but also evi-
dence that could prove their innocence. For instance, if you can show the attacker
was logged in at the time of the incident, you also need to show who else was logged
in and why you think they didn’t do it. This is called exculpatory evidence and is an
important part of proving a case.
Reliable
The evidence you collect must be reliable. Your evidence collection and analysis
procedures must not cast doubt on the evidence’s authenticity and veracity.
Believable
The evidence you present should be clearly understandable and believable to a jury.
There’s no point presenting a binary dump of process memory if the jury has no
idea what it all means. Similarly, if you present them with a formatted, human-
understandable version, you must be able to show the relationship to the original
binary, otherwise there’s no way for the jury to know whether you’ve faked it. Using
the preceding five rules, you can derive some basic do’s and don’ts:
220
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Minimize handling and corruption of original data.
Account for any changes and keep detailed logs of your actions.
Comply with the five rules of evidence.
Do not exceed your knowledge.
Follow your local security policy.
Capture as accurate an image of the system as possible.
Be prepared to testify.
Work fast.
Proceed from volatile to persistent evidence.
Don’t shutdown before collecting evidence.
Don’t run any programs on the affected system.
Minimize Handling and Corruption of Original Data
Once you’ve created a master copy of the original data, don’t touch it or the origi-
nal. Always handle secondary copies. Any changes made to the originals will affect
the outcomes of any analysis later done to copies. You should make sure you don’t
run any programs that modify the access times of all files (such as tar and xcopy).
You should also remove any external avenues for change and, in general, analyze
the evidence after it has been collected.
Account for Any Changes and Keep Detailed Logs of Your Actions
Sometimes evidence alteration is unavoidable. In these cases, it is absolutely essen-
tial that the nature, extent, and reasons for the changes be documented. Any
changes at all should be accounted for—not only data alteration but also physical
alteration of the originals (the removal of hardware components).
Comply with the Five Rules of Evidence
The five rules are there for a reason. If you don’t follow them, you are probably
wasting your time and money. Following these rules is essential to guaranteeing
successful evidence collection.
Do Not Exceed Your Knowledge
If you don’t understand what you are doing, you can’t account for any changes you
make and you can’t describe what exactly you did. If you ever find yourself “out of
your depth,” either go and learn more before continuing (if time is available) or
find someone who knows the territory. Never soldier on regardless. You’ll just
damage your case.
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
221

Follow Your Local Security Policy
If you fail to comply with your company’s security policy, you may find yourself
with some difficulties. Not only may you end up in trouble (and possibly fired 
if you’ve done something really against policy), but you may not be able to use the
evidence you’ve gathered. If in doubt, talk to those who know.
Capture as Accurate an Image of the System as Possible
Capturing an accurate image of the system is related to minimizing the handling or
corruption of original data. Differences between the original system and the master
copy count as a change to the data. You must be able to account for the differences.
Be Prepared to Testify
If you’re not willing to testify to the evidence you have collected, you might as well
stop before you start. Without the collector of the evidence being there to validate
the documents created during the evidence-collection process, the evidence be-
comes hearsay, which is inadmissible. Remember that you may need to testify at a
later time. No one is going to believe you if they can’t replicate your actions and
reach the same results. This also means that your plan of action shouldn’t be based
on trial-and-error.
Work Fast
The faster you work, the less likely the data is going to change. Volatile evidence may
vanish entirely if you don’t collect it in time. This is not to say that you should rush.
You must still collect accurate data. If multiple systems are involved, work on them
in parallel (a team of investigators would be handy here), but each single system
should still be worked on methodically. Automation of certain tasks makes collec-
tion proceed even faster.
Proceed from Volatile to Persistent Evidence
Some electronic evidence (discussed later) is more volatile than others are. Because
of this, you should always try to collect the most volatile evidence first.
Don’t Shutdown Before Collecting Evidence
You should never, ever shutdown a system before you collect the evidence. Not
only do you lose any volatile evidence, but also the attacker may have trojaned (via
a trojan horse) the startup and shutdown scripts, plug-and-play devices may alter
the system configuration, and temporary file systems may be wiped out. Rebooting
222
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

is even worse and should be avoided at all costs. As a general rule, until the com-
promised disk is finished with and restored, it should never be used as a boot disk.
Don’t Run Any Programs on the Affected System
Because the attacker may have left trojaned programs and libraries on the system,
you may inadvertently trigger something that could change or destroy the evidence
you’re looking for. Any programs you use should be on read-only media (such as a
CD-ROM or a write-protected floppy disk) and should be statically linked.
VOLATILE EVIDENCE
Not all the evidence on a system is going to last very long. Some evidence resides in
storage that requires a consistent power supply; other evidence may be stored in in-
formation that is continuously changing [1]. When collecting evidence, you should
always try to proceed from the most volatile to the least. Of course, you should still
take the individual circumstances into account. You shouldn’t waste time extracting
information from an unimportant or unaffected machine’s main memory when an
important or affected machine’s secondary memory hasn’t been examined.
To determine what evidence to collect first, you should draw up an order of
volatility—a list of evidence sources ordered by relative volatility. An example an
order of volatility would be:
1. Registers and cache
2. Routing tables
3. Arp cache
4. Process table
5. Kernel statistics and modules
6. Main memory
7. Temporary file systems
8. Secondary memory
9. Router configuration
10. Network topology [2]
Once you have collected the raw data from volatile sources you may be able to shut
down the system.
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
223

GENERAL PROCEDURE
When collecting and analyzing evidence, there is a general four-step procedure you
should follow. Note that this is a very general outline. You should customize the de-
tails to suit your situation.
Identification of Evidence
You must be able to distinguish between evidence and junk data. For this purpose,
you should know what the data is, where it is located, and how it is stored. Once this
is done, you will be able to work out the best way to retrieve and store any evidence
you find.
Preservation of Evidence
The evidence you find must be preserved as close as possible to its original state.
Any changes made during this phase must be documented and justified.
Analysis of Evidence
The stored evidence must then be analyzed to extract the relevant information and
recreate the chain of events. Analysis requires in-depth knowledge of what you are
looking for and how to get it. Always be sure that the person or people who are an-
alyzing the evidence are fully qualified to do so.
Presentation of Evidence
Communicating the meaning of your evidence is vitally important—otherwise you
can’t do anything with it. The manner of presentation is important, and it must be
understandable by a layman to be effective. It should remain technically correct and
credible. A good presenter can help in this respect.
COLLECTING AND ARCHIVING
Once you’ve developed a plan of attack and identified the evidence that needs to be
collected, it’s time to start the actual process of capturing the data. Storage of that
data is also important, as it can affect how the data is perceived.
Logs and Logging
You should run some kind of system logging function. It is important to keep these
logs secure and to back them up periodically. Because logs are usually automatically
224
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

timestamped, a simple copy should suffice, although you should digitally sign and
encrypt any logs that are important to protect them from contamination. Remem-
ber, if the logs are kept locally on the compromised machine, they are susceptible
to either alteration or deletion by an attacker. Having a remote syslog server and
storing logs in a sticky directory can reduce this risk, although it is still possible for
an attacker to add decoy or junk entries into the logs.
Regular auditing and accounting of your system is useful not only for detecting
intruders but also as a form of evidence. Messages and logs from programs can be
used to show what damage an attacker did. Of course, you need a clean snapshot for
these to work, so there’s no use trying it after the compromise.
Monitoring
Monitoring network traffic can be useful for many reasons—you can gather statis-
tics, watch out for irregular activity (and possibly stop an intrusion before it hap-
pens), and trace where an attacker is coming from and what he is doing.
Monitoring logs as they are created can often show you important information you
might have missed had you seen them separately. This doesn’t mean you should ig-
nore logs later—it may be what’s missing from the logs that is suspicious.
Information gathered while monitoring network traffic can be compiled into
statistics to define normal behavior for your system. These statistics can be used as
an early warning of an attacker’s actions. You can also monitor the actions of your
users. This can, once again, act as an early warning system. Unusual activity or the
sudden appearance of unknown users should be considered definite cause for closer
inspection.
No matter the type of monitoring done, you should be very careful. There are
plenty of laws you could inadvertently break. In general, you should limit your
monitoring to traffic or user information and leave the content unmonitored un-
less the situation necessitates it. You should also display a disclaimer stating what
monitoring is done when users log on. The content of this should be worked out in
conjunction with your lawyer.
METHODS OF COLLECTION
There are two basic forms of collection: freezing the scene and honeypotting. The two
aren’t mutually exclusive. You can collect frozen information after or during any
honeypotting.
Freezing the scene involves taking a snapshot of the system in its compromised
state. The necessary authorities should be notified (the police and your incident re-
sponse and legal teams), but you shouldn’t go out and tell the world just yet. You
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
225

should then start to collect whatever data is important onto removable nonvolatile
media in a standard format. Make sure the programs and utilities used to collect the
data are also collected onto the same media as the data. All data collected should
have a cryptographic message digest created, and those digests should be compared
to the originals for verification.
Honeypotting is the process of creating a replica system and luring the attacker
into it for further monitoring. A related method (sandboxing) involves limiting what
the attacker can do while still on the compromised system, so he can be monitored
without (much) further damage. The placement of misleading information and the
attacker’s response to it is a good method for determining the attacker’s motives. You
must make sure that any data on the system related to the attacker’s detection and ac-
tions is either removed or encrypted; otherwise they can cover their tracks by de-
stroying it. Honeypotting and sandboxing are extremely resource intensive, so they
may be infeasible to perform. There are also some legal issues to contend with, most
importantly entrapment. As previously mentioned, you should consult your lawyers.
ARTIFACTS
Whenever a system is compromised, there is almost always something left behind
by the attacker—be it code fragments, trojaned programs, running processes, or
sniffer log files. These are known as artifacts. They are one of the important things
you should collect, but you must be careful. You should never attempt to analyze
an artifact on the compromised system. Artifacts are capable of anything, and you
want to make sure their effects are controlled.
Artifacts may be difficult to find; trojaned programs may be identical in all ob-
vious ways to the originals (file size, medium access control [MAC] times, etc.). Use
of cryptographic checksums may be necessary, so you may need to know the orig-
inal file’s checksum. If you are performing regular file integrity assessments, this
shouldn’t be a problem. Analysis of artifacts can be useful in finding other systems
the attacker (or his tools) has broken into.
COLLECTION STEPS
You now have enough information to build a step-by-step guide for the collection
of the evidence. Once again, this is only a guide. You should customize it to your
specific situation. You should perform the following collection steps:
1. Find the evidence.
2. Find the relevant data.
226
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

3. Create an order of volatility.
4. Remove external avenues of change.
5. Collect the evidence.
6. Document everything.
Find the Evidence
Determine where the evidence you are looking for is stored. Use a checklist. Not
only does it help you to collect evidence, but it also can be used to double-check
that everything you are looking for is there.
Find the Relevant Data
Once you’ve found the evidence, you must figure out what part of it is relevant to
the case. In general, you should err on the side of over-collection, but you must re-
member that you have to work fast. Don’t spend hours collecting information that
is obviously useless.
Create an Order of Volatility
Now that you know exactly what to gather, work out the best order in which to
gather it. The order of volatility for your system is a good guide and ensures that
you minimize loss of uncorrupted evidence.
Remove External Avenues of Change
It is essential that you avoid alterations to the original data, and prevention is al-
ways better than a cure. Preventing anyone from tampering with the evidence helps
you create as exact an image as possible. However, you have to be careful. The at-
tacker may have been smart and left a dead-man switch. In the end, you should try
to do as much as possible to prevent changes.
Collect the Evidence
You can now start to collect the evidence using the appropriate tools for the job. As
you go, reevaluate the evidence you’ve already collected. You may find that you
missed something important. Now is the time to make sure you get it.
Document Everything
Your collection procedures may be questioned later, so it is important that you
document everything you do. Timestamps, digital signatures, and signed state-
ments are all important. Don’t leave anything out.
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
227

CONTROLLING CONTAMINATION: THE CHAIN OF CUSTODY
Once the data has been collected, it must be protected from contamination. Origi-
nals should never be used in forensic examination; verified duplicates should be
used. This not only ensures that the original data remains clean, but also enables ex-
aminers to try more dangerous, potentially data-corrupting tests. Of course, any
tests done should be done on a clean, isolated host machine. You don’t want to
make the problem worse by letting the attacker’s programs get access to a network.
A good way of ensuring that data remains uncorrupted is to keep a chain of
custody. This is a detailed list of what was done with the original copies once they
were collected. Remember that this will be questioned later on, so document every-
thing (who found the data, when and where it was transported [and how], who had
access to it, and what they did with it). You may find that your documentation ends
up greater than the data you collected, but it is necessary to prove your case.
Analysis
Once the data has been successfully collected, it must be analyzed to extract the ev-
idence you wish to present and to rebuild what actually happened. As always, you
must make sure that you fully document everything you do. Your work will be
questioned and you must be able to show that your results are consistently obtain-
able from the procedures you performed.
Time
To reconstruct the events that led to your system being corrupted, you must be able
to create a timeline. This can be particularly difficult when it comes to computers.
Clock drift, delayed reporting, and differing time zones can create confusion in
abundance. One thing to remember is to never, ever change the clock on an affected
system. Record any clock drift and the time zone in use, as you will need this later,
but changing the clock just adds in an extra level of complexity that is best avoided.
Log files usually use timestamps to indicate when an entry was added, and
these must be synchronized to make sense. You should also use timestamps. You’re
not just reconstructing events, you yourself are making a chain of events that must
be accounted for as well. It’s best to use the GMT time zone when creating your
timestamps. The incident may involve other time zones than your own, so using a
common reference point can make things much easier.
Forensic Analysis of Backups
When analyzing backups, it is best to have a dedicated host for the job. This examina-
tion host should be secure, clean (a fresh, hardened install of the operating system is a
228
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

good idea), and isolated from any network. You don’t want it tampered with while you
work, and you don’t want to accidentally send something nasty down the line.
Once this system is available, you can commence analysis of the backups. Mak-
ing mistakes at this point shouldn’t be a problem. You can simply restore the back-
ups again if required. Remember the mantra: Document everything you do. Ensure
that what you do is repeatable and capable of always giving the same results.
RECONSTRUCTING THE ATTACK
Now that you have collected the data, you can attempt to reconstruct the chain of
events leading to and following the attacker’s break-in. You must correlate all the
evidence you have gathered (which is why accurate timestamps are critical), so it’s
probably best to use graphical tools, diagrams, and spreadsheets. Include all of the
evidence you’ve found when reconstructing the attack—no matter how small it is.
You may miss something if you leave a piece of evidence out.
Finally, as you can see, collecting electronic evidence is no trivial matter. There
are many complexities you must consider, and you must always be able to justify
your actions. It is far from impossible though. The right tools and knowledge of
how everything works is all you need to gather the evidence required.
SUMMARY
Companies spend millions each year to ensure that their networks and data are
properly protected against intrusion. Operating systems are hardened, firewalls are
installed, intrusion detection systems are put in place, honeypots are implemented,
security policies and procedures are established, security awareness programs are
rolled out, and systems are monitored. This defense-in-depth approach is used be-
cause companies know that people will try to gain unauthorized access to their sys-
tems. When unauthorized access does occur, the last line of defense is legal action
against the intruder. However, if evidence of an intrusion is not properly handled,
it becomes inadmissible in a court of law. It is important to remember one of the
basic rules of our legal system: if there is no evidence of a crime, there is no crime
in the eyes of the law. Therefore, it is of paramount importance that utmost care is
taken in the collection and seizure of data evidence.
Some of the most common reasons for improper evidence collection are poorly
written policies, lack of an established incident response plan, lack of incident re-
sponse training, and a broken chain of custody. For the purposes of this chapter,
the reader should assume that policies have been clearly defined and reviewed by
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
229

legal counsel, an incident response plan is in place, and necessary personnel have
been properly trained.
Conclusions
Admissible is the most basic rule (the evidence must be able to be used in court
or otherwise).
If you can’t tie the evidence positively with the incident, you can’t use it to
prove anything.
It’s not enough to collect evidence that just shows one perspective of the inci-
dent. You collect not only evidence that can prove the attacker’s actions, but
also evidence that could prove his innocence.
Your evidence collection and analysis procedures must not cast doubt on the
evidence’s authenticity and veracity.
The evidence you present should be clearly understandable and believable by 
a jury.
There are six fundamental rules to guide an investigator during a search and
seizure. In essence, these rules are devised to help prevent the mishandling of
evidence and encourage the documentation of search and seizure activities. In
other words, the rules help ensure an investigation’s chain of custody, which is
critical to the success of any case.
The preparation and team-structuring activities that take place help ensure a
successful investigation. Without these activities, the chain of custody is put at
great risk.
The next three stages of the search and seizure process are approach and secure
the crime scene, document the crime scene, and search for evidence.
Crime scene security may range from locking doors to (for law enforcers) 
arresting trespassers.
Documentation can be rough, but must be adequate in its depiction of the
crime scene layout and the location of evidence.
The search for evidence can involve looking in a variety of places, but the legal-
ities of searching must always be considered.
The virus protocol is a means of preventing and containing the threat to elec-
tronic evidence by computer viruses.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Evidence Collection and Data Seizure Checklist (Table F6.1
in Appendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the
provisional list of actions for evidence collection and data seizure. The order is not
230
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

significant; however, these are the activities for which the researcher would want to
provide a detailed description of procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use
and admissibility. A number of these systems have been mentioned in passing
already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? No two investigations you encounter will be the same.
2.
True or False? Windows will not save a user’s file search history, history of the
last visited Internet sites, information filled out in Web forms, or the last pro-
grams used.
3.
True or False? Bash history is not saved to file until an orderly shutdown is
performed.
4.
True or False? Electronic evidence is not very expensive to collect. The
processes are strict and exhaustive, the systems affected may be unavailable for
regular use for a long period of time, and analysis of the data collected must be
performed.
5.
True or False? Once a compromise has been detected, you have two options:
pull the system off the network and begin collecting evidence or leave it offline
and attempt to monitor the intruder.
Multiple Choice
1.
Make sure you always document the following points, except::
A. Who collected the evidence, how they did it and where they got it
B.
Who took possession of it
C. How it was stored and protected
D. How it was stored and unprotected
E.
Who removed it from storage and why
2.
Make sure you always label any hardware with the following, except:
A. A part number
B.
A case number
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
231

C. A short description of the hardware
D. The time and date you got the evidence
E.
Your signature
3.
There are five rules of collecting electronic evidence. These relate to the following
five properties that evidence must have to be useful, except:
A. Unadmissible
B.
Authentic
C. Complete
D. Reliable
E.
Believable
4.
Using the five rules in multiple choice question 3, you can derive some basic
do’s and don’ts, except:
A. Minimize handling/corruption of original data
B.
Account for any changes and keep detailed logs of your actions
C. Comply with the six rules of evidence
D. Do not exceed your knowledge
E.
Follow your local security policy
5.
To determine what evidence to collect first, you should draw up an order of
volatility—a list of evidence sources ordered by relative volatility. An example
of an order of volatility would be the following, except:
A. Registers and cache
B.
Routing tables
C. Arp cache
D. Process table
E.
Table statistics and modules
Exercise
A computer forensics specialist was called on a teenage runaway case. Why would
a CFS be called in to solve a teenage runaway case? What would his role be here?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A parent was concerned that her son was accessing pornographic Web sites from
his computer. Each time the computer was checked by a technician, no evidence
was found. How would a CFS go about investigating this incident?
232
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Case Project
An adult roommate was accused of using another’s computer to make unautho-
rized purchases on a popular Internet shopping site. What did the CFS do after he
conducted an investigation?
Optional Team Case Project
A female executive assistant was fired from a major U.S. chemical company. The
former employee filed a lawsuit accusing her superiors at the company of sexual 
harassment and wrongful termination. Explain how a CFS would deal with this case.
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[2] Braid, Matthew, “Collecting Electronic Evidence After a System Compro-
mise,” Australian Computer Emergency Response Team (AusCERT), The
University of Queensland, Qld 4072 Australia (SANS Institute, 5401 West-
bard Ave. Suite 1501, Bethesda, MD 20816), 2001.
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
233

This page intentionally left blank 

235
Duplication and
Preservation of
Digital Evidence
7
C
omputer evidence is odd, to say the least. It lurks on computer hard disk
drives, zip disks, and floppy diskettes at three different levels. Two of these
levels are not visible to the computer user. Such evidence is fragile and can
easily be destroyed by something as simple as the normal operation of the com-
puter. Electromagnets and planted destructive trojan horse programs are other
hazards that can permanently destroy computer evidence within seconds. There
is no other type of evidence that presents the investigator with as many potential
problems and challenges. In the old days, defense lawyers didn’t know much
about computer evidence. As a result, cross-examination by the defense wasn’t as
strong a few years ago as it is today. However, things are changing because
lawyers are becoming educated because of the current popularity of electronic
document discovery in the legal community. Times have changed and it is all the
more important to do things by the book [1].
Nevertheless, computer forensic evidence is frequently challenged in court.
Some judges accept it with little question because they want to crack down on com-
puter criminals, and others reject it because they hold to a fairly technophobic view
of the Fourth Amendment. There’s also some confusion over the legal classification
of computer evidence. Is it documentary evidence (which would require reams of
printout under the best evidence rule) or is it demonstrative evidence (which would
require a true-to-life sample of the reconstructed evidence)? Then there’s the prob-
lem of establishing the expertise of cyber forensic experts who testify. The com-
plexity of the criminal law means that the overwhelming majority of cases do not
make it to civil or criminal court, but should [1].

The three criminal evidence rules to gain admissibility are
1. Authentication
2. The best evidence rule
3. Exceptions to the hearsay rule [1]
Authentication means showing a true copy of the original; best evidence means
presenting the original; and the allowable exceptions are when a confession or busi-
ness or official records are involved. Authentication appears to be the most com-
monly used rule, but experts disagree over what is the most essential, or most
correct, element of this in practice. Some say documentation (of what has been
done); others say preservation (the integrity of the original); still others say au-
thenticity (the evidence being what you say it is). Good arguments could be made
for the centrality of each, or all, as the standard in computer forensic law [1].
If your documentation is poor, it will look like your processing procedures
were poor, and when you testify in court, you will look ridiculous since you have no
good written record to refresh your memory. Problems in the documentation area
arise when you try to take shortcuts or make do with less than adequate time,
equipment, and resources. In general, the condition of all evidence has to be docu-
mented. It has to be photographed, weighed, and sketched, for example. Then, the
laboratory worker (forensic scientist or criminalist) figures out what tests are ap-
propriate, decides on what part of the evidence to examine first, dissects or copies
the part to be tested (specimen = dissection; exemplar = copying), and prepares the
testing ground, all the while documenting each decision step. Only then does any
testing begin, and that’s heavily documented with bench notes that are subject to
discovery and review by experts from the other side [1].
If your preservation is poor, it becomes fairly evident that your collection and
transportation of evidence gives rise to numerous possibilities for error in the form of
destruction, mishandling, and contamination. Problems in the preservation area have
implications for the integrity of law enforcement and crime labs. The basic chain of
custody, for example, involves at least three initial sources of error. Evidence has to be
discovered (police), it has to be collected (crime scene technician), and then it has to
be packaged, labeled, and transported (police supervisor). Once it gets to the lab, it
has to be logged in, assigned an identification number, placed in storage, and kept
from intermingling with other evidence. All workplaces must be clean and contami-
nation free. Some workplaces are required to meet the standards of professional ac-
crediting organizations. Written policies have to be in place. The quality assurance
policy, for example, must act as a check on quality control. Some employee job titles
must be held by those with college degrees in the appropriate field [1].
If your authenticity is poor, then you, your agency, and the prosecutor will look
like inexperienced rookies, not so much foolish, but like rank amateurs who can’t
236
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

explain, for example, how an “MD5 Hash algorithm” works. Computer evidence,
like computer simulations, hasn’t fared all that well under the rigorous standards of
admissibility for scientific evidence. The old common law standard is oculis subjecta
fidelibus, as it is for any piece of demonstrative evidence (like a plaster cast model;
if the scale is 1:10, an average person ought to be able to visualize the larger thing
to scale). Case law, however, varies by jurisdiction. Only the Marx standard resem-
bles the old common law standard, and it’s only found in a handful of jurisdictions.
Here’s a list of all the scientific evidence standards [1]:
Relevancy test (FRE 401, 402, 403): This is embodied in the Federal Rules of Evi-
dence and some state versions that liberally allow anything that materially
assists the trier of fact to be deemed relevant by the trier of law.
Frye standard (Frye v. U.S., 1923): For the results of a scientific technique to be ad-
missible, the technique must be sufficiently established to have gained general
acceptance in its particular field. This is a “general acceptance” test.
Coppolino standard (Coppolino v. State, 1968): The court allows a novel test or
piece of new, sometimes controversial, science on a particular problem at hand
if an adequate foundation can be laid, even if the profession as a whole isn’t fa-
miliar with it.
Marx standard (People v. Marx, 1975): The court is satisfied that it did not have to
sacrifice its common sense in understanding and evaluating the scientific ex-
pertise put before it. This is a “common sense” or “no scientific jargon” test.
Daubert standard (Daubert v. Merrell Dow, 1993): This rigorous test requires
special pretrial hearings for scientific evidence and special procedures on dis-
covery where the rules are laid out beforehand on validity, reliability, bench-
marking, algorithms, and error rates [1].
The federal courts were the first to recognize that files on computers were sim-
ilar, but unlike, files kept on paper. The best evidence rule has also, in recent years,
seen the growth of a standard known as representational accuracy, which means
you don’t have to present all the originals. Therefore, a modern clause exists in the
Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE 1001-3) that states, If data are stored by computer
or similar device, any printout or other output readable by sight, shown to reflect
the data accurately, is an original [1].
This exception to the best evidence rule has found a mostly welcome reception
in state courts, and you should argue that it’s more appropriate to consider digital
evidence as demonstrative than documentary. The history of computers in the
courtroom ties in with demonstrative standards, and computer forensics, after all, is
about reconstructing the crime, or criminalistics. You see how apparent this is once
you realize that investigators and technicians always work from a copy, duplicate,
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
237

mirror, replica, or exemplar of the original evidence. Digital evidence is the most
easily lost evidence. There’s nothing in criminal justice more easily damaged, cor-
rupted, or erased. You need to be able to demonstrate that the evidence is what you
say it is, came from where you say it did, and has not been modified in any way since
you obtained it. How you go about that depends on the circumstances and the com-
puter systems you’re dealing with. It’s futile to talk about any one correct way to do
it, or any perfect printout. There’s no “silver bullet” standardized checklist, and
there’s no “magic” software to produce the perfect printout [1].
Now let’s look at some of the emerging principles of duplication and preserva-
tion of digital evidence collection and handling. Many regard this as the skillset of
computer forensics.
PRESERVING THE DIGITAL CRIME SCENE
The computer investigator not only needs to be worried about destructive process
and devices being planted by the computer owner, he or she also needs to be con-
cerned about the operating system of the computer and applications. Evidence is
easily found in typical storage areas (spreadsheet, database, and word processing
files). Unfortunately potential evidence can also reside in file slack, erased files, and
the Windows swap file. Such evidence is usually in the form of data fragments and
can be easily overwritten by something as simple as the booting of the computer or
the running of Microsoft Windows. When Windows starts, it potentially creates
new files and opens existing ones as a normal process. This situation can cause
erased files to be overwritten, and data previously stored in the Windows swap file
can be altered or destroyed. Furthermore, all of the Windows operating systems
(Windows 2000, XP and especially 2003) have a habit of updating directory entries
for files as a normal operating process. As you can imagine, file dates are important
from an evidence standpoint.
Another concern of the computer investigator is the running of any programs
on the subject computer. Criminals can easily modify the operating system to de-
stroy evidence when standard operating systems commands are executed. Perpe-
trators could modify the operating system such that the execution of the DIR
command destroys simulated evidence. Standard program names and familiar
Windows program icons can also be altered and tied to destructive processes by a
crafty high-tech criminal.
Even trusted word processing programs such as Microsoft Word and Word-
PerfectTM can become the enemy of the cyber cop. It works this way: When word
processing files are opened and viewed, the word processing program creates tem-
porary files. These files overwrite the temporary files that existed previously, and
potential evidence stored in those files can be lost forever. There’s a point to all of
238
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

this. Computer evidence processing is risky business and is fraught with potential
problems. Of course, any loss of crucial evidence or exculpatory material falls on
the shoulders of the computer investigator. What will your answer be if the defense
attorney claims the data you destroyed proved the innocence of his or her client?
You had better have a good answer.
Many inherent problems associated with computer evidence processing vanish
when tried and proven processing procedures are followed. The objective of this
section is to keep Murphy’s law from ruining your case. When it comes to com-
puter evidence processing, Murphy is always looking over your shoulder. He stands
ready to strike at just the wrong moment.
Your first objective, after securing the computer, should be to make a complete
bit stream backup of all computer data before it is reviewed or processed. This
should normally be done before the computer is operated. Preservation of evidence
is the primary element of all criminal investigations, and computer evidence is cer-
tainly no exception. These basic rules of evidence never change. Even rookies know
that evidence must be preserved at all costs. As stated previously, evidence can re-
side at multiple levels and in bizarre storage locations. These levels include allocated
files, file slack, and erased files. It is not enough to do a standard backup of a hard
disk drive. To do so would eliminate the backup of file slack and erased file space.
Without backing up evidence in these unique areas, the evidence is susceptible to
damage and modification by the computer investigator. Bit stream backups are
much more thorough than standard backups. They involve copying of every bit of
data on a storage device, and it is recommended that two such copies be made of
the original when hard disk drives are involved. Any processing should be per-
formed on one of the backup copies. As previously recommended, the original ev-
idence should be preserved at all costs. After all, it is the best evidence.
The importance of bit stream image backups cannot be stressed enough. To
process a computer hard disk drive for evidence without a bit stream image backup
is like playing with fire in a gas station. The basic rule is that only on rare occasions
should you process computer evidence without first making an image backup. The
hard disk drive should be imaged using a specialized bit stream backup product.
To avoid getting too technical for the purposes of this chapter, specifics re-
garding the uses of these backup programs will be avoided. However, instruction
manuals should be studied thoroughly before you attempt to process computer ev-
idence. Ideally, you should conduct tests on your own computers beforehand and
compare the results with the original computer evidence. Being comfortable with
the software you use is an important part of computer evidence processing. Know
your tools. Practice using all of your forensic software tools before you use them for
processing of computer evidence. You may only get one chance to do it right.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
239

COMPUTER EVIDENCE PROCESSING STEPS
Computer evidence is fragile by its very nature, and the problem is compounded by
the potential of destructive programs and hidden data. Even the normal operation
of the computer can destroy computer evidence that might be lurking in unallo-
cated space, file slack, or in the Windows swap file. There really are no strict rules
that must be followed regarding the processing of computer evidence. Every case is
different, and flexibility on the part of the computer investigator is important.
With that in mind, the following general computer evidence processing steps
have been provided. Remember that these do not represent the only true way of pro-
cessing computer evidence. They are general guidelines provided as food for thought:
1. Shut down the computer.
2. Document the hardware configuration of the system.
3. Transport the computer system to a secure location.
4. Make bit stream backups of hard disks and floppy disks.
5. Mathematically authenticate data on all storage devices.
6. Document the system date and time.
7. Make a list of key search words.
8. Evaluate the Windows swap file.
9. Evaluate file slack.
10. Evaluate unallocated space (erased files).
11. Search files, file slack, and unallocated space for keywords.
12. Document file names, dates, and times.
13. Identify file, program, and storage anomalies.
14. Evaluate program functionality.
15. Document your findings.
16. Retain copies of software used [2].
If you are not trained and have had a computer incident or threat, see sidebar,
“Emergency Guidelines.”
EMERGENCY GUIDELINES
The popularity of desktop and notebook computers has come with a mixed blessing.
These wonderful tools contribute to increased productivity and help facilitate
240
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

communications and file transfers worldwide over the Internet. However, they 
also provide opportunities for abuse of corporate policies and the commission of
computer-related crimes. Internet viewing of pornography has become a serious
problem for corporations and government agencies. Embezzlements using comput-
ers have become commonplace in small- and medium-size businesses.
Computer forensic tools and techniques can help identify such abuses. They can
also be used to find and document evidence in a civil or criminal case. However, the
computer evidence must be preserved and protected. As a result, it is important that
things are done correctly as soon as a computer incident is identified. By following
the guidelines listed here, you stand a good chance of preserving the evidence:
1. Don’t turn on or operate the subject computer.
2. Don’t solicit the assistance of the resident “computer expert.”
3. Don’t evaluate employee email unless corporate policy allows it.
Computer evidence is very fragile and can easily be altered or destroyed if the
wrong things are done.
DON’T TURN ON OR OPERATE THE SUBJECT COMPUTER
The computer should first be backed up using bit stream backup software. When the
computer is run, the potential exists for information in the Windows swap file to be
overwritten. Internet activity and fragments of Windows work sessions exist in the
Windows swap file. This can be valuable from an evidence standpoint. For that mat-
ter, the same is true of a Windows system. To save grief, don’t run the computer.
DON’T SOLICIT THE ASSISTANCE OF
THE RESIDENT COMPUTER EXPERT
The processing of computer evidence is tricky to say the least. Without proper train-
ing, even a world-class computer scientist can do the wrong things. Like any other
science, computer science has its areas of specialty. Computer forensics investigators
typically get calls after the fact and are informed that a computer-knowledgeable
internal auditor or systems administrator has attempted to process a computer for
evidence. In some cases, valuable evidence is lost or the evidence is so tainted that it
loses its evidentiary value. For these reasons, seek the assistance of a computer spe-
cialist who has been trained in computer evidence processing procedures. Do this
before you turn on the computer.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
241
q

DON’T EVALUATE EMPLOYEE EMAIL UNLESS
CORPORATE POLICY ALLOWS IT
New electronic privacy laws [3] protect the privacy of electronic communications. If
your corporate policy specifically states that all computers and data stored on them
belongs to the corporation, then you are probably on safe ground. However, be sure
that you have such a policy and that the employee involved has read the policy. Fur-
thermore, it is always a good idea to check with corporate counsel. Don’t be in a
hurry; do things by the book. To do otherwise could subject you and your corpora-
tion to a lawsuit [4].
Shut Down the Computer
Depending on the computer operating system, this usually involves pulling the
plug or shutting down a network computer using relevant commands required by
the network involved. At the option of the computer investigator, pictures of the
screen image can be taken. However, consideration should be given to possible de-
structive processes that may be operating in the background. These can be in mem-
ory or available through a connected modem. Depending on the operating system
involved, a password-protected screen saver may also kick in at any moment. This
can complicate the shutdown of the computer. Generally, time is of the essence,
and the computer system should be shut down as quickly as possible.
Document the Hardware Configuration of the System
It is assumed that the computer system will be moved to a secure location where a
proper chain of custody can be maintained and evidence processing can begin. Be-
fore dismantling the computer, it is important that pictures are taken of the com-
puter from all angles to document the system hardware components and how they
are connected. Labeling each wire is also important, so that it can easily be recon-
nected when the system configuration is restored to its original condition at a se-
cure location.
Transport the Computer System to a Secure Location
This may seem basic, but all too often seized computers are stored in less than
secure locations. War stories can be told about this one that relate to both law
enforcement agencies and corporations. It is imperative that the subject com-
puter is treated as evidence and stored out of reach of curious computer users.
All too often, individuals operate seized computers without knowing that they
242
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

are destroying potential evidence and the chain of custody. Furthermore, a
seized computer left unattended can easily be compromised. Evidence can be
planted on it and crucial evidence can be intentionally destroyed. A lack of a
proper chain of custody can make a savvy defense attorney’s day. Lacking a
proper chain of custody, how can you say that relevant evidence was not planted
on the computer after the seizure? The answer is that you cannot. Don’t leave
the computer unattended unless it is locked up in a secure location.
Make Bit Stream Backups of Hard Disks and Floppy Disks
The computer should not be operated, and computer evidence should not be
processed until bit stream backups have been made of all hard disk drives and floppy
disks. All evidence processing should be done on a restored copy of the bit stream
backup rather than on the original computer. The original evidence should be left un-
touched unless compelling circumstances exist. Preservation of computer evidence is
vitally important. It is fragile and can easily be altered or destroyed. Often such alter-
ation or destruction of data is irreversible. Bit stream backups are much like an in-
surance policy and are essential for any serious computer evidence processing.
Mathematically Authenticate Data on All Storage Devices
You want to be able to prove that you did not alter any of the evidence after the
computer came into your possession. Such proof will help you rebut allegations
that you changed or altered the original evidence. Since 1989, law enforcement and
military agencies have used a 32-bit mathematical process to do the authentication
process. Mathematically, a 32-bit validation is accurate to approximately one in 4.3
billion. However, given the speed of today’s computers and the vast amount of stor-
age capacity on today’s computer hard disk drives, this level of accuracy is no longer
accurate enough. A 32-bit CRC can be compromised.
Document the System Date and Time
The dates and times associated with computer files can be extremely important
from an evidence standpoint. However, the accuracy of the dates and times is just
as important. If the system clock is one hour slow because of daylight-savings time,
then file timestamps will also reflect the wrong time. To adjust for these inaccura-
cies, documenting the system date and time settings at the time the computer is
taken into evidence is essential.
Make a List of Key Search Words
Because modern hard disk drives are so voluminous, it is all but impossible for a
computer specialist to manually view and evaluate every file on a computer hard
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
243

disk drive. Therefore, state-of-the-art automated forensic text search tools are
needed to help find the relevant evidence. Usually some information is known
about the allegations, the computer user, and the alleged associates who may be in-
volved. Gathering information from individuals familiar with the case to help com-
pile a list of relevant keywords is important. Such keywords can be used in the
search of all computer hard disk drives and floppy diskettes using automated soft-
ware. Keeping the list as short as possible is important and you should avoid using
common words or words that make up part of other words. In such cases, the
words should be surrounded with spaces.
Evaluate the Windows Swap File
The Windows swap file is a potentially valuable source of evidence and leads. In
the past, this tedious task was done with hex editors, and it took days to evalu-
ate just one Windows swap file. With the use of automated tools, this process
now takes only a few minutes. When Windows 2000, XP, and 2003 are involved,
the swap file may be set to be dynamically created as the computer is operated.
This is the default setting, and when the computer is turned off, the swap file is
erased. However, all is not lost, because the content of the swap file can easily be
captured and evaluated.
Evaluate File Slack
File slack is a data storage area of which most computer users are unaware [5]. It is
a source of significant security leakage and consists of raw memory dumps that
occur during the work session as files are closed. The data dumped from memory
ends up being stored at the end of allocated files, beyond the reach or view of the
computer user. Specialized forensic tools are required to view and evaluate the file
slack; file slack can provide a wealth of information and investigative leads. Like the
Windows swap file, this source of ambient data can help provide relevant keywords
and leads that may have previously been unknown.
On a well-used hard disk drive, as much as 1.1 billion bytes of storage space
may be occupied by file slack. File slack should be evaluated for relevant keywords
to supplement the keywords identified in the previous steps. Such keywords should
be added to the computer investigator’s list of keywords for use later. Because of the
nature of file slack, specialized and automated forensic tools are required for eval-
uation. File slack is typically a good source of Internet leads. Tests suggest that file
slack provides approximately 80 times more Internet leads than the Windows swap
file. Therefore, this source of potential leads should not be overlooked in cases in-
volving possible Internet uses or abuses.
244
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Evaluate Unallocated Space (Erased Files)
On a well-used hard disk drive, billions of bytes of storage space may contain data
associated with previously erased files. Unallocated space should be evaluated for
relevant keywords to supplement the keywords identified in the previous steps.
Such keywords should be added to the computer investigator’s list of keywords for
use in the next processing step. Because of the nature of data contained in unallo-
cated space and its volume, specialized and automated forensic tools are required
for evaluation. Unallocated space is typically a good source of data that was previ-
ously associated with word processing temporary files and other temporary files
created by various computer applications.
Search Files, File Slack, and Unallocated Space for Keywords
The list of relevant keywords identified in the previous steps should be used to
search all relevant computer hard disk drives and floppy diskettes. Several forensic
text search utilities are available in the marketplace. Some of these tools are de-
signed to be state-of-the-art and have been validated as security review tools by the
federal government intelligence agencies.
It is important to review the output of the text search utility and equally im-
portant to document relevant findings. When relevant evidence is identified, the
fact should be noted and the identified data should be completely reviewed for ad-
ditional keywords. When new keywords are identified, they should be added to the
list, and a new search should be conducted using the text search utility. Text search
utilities can also be used effectively in security reviews of computer storage media.
Document File Names, Dates, and Times
From an evidence standpoint, file names, creation dates, and last modified dates
and times can be relevant. Therefore, it is important to catalog all allocated and
“erased” files. The file should be sorted based on the file name, file size, file content,
creation date, and last modified date and time. Such sorted information can pro-
vide a timeline of computer usage. The output should be in the form of a word-
processing-compatible file that can be used to help document computer evidence
issues tied to specific files.
Identify File, Program, and Storage Anomalies
Encrypted, compressed, and graphic files store data in binary format. As a result,
text data stored in these file formats cannot be identified by a text search program.
Manual evaluation of these files is required and, in the case of encrypted files, much
work may be involved. Depending on the type of file involved, the contents should
be viewed and evaluated for its potential as evidence.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
245

Reviewing the partitioning on seized hard disk drives is also important. When
hidden partitions are found, they should be evaluated for evidence and their exis-
tence should be documented. If Windows 2000, XP, and 2003 are involved, it
makes sense to evaluate the files contained in the Recycle Bin. The Recycle Bin is
the repository of files selected for deletion by the computer user. The fact that they
have been selected for deletion may have some relevance from an evidentiary
standpoint. If relevant files are found, the issues involved should be documented
thoroughly.
Evaluate Program Functionality
Depending on the application software involved, running programs to learn their
purpose may be necessary. When destructive processes that are tied to relevant ev-
idence are discovered, this can be used to prove willfulness. Such destructive
processes can be tied to hot keys or the execution of common operating commands
tied to the operating system or applications.
Document Your Findings
As indicated in the preceding steps, it is important to document your findings as is-
sues are identified and as evidence is found. Documenting all of the software used
in your forensic evaluation of the evidence, including the version numbers of the
programs used, is also important. Be sure you are legally licensed to use the foren-
sic software. Software pirates do not stand up well under the rigors of a trial. Smart
defense lawyers will usually question software licensing; you don’t want to testify
that you used unlicensed software in the processing of computer evidence. Techni-
cally, software piracy is a criminal violation of federal copyright laws.
When appropriate, mention in your documentation that you are licensed to use
the forensic software involved. Screen prints of the operating software also help doc-
ument the version of the software and how it was used to find or process the evidence.
Retain Copies of Software Used
Finally, as part of your documentation process, it is recommended that a copy of the
software used be included with the output of the forensic tool involved. Normally,
this is done on an archive Zip disk, Jazz disk, or other external storage device (exter-
nal hard disk drive). When this documentation methodology is followed, it elimi-
nates confusion (about which version of the software was used to create the output)
at trial time. Often it is necessary to duplicate forensic-processing results during or
before trial. Duplication of results can be difficult or impossible to achieve if the soft-
ware has been upgraded and the original version used was not retained.
246
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

There is a high probability that you will encounter this problem because most com-
mercial software is upgraded routinely, but it may take years for a case to go to
trial.
LEGAL ASPECTS OF COLLECTING AND PRESERVING COMPUTER
FORENSIC EVIDENCE
Some of the most common reasons for improper evidence collection are poorly
written policies, lack of an established incident response plan, lack of incident re-
sponse training, and a broken chain of custody. For the purposes of this chapter,
the reader should assume that policies have been clearly defined and reviewed by
legal counsel, an incident response plan is in place, and necessary personnel have
been properly trained. The remainder of this chapter focuses on the procedure a
private organization should follow in collecting computer forensic evidence to
maintain chain of custody.
Definition
In simple terms, a chain of custody is a roadmap that shows how evidence was col-
lected, analyzed, and preserved in order to be presented as evidence in court. Es-
tablishing a clear chain of custody is crucial because electronic evidence can be
easily altered. A clear chain of custody demonstrates that electronic evidence is
trustworthy. Preserving a chain of custody for electronic evidence, at a minimum,
requires proving that:
No information has been added or changed.
A complete copy was made.
A reliable copying process was used.
All media was secured [6].
Proving this chain is unbroken is a prosecutor’s primary tool in authenticating
electronic evidence.
Legal Requirements
When evidence is collected, certain legal requirements must be met. These legal re-
quirements are vast, complex, and vary from country to country. However, there
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
247

are certain requirements that are generally agreed on within the United States. U.S.
Code Title 28, Section 1732 provides that log files are admissible as evidence if they
are collected in the regular course of business. Also, Rule 803(6) of the Federal Rules
of Evidence provides that logs, which might otherwise be considered hearsay, are
admissible as long as they are collected in the course of regularly conducted business
activity. This means you’d be much safer to log everything all the time and deal with
the storage issues than to turn on logging only after an incident is suspected. Not
only is this a bit like closing the barn door after the horse has fled, but it may also
render your logs inadmissible in court.
Another factor in the admissibility of log files is the ability to prove that they
have not been subject to tampering. Whenever possible, digital signatures should be
used to verify log authenticity. Other protective measures include, but are not lim-
ited to, storing logs on a dedicated logging server and encrypting log files. Log files
are often one of the best, if not only, sources of evidence available. Therefore, due
diligence should be applied in protecting them.
One other generally accepted requirement of evidence collection is a user’s ex-
pectation of privacy. A key to establishing that a user has no right to privacy when
using corporate networks or computer systems is the implementation of a log-on
banner. CERT Advisory CA-1992-19 suggests the following text be tailored to a
corporation’s specific needs under the guidance of legal counsel:
This system is for the use of authorized users only. Individuals using this computer
system without authority, or in excess of their authority, are subject to having all
of their activities on this system monitored and recorded by system personnel.
In the course of monitoring individuals improperly using this system, or in the
course of system maintenance, the activities of authorized users may also be
monitored.
Anyone using this system expressly consents to such monitoring and is advised
that if such monitoring reveals possible evidence of criminal activity, system per-
sonnel may provide the evidence of such monitoring to law enforcement officials.
Furthermore, security policy can play a key role in establishing a user’s expec-
tation of privacy. The Supreme Court ruling in O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709
(1987) implies that the legality of workplace monitoring depends primarily on
whether employment policies exist that authorize monitoring and whether that
policy has been clearly communicated to employees. To prove that the policy has
been communicated, employees should sign a statement indicating that they have
read, understood, and agreed to comply with corporate policy and consent to sys-
tem monitoring.
248
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Evidence Collection Procedure
When the time arrives to begin collecting evidence, the first rule that must be fol-
lowed is do not rush. Tensions will probably be high and people will want to find an-
swers as quickly as possible. However, if the investigators rush through these
procedures, mistakes will be made and evidence will be lost.
The investigation team will need to bring certain tools with them to the inci-
dent site. They will need a copy of their incident-handling procedure, an evidence
collection notebook, and evidence identification tags. Depending on the type of in-
cident and whether the team will be able to retrieve an entire system or just the data,
they may also need to bring tools to produce reliable copies of electronic evidence,
including media to use in the copying process. In some cases, legal counsel will
want photographs of the system prior to search and seizure. If this is something
your legal counsel wants as part of the evidence, then also include a Polaroid cam-
era in the list of tools.
Policy and procedure should indicate who is to act as incident coordinator.
When an incident is reported, this individual will contact the other members of the
response team as outlined in the Incident Response Policy. Upon arrival at the in-
cident site, this individual will be responsible for ensuring that every detail of the
incident-handling procedure is followed. The incident coordinator will also assign
team members the various tasks outlined in the incident-handling procedure and
will serve as the liaison to the legal team, law enforcement officials, management,
and public relations personnel. Ultimate responsibility for ensuring that evidence
is properly collected and preserved, and that the chain of custody is properly main-
tained, belongs to the incident coordinator.
One team member will be assigned the task of maintaining the evidence note-
book. This person will record the who, what, where, when, and how of the investi-
gation process. At a minimum, items to be recorded in the notebook include
Who initially reported the suspected incident along with time, date, and cir-
cumstances surrounding the suspected incident.
Details of the initial assessment leading to the formal investigation.
Names of all persons conducting the investigation.
The case number of the incident.
Reasons for the investigation.
A list of all computer systems included in the investigation, along with com-
plete system specifications. Also include identification tag numbers assigned to
the systems or individual parts of the system.
Network diagrams.
Applications running on the computer systems previously listed.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
249

A copy of the policy or policies that relate to accessing and using the systems
previously listed.
A list of administrators responsible for the routine maintenance of the system.
A detailed list of steps used in collecting and analyzing evidence. Specifically,
this list needs to identify the date and time each task was performed, a descrip-
tion of the task, who performed the task, where the task was performed, and the
results of the analysis.
An access control list of who had access to the collected evidence at what date
and time [6].
A separate notebook should be used for each investigation. Also, the notebook
should not be spiral-bound. It should be bound in such a way that it is obvious if
a page or pages have been removed.
This notebook is a crucial element in maintaining chain of custody. Therefore,
it must be as detailed as possible to assist in maintaining this chain.
Another team member (or members) will be assigned the task of evidence col-
lection. To avoid confusion, the number of people assigned this task should be
kept to a minimum. This member (or members) should also be highly proficient
with copying and analysis tools. This person will tag all evidence and work with the
person responsible for the evidence notebook to ensure that this information is
properly recorded. Next, the person will also be responsible for making a reliable
copy of all data to be used as evidence. The data will include complete copies of dri-
ves on compromised or suspect systems, as well as all relevant log files. This can be
done on-site or the entire system can be moved to a forensics lab, as needs dictate.
A simple file copy is not sufficient to serve as evidence in the case of compromised
or suspect systems. A binary copy of the data is the proper way to preserve evidence.
A reliable copy process has three critical characteristics. First, the process must meet
industry standards for quality and reliability. This includes the software used to cre-
ate the copy and the media on which the copy is made. A good benchmark is whether
the software is used and relied on by law enforcement agencies. Second, the copies
must be capable of independent verification. Third, the copies must be tamperproof.
Two copies of the data should be made using an acceptable tool. The original
should be placed in a sealed container. One copy will be used for analysis and the
other copy can be put back in the system so the system can be returned to service
as quickly as possible.
250
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

In certain cases, it is necessary to keep the entire system or certain pieces of hard-
ware as part of evidence. The investigation coordinator will work with the legal
team to determine the requirements for a given case.
Once all evidence is collected and logged, it can be securely transported to the
forensics lab. A detailed description of how data was transported and who was re-
sponsible for the transport, along with date, time, and route, should be included in
the log. It is required that the evidence be transported under dual control.
Storage and Analysis of Data
Finally, the chain of custody must be maintained throughout the analysis process.
One of the keys to maintaining the chain is a secure storage location. If the corpo-
ration uses access control cards or video surveillance in other parts of the building,
consider using these devices in the forensics lab. Access control cards for entering
and exiting the lab will help verify who had access to the lab at what time. The video
cameras will help determine what they did once they were inside the lab. At a min-
imum, the lab must provide some form of access control; a log should be kept de-
tailing entrance and exit times of all individuals. It is important that evidence never
be left in an unsecured area. If a defense lawyer can show that unauthorized persons
had access to the evidence, it could easily be declared inadmissible.
Pieces of evidence should be grouped and stored by case along with the evi-
dence notebook. In an effort to be as thorough as possible, investigators should fol-
low a clearly documented analysis plan. A detailed plan will help prevent mistakes
(which could lead to the evidence becoming inadmissible) during analysis. As
analysis of evidence is performed, investigators must log the details of their actions
in the evidence notebook. The following should be included at a minimum:
The date and time of analysis
Tools used in performing the analysis
Detailed methodology of the analysis
Results of the analysis [6]
Again, the information recorded in the evidence notebook must be as detailed
as possible to demonstrate its trustworthiness. A trial lawyer well versed in the tech-
nological world, who knows how to ask the right questions, may find that the
method or circumstances of preparation indicate lack of trustworthiness (under Fed. R.
Evid. 803(6)), to such a degree that a court will sustain, or at least consider, a chal-
lenge to the admissibility of the evidence. A properly prepared evidence notebook
will help to defeat such a challenge.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
251

Finally, once all evidence has been analyzed and all results have been recorded
in the evidence notebook, a copy of the notebook should be made and given to the
legal team. If the legal team finds that sufficient evidence exists to take legal action,
it will be important to maintain the chain of custody until the evidence is handed
over to the proper legal authorities. Legal officials should provide a receipt detail-
ing all of the items received for entry into evidence.
SUMMARY
The latter part of the 20th century was marked by the electronic transistor and the
machines and ideas made possible by it. As a result, the world changed from ana-
log to digital. Although the computer reigns supreme in the digital domain, it is not
the only digital device. An entire constellation of audio, video, communications,
and photographic devices are becoming so closely associated with the computer as
to have converged with it.
From a law enforcement perspective, more of the information that serves as
currency in the judicial process is being stored, transmitted, or processed in digital
form. The connectivity resulting from a single world economy, in which the com-
panies providing goods and services are truly international, has enabled criminals
to act transjurisdictionally with ease. Consequently, a perpetrator may be brought
to justice in one jurisdiction while the digital evidence required to successfully pros-
ecute the case may only reside in other jurisdictions.
This situation requires that all nations have the ability to collect and preserve
digital evidence for their own needs as well as for the potential needs of other sov-
ereigns. Each jurisdiction has its own system of government and administration of
justice, but in order for one country to protect itself and its citizens, it must be able
to make use of evidence collected by other nations. Though it is not reasonable to
expect all nations to know about and abide by the precise laws and rules of other
countries, a means that will allow the exchange of evidence must be found. This
chapter was a first attempt to define the technical aspects of these exchanges.
Conclusions
The laws surrounding the collection and preservation of evidence are vast and
complex.
Even if local law enforcement does not have a computer forensics expert on
staff, they will know the basic rules of evidence collection and should have con-
252
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

tacts within the law enforcement community who are experts in computer
forensics.
A clearly documented plan is essential for an investigation team to be success-
ful in collecting admissible evidence. The plan should be designed with the as-
sistance of legal counsel and law enforcement agencies to ensure compliance
with all applicable local, state, and federal laws.
Once a plan has been drafted and the incident team is assembled, practice
should begin.
Configure a test network in a lab environment and invite members of the IT
staff to attempt to circumvent the security measures installed in the lab network.
Treat the intrusion as an actual incident and follow incident handling and ev-
idence collection procedures.
Review the results with the team and evaluate whether evidence collected
would be admissible, based on the procedures followed and the analysis results.
When possible, include legal staff and local law enforcement in practice sessions.
When in doubt, hire an expert.
If resident security staff members are not equipped to perform the investiga-
tion, do not hesitate to bring in outside assistance.
It is in the best interest of the company to ensure that the investigation is han-
dled properly.
The goal is to collect and preserve evidence in such a way that it will be admis-
sible in a court of law.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence Checklist
(Table F7.1 in Appendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere
to the provisional list of actions for duplication and preservation of digital evi-
dence. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for which the
researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review, and
assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems have been
mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review
questions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case
project. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
253

CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? The computer investigator needs to be worried about destructive
process and devices being planted by the computer owner but does not need to
be concerned about the operating system of the computer and applications.
2.
True or False? Computer evidence is fragile by its very nature and the problem
is compounded by the potential of destructive programs and open data.
3.
True or False? Some of the least common reasons for improper evidence col-
lection are poorly written policies, lack of an established incident response
plan, lack of incident response training, and a broken chain of custody.
4.
True or False? The complexity of criminal law means that the overwhelming
majority of cases do not make it to civil or criminal court, but should.
5.
True or False? If your preservation is good, it becomes fairly evident that your
collection and transportation of evidence gives rise to numerous possibilities
for error in the form of destruction, mishandling, and contamination.
Multiple Choice
1.
There are three criminal evidence rules to gain admissibility, except for two:
A. Destruction
B.
Mishandling
C. Authentication
D. The best evidence rule
E.
Exceptions to the hearsay rule
2.
The following general computer evidence processing steps have been provided,
except:
A. Shut down the computer.
B.
Document the hardware configuration of the system.
C. Transport the computer system to an unsecure location.
D. Make bit stream backups of hard disks and floppy disks.
E.
Mathematically authenticate data on all storage devices.
3.
By following the guidelines listed here, you stand a good chance of preserving
the evidence, except for two:
A. Turn on or operate the subject computer.
B.
Don’t turn on or operate the subject computer.
C. Don’t solicit the assistance of the resident “computer expert.”
254
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

D. Solicit the assistance of the resident “computer expert.”
E.
Don’t evaluate employee email unless corporate policy allows it.
4.
Preserving a chain of custody for electronic evidence, at a minimum, requires
proving that, except:
A. No information has been added or changed.
B.
A complete copy was made.
C. A reliable copying process was used.
D. An unreliable copying process was used.
E.
All media was secured.
5.
One team member will be assigned the task of maintaining the evidence note-
book. This person will record the who, what, where, when, and how of the
investigation process. At a minimum, items to be recorded in the notebook
include the following, except:
A. Who initially declined to report the suspected incident along with time,
date, and circumstances surrounding the suspected incident
B.
Details of the initial assessment leading to the formal investigation
C. Names of all persons conducting the investigation
D. The case number of the incident
E.
Reasons for the investigation
Exercise
Downsizing and outsourcing overseas at a large U.S. government contractor resulted in
the termination of 500 engineers. What would the role of a CFS team (CFST) be here?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A male employee at a regional trucking company was accused of downloading child
pornography to his office computer. He is now suing the company for millions for
being wrongly accused, which resulted in tarnishing his reputation and his stand-
ing in the community. How did the CFS prove that the employee did not download
the images, and in fact some other employee did?
Case Project
A computer was seized during a routine drug arrest. What did the CFS do to prove
that the computer was involved in other crimes?
Optional Team Case Project
A small landscaping company suspecting embezzlement hired a CFST to review
their bookkeeper’s computer. Explain how a CFST would deal with this case.
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
255

REFERENCES
[1] “Digital Evidence Collection & Handling” (© North Carolina Wesleyan
College), North Carolina Wesleyan College, 3400 N. Wesleyan Boulevard,
Rocky Mount, NC 27804, 2004.
[2] Computer Evidence Processing Steps,” New Technologies, Inc., 2075 NE
Division St., Gresham, Oregon 97030, 2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad E-Business Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill Professional, New York,
2001.
[4] “Computer Incident Response Guidelines,” New Technologies, Inc., 2075
NE Division St., Gresham, Oregon 97030, 2001.
[5] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[6] Witter, Franklin, “Legal Aspects of Collecting and Preserving Computer
Forensics Evidence,” Branch Banking & Trust, 2501 Wooten Blvd., MC
100-99-08-25, Wilson, North Carolina 27893 (SANS Institute, 5401 West-
bard Ave., Suite 1501, Bethesda, MD 20816), 2001.
256
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

257
Computer Image
Verification and
Authentication
8
A
s law enforcement and other computer forensics investigators become more
familiar with handling evidential computer material, it is apparent that a
number of more or less formalized procedures have evolved to maintain
both the continuity and integrity of the material to be investigated. Although these
procedures are extremely effective under the current rules of evidence, it is ex-
pected that alternative procedures will develop as technology advances. The current
procedures, in use by both law enforcement and computer forensics investigators,
work something like this:
At least two copies are taken of the evidential computer. One of these is sealed
in the presence of the computer owner and then placed in secure storage. This is the
master copy and it will only be opened for examination under instruction from the
court in the event of a challenge to the evidence presented after forensic analysis on
the second copy. If the computer has been seized and held in secure storage by law
enforcement, this will constitute best evidence. If the computer has not been seized,
then the master copy becomes best evidence. In either case, the assumption is that
while in secure storage, there can be no possibility of tampering with the evidence.
This does not protect the computer owner from the possibility that secured evi-
dence may be tampered with.
A growing practical problem with this method of evidential copying occurs not
because of the security aspect or appearance of the situation, but because of the in-
creasing sizes of fixed disks found in computers. A size of 2 gigabytes is no longer un-
usual, and it is common to find more than one fixed disk within a single machine.
The cost of the media is decreasing slowly, but this is still significant when consider-
ing the quantity of information to be copied and stored (even though the system does
allow for media reuse). There is also the problem of the length of time individual

copies may take to complete. A sizable saving in both time and expense might, there-
fore, be achieved if an alternative method of evidential security could be arranged.
SPECIAL NEEDS OF EVIDENTIAL AUTHENTICATION
A wealth of mathematical algorithms deal with secure encryption, verification, and
authentication of computer-based material. These display varying degrees of secu-
rity and complexity, but all of them rely on a second channel of information,
whereby certain elements of the encryption/decryption/authentication processes
are kept secret. This is characterized most plainly in the systems of public and pri-
vate key encryption but is also apparent in other protocols.
Consider the investigative process where computers are concerned. During an
investigation, it is decided that evidence may reside on a computer system. It may
be possible to seize or impound the computer system, but this risks violating the
basic principle of innocent until proven guilty, by depriving an innocent party of the
use of his or her system. It should be perfectly possible to copy all the information
from the computer system in a manner that leaves the original system untouched
and yet makes all contents available for forensic analysis.
When this is done, the courts may rightly insist that the copied evidence is pro-
tected from either accidental or deliberate modification and that the investigating
authority should prove that this has been done. Thus, it is not the content that
needs protection, but its integrity.
This protection takes two forms: a secure method of determining that the data
has not been altered by even a single bit since the copy was taken and a secure method
of determining that the copy is genuinely the one taken at the time and on the com-
puter in question. For the purpose of this chapter, these elements are collectively re-
ferred to here as the digital image verification and authentication protocol [1].
It is argued that when considering forensic copies of computer contents, en-
cryption of data is not the point at issue. Neither are the provisions of the many
digital signature protocols appropriate to the requirements of evidential authenti-
cation (see sidebar, “Digital IDs and Authentication Technology”).
DIGITAL IDS AND AUTHENTICATION TECHNOLOGY
When customers buy software in a store, the source of that software is obvious. Cus-
tomers can tell who published the software and they can see whether the package has
been opened. These factors enable customers to make decisions about what software
to purchase and how much to “trust” those products.
258
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
259
When customers download software from the Internet, the most they see is a
message warning them about the dangers of using the software. The Internet lacks
the subtle information provided by packaging, shelf space, shrink wrap, and the like.
Without an assurance of the software’s integrity, and without knowing who pub-
lished the software, it’s difficult for customers to know how much to trust software.
It’s difficult to make the choice of downloading the software from the Internet.
For example (when using Microsoft Authenticode coupled with Digital IDs™
from VeriSign®), through the use of digital signatures, software developers are able
to include information about themselves and their code with their programs. When
customers download software signed with Authenticode and verified by VeriSign,
they should be assured of content source, indicating that the software really comes
from the publisher who signed it, and content integrity, indicating that the software
has not been altered or corrupted since it was signed.
The author and publisher do not endorse any specific computer forensics soft-
ware over another. Authenticode from Microsoft and Digital IDs from
VeriSign are mentioned here for illustration purposes only.
Users benefit from this software accountability because they know who pub-
lished the software and that the code hasn’t been tampered with. In the extreme case
that software performs unacceptable or malicious activity on their computers, users
can pursue recourse against the publisher. This accountability and potential recourse
serve as a strong deterrent to the distribution of harmful code.
Developers and Webmasters should benefit from Authenticode, because it puts
trust in their name and makes their products harder to falsify. By signing code,
developers build a trusted relationship with users, who then learn to confidently
download signed software from that software publisher or Web site provider. With
Authenticode, users can make educated decisions about what software to download,
knowing who published the software and that it hasn’t been tampered with.
WHO NEEDS A SOFTWARE PUBLISHER ID?
Any publisher who plans to distribute code or content over the Internet or over
corporate extranets, risks impersonation and tampering. For example, Authenti-
code is currently used to sign 32-bit .exe files (portable executable  files), .cab files,
.ocx files, and .class files. In particular, if you are distributing active content (such
as ActiveX controls) for use with such Microsoft end user applications as Internet
Explorer, Exchange, Outlook, or Outlook Express, you will want to sign code
using Authenticode.
q

VeriSign offers a Class 3 Digital ID designed for commercial software publish-
ers. These are companies and other organizations that publish software. This class
of digital IDs provides the identity of a publishing organization and is designed to
represent the level of assurance provided today by retail channels for software.
WHAT AUTHENTICODE LOOKS LIKE TO CONSUMERS
Microsoft client applications, such as Internet Explorer, Exchange, Outlook, and
Outlook Express, come with security features that incorporate Authenticode. These
applications are often used to obtain other pieces of software. In a component model
such as Active™or Java™this happens frequently, often without the end user being
aware of it. For example, when a user visits a Web page that uses executable files to
provide animation or sound, code is often downloaded to the end user’s machine to
achieve the effects. Although this may provide substantial value, users risk down-
loading viruses or code from a disreputable publisher.
If an end user of one of these applications encounters an unsigned component
distributed via the Internet, the following will occur: if the application’s security set-
tings are set on High, the client application will not permit the unsigned code to
load; if the application’s security settings are set on Medium, the client application
will display a warning similar to the screen shown in Figure 8.1 [2].
260
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q
FIGURE 8.1 Security warning screen.

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
261
By contrast, if a user encounters a signed applet or other code, the client appli-
cation will display a screen similar to the one shown in Figure 8.2 [2]. Through
Authenticode, the user is informed:
Of a place to find out more about the control
The authenticity of the preceding information
Users can choose to trust all subsequent downloads of software from the same
publisher. They can also choose to trust all software published by commercial pub-
lishers (see preceding information) that has been certified by VeriSign. Simply by
clicking the More Info button, users can inspect the certificate and verify its validity,
as shown in Figure 8.3 [2].
TECHNICAL OVERVIEW
A digital ID (also known as a digital certificate) is a form of electronic credentials for
the Internet. Similar to a driver’s license, employee ID card, or business license, a
digital ID is issued by a trusted third party to establish the identity of the ID holder.
The third party who issues certificates is known as a certification authority (CA).
Digital ID technology is based on the theory of public key cryptography. In pub-
lic key cryptography systems, every entity has two complementary keys (a public key
and a private key) that function only when they are held together. Public keys are
widely distributed to users, whereas private keys are kept safe and only used by their
owner. Any code digitally signed with the publisher’s private key can only be suc-
cessfully verified using the complementary public key. Another way to look at this is
FIGURE 8.2 Client application security warning.

that code successfully verified using the publisher’s public key (which is sent along
with the digital signature), could only have been digitally signed using the pub-
lisher’s private key (thus authenticating the source of the code) and has not been
tampered with.
The purpose of a digital ID is to reliably link a public and private key pair with
its owner. When a CA such as VeriSign issues digital IDs, it verifies that the owner is
not claiming a false identity. Just as when a government issues you a passport, it is
officially vouching for the fact that you are who you say you are. Thus, when a CA
issues you a digital certificate, it is putting its name behind the statement that you are
the rightful owner of your public and private key pair.
CERTIFICATION AUTHORITIES
CAs such as VeriSign are organizations that issue digital certificates to applicants whose
identity they are willing to vouch for. Each certificate is linked to the certificate of the CA
that signed it. As the Internet’s leading CA, VeriSign has the following responsibilities:
Publishing the criteria for granting, revoking, and managing certificates
Granting certificates to applicants who meet the published criteria
Managing certificates (enrolling, renewing, and revoking them)
Storing VeriSign’s root keys in an exceptionally secure manner
Verifying evidence submitted by applicants
262
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q
FIGURE 8.3 Inspect the certificate and verify its validity.

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
263
Providing tools for enrollment
Accepting the liability associated with these responsibilities
Timestamping digital signatures
HOW AUTHENTICODE WORKS WITH VERISIGN DIGITAL IDS
Authenticode relies on industry-standard cryptography techniques such as X.509
v3 or higher certificates and PKCS #7 and #10 signature standards. These are
well-proven cryptography protocols, which ensure a robust implementation of
code-signing technology. Developers can use the WinVerifyTrust API, on which
Authenticode is based, to verify signed code in their own Win32 applications.
Authenticode uses digital signature technology to assure users of the origin and
integrity of software. In digital signatures, the private key generates the signature,
and the corresponding public key validates it. To save time, the Authenticode pro-
tocols use a cryptographic digest, which is a one-way hash of the document. The
process is outlined below and shown in Figure 8.4 [2].
1. Publisher obtains a software developer digital ID from VeriSign.
2. Publisher creates code
3. Using the SIGNCODE.EXE utility, the publisher
a.
Creates a hash of the code, using an algorithm such as MD5 or SHA
b.
Encrypts the hash using his private key
c.
Creates a package containing the code, the encrypted hash, and the
publisher’s certificate
4. The end user encounters the package.
q
Pub
Key
Original
Code
Original
Code
Certificate
1. Inspect
    Certificate
    Certificate
Signed Code
2. Generic Hash
Hash Algorithm
One-Way Hash
4. Compare
One-Way Hash
3. Apply Public Key
FIGURE 8.4 Authenticode: VeriSign Digital ID process.

264
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
5. The end user’s browser examines the publisher’s digital ID. Using the
VeriSign®root public key, which is already embedded in Authenticode-en-
abled applications, the end user’s browser verifies the authenticity of the
software developer digital ID (which is itself signed by the VeriSign root
Private Key).
6. Using the publisher’s public key contained within the publisher’s digital
ID, the end user’s browser decrypts the signed hash.
7. The end user’s browser runs the code through the same hashing algorithm
as the publisher, creating a new hash.
8. The end user’s browser compares the two hashes. If they are identical, the
browser messages that the content has been verified by VeriSign, and the
end user has confidence that the code was signed by the publisher identified
in the digital ID and that the code hasn’t been altered since it was signed.
The entire process is seamless and transparent to end users, who see only a
message that the content was signed by its publisher and verified by VeriSign.
TIMESTAMPING
Because key pairs are based on mathematical relationships that can theoretically be
“cracked” with a great deal of time and effort, it is a well-established security prin-
ciple that digital certificates should expire. Your VeriSign Digital ID will expire one
year after it is issued. However, most software is intended to have a lifetime of
longer than one year. To avoid having to resign software every time your certificate
expires, a timestamping service is now available. Now, when you sign code, a hash
of your code will be sent to VeriSign to be timestamped. As a result, when your code
is downloaded, clients will be able to distinguish between code signed with an
expired certificate, which should not be trusted, and code signed with a certificate
that was valid at the time the code was signed, but which has subsequently expired.
This code should be trusted [2].
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
It is useful to present some fundamental requirements of a forensic data collection
system before considering how these can be securely protected. These requirements
were chosen to reflect the experience of computer forensic investigators. Other
forensic experts may argue against some or all of them:
1. Forensic data collection should be complete and non-software specific,
thus avoiding software traps and hidden partitioning.

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
265
2. In operation, it should be as quick and as simple as possible to avoid error
or delay.
3. It should be possible for anyone to use a forensic data collection system
with the minimum amount of training.
4. Necessary costs and resources should be kept to a minimum [1].
To meet the conditions specified in items 2, 3, and 4, the digital integrity verifi-
cation and authentication protocol must be tailored to suit. For the collection phase
to remain quick and simple, the digital integrity verification and authentication
protocol must not add significantly to the time required for copying, nor should
there be additional (possibly complex) procedures.
The time and effort required to introduce links with key management agencies,
trusted third parties, key distribution centers, and similar paraphernalia of digital
signatures and document authentication is not necessary. It would add to the cost
and complexity with little increase to security. It might mean, for example, that
only investigators issued with a valid digital signature would be able to complete
copies. Who is to issue these? Where are they to be stored? How will each individ-
ual remember his or her own key? How can misuse of keys be detected?
The digital integrity verification and authentication protocol described in the next
section is virtually a self-contained system. Obviously, a truly self-contained encryp-
tion system cannot be cryptographically secure. However, within the digital integrity
verification and authentication protocol, alternative channels of security are used to
provide a truly secure system, but at much lower cost in time and consumables.
PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION
The emphasis here is on a practical application of proven technology, such that a
minimum amount of reliance is placed on the technical ability of the operator/in-
vestigator. It must be understood that during the copying process, procedures are
implemented to trap and handle hardware errors, mapping exceptions where nec-
essary. It must also be understood that procedures are implemented to verify that
information is copied correctly. This information is stored on each cartridge within
a copy series.
Also stored on each cartridge is a reference area containing copy-specific in-
formation such as CPU type and speed, hardware equipment indicators, copying
drive serial number, cartridge sequence number, exhibit details and reference com-
ments, operator name together with a unique password, and the real date and time
as entered by the operator. The remainder (in fact the bulk) of each cartridge con-
tains the information copied from the suspect drive on a sector by sector basis.

Thus, for computer forensics investigators and senior technology strategists, IT
security with regard to image verification and authentication is a study in con-
trasts. On the one hand, it’s a topic that chief information officers (CIOs) repeat-
edly cite as one of their most important issues, if not the most important. Yet,
despite the 9-11-01 terrorist attacks, CIOs and senior IT executives still suggest
that their non-IT colleagues simply do not share their sense of urgency—they have
all become complacent. Perhaps that’s because relatively few security breaches 
have hit their organizations—and most of those are of the nuisance variety, which
doesn’t cost a lot of hard dollars. Unfortunately, security is like insurance: You
never know when you’ll need it. With that in mind, let’s take a look at why there
isn’t a sense of urgency in implementing image verification and authentication
security considerations.
Security Considerations
Day after day, in every company, university, and government agency, a never-
ending parry and thrust with those who threaten the security of their networks
continues. Ultimately, with everything changing, the struggle for security is a con-
stant battle. Everything has to be updated as new and different threats are received.
Organizations must be constantly vigilant. New technologies in the areas of
image verification and authentication bring new vulnerabilities, and computer
forensics investigators are constantly discovering vulnerabilities in old image veri-
fication and authentication products. It is expected that the number of vulnerabil-
ities reported in 2002 will be triple the previous year’s number.
As a result, CIOs are devoting more money and time to image verification and
authentication security. The costs will continue to grow as the world becomes more
interconnected and as the cleverness of those who would cause harm increases. In
1989, CERT/CC (http://www.cert.org/) counted fewer than 200 security incidents
(other viruses since then, and everything that resulted from it, counts as one inci-
dent). In 2003, CERT/CC recorded more than 40,000 incidents.
The CERT® Coordination Center (CERT/CC) is a center of Internet security ex-
pertise at the Software Engineering Institute, a federally funded research and de-
velopment center operated by Carnegie Mellon University. They study Internet
security vulnerabilities, handle computer security incidents, publish security alerts,
research long-term changes in networked systems, and develop information and
training to help you improve security at your site.
No one is immune. When 30 computer security experts involved in a spare-
time endeavor called The Honeynet Project hooked a typical computer network to
the Internet to see what hackers would do, the network was probed and exploited
266
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
267
in 15 minutes. Such hackers are intelligent adversaries who are going to find your
weak points. That’s what makes the Honeynet Project different from other kinds of
risk management.
Network managers must balance security against the business advantages that
new technology (image verification and authentication security) brings. The biggest
issue most companies face is how to allow users to do everything they need to do to
be efficient from a business standpoint without opening the door to an attack.
Most CIOs do understand the key role employees play in security. Some take
precautions when employees are being dismissed—quickly removing their network
access, for example. Everyone knows that education is key. Employees can defi-
nitely cause problems if they don’t do the right thing.
Employees can also be allies in the battle. Most CIOs view their staff as a
strength in their overall information security program. Staff members are the ones
who make sure viruses don’t come in and holes aren’t created in the firewall. They
have to understand that most business is built on trust, and their role in maintain-
ing that trust is critical.
It’s also necessary to win support of non-staff members. Usually it’s not an issue,
because, in the case of a virus outbreak, everybody is affected. It’s very visible, and
anything that is done is appropriate as far as the non-staff employees are concerned.
Some esoteric things, such as virtual private network (VPN) hardware or encrypting
outside communications, are a little harder to sell. The non-staff employees want to
know what it’s going to cost and what the risk is. Non-staff employees can under-
stand it on a gut level, but after all, companies are not the Defense Department—
they don’t make nuclear arms; they roll and distribute stainless steel or other
products.
For example, the CIO should create a team, consisting of him- or herself, the
company’s security officer, and the internal auditor, that meets regularly to review
risks and then makes recommendations on spending. CERT/CC encourages tech-
nical and business-side people to work together because they will bring different
perspectives to the matter. This collaboration should be part of an organization-
wide, comprehensive plan to prevent companies from focusing on one aspect of
security and overlooking others. Security is a mindset and a management practice
as much as it is a technology.
Nevertheless, there is always some difficulty in enlisting the support of senior
executives at some point. It’s more political than technical. Full communication
and credibility are important. You should not try to deal with problems unless
there really are problems. You should also avoid affecting the user any more than
is absolutely necessary.
Financial institutions have had to conform to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of
1999, which governs these institutions and the privacy of their customer informa-
tion [3]. Privacy is critical by law, and it’s security that enables privacy. Financial

institutions have to prove that they are securing their members’ information. Fi-
nancial institutions are also subject to at least an annual review. In the past it was
“Show me your vaults, show me your cameras, show me your paper-shredders.”
Now it’s “Show me your password policy, show me your firewall.”
In the end, it’s difficult, perhaps impossible, to measure the return on invest-
ment in security, but perhaps that’s the wrong way to think about it. It’s difficult to
determine whether CIOs are overspending or under spending. You can’t overspend,
really. You have to protect your data. It only takes one time—one hacker getting in
and stealing all your financial data. It would be irresponsible on a CIO’s part to not
have the toughest image verification and authentication security possible.
SUMMARY
The overall security of a computer image verification and authentication system
rests in the combination of security measures. These can be summarized technically
as follows:
The block hash values are generated in conjunction with a one-time pad sim-
ulation. As well as providing continuity between blocks, this negates the re-
dundancy encountered when copying the type of data found on fixed disks
(quantities of zeroes, ASCII text, and fixed structures). Thus, repeat hash val-
ues are avoided and a possible birthday attack is thwarted.
The encryption of the vault, because it only occurs at the end of each section of
the copy, can be accomplished using a secure encryption algorithm.
Both the prosecuting and defending parties have secure protection against the
possibility of the evidence being tampered with as long as they retain the sealed
floppies. In the event of a challenge, one or both envelopes can be opened in
court and verified against each other and the cartridges. In the event of a mis-
match with the cartridge, reference to the encrypted vault stored on the car-
tridge will show which block on the cartridge has been altered (or even the
vault itself) [1].
Image verification and authentication security involves a relatively straightfor-
ward risk-management equation (the more security you put in place, the more
onerous it is for end users), and until the technology arrives to make impenetrable
security invisible to end users, it will remain that way. Most CIOs today clearly sup-
port increased security, and although they fault their non-IT cohorts for lack of se-
curity awareness, they appear to be realistic about the burden it puts on their
companies’ business units. However, CIOs aren’t instituting enough of the high-
profile risk-assessment measures that would increase awareness of the problem
throughout their corporations.
268
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
269
Conclusions
Having examined various alternative methods of copying suspect computers, a
computer image verification and authentication concept with dedicated hardware
remains the simplest, most secure, and most practical method currently available.
Copying directly to CD-ROM is not possible without some buffer drive to en-
able correct data-streaming; this introduces a number of potential problem
areas both with the increasingly complex hardware and evidential continuity.
CD-ROM technology was originally developed for audio requirements, and
the current reliability when storing digital data is extremely suspect [4].
Copying to tape is less expensive, but the viability of data stored for long peri-
ods (in many cases years), particularly if unattended, is also extremely suspect.
Both of these methods have additional problems of data verification during
and after the copy process.
Software-copying packages intended for use on nonspecific peripheral storage
devices raise problems of technical support and hardware matching.
The problems that were originally anticipated with rewriteable media have
not materialized, and the advantages of rewriteable media far outweigh the
disadvantages.
The process of copying fixed disks at BIOS level has enabled DIBS® to avoid
problems with operating systems and access control mechanisms while the
drive restoration process has proven capable of dealing with all currently avail-
able operating systems on the PC platform. In spite of these observations, no
forensic copying system in current use offers equal protection to both the in-
vestigator and the computer owner. Note that this protection depends on nei-
ther how securely the copy cartridges are stored nor the relative security
attending the storage of the floppy disks. Rather, it depends on the combina-
tion of all three and the technical security of the encryption mechanisms.
When it comes to security readiness, company size doesn’t matter. Larger com-
panies (those with at least 1,000 employees) typically devote larger portions of
their IT department’s staff and budget to image verification and authentication
security measures, but they are also more likely to have suffered security
breaches, to have seen the number of security breaches increase from the pre-
vious year, and to have experienced more serious security problems.
Security breaches normally cost larger companies $90,000, compared with
$78,000 for smaller companies.
Denial-of-service attacks are far more likely to occur at larger organizations.
Larger companies are also more likely to be hit with a virus than smaller com-
panies and more likely to have their Web sites defaced.

CIOs who place a high priority on security will spend an average of $869,000 in
2005 on security measures and technologies; their counterparts who place a
lower priority will spend an average of $654,000.
The role of senior business executives in beefing up security is significant, but
CIOs continue to express concerns about their executives’ approaches to security.
Indications are that CIOs often see their executives as paying lip service to
aligning their companies’ business practices with security concerns. At the
same time, CIOs don’t seem to be taking all the steps they could or should be
taking to make security a higher priority for their companies.
There aren’t many significant differences between CIOs who assign a high pri-
ority to security and those who don’t in terms of what security features they’ve
put in place.
Anti-virus software and firewalls are far and away the most frequently deployed
technologies.
Desktop anti-virus software is either already in place or in the process of being
installed by the CIOs’ companies.
Technologies not yet widely deployed include image verification and authenti-
cation, decoy services, risk-assessment software, and public key information
(PKI) document encryption.
The only significant divergence between CIOs who view security as a high pri-
ority and those who do not is in the use of risk-assessment software, PKI doc-
ument encryption, hybrid intrusion detection, and managed security services
for firewall management.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Computer Image Verification and Authentication Checklist
(Table F8.1 in Appendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere
to the provisional list of actions for computer image verification and authentica-
tion. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for which the re-
searcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review, and
assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems have been
mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
270
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
271
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? There’s a deficit of mathematical algorithms dealing with secure
encryption, verification, and authentication of computer-based material.
2.
True or False? It is not useful to present some fundamental requirements of a
forensic data collection system before considering how these can be securely
protected.
3.
True or False? It must be understood that during the copying process, proce-
dures are implemented to trap and handle hardware errors, mapping excep-
tions where necessary.
4.
True or False? A digital ID (also known as a digital certificate) is a form of elec-
tronic credentials for the extranet.
5.
True or False? The purpose of a digital ID is to reliably separate a public and
private key pair with its owner.
Multiple Choice
1.
Through Authenticode, the user is informed of the following, except for two:
A. The true identity of the publisher
B. A place to find out less about the control
C. The authenticity of the preceding disinformation
D. A place to find out more about the control
E. The authenticity of the preceding information
2.
As the Internet’s leading certification authority, VeriSign has the following
responsibilities, except:
A. Publishing the criteria for granting, revoking, and managing certificates
B. Granting certificates to applicants who meet the published criteria
C. Managing certificates (enrolling, renewing, and revoking them)
D. Storing VeriSign’s root keys in an exceptionally unsecure manner
E. Verifying evidence submitted by applicants
3.
To save time, the Authenticode protocols use a cryptographic digest, which is a
one-way hash of the document. The process is outlined by the following, except:
A. Publisher obtains a software developer digital ID from VeriSign.
B. Publisher creates unicode.
C. Using the SIGNCODE.EXE utility.

D. The end user encounters the package.
E. The end user’s browser examines the publisher’s digital ID. Using the
VeriSign root public key, which is already embedded in Authenticode-
enabled applications, the end user’s browser verifies the authenticity of
the software developer digital ID (which is itself signed by the VeriSign
root private key).
4.
It is useful to present some fundamental requirements of a forensic data col-
lection system before considering how these can be securely protected. These
requirements were chosen to reflect the experience of computer forensic inves-
tigators. Other forensic experts may argue against some or all of them, except:
A. Forensic data collection should be complete and non-software specific,
thus avoiding software traps and hidden partitioning.
B. In operation, it should be as slow and as difficult as possible to avoid
error or delay.
C. It should be possible for anyone to use a forensic data collection system
with the minimum amount of training.
D. Necessary costs and resources should be kept to a minimum.
E. In operation, it should be as quick and as simple as possible to avoid
error or delay.
5.
Within the current raw data content of the suspect disk drive, a copy is also
taken of the high section of conventional memory (to include any on-board
ROM areas) and the CMOS contents via port access. This information is stored
on each cartridge within a copy series. Also stored on each cartridge is a refer-
ence area containing copy-specific information such as the following, except:
A. CPU type and speed; hardware equipment indicators
B. Deleting drive serial number
C. Cartridge sequence number
D. Exhibit details and reference comments
E. Operator name together with a unique password
Exercise
A company had contracted with a government agency to provide services for the
agency’s employees. The government agency alleged that the company had violated
its agreement and filed a lawsuit. Discovery requests were onerous, to say the least;
production of over two terabytes (2,000 gigabytes, the equivalent of 700,000,000
document pages) of data was mandated by the court. Almost all the data resided on
272
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Computer Image Verification and Authentication
273
backup tapes. It would be impossible for the company to meet this request using
manual methods, and they lacked the internal technical expertise to produce the
massive amounts of data involved in a cohesive electronic format. The company
turned to a CFS team (CFST) to compile the data necessary to meet the discovery
request. To narrow the scope of meaningful data, what did the CFST do?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
An accounting firm was conducting an audit of a publicly owned company when
they came upon some accounting irregularities. The irregularities were serious
enough to potentially necessitate a re-stating of earnings. Considering the many
scandals currently blighting the corporate sector, the accounting firm wished to
confirm their findings before sounding any public alarms. They retained a CFST to
conduct large-scale data mining to get to the bottom of the irregularities. How
would a CFST go about conducting a forensics data mining operation?
Case Project
A bank suspected an employee of downloading sensitive files from the bank’s com-
puter network using his bank laptop computer from home while on leave of ab-
sence. The bank sent the computer to a CFST for computer forensic examination.
What were the results of that examination?
Optional Team Case Project
A woman employed by a large defense contractor accused her supervisor of sexu-
ally harassing her. She was fired from her job for “poor performance” and subse-
quently sued her ex-boss and the former employer. A CFST was retained by the
plaintiff’s attorneys to investigate allegations of the former supervisor’s harassing
behavior. How did the CFST go about conducting the investigation?
REFERENCES
[1] “DIVA Computer Evidence: Digital Image Verification and Authentica-
tion,” Computer Forensics UK Ltd, Third Floor, 9 North Street, Rugby,
Warwickshire, CV21 2AB, U.K., 2002.
[2] “Software Publisher Digital IDs for Microsoft Authenticode Technology,”
VeriSign Worldwide Headquarters, 487 East Middlefield Road, Mountain

View, CA 94043 (VeriSign and other trademarks, service marks and logos
are registered or unregistered trademarks of VeriSign and its subsidiaries in
the United States and in foreign countries), 2002.
[3] “Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad E-Business Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill Professional, New York, 2001.
[4] “Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice
Hall, New York, 2002.
274
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

T
he third part of this book covers the discovery of electronic evidence, identi-
fication of data, reconstructing past events, and networks.
III
Computer Forensics
Analysis
Part

This page intentionally left blank 

277
Discovery of Electronic
Evidence
9
C
omputer technology has revolutionized the way we deal with information
and the way we run our businesses. Increasingly important business infor-
mation is created, stored, and communicated electronically [1]. Many types
of information that can play a useful role in litigation are no longer printed on
paper and stored in paper files, but rather are stored in a computer system or in
computer-readable form. As companies have increased their reliance on their com-
puter systems, lawyers have begun to be aware of the valuable electronic treasures
that are now being kept in these systems and have started aggressively to target elec-
tronic data for discovery in all types of litigation cases. The discoverability of these
electronic files is referred to as discovery of electronic evidence or DEE.
Plaintiffs’ lawyers have increasingly targeted electronic evidence for a number
of reasons. It is also likely that electronic evidence will soon attract the attention of
government investigators. Numerous statutory provisions empower government
officials to enter, inspect, and make copies of records that must be maintained pur-
suant to various statutes and regulations.
The primary purpose of these provisions is to enable the government to deter-
mine whether a company is complying with the record keeping and other require-
ments contained in the statute that imposes them. Many businesses are increasingly
storing the required records in electronic form. Government investigators will
likely begin to focus their attention on the electronic forms of these records and the
computer systems that house them.
The government also has access to records for investigatory purposes. Several
statutes, such as the human rights codes, Competition Act, Criminal Code, and tax acts
give government officials the right to enter a business establishment and inspect or
seize records. For example, under the Competition Act, peace officers with, or in exigent

circumstances without, a search warrant, may enter the premises, examine records, and
copy or seize them. They may use the computer system on the premises to search data
and produce printouts, which they may then seize for examination or copying.
Plaintiffs’ lawyers and government investigators need to develop the knowledge
and skills necessary to take advantage of the information residing in electronic form.
This does not mean they need to become computer specialists, but rather, that they
need to understand enough about technology to ask the right questions and enlist
the assistance of the forensic computer experts where necessary. Lawyers who choose
to ignore these new opportunities could expose themselves to malpractice claims.
Lawyers representing parties with large amounts of electronic data need to un-
derstand that their clients’ data will be targeted for such discovery and need to
advise their clients on how to prepare. Defensive strategies that should be imple-
mented prior to litigation include a proper document retention program, periodic
purging of magnetic media, and the implementation of a document management
system. Once litigation has commenced, defendants need to be better advised on
how to preserve relevant electronic evidence adequately—to avoid possible sanc-
tions or a negative inference at trial.
Now, let’s begin the discussion of electronic document discovery. This is the
process of viewing log files, databases, and other data sources on unseized equip-
ment to find and analyze information that may be of importance to a computer
crime investigation.
ELECTRONIC DOCUMENT DISCOVERY: 
A POWERFUL NEW LITIGATION TOOL
Other than direct testimony by an eyewitness, documentary evidence is probably
the most compelling form of evidence in criminal and civil cases. Often, important
communications are committed to writing, and such writings can make or break a
case. The same is true about documents used to conduct financial transactions. The
paper trail has always provided a wealth of information in criminal and civil cases
involving fraud. Traditional paper documents have been sought in the legal dis-
covery process for hundreds of years in cases involving white collar crime (financial
frauds, embezzlements). In more recent times, documentary evidence has become
the keystone in civil cases involving wrongful employment dismissals, sexual dis-
crimination, racial discrimination, stock fraud, and the theft of trade secrets.
Today, judges and attorneys are very familiar with documentary evidence in paper
form. Unfortunately, the legal process has not kept pace with computer technology,
and the document discovery rules have changed concerning the discovery of
computer-created documents and related electronic data.
In years past, documentary evidence was limited to paper documents. Subpoe-
nas and court orders were issued for the production of specific documents, and the
278
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

best evidence was typically considered to be the final draft of a document in paper
form. Today, documents are rarely typed or handwritten. Most documents are cre-
ated using personal computers with word processing applications or email pro-
grams. Most professionals rely on personal computers to maintain schedules and to
create their written communications. Most computer users have become prolific
writers because of the convenience that computers provide. As a result, more doc-
umentary evidence exists today than ever before and it exists in a variety of elec-
tronically stored formats. However, a majority of computer-created documents are
never printed on paper. Many are exchanged over the Internet and are read on the
computer screen. Thus, the legal document discovery process has drastically
changed as it relates to computer-created documents.
The best evidence rules also work differently today, because copies of computer
files are as good as the original electronic document. From a computer forensics
standpoint, this can be proven mathematically. There is no difference between the
original and an exact copy. In addition, modern technology has created new types
of documentary evidence that previously did not exist. This is especially true for the
creation of documents on a computer word processor. When electronic documents
are created, bits and pieces of the drafts leading up to the creation of the final doc-
ument are written in temporary computer files, the Windows swap file, and file
slack. The computer user is usually not aware of this situation. Furthermore, when
computer-created documents are updated or erased, remnants of the original ver-
sion and drafts leading up to the creation of the original version remain behind on
the computer hard disk drive. Most of this data is beyond the reach or knowledge
of the computer user who created the data. As a result, these forms of ambient data
can become a valuable source of documentary evidence. Lawyers are just beginning
to understand the evidentiary value of computer-related evidence and computer
forensics in the document discovery process. It is becoming more common for
lawyers to seek production of entire computer hard disk drives, floppy diskettes,
Zip disks, CD-ROMs, cell phones, and palm computer devices. These new forms of
documentary evidence have broadened the potential for legal discovery.
Electronic document discovery is clearly changing the way lawyers and the
courts do business when it comes to documents created with personal computers.
From a computer forensics perspective, computer data is stored at multiple levels
on computer storage media. Some levels are visible to the computer user and oth-
ers are not. When computer files are deleted, the data is not really deleted. Frag-
ments of various drafts of documents and email linger for months in bizarre storage
locations on hard disk drives, floppy diskettes, and Zip disks. Government intelli-
gence agencies have relied on these secret computer storage areas for years, but the
word is starting to get out. Electronic document discovery is making a difference in
civil and criminal litigation cases. This is especially true in cases involving the theft
of corporate trade secrets and in wrongful dismissal lawsuits. The trail of computer
evidence left behind on notebook and desktop computers can be compelling.
Discovery of Electronic Evidence
279

A historical perspective helps one understand the evolution of computer foren-
sics and its transition into the new field of electronic document discovery. When
computer mainframe giant International Business Machines (IBM) entered the
personal computer market in October of 1981, the event quickly captured the at-
tention of corporations and government agencies worldwide. Personal computers
were no longer thought of as toys; almost overnight they were accepted as reliable
business computers because of the IBM endorsement. Since their introduction,
IBM PCs and compatible computers have evolved into powerful corporate network
servers, desktop computers, and portable notebook computers. They have also mi-
grated into millions of households, and their popularity exploded during the 1990s
when people discovered the Internet.
The worldwide popularity of both personal computers and the Internet has
been a mixed blessing. Powerful personal computers are technology workhorses
that increase productivity and provide portability. The Internet provides a conduit
for the transfer of communication and computer files anywhere in the world via
personal computers. However, essentially all personal computers lack meaningful
security. This is because security was not factored into the design of the original
personal computers, or the Internet for that matter. The DOS operating system in-
stalled on the original IBM PC was never intended for commercial use. Security was
never part of its design; in the interest of maintaining compatibility with the early
versions of DOS, upgrades did not adequately address security. As a result, most
popular desktop PCs and notebook computers lack adequate security. This situa-
tion creates an ideal environment for electronic document discovery of computer
files, file fragments, and erased files. Some computer forensics specialists regard
electronic document discovery as nothing more than the exploitation of the inher-
ent security weaknesses in personal computers and the Internet.
You would think that the obvious security vulnerabilities of personal comput-
ers would be a wake-up call for government agencies and corporations. You would
also think that individuals who carry secrets on their desktop and notebook com-
puters would be more careful given these inherent security weaknesses. Lawyers,
accountants, bankers, insurance agents, and health care professionals are particu-
larly at risk because they are responsible for the secrets of others. It is likely that most
lawyers don’t even understand the potentials for attorney–client information to be
compromised when computer files and data are exchanged with others. These se-
curity issues should be of concern to computer users. However, they provide great
benefits to lawyers because of the potentials of electronic document discovery.
Most computer users are unaware that their personal computers track their every
move as it relates to documents created over time. This situation provides the tech-
nology savvy attorney with an edge when it comes to document discovery. Com-
puter files, erased files, email, and ambient computer data can be subpoenaed in
280
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

civil and criminal cases. The attorney just needs to understand the potentials and
the new twist in thinking that is required to reap the benefits of electronic docu-
ment discovery [2].
SUMMARY
Computers should now be considered a primary source of evidence in almost every
legal case. With businesses and individuals relying on computers for data process-
ing, scheduling, and communications, it is possible to discover anything from back-
ground information to the “smoking gun” document by investigating what is on
your opponent’s computer systems.
With that in mind, this chapter began with consideration of the process of in-
formation discovery. Because information discovery only deals with logical evi-
dence (electronic data), you can avoid much of the tedium required by search and
seizure to ensure evidence integrity and the chain of custody. Nevertheless, there
are strong similarities between the two processes throughout their respective basic
rules and planning stages.
Finally, for information discovery, where the basics are concerned, the investi-
gator is occupied with safeguarding the chain of custody. During the planning
stage, emphasis is given to understanding the information being sought. Backups of
discovered information files are critical to the overall process, and tools such as
revision-control software can be very handy for this task.
Conclusions
With regards to the basics of the information discovery process, establishing and
protecting the chain of custody for logical evidence should be straightforward.
Three basic rules of thumb should act as guides for any information discovery.
Each rule has a parallel in the world of physical search and seizure.
The notable difference between searching for physical evidence and searching
for logical evidence is that in the latter there is much less structure.
Because the format and location of information varies tremendously from case
to case, how information is discovered depends on the circumstances of the
case and the imagination of the investigator.
Once information is found, rigorous methods are applied to its handling and
processing.
Computer forensics may be applied: search and seizure and information dis-
covery. Although different in their implementations, these areas share a few
prominent common principals. These include the important concept that evi-
dence should always be backed up and digitally authenticated prior to forensic
Discovery of Electronic Evidence
281

work. Both approaches require that everything the investigator does be care-
fully documented. In addition, for both areas, the evidence preservation lab
plays an important role as a secure, controlled environment for computer
forensics work and evidence storage. Without such a facility, the investigator
will have a difficult (if not impossible) time maintaining the chain of custody
while examining and holding evidence.
The use of secure case-management software is highly desired because it lends
structure, efficiency, and safety to the gathering and management of case notes
and data.
In a venue where law enforcement authorities are investigating a computer
crime, there is a measurable chance that a case could find its way to court.
Within a corporation or other organization, however, things are vastly different.
Companies loathe being involved in litigation—even in situations where it ap-
pears the law is on their side.
It’s no surprise that legal fees and bad publicity can take a mighty toll on the
“bottom line.” For this reason, much of what the corporate computer fraud
and abuse investigator does is for naught.
It’s easy for a corporate investigator to become frustrated and even disillu-
sioned with his work when he sees good cases ending up on the wayside be-
cause of fears of bad P.R. Such feelings must be contained, as they will quickly
result in laziness and incomplete work on the part of the investigator.
Most of the computer crime cases handled by the corporate investigator won’t
end up in litigation.
Even a seemingly low-profile case can take a sudden twist and end up garner-
ing the attention of the CEO.
Because practically any case can turn into a matter for litigation, the corpo-
rate investigator needs to treat all cases with a proper and reasonable amount
of attention.
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Discovery of Electronic Evidence Checklist (Table F9.1 in Ap-
pendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional
list of actions for discovery of electronic evidence. The order is not significant; how-
ever, these are the activities for which the researcher would want to provide a de-
tailed description of procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use and
admissibility. A number of these systems have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
282
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Other than direct testimony by an eyewitness, documentary evi-
dence is probably the most compelling form of evidence in criminal and civil
cases.
2.
True or False? Biometric technology has revolutionized the way you deal with
information and the way you run your businesses.
3.
True or False? Numerous statutory provisions empower government officials
to enter, inspect, and make copies of records that must be maintained pursuant
to various statutes and regulations.
4.
True or False? Many businesses are increasingly storing their required records
in hard copy form.
5.
True or False? CPAs representing parties with large amounts of electronic data
need to understand that their clients’ data will be targeted for such discovery
and need to advise their clients on how to prepare.
Multiple Choice
1.
Under the Competition Act, peace officers with, or in exigent circumstances
without, a search warrant, may do the following, except:
A. Enter the premises
B.
Examine records
C. Copy records
D. Seize records
E.
Delete records
2.
In recent times, documentary evidence has become the keystone in civil cases
involving the following, except:
A. Wrongful employment dismissals
B.
Sexual discrimination
C. Racial discrimination
D. Stock options
E.
The theft of trade secrets
3.
It is becoming more common for lawyers to seek production of the following,
except:
A. The entire computer hard disk drives
Discovery of Electronic Evidence
283

B.
Land lines
C. Zip disks
D. CD-ROMs
E.
Cell phones and palm computer devices
4.
Since their introduction, IBM PCs and compatible computers have evolved
into the following, except two:
A. Weak mainframes
B.
Powerful calculators
C. Powerful corporate network servers
D. Desktop computers
E.
Portable notebook computers
5.
As a result, most popular desktop PCs and notebook computers lack adequate
security. This situation creates an ideal environment for electronic document
discovery of the following, except:
A. Computer files
B.
File fragments
C. Added files
D. Data miming
E.
Erased files
Exercise
A patient with a heart ailment was transported to a hospital where an angiogram
was performed. The patient later had a stint inserted into an artery, along with a
second angiogram, but died shortly thereafter. A third angiogram was performed
immediately after the patient’s death. Images of the angiogram procedures were
purportedly stored on computer hard drives. The day following the patient’s
death, hospital staff were able to locate images for the first and third angiograms
but could not find any images of the second procedure. The hospital and doctor
were sued for medical malpractice and wrongful death. The plaintiffs also
claimed the defendants had deliberately deleted the images of the second an-
giogram that allegedly proved the wrongful death claim. A CFS team (CFST) was
engaged by the doctor’s insurance company to locate images of the second an-
giogram on the computer hard drive. Explain the possible actions that the CFST
took to locate the images.
284
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

HANDS-ON PROJECTS
The board of directors of a technical research company demoted the company’s
founder and chief executive officer. The executive, disgruntled because of his de-
motion, was later terminated; it was subsequently determined that the executive
had planned to quit about the same time he was fired and establish a competitive
company. Upon his termination, the executive took home two computers; he re-
turned them to the company four days later, along with another company com-
puter that he had previously used at home. Suspicious that critical information
had been taken; the company’s attorneys sent the computers to a CFST for exami-
nation. What did the CFST find during their examination?
Case Project
A CFST at a major financial institution in New York recently used a computer
forensics tool to successfully preview two drives in Asia connected to the company-
wide area network. The drives were previewed less than an hour after management
determined that the investigation was necessary and that time was of the essence.
The preview process revealed that one of the drives contained highly relevant in-
formation, and the drive was promptly acquired for further forensic analysis in
New York [3]. What occurred during that analysis?
Optional Team Case Project
A large government agency, through a CFST, was able to enable a rapid incident re-
sponse and capture sensitive data in a timely manner [3]. How was the CFST able
to do this?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[2] “Electronic Evidence Discovery: A Powerful New Litigation Tool,” New
Technologies, Inc., 2075 NE Division St., Gresham, Oregon 97030, 2002. 
[3] “EEE in Action: Real-World Scenarios” (Copyright 2004 Guidance Soft-
ware, Inc.), Guidance Software, Inc., 215 N. Marengo Ave., 2nd Floor,
Pasadena, CA 91101, 2004.
Discovery of Electronic Evidence
285

This page intentionally left blank 

287
Identification of Data
10
T
he popularity of the Internet has grown at incredible rates and today it
reaches into the hearts of many corporations and households worldwide.
The Internet gives computer users access to a wealth of information. It is also
a wonderful mechanism for the exchange of email communications and file at-
tachments globally. International boundaries no longer exist when it comes to the
exchange of information over the Internet. This new technology has proven to be
ideal for international commerce and has the potential to be a valuable communi-
cations tool for exchange of law enforcement and government information. How-
ever, the Internet also provides the crooks with communication capabilities that did
not exist previously. Through the use of a modem and with just a few clicks of a
mouse, criminals can share information worldwide. It is sad but very true. Cyber
crime has become a reality in our modern world.
More and more, law enforcement agencies are encountering computers at
crime scenes. These computers are used to store the secrets of criminals and are
used in the commission of crimes. Internet-related crimes are clearly on the rise,
and abuses of corporate and government Internet accounts by employees are be-
coming commonplace. For example, one recent case involved an employee of a
large corporation. He was using his corporate Internet account, on company time,
to run his side business. What a deal—thanks to the Internet, he had two day jobs.
To make matters worse, he was also using the corporate computers on company
time to view and download pornographic images from the Internet. In another
case, a law enforcement management official destroyed his 15-year law enforce-
ment career when he was caught using a law enforcement computer to download
pornography from the Internet. Just recently, law enforcement officials in Hern-
don, Virginia, requested help in the investigation of the rape of a young girl. The

girl had been lured from an Internet chat room to meet the rapist at a shopping
mall. When the rapist was finally caught, his computer contained crucial evidence
in the case.
The law enforcement community is starting to effectively deal with computer-
related criminal investigations. Funding is finally being focused on the creation of
local and state computer crime units. Law enforcement training organizations such
as the National White Collar Crime Center, Search Group, International Association
of Computer Investigation Specialists, and the Federal Law Enforcement Training
Center are training hundreds of law enforcement computer specialists each year.
Some of these training efforts are directed at Internet-related crimes, and more
training emphasis will be placed on this important technology issue in the future.
Let’s look at how keeping an accurate and consistent sense of time is critical for
many computer-forensic-related activities such as data identification. In other
words, being able to investigate incidents that involve multiple computers is much
easier when the timestamps on files (identified data) and in logs are in sync.
TIMEKEEPING
It seems that, although every computer has a clock, none of them appear to be syn-
chronized—unless the computer in question is running the Network Time Proto-
col (NTP). With NTP, you can synchronize against truly accurate time sources
such as the atomic clocks run by the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST), the U.S. Naval Observatory, or counterparts in other countries around
the world.
NTP is a protocol built on top of transmission control protocol/Internet protocol
(TCP/IP) that ensures accurate local timekeeping with reference to radio, atomic,
or other clocks located on the Internet. This protocol is capable of synchronizing
distributed clocks within milliseconds over long periods of time. It is defined in STD
12, RFC 1119. The package that implements the latest version of NTP is called
xntp™ and was developed at the University of Delaware. You can obtain the lat-
est version of xntp via anonymous ftp to terminator.rs.itd.umich.edu in the file
/unix/xntp/xntp-src.tar.Z. You may also find binary distributions there. Filenames
for binary distributions will be named xntp-VERSION-OSNAME.tar.Z, (the bi-
nary distribution for SunOS is named xntp-3.4h-sunos4.tar.Z).
File names and URLs can change without notice.
288
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

What does accurate timekeeping have to do with computer forensics? Keeping
a consistent sense of time is critical for many computer-forensic-related activities.
Financial organizations rely on accurate timekeeping for their transactions. Many
authentication systems, Kerberos being the most prominent example, use dated
tickets to control access to systems and resources. Investigating incidents that in-
volve multiple computers is much easier when the timestamps on files and in logs
are in sync.
NTP began as a tool that permitted researchers to synchronize workstation
clocks to within milliseconds or better. With the growth of the Internet, the mech-
anisms that enabled NTP clients and servers to securely exchange time data have
gone from sufficiently secure to not nearly secure enough. Newer versions of NTP
fixed the problem by providing a model for automatic configuration and key ex-
change. Let’s take a look at time-synchronization systems, and how you can se-
curely use them to set all your clocks accurately.
Time Matters
Why bother having accurate clocks? Isn’t the one that comes in your desktop PC or
your enterprise server adequate? The answer is that accurate timekeeping is an ad-
vanced science, an avocation practiced by hundreds of scientists around the world,
and the paltry clock chip you have in your PC or expensive server winds up being
a bit less accurate than your Swatch® watch for several reasons.
Computer clocks, like most electronic clocks, detect the oscillations of a quartz
crystal and calculate the passing time based on these oscillations. Not all quartz
crystals are the same to begin with, but put one inside a nice, hot computer that’s
cool whenever it’s turned off, and the crystal’s frequency tends to wander. Also,
Unix systems base their notion of time on interrupts generated by the hardware
clock. Delays in processing these interrupts cause Unix system clocks to lose time—
slowly, but erratically. These small changes in timekeeping are what time scientists
call jitter.
Over time, scientists and programmers have developed different techniques
for synchronizing clocks over TCP/IP or other network protocols. The time proto-
col provides a server’s notion of time in a machine-readable format, and there’s also
an Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) timestamp message. Though these
remain available Internet standards, neither is currently sufficient for accurate
timekeeping, and, hence, both are considered out-of-date. The Unix r commands
include rdate, which permits setting a local clock based on a remote server. There
are modem-based programs that contact NIST timeservers and fetch a time mes-
sage (along with an estimate of round-trip time to account for latency), which you
can still use today.
Identification of Data
289

The NTP software includes drivers for a large number of devices—radios that
listen to time signals such as WWV, global positioning system (GPS) receivers, and
even atomic clocks—that serve as references for stratum-one servers. The Univer-
sity of Delaware site (http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~mills/ntp/clock1a.html) includes
lists of stratum-one servers in the United States; you can also find stratum-one
servers through Web search engines.
WWV is a radio station operated by NIST that maintains an atomic clock used by
the scientific community.
Below stratum-one servers are many stratum-two servers; stratum-three
servers are below that, and so on. NTP supports more than 15 stratums, but being
closer to the top implies being closer to the most accurate source of time. To im-
prove each server’s notion of time, servers in the same stratum may peer (that is, act
as equals) and perform the same timestamp exchanges done by NTP clients. NTP
servers and clients don’t blindly accept another system’s notion of time, even if it
comes from a higher stratum. This was NTP’s only security provision for a while.
Clock Filters
Automatically accepting another system’s statement about the current time can be
harmful: suppose the timekeeping system has been taken over by an attacker who
needs to turn back the clock so that a replay attack can function. NTP guards against
this in several ways. First, NTP assumes that time moves forward, not backward, al-
though small backward changes are acceptable. Also, if a system has been using
NTP, the NTP software assumes that changes in a local clock will be small, gener-
ally less than a second. This makes controlling a local clock or making large changes
literally a time-consuming process—even a one-second change is a big deal.
NTP goes beyond this by collecting timestamps from many servers (and peers,
if appropriate). NTP maintains a queue composed generally of eight samples and
uses carefully crafted algorithms to compute the best approximation of exact time.
For example, the outlyers in the sample (the timestamps with the largest diver-
gence) are discarded. The remaining set of samples is then used to calculate what
the local clock should read. On Unix systems, a special system call, adjtime (),
makes small adjustments to system time. With multiple sources, the influence of 
a single, compromised timeserver (a falseticker, in NTP jargon) is completely
avoided. You can modify the configuration of ntpd to label a timeserver as un-
trusted. You can also use the configuration to list trusted timeservers and peers.
By the late 1980s, version 2 had been released. NTP 2 included digital signa-
tures based on a shared secret key so that servers and peers could sign NTP data and
prevent an attacker from spoofing packets. NTP uses user datagram protocol
290
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

(UDP) packets (on port 123), which are easy to spoof because of their stateless na-
ture (no connection setup, as in TCP).
Autokey
Version 4 of NTP has now entered the internet engineering task force (IETF) stan-
dards track. The most interesting aspects of version 4 are the security improve-
ments. A system called the autokey uses public key algorithms combined with a list
of one-way hashes. When a client contacts an NTP server, the client can collect a
certificate that contains the server’s public key and independently verifies it. Then,
using the enclosed public key, the client can check the signature sent by the server
containing a list of key ids. The key ids are used with session keys to perform a quick
digital signature check based on Message Digest 5 (MD5).
Using public key cryptography for signing timestamps is just too slow. Public
key encryption algorithms aren’t only slow (compared to private key algorithms
such as RC4), they’re also inconsistent in that the amount of time used to encrypt
may vary by a factor of two—something very unpleasant for those obsessed with
keeping accurate time. Using the list of key ids reduces the need for public key en-
cryption to once an hour on average.
Version 4 also supports the Diffie-Hellman key exchange for peers, so that
peers can exchange private session keys. Multicast updates of clients are also sup-
ported and use the client/server autokey for setting up security.
FORENSIC IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS
OF TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE DEVICES
It was one sentence among hundreds in a transcription of a dull congressional hearing
on the environment, a statement anyone might have missed: Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.
was looking to increase its harvest of the Pacific yew, a protected tree. However, the
competitive intelligence (CI) officer at arch rival SmithKline Beecham Corp., hap-
pened to catch it, thanks to a routine search of competitors’ activities on the Web.
The intelligence officer sprang into action. He knew Bristol-Myers’ researchers
had been testing a substance in the tree’s bark as an experimental agent against
breast cancer. But why was Bristol-Myers suddenly seeking to cut down 200 times
as many yews? Was it ready to put its planned anticancer drug, Taxol, into pro-
duction? Back at SmithKline headquarters in Philadelphia, the news was enough to
trigger serious nail-biting in the boardroom. SmithKline was developing its own
anticancer drug, Hycamtin, but it wouldn’t be ready for another 18 months. Would
it beat Bristol-Myers’ drug to market? Or would SmithKline Beecham have to speed
up its production schedule—and if so, by how much?
Identification of Data
291

The intelligence officer’s team wasted no time. It immediately began canvass-
ing conferences and scouring online resources for clues. It tapped into Web sources
on the environment and got staffers to work the phones, gathering names of re-
searchers working for Bristol-Myers. It even zeroed in on cities where Bristol-Myers
had sponsored experimental trials of the substance.
Sure enough, Bristol-Myers had been taking out recruitment ads in those areas’
newspapers for cancer researchers—a sure sign that Bristol-Myers was stepping up
its hiring of oncologists specializing in breast cancer. The next clue? From data
discovered on financial Web sites and in the comments of Wall Street analysts, the
intelligence officer’s team discovered that Bristol-Myers was increasing its spending
on its oncology group.
That was all the intelligence officer needed to hear. Senior R&D managers were
ordered to speed things up and ended up rushing Hycamtin to market in 6 months
instead of 18—preserving SmithKline some $50 million in market share and
millions in drug development costs. The CIA, the National Security Agency, and
England’s MI5 used a form of CI to figure out what the Russians were doing.
SmithKline used it too.
SmithKline Beecham’s tale of how competitive intelligence saved a company
millions is no longer unusual. Indeed, one of corporate America’s worst-kept se-
crets these days is that more and more companies, from Burger King to Nutrasweet
to MCI, are spying—and have in-house operations to keep tabs on rivals. The num-
ber of large corporations with CI units has quadrupled since 1997, and spending on
CI is estimated to be around $32 billion annually—nearly double the amount spent
just two years ago.
To be sure, data-diving isn’t new. As far back as the 1970s, in a now-famous ex-
ample of excess zeal, The Boeing Company discovered that a Russian delegation
visiting one of its manufacturing plants was wearing crepe-soled shoes that would
surreptitiously pick up metal shavings off the factory floor to determine the type of
exotic metal alloys Boeing was using in its planes. And at Motorola Inc., the former
chief of CI used to work for the CIA.
Now, thanks to the Net and its ever-growing, low-cost reach and speed, nearly
everybody’s spying. In a May 2003 survey by marketing firm TR Cutler, Inc.
(http://www.trcutler.com/), 77% of U.S. manufacturing companies with fewer than
3,000 employees admitted to spying on competitors during the previous 12
months, using the Web and posing as potential customers to glean pricing and
other competitive tidbits.
Corporate Information
Now, here’s a real secret: until recently, most corporate gumshoeing was being out-
sourced to spy companies with 007-sounding names such as WarRoom Research
292
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Inc., many of which were founded by ex-CIA, National Security Agency, and
Mossad operatives seeking work after the Cold War. Now, though, corporate
snooping is increasingly being conducted in-house—and for the first time, chief in-
formation officers (CIOs) are being forced to the frontlines. More and more CIOs
are gaining responsibility for the intelligence function. And why not? Information
is about technology, and information is increasingly a company’s competitive edge.
To be sure, companies without the ability to pluck the juiciest scoops from a
growing quagmire of data will increasingly lose market share to those companies that
can. This is now a double-edged sword. Those who get spied on are now also spying.
Case in point: The CIO of 3COM Corp. (http://www.3com.com/selectsite.html/),
makers of Internet switches and hubs, now supplies employees with two toll-free
numbers: one to report any intrusions into corporate secrets, the other to report
what 3COM’s rivals are up to. You’ve got to take the offensive these days or you’ll
be clobbered in the marketplace, and the spy-versus-spy mentality is only being ex-
acerbated by the stiffening competitive pressures of the current economy.
What is CI? Everything from illegal spying and theft of trade secrets to classic
intelligence-gathering—whatever it takes to provide executives with a systematic
way to collect and analyze public information about rivals and use it to guide strat-
egy. At its best, CI borrows tools and methods from strategic planning, which takes
a broad view of the market and how a company hopes to position itself, and from
market research, which pinpoints customers’ desires. Its goal: to anticipate, with
razor-sharp accuracy and speed, a rival’s next move, plot new opportunities, and
help avert disasters.
CI is hottest in the pharmaceuticals, telecom, petrochemicals, and consumer
products industries, where consumers are the most fickle and where speed and
flexibility are especially critical for success. Indeed, some companies, from Burger
King to Lucent Technologies Inc., are getting so good at using the new digital tools
to sniff out what rivals’ customers are eating this week or paying for long-distance
that it’s enough to rattle even the most rival-savvy marketers—and to push a lot of
data, once commonly available, underground.
For example, in 2002, Wal-Mart Stores Inc. ended a years-long practice of shar-
ing data about its sales of food, beverages, toys, clothing, and over-the-counter
medications. Gathered by electronic scanners in checkout aisles, the data had been
closely monitored by various parties—from the companies that make products
sold in Wal-Mart’s more than 4,800 stores to Wall Street analysts.
Competing at the speed of information can pay off handsomely. NutraSweet
estimates its intelligence unit is worth at least $70 million a year in sales gained or
revenues not lost. SmithKline Beecham estimates saving more than $300 million
and gaining untold protection of market share for any number of products. All in-
formation is now being thrown into the digital hopper and sliced and diced for
clues and leaks. It’s a CIO’s gold mine.
Identification of Data
293

What is the real bottom line? The new business-led push to get better compet-
itive data (faster) is also defining new opportunities for CIO leadership at most
firms. The CIO who is just responsible for wires, equipment, and software now
knows about hacking and penetration. Those responsible for business intelligence
activities will really be clued in; companies who have CIOs with competitive lead-
ership abilities, will have the competitive edge in the years ahead.
Information Overload
The growing information glut makes it critical for CIOs to start thinking about how
they can support their company’s CI snoopsters—and do it with as much zeal and
imagination as they already apply to building hacker-proof security systems. Most
existing systems and organizations are still ill-equipped to keep pace with the ever-
growing amount of information available. Many companies are still stumbling to
process and respond to competitive information as fast as it pours in. The result is
that the key to carving out the leading edge of the knowledge gap in one’s industry
(the difference between what you know and what your rival knows) lies in the abil-
ity to build IT systems that can scope out the movements of corporate rivals in real
time. IT-aided intelligence gathering is so critical that entire industries will be re-
defined by the companies most skilled at snooping. Players unable to surmount
their bureaucratic inertia will find their existence threatened. Once intellectual and
competitive agility becomes more commonplace, competitive advantage will be
both harder to come by and increasingly expensive.
Therefore, it is recommended that you now start recruiting the technology ex-
ecutives who can build systems that will give your company the ability to react in
real time to what its rivals are doing. Build such systems, and your company also
will be able to respond faster to customers. The goal is to tie technology and busi-
ness together in a common pursuit of becoming more competitive and responsive
to rivals and customers in the marketplace. CI is to a company what radar is to an
airplane. Companies are now installing radar in the corporate cockpit, and that’s
where the CIO comes in.
At minimum, CIOs should start helping executives monitor the Web more ef-
fectively. The Net is opening up whole new ways to snoop, giving companies access
to material that used to take months or years and millions of dollars to unearth,
from satellite photos of rival plant sites, to the inside skinny on a rival CEO’s off-
work activities. And it’s legal. For example, the London-based consumer products
firm Unilever plc was looking to go into China with a new product, but Dollens and
Associates’ (Chicago-based) chief technology officer (CTO), by going on the Web,
discovered that Proctor & Gamble was developing a similar product. Unilever, the
CTO’s client, had to decide whether to offer that product at a lower price, add on
more features, or simply avoid the Chinese market entirely. How did Unilever get
294
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

wind of P&G’s plans? The CTO found P&G’s new product report on P&G’s own
corporate intranet—access to which Unilever was able to get through the CTO and
a common supplier. Without this information, Unilever would have gone into
China blind.
It takes far more than watching Web sites to get smart about CI. At Royal
Dutch/Shell Group, the CIO is part of the CI team and is in charge of helping
corporate snoopers gather and distribute key bits of information about rivals to
company executives. Shell’s CI office provides the CIO with benchmarks on com-
petitors, and the CIO then develops customized search software to help the CI
team sift through files. At Shell, the CI is all about aiding the decision-making
process. It’s a mix of technology and people. Ideally, the CIO should be the hub for
CI throughout the company.
Most CIOs are still far more likely to shop for technology than actively partic-
ipate in CI tag teams and strategy sessions, but increasingly, companies like P&G
are realizing they cannot move forward on CI without asking CIOs to help tag and
distribute priority data to the people inside the company who most need to know.
Companies that ignore the CIO do so at their peril. Recently, that happened to
a large telecom equipment maker with 30,000 home pages on its supply-chain in-
tranet. Several hundred of the home pages were dedicated to the competition, but
there was no coordination between home pages. This was a situation where the CIO
could have taken charge and made sure the information was in one spot. How
many tens of millions of dollars were thrown at that intranet and wasted annually
in inefficient man-hours?
Ideally, CIOs can help marketing and sales strategies turn on a dime. CI teams
should spend one-third of their time gathering information on a project, one-third
in analysis, and one-third discussing their findings. Instead, many companies spend
80% of their CI time on collection, most of the rest on analysis, and very little on
communication that reaches everyone. CIOs can step in and devise ways to im-
prove the ability of executives to focus on information that really matters to them,
with filters that take out the junk nobody needs to be looking at.
CIOs also can help determine what the company considers junk. Often the
best competitive information does not appear as highly structured data, such as fi-
nancial information. More likely, it’s something like an offhand comment in a press
release, a photograph in a rival’s advertisement, or a soundbite from a television
news show.
Once the best data is tagged for collection, who gets access to it? If you search
for data involving a two-in-one laundry soap and fabric softener, what terms do
you classify, and what do you let everyone see? CIOs can help companies figure out
how to tag, gather, store, and distribute a wide range of competitive data with dif-
fering levels of access and indexing—and with standards that are consistent
throughout the company, domestically and abroad. Most companies are sloppy
Identification of Data
295

about this. They haven’t marked documents as confidential, and nobody beyond a
certain level knows what specifically they’re looking for. They just know they want
something, and fast. With a proliferation of business relationships these days (joint
ventures, supply-chain collaborations, and so forth) you really need to do an in-
formation audit to make sure you know what you have and what you need.
Building Teams
You need to build teams with diverse membership. People who understand the
concept of organizing information and indexing it could be paired with someone
who understands different technology capabilities, such as a relational database
showing connections between different terms or items. As managers, CIOs have to
amass different strengths on a CI project so they don’t have an abundance of ham-
mer holders who look only for nails.
However, don’t get carried away on the technology. A few years ago, a study
conducted by Fuld & Company [1] found flaws with many of the 170 software
packages with potential CI applications. None of them were able to take companies
through the process of data identification, discovery, distribution, and analysis.
Each did some part of the process, but not the whole thing. The thinking machine
has not yet arrived. No company should buy a software package in the hope it will
build an intelligence process for the corporation. CIOs need to help build that. It
won’t come off the shelf.
Still not convinced? CIOs confident that their rivals’ intranet data is too safe to
even try prying open should take a ride (fly or drive) down Virginia’s Dulles Corri-
dor, a throughway outside Washington, DC that is lined with high-tech firms. If you
have a laptop, slip a wireless card [2] into it and drive down Route 7 or fly around
Northern Virginia. You can actually pick up one wireless network after another (hot
spots), including the networks of a major credit clearinghouse and Department of
Defense contractors that store classified data on their servers. Instead of hacking
from the Internet, people can hack from inside on the intranet (known as war flying
or war driving), albeit from the road or by air, and probably get to the accounting
server or worse. Imagine the kind of damage a terrorist organization could do.
War driving or flying is the activity of driving around in a car or flying a plane
around for the purpose of searching and pinpointing the location of wireless net-
works or hot spots in metropolitan areas. Recent surveys have revealed that 80% 
of these hot spots are not protected by firewalls, encryption, or intrusion detection
systems.
For all the digital dumpster-diving out there, don’t forget that plenty of old-
fashioned snooping is still being used by even the most high-tech firms. For 
296
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

example, when Oracle Corp. got caught (in the summer of 2000) hiring a Wash-
ington, DC–based detective group to dig into the dealings of organizations sym-
pathetic to Microsoft Corp., it didn’t use even a byte of cyber sleuthing. It did it the
old-fashioned way—rummaging through the dumpsters of one of those groups by
bribing janitors at its Washington office.
In other words, in this business, you need to be aggressive. Take the offensive.
Always recall the words of ancient Chinese general Sun Tzu (6th–5th century B.C.):
“Be so subtle that you are invisible, be so mysterious that you are intangible; then
you will control your rival’s fate.”
SUMMARY
As previously explained, computer forensics involves the preservation, identifica-
tion, extraction, and documentation of computer evidence stored in the form of
magnetically encoded information (data) [3]. Many times the computer evidence
was created transparently by the computer’s operating system and without the
knowledge of the computer operator. Such information may actually be hidden
from view and, thus, special forensic software tools and techniques are required to
preserve, identify, extract, and document the related computer evidence. It is this
information that benefits law enforcement and military agencies in intelligence
gathering and in the conduct of investigations.
Computer forensic software tools and methods can be used to identify pass-
words, computer network logons, and other information that is transparently and
automatically transferred from the computer’s memory to floppy diskettes, Iomega
Zip Disks, and computer hard disk drives. Such computer forensic software tools
and methods can also be used to identify backdated files and to tie a floppy diskette
to a specific computer.
Trade secret information and other sensitive data can easily be secreted using
any number of techniques. It is possible to hide diskettes within diskettes and to
hide entire computer hard disk drive partitions.
The last section of this chapter discussed a deterrence-based approach as an el-
ement of an overall cyber defense strategy. The need for timely and unequivocal
identification of attackers is essential for such an approach to be effective. Unfor-
tunately, the technical basis for such identification has not received much attention
from the research and development community. In addition, there may be some
complicating factors for the implementation of the type of identification and foren-
sics capability discussed in this chapter, such as the widespread move to encryption.
However, until research and development resources are committed to investigation
of the relevant issues, the extent of the challenge cannot be fully understood.
Identification of Data
297

Conclusions
The hiding of data in computer graphic files (steganography)
Detection of steganography and watermarks
Steganography jamming techniques and theory
Data written to “extra” tracks
Data written to “extra” sectors
Data written to hidden partitions
Data stored as unallocated space
Massive amounts of data written to file slack areas
Data hidden by diffusion into binary objects, Windows swap, and Windows
page files
Hidden disks within disks
Floppy diskette data storage anomaly detection
Data scrubbing of ambient data storage areas. These security processes are es-
pecially helpful when computers are transferred from one user to another.
Data scrubbing of entire storage devices using methods that meet current De-
partment of Defense security requirements
The potential risk of shadow data issues
The appending of data to program files, graphics files, and compressed data
files—simple and very effective
Electronic eavesdropping techniques, threats, risks, and remedies
Covert capture of keystrokes via hardware and radio interception
Tempest issues regarding the remote capture of computer screen images
Electronic eavesdropping techniques concerning cellular telephones
Electronic eavesdropping techniques concerning personal pagers
Search methodologies for use in the identification of foreign language phrases
in binary form stored on computer media
An Agenda for Action
When completing the Identification of Data Checklist (Table F10.1 in Appendix F),
the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional list of ac-
tions for identification of data. The order is not significant; however, these are the
activities for which the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of
procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of
these systems have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
298
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? It seems that, although every computer has a clock, none of
them appear to be synchronized—unless the computer in question is running
the Network Time Protocol (NTP).
2.
True or False? Data-diving isn’t new.
3.
True or False? Deterrence is a fundamental element of defensive strategy.
4.
True or False? Computer forensics involves the preservation, identification,
extraction, and documentation of computer evidence stored in the form of
magnetically encoded information (data).
5.
True or False? Computer forensic software tools and methods can be used to
identify passwords, computer network logons, and other information that is
transparently and automatically transferred from the computer’s memory to
floppy diskettes, Iomega Zip Disks, and computer hard disk drives.
Multiple Choice
1.
Law enforcement training organizations such as the following (except for one)
are training hundreds of law enforcement computer specialists each year.
A. NRA
B.
National White Collar Crime Center
C. Search Group
D. International Association of Computer Investigation Specialists
E.
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
2.
The NTP software includes drivers for a large number of devices, except for two
of the following that do not serve as references for stratum-one servers:
A. Radio telescopes
B.
Land lines
C. Radios that listen to time signals such as WWV
D. Global positioning system (GPS) receivers
E.
Atomic clocks
3.
The CI’s goal is to do, with razor-sharp accuracy and speed, the following,
except for two:
A. Anticipate a rival’s next move
B.
Plot new opportunities
Identification of Data
299

C. Help avert disasters
D. Help cause disasters
E.
Plot new attacks
4.
Which one of the following do financial organizations rely on for the accuracy
of their transactions?
A. Computer files
B.
File fragments
C. Timekeeping.
D. Data miming
E.
Erased files
5.
Which one of the following began as a tool that permitted researchers to syn-
chronize workstation clocks to within milliseconds or better?
A. NTP
B.
TCP/IP
C. DOS
D. BIOS
E.
WEP
Exercise
A CFS team (CFST) arrived at a company site to collect computer evidence from a
server. The company was not the perpetrator of the investigated crime but appar-
ently did possess imported evidence that resided on a mission-critical server that
could not be taken offline [4]. What did the CFST do to collect key evidence to
solve this problem?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
The CTO of a large beverage company suspected something was amiss when he 
noticed a significant amount of traffic traveling through the company network. He 
deduced that his trusted staff of system administrators might have been misusing
their access privileges and the network servers for some unknown purpose. A CFST
was contracted to perform a confidential after-hours investigation of the network
and the system administrators [4]. What did they find out?
300
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Case Project
A large multinational corporation was accused of questionable financial reporting
by the SEC, resulting in an investigation by a major independent consulting com-
pany. The goal of the investigation was to determine if the chief financial officer had
ordered his staff to alter or destroy transactions to help the company’s financial po-
sition appear more favorable [5]. How did the CFST go about performing an ex-
haustive search of all computer records within the company’s large finance
division?
Optional Team Case Project
A public institution was the victim of a hacker. The subject got into the network
and placed several large media files on several computers and changed the desktop
configurations. Management decided against calling law enforcement initially (be-
cause of media attention) and instructed the IT department to get a CFST to pri-
vately investigate. The IT department called and the CFST consulted on the case
[5]. How did the CFST go about doing this?
REFERENCES
[1] Fuld & Company Inc., 126 Charles Street, Cambridge, MA 02141, 2002. 
[2] Vacca, John R., Wireless Broadband Networks Handbook: 3G, LMDS and
Wireless Internet, McGraw-Hill Professional, New York, 2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[4] “EEE in Action: Real-World Scenarios” (Copyright 2004 Guidance Soft-
ware, Inc., Guidance Software, Inc.), Guidance Software, 215 N. Marengo
Ave., 2nd Floor, Pasadena, CA 91101, 2004.
[5] Mandall, Robert, Computer, Forensic Evidence Solutions, Inc., (© 2002
Computer Forensic Evidence Solutions, Inc.) 1212 Hope Ranch Lane, Las
Vegas, NV, 2002.
Identification of Data
301

This page intentionally left blank 

303
Reconstructing Past Events
11
T
he increase in computer-related crime has led to the development of special
tools to recover and analyze computer data. A combination of hardware and
software tools has been developed using commercial off-the-shelf utilities in-
tegrated with newly developed programs. Procedures have been defined and im-
plemented to protect the original computer data. Processes have been developed to
recover hidden, erased, and password-protected data. To that end, all recovery and
analysis work is performed on image copies of the original.
Because there is a wide variety of computers, peripherals, and software avail-
able, including many different forms of archival storage (Zip, Jaz, disk, tape, CD-
ROM, etc.) [1] it is important that a wide variety of equipment be available for
recovery and analysis of evidence residing on a computer’s hard disk and external
storage media. Recovered data must be analyzed, and a coherent file must be re-
constructed using advanced search programs specifically developed for this work.
For example, these techniques were recently used to recover data from several
computers that indicated a large check forgery ring was in operation throughout
California and personal and business identities were being stolen without the
knowledge of the victims. Case files going back over five years were cleared with the
information obtained.
In another case, proprietary intellectual property was found on the suspect’s
computer and was being used for extortion. In the case of a murdered model, the
murderer’s computer address book was recovered and is now being used to deter-
mine if he might be a serial killer. Another case involved a stalker who had restricted
pager information on his victim, which was recovered from the suspect’s computer.
The primary goal of this chapter is to illustrate how to reconstruct past events
with as little distortion or bias as possible. Many analogies can be drawn from the

physical to the virtual realms of detective work. Anyone who has seen a slaying on
a police show can probably give a reasonably good account of the initial steps in an
investigation. First, you might protect and isolate the crime scene from outside
disturbances. Next, comes recording the area via photographs and note taking. Fi-
nally, a search is conducted to collect and package any evidence found.
HOW TO BECOME A DIGITAL DETECTIVE
Recovering electronic data is only the beginning. Once you recover it, you need to
determine how to use it in your case. In other words, how do you reconstruct past
events to ensure that your findings will be admissible as evidence in your case?
What follows are some recommendations for accomplishing that goal.
If You Need Help, Get Help
When you receive the package of evidence containing a Zip disk and cover letter
stating, “Enclosed and produced upon your request, please find ...,” you may not
know what to do with the disk. If you don’t know, get help.
Help may be just down the hall. If you have an information services depart-
ment, consider going there. They might not understand what you mean by a dis-
covery request, but they may be able to help you convert the contents of the disk to
a form you can look at. If you have a litigation support group, consider contacting
them. They may have the tools you need to look at and start working with the data
you just received. Even if there is no formal entity within your office dedicated to
dealing with technological issues, there may be informal resources.
In addition, your client may have the resources you need. Your expert wit-
nesses, assuming you have some, may be able to sort out the data for you. If you are
using a litigation support vendor, that organization may be able to bring skills to
bear. Of course, don’t forget the professionals, the ones who deal with electronic
data recovery and reconstructing past events for a living.
Convert Digital Evidence
Before you can reconstruct past events and present the data, you need it on a
medium and in a format you can work with. In other words, you need to get the
data onto a medium you can use, if it is not already on one. Today, data can come
on a variety of media, such as holograms, video, data tapes, Zip disks, CD-ROM
disks, and even 3.5-inch floppy disks.
If you receive electronic evidence on an 8-mm data tape, chances are that you
will not have an 8-mm tape drive at your desk. Even if you have a drive, it may not
be able to read that specific tape. You need to get the data onto a medium your
304
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

computer can read, which these days generally means a 3.5-inch floppy or a CD
disk. How do you do this?
For example, you could use Zip disks. Zip disks are simpler. The cost of Iomega
Zip drives (http://www.iomega.com/global/index.jsp) is so low that you can keep
one on hand just to copy data from Zip disks you receive (and to copy data to Zip
disks when others request data from you on that medium). CDs are even simpler,
as CD drives have become commonplace on PCs. Similarly, even 3.5-inch disks
generally pose no problem.
Put the Evidence in a Useable Format
Having data on a useable medium is useless unless it also is in a useable format. At
times this is not an issue. If the data comes in a format that you already use, then
you can begin to work with it as soon as you get it off the media. The formats most
likely to be useable without conversion are word processing files (principally Word-
Perfect and Word files), spreadsheet files (principally Excel and Lotus), and pre-
sentation files (principally PowerPoint files).
USEABLE FILE FORMATS
Even if the data is in a format that appears to be one you already use, conversion still
may be necessary. The format may be too new. The problem is a basic one. In a sim-
ilar vein, you may have to get the data converted if it comes to you in a format that
is too old or runs on a different operating system. Although simple files created with
one company’s software generally can be opened without a problem using a com-
petitor’s comparable product, this often does not hold true for more complex files.
UNUSABLE FILE FORMATS
You may get electronic data in a format that you cannot use “out of the box.” When
that happens, you have to convert the files to a format you can use—or find some-
one to do the conversion for you. You may have already encountered these issues
with a variety of files including email files, database files from mainframe systems,
and “.txt” files containing data dumped from database files. Anyone who has un-
dertaken this task can attest that it is potentially a difficult and painstaking process.
Whenever you suspect that you will have to convert data, there are some steps
you can take to facilitate the process. Initially, try to get as much information about
how the files were created and maintained as you can. Whether you intend to try
the conversion yourself or rely on outside resources to get the work done, the more
Reconstructing Past Events
305

you know about the files, the better your chances of a successful conversion. For ex-
ample, if you receive a “.txt” file that appears to contain information from a data-
base file, try to find out, among other things, the make and model of the computer
the file came from; the name and version of the operating system the computer ran;
the name and version of the database program used; the name of the database file;
a list of all fields in the database; and descriptions of each field with the descriptions
including the type, length, and other characteristics of the field.
Furthermore, get sample printouts if possible. If you get these, they may pro-
vide answers to some of the questions previously listed. They may show how the
data was laid out—and, hence, how it was used. They also may give clues about
electronic data that you should have received but did not.
CONVERTING FILES
If you are going to attempt converting the data yourself, you may be fortunate
enough to have received electronic data that you can covert directly into programs
such as Access or Excel using the wizards built into those programs. This can be the
case with “.txt” files. Sometimes the first line in a file you are converting may even
contain the names of the fields that need to be created, further simplifying your
task. If that information is not in the file, then try to get the field names and de-
scriptions from the producing party. Should you fail at that, you may have an ex-
ceedingly difficult time carrying out a meaningful conversion.
Sometimes data will not be in a format amenable to immediate conversion.
Email files are a common example.
Get the Right Software, Hardware, and Personnel
Concomitant with getting the data into a useable format is getting the right soft-
ware, hardware, and personnel to work with the format you choose. For software,
you may have already found that Access, Excel, and Concordance (http://www.
mario.uklinux.net/concordance/) meet most of your needs, but there are, of course,
a plethora of other good tools available.
Concordance is a program that scans a text file and outputs concordance lines
based on a node entered by the user.
Hardware requirements will vary greatly depending on specific circumstances.
For example, 100 kb of data can be handled by any machine and across any
network. A hundred gigabytes of data still pose very few problems. However, 100
terabytes of data does pose some substantial challenges in terms of hard drive space,
backups, network traffic, and, for that matter, performance. When faced with data
306
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

of that quantity, you need to set up dedicated machines that do not pass queries or
results across your network.
Personnel requirements present the greatest challenge. If you are going to make
sense of the electronic data you have received, converted, and loaded, you need
know how to use the tools yourself, or, failing that, rely on someone who can use
the tools for you. As previously discussed, you may already have the personnel you
need in your own office or you may have to turn to outside resources. Also, once
you are in a position to work with the electronic data you got from outside re-
sources, check that the data is what it ought to be.
Did You Get All the Data?
Check to see whether you received all the data you should have received. Prepare an
inventory of what you received and compare it against what you requested. This
may be as simple as preparing and comparing lists of file names. More likely, how-
ever, it will require that you develop short descriptions of the data you received and
then match the descriptions with your discovery requests. It may even mean you
will have to closely analyze the data to see whether gaps emerge that indicate some
failure to produce all that it ought to have produced.
You also can search the electronic data for references to electronic files that
should have been given to you but were not. This can be done through a manual re-
view. The manual review can be enhanced if the software you are using to review
the data allows you to search for strings of characters. If it does, you can search for
filename extensions that are typically associated with the types of files you want to
find. Examples include .doc, .htm, .html, .htx, .rtf, .mcw, .txt, .wps, and .wpd for
word processing files; .csv, .dbf, .dif, .txt, .wk1, .wk3, .wk4, .wks, .wq1, .xls, and .xlw
for spreadsheet files; and .asc, .csv, .dbe, .dbf, .htm, .html, .mda, .mdb, .mde, .mdw,
.tab, .txt, and .xls for database files.
If you received spreadsheet or database files in their native format, you can
scrutinize them for signs of links to files that were used in connection with the files
you got but that were not given to you. In a spreadsheet file such as an Excel file,
this might mean searching the cells for extensions such as the ones previously listed.
It also can mean checking the “properties.” If you are asked whether you want to
reestablish a link when you open the file, that is a clear sign of potentially missing
files; keep track of the file names and check to see whether you received them. In a
database file such as an Access file, this means closely examining all tables, queries,
forms, reports, macros, and modules for references to other files.
Did the Evidence Come from the People You Thought It Would?
Files often contain indications of who created them, who worked on them, and who
last saved them. If you go to File | Properties, you can sometimes find this information.
Reconstructing Past Events
307

Look for “Hidden” Data
Electronic files often contain “hidden” data (information that does not show up on
any printouts of the file) that can potentially prove useful. You should go to File |
Properties, where you may be able to find out a host of details about the file that the
people sending it to you may never have known went with it. These can include
when the file was created; when it was last modified; who created it; what com-
ments have been added; what title was given to the file; whether intentionally or au-
tomatically, which subjects have been assigned to the file; who last saved the file;
and how many revisions the file has gone through.
In word processing files, look for comments that display on the screen, but do
not automatically print out. If there are tables containing numbers, check them for
a formula that calculates the figures displayed in the tables. If there are objects em-
bedded in the word processing file, such as portions of spreadsheet files, try to as-
certain the names of source files.
In spreadsheet files, look at the formula; these show the true work being done
by the spreadsheet file in a way that a printout never can. Check the formula for ref-
erences to other files. Look for hidden columns. If the column listing across the top
reads “A B C E H,” that means there are at least three hidden columns (D, F, and
G) that might contain information of greater value than anything shown. Watch for
comments; in Excel, these may initially only show up as small red triangles at the
upper right corners of cells. Beware of cells that appear to be empty but are not.
In database files, look for an explanation of field names or contents; in Access,
you might find this by looking at the database tables in “design” mode. Look for
links to files you did not receive; in Access, this might be indicated by small arrows
to the left of the table icons. Look for tables, queries, forms, reports, macros, and
modules that you did not know about. In tables, look for hidden fields.
Test the Data
Test the electronic data to determine how complete, accurate, and reliable it is. You
can test the data against itself. Look for inconsistencies. Look for errors as well.
Where feasible, the electronic data can be compared to underlying documents,
again to determine the completeness, accuracy, and reliability of the data. This com-
parison can highlight coding errors made when creating the database such as wrong
numbers, dates, and names. It also can reveal categories of information that were not
added to the electronic data, which if they had been added, would have affected the
results of searching the data. Just as electronic data can be compared to underlying
documents, so also can it be compared to data in other electronic files, the contents
of other documents, and information available through the Internet.
308
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Work the Evidence
What one can do with data really is limited more by one’s imagination than any-
thing else. That said, there are several general recommendations that can be offered:
Put the data into tools you can use. Spreadsheet programs can allow one to perform
calculations, prepare pivot tables that can quickly summarize data across several di-
mensions, develop charts to graphically present trends in the data, and map out in-
formation geographically. Database programs can permit one to search or query
the databases in complex and subtle ways, perform calculations, and generate a
broad range of reports. Sharing the data you receive and the knowledge you glean
from it to reconstruct past events with your client, experts, and other colleagues, as
appropriate, can offer you the opportunity to more effectively handle your case.
SUMMARY
Once the data has been successfully collected, it must be analyzed to extract the ev-
idence you wish to present and to rebuild what actually happened. As always, you
must make sure you fully document everything you do; your work will be ques-
tioned and you must be able to show that your results are consistently obtainable
from the procedures you performed.
Finally, this is where logging utilities come in. Logging utilities are vital for
forensics when reconstructing the sequence of events leading up to, during, and
after an attack, provided the attacker doesn’t delete the log files. Refining the fire-
wall rules, keeping the intrusion detection systems (IDSs) current, and reviewing
the log files will be important to stay one step ahead of the bad guys.
Conclusions
Computer forensics is the principle of reconstructing the activities leading to an
event and determining the answers to “What did they do?” and “How did they
do it?”
Stored information can be volatile and persistent at the same time.
Collecting electronic evidence is no trivial matter. There are many complexities
you must consider, and you must always be able to justify your actions.
Gathering electronic evidence is far from impossible. The right tools and knowl-
edge of how everything works is all you need to gather the evidence required.
Audit trails can also be used to reconstruct events after a problem has occurred.
Reconstructing Past Events
309

An Agenda for Action
When completing the Reconstructing Past Events Checklist (Table F11.1 in Ap-
pendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional
list of actions for reconstructing past events. The order is not significant; however,
these are the activities for which the researcher would want to provide a detailed de-
scription of procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A
number of these systems have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Recovering electronic data is only the beginning.
2.
True or False? Even if the data is in a format that appears to be one you already
use, conversion may not be necessary.
3.
True or False? If you are going to attempt converting the data yourself, you may
be fortunate enough to have received electronic data that you can convert
directly into programs such as Access or Excel using the wizards built into
those programs.
4.
True or False? Once the data has been unsuccessfully collected, it must be analyzed
to extract the evidence you wish to present and to rebuild what actually happened.
5.
True or False? Refining the firewall rules, keeping the IDS current, and review-
ing the log files will be important to stay one step ahead of the bad guys.
Multiple Choice
1.
The increase in computer-related crime has led to development of special tools
to recover and analyze what?
A. NRA
B.
Computer data
C. Search data
D. Data specialists
E.
Data centers
310
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

2.
Today, data can come on a variety of:
A. Radio telescopes
B.
Media
C. Radios that listen to time signals such as WWV
D. Global positioning system (GPS) receivers
E.
Atomic clocks
3.
Having data on a useable medium is useless unless it also is in a:
A. Rival’s next move
B.
Plot
C. Disaster
D. Unuseable format
E.
Useable format
4.
Hardware requirements will vary greatly depending on:
A. Computer files
B.
File fragments
C. Timekeeping
D. Data miming
E.
Specific circumstances
5.
Electronic files often contain “hidden” data (information that does not show
up on any printouts of the file) that can potentially prove to be:
A. Useful
B.
Not useful
C. A waste of time
D. Good
E.
Bad
Exercise
Offensive jokes were being posted in various locations in the offices of a large
corporation. Management had identified four possible suspects but each denied
involvement. The company’s IT department could not find where the docu-
ments had been created on any computer in the office. A CFS team (CFST) was
called to consult on the matter [2]. Using forensic analysis, how did the CFST
solve the problem?
Reconstructing Past Events
311

HANDS-ON PROJECTS
It was every attorney’s nightmare. A default judgment had been entered against his
client because no answer had been filed with the court. The attorney knew he had
signed the paperwork and his paralegal insisted that the paperwork had been
mailed to the court. However, the paralegal did not receive a stamped copy re-
turned from the clerk and never followed up. The opposing counsel would not con-
sent to re-opening the case, and the client had secured a hearing to attempt to set
aside the judgment and re-open the case. A CFST was called in to perform a foren-
sic analysis of the paralegal’s computer to determine when the document had been
created and last revised, hoping to verify her testimony [2]. What do you think the
CFST did to resolve the case?
Case Projects
An executive at a company was accused of stealing or misdirecting company funds
for his personal use. The company requested that a CFST process the computer in
the subject’s office to determine if any evidence of the theft was there [2]. What do
you think the CFST found?
Optional Team Case Project
Three months after an application developer was fired from a major railroad com-
pany for harassing a female clerk, someone gained unauthorized remote access to
the company’s computer network, using the name and password of another em-
ployee. The intruder copied and then deleted almost 2,000 files relating to senior
executive compensation, corrupted the compensation database to give the clerk a
$250,000 raise, and tampered with audit trail information to disguise the date and
time of the intrusion. Simultaneously, an intruder hacked into the clerk’s personal,
university email account, copied content from that account, established unautho-
rized Yahoo! and Hotmail accounts using the clerk’s name, and began forwarding
embarrassing content from the clerk’s personal email box to the clerk’s supervisors
at the company. To make matters worse, the intruder physically stole another em-
ployee’s two-way pager and, from it, began sending increasingly threatening emails
to the clerk. What did the CFST do to solve this case?
312
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[2] Mandall, Robert, Computer, Forensic Evidence Solutions, Inc. (© 2002
Computer Forensic Evidence Solutions, Inc.), 1212 Hope Ranch Lane, Las
Vegas, NV 89134, 2002.
Reconstructing Past Events
313

This page intentionally left blank 

315
Networks
12
A
s information systems become cheaper and cheaper, companies are rapidly
automating not only their overhead processes such as purchasing, payables,
hiring, and payroll, but also their value by adding processing such as mar-
keting and sales. The result of this rush to automate and, with the explosion of the
Internet, a rush to publish, is the highest level of dependency on information sys-
tems corporate America has ever seen. With this dependency comes a vulnerabil-
ity: The ability of corporations to conduct their business is dependent on
technology that was designed to be as open as possible and that only a minority of
engineers and scientists understand.
When connected to the Internet, what managers need to do is create barriers
that deter cyber-based or internal perpetrators from attacking their systems. The
first way to do this is to analyze corporate resources for known vulnerabilities. That
is, systems need to be checked to ensure that they are correctly configured and have
the most up-to-date security patches in place. This is what security scanners do.
Next, one needs to find out the perpetrator’s methods of operation and be alert
when those methods are sensed. This is what intrusion detectors do. Next, one
needs a mechanism to filter out suspected malicious activity once it is identified.
This is what firewalls do. However, even with all of these systems in place, there is
a vulnerability to attacks that use new or unknown methods.
What current intrusion detection systems (IDSs) do is monitor the network
and watch for specific patterns. Once a pattern is recognized, the IDS can alert the
systems administrator, close the connection via the firewall, or record the activity
for further analysis. However, if an attacker uses a method not previously known to
the IDS, it will transpire unnoticed, the corporate Web site will be defaced, em-
ployee records will be retrieved, or client lists will be extracted. When the malicious

act is discovered, the question immediately comes to mind: How did they do this?
And sometimes: What did they do?
This chapter introduces a solution to this dilemma: network forensics. Net-
work forensics is the principle of reconstructing the activities leading to an event
and determining the answers to “What did they do?” and “How did they do it?” In-
stead of matching observed activities on a local area network (LAN) to a database
of known patterns of malicious intent, it records all activity on a LAN and provides
centralized tools to analyze the activity in real time for surveillance and historically
for damage assessment and prosecution. Because the system is network-based, it is
impregnable to circumvention. If a resource is accessible via a LAN for exploitation,
it is observable by a network forensics agent.
NETWORK FORENSICS SCENARIO
A high-profile computer system has been compromised, and federal law enforce-
ment officials have been called in to investigate the break-in. Fortunately, a network
security system has been retaining all network packet information for the past six
months. Because of the high volume of data involved, advanced visual analysis tools
are applied to the tens of millions of network events. These tools, in combination
with information produced from an on-sight investigation, are used to identify sus-
pect communications. Through the use of visualization tools, the investigators iden-
tified the intruder and his unlawful activity spanning six months. In addition,
patterns of network misuse invisible to system administrators, caused by other per-
petrators, were discovered through pattern analysis. The additional abnormalities in
network usage were identified by visually mining through the forensic data.
A TECHNICAL APPROACH
One approach here will be to use an interactive visualization interface to drive the
underlying network forensic data acquisition tools and analysis routines. The ob-
jective of the interface will be to capture the abilities of a skilled network security
analyst into an intuitive and guided examination of network security events. To
achieve this, you should propose to investigate different visualization techniques to
model the network security data. The goal is to encapsulate these visualization tech-
niques into modular network forensic data visualizers. In addition, you should tie
these data visualizers into a visual query interface that can drive the network secu-
rity database backend.
For example, a prototyping vehicle used to conceptualize and test these ideas is
AVS/Express (http://www.avs.com/software/soft_t/avsxps.html). AVS/Express is a
316
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

comprehensive and versatile data visualization tool for both non-programmers and
experienced developers. Rapid data analysis and rich visualization techniques com-
bined with an intuitive, graphical application development environment make
AVS/Express the best choice for any data visualization task. AVS/Express provides
powerful visualization methods for challenging problems in a vast range of fields,
including science, business, engineering, medicine, telecommunications, and envi-
ronmental research. Also, an interactive data flow process allows multiple visual-
ization steps to be combined as a single visualization macro. The main components
of a network forensic data visualizer are as follows:
Network forensic data and database
Visual query interface
Network forensic data visualizers
AVS/Express is Advanced Visual System’s [1] visualization development tool. It is
a modular, hierarchical, open, and extensible system with hundreds of predefined
components for visualizing data.
Network Forensic Data and Database
The data that will be used for visual analysis consists of network forensic data de-
scribing Internet protocol (IP) sessions. This data can consist of, but is not limited
to, a time, date, IP address pair, session type, and duration. Session type identifies
the communication event type. For example, network communications such as
email, ftp transfers, and http sessions are considered to be session types.
The collected network communication metadata should be stored in a high-
capacity data warehouse. The data warehouse should consist of the following two
stages: stage 1 collects all observed network transactions and records them into logs;
stage 2 summarizes these transactions into objects and communicants producing a
network event. You should also investigate the possibility of creating additional
smaller browsable tables for supporting rapid high-level looks into the database. If
successful, these will support a smooth interactive visual query interface while still
allowing drilling down into the more extensive databases with additional, more ex-
tensive queries.
Currently there are various reports that can be generated on these databases via
queries. One approach to integrate these reports into the visualization engine is to
develop network forensic data models that can hold the different types of report
data and provide a seamless input into the visualization engine through data read-
ers. Thus, to integrate a new report type into the visualization engine, you must first
create a predefined query as a data model or a variation on an existing data model
that is created for the report, where the data is inserted into the data model and a
reader is developed to load the data model into the visualization engine.
Networks
317

Visual Query Interface
The visual query interface allows the network security analyst to interactively probe
the output of the network forensic data visualizers. A probe may involve one of
several different actions. One is to expose greater detail at a particular data point. For
example, if the node of a network security event is shown, then picking it would give
the ancillary information associated with that node. Second, one may use node in-
formation as a way to give additional constraints to a drill down query. This would
allow, for example, a way to pare down the number of nodes that need to be exam-
ined. An effective data visualization is highly segregated by space and color. There-
fore, spatially oriented visual queries can serve to partition the data space and be
automatically translated to query constraints. Range constraints can be applied based
on the node data or color values. Finally, a menu-driven choice of a set of predefined
queries can help serve as a navigational aid into the various parts of the database.
The goal here is to investigate the effectiveness of each of the preceding techniques
in browsing and navigating the network forensics database. Effective techniques can
then be incorporated as templates to allow the network security analyst to customize
the interface to perform context-based searches pertinent to his or her investigation.
Network Forensic Data Visualizers
Network forensic data visualizers are key to an understanding of the network foren-
sic data. They not only allow the raw network data to be displayed, but do so in a
way that highlights relevant data through spatial, color, or projection techniques.
You should also investigate a number of different visualizations of the network
forensic data to see which methods work best in conveying useful information to
the network forensic analyst. Due to the large size of the network forensic database,
a hierarchical approach may be useful in categorizing the visualizations, with each
level showing correspondingly greater detail. Such an approach could also support
the visual query interface in a browse/detail mode. You should also investigate such
a hierarchical partitioning of detail to see if it can be used as an effective means of
displaying network forensic data at different detail levels.
The network forensic database also has several possibly different modes of in-
vestigation. The first looks at the data from a chronological or time-ordered point
of view. In this case, the visualization performs a mapping from time-ordered to
space-ordered view or presents a specific time range with other parameters such as
duration, ip_address, and session type being mapped spatially. In addition, binning
(see note below) to create counts of events within certain ranges of parameters is
also possible.
318
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Binning is a method used to map data to spatial axes in uniformly sized bins. Real
values are discretized into data ranges that define a bin. Unique categorical values
define a bin. Binning resolution determines accuracy and rendering efficiency.
In the second mode of investigation, a network-event view of the database is
appropriate. This can lead to a nodal map view of the network events. Connections
could represent paths an intruder has used to enter the network domain.
DESTRUCTION OF EMAIL
Now that email has worked its way into the very fabric of your life, you need to rec-
ognize it as more than simply an informal, casual means of communication. The
courts treat email as formal records—no different than print communication—so
be prepared for the legal consequences, including the fact that your company’s
email is discoverable in litigation.
For example, just ask Bill Gates about the significance of this treatment. Reams
and megabytes of Microsoft email messages dating from the 1990s (including
Gates’ own) were used skillfully by the government in its antitrust case against Mi-
crosoft. As with any other printed documents, these email messages were deemed
records discoverable under the federal rules of civil procedure.
Accordingly, the courts will not hesitate to compel businesses to produce these
records and, further, to sanction them for their failure to do so. For instance, in the
Brand Name Prescription Drugs Antitrust Litigation, 1995 WL 360526 (N.D. Ill.
1995), the court required the corporate defendant, CIBA-Geigy Corporation, to
produce over 30 million email messages stored on backup tapes and to foot the
$50,000–$70,000 cost of searching the messages and formatting them into a read-
able form. According to the court, the reasonable translation of electronic data into
a usable form is an ordinary and foreseeable burden of litigation that the defendant
should bear, absent a showing of extraordinary hardship.
That the electronic data may be duplicative of print documentation already
produced in litigation is irrelevant. Thus, for example, when the insurance com-
pany in American Bankers Ins. Co. of Florida v. Caruth, et al., 786 S.W.2d 427 (Tex.
Ct. App. 1990) failed to produce computer files despite already having produced
approximately 30,000 boxes of material containing the same information, the court
sanctioned the company by conclusively deeming each allegation against the com-
pany to be true, thereby precluding the company from contesting the allegations
and leading to a default judgment against it.
Hitting the Delete button on your keyboard is not a panacea either. Do you re-
member Oliver North, whose deleted email messages from the White House were
retrieved from a main frame backup tape during the Iran-Contra investigation? If
Networks
319

information that has been deleted has not yet been overwritten by the computer
system or is stored on back-up tapes or archive tapes, the information may still be
accessible.
Any attempts to destroy the email will likewise be met with harsh conse-
quences. For example, in Computer Associates International, Inc. v. American
Fundware, Inc., 133 F.R.D. 166 (D. Colo. 1990), a developer of a computer pro-
gram, over the course of years, destroyed prior versions of a source code, retaining
only the current version. Although the court acknowledged that such destruction of
older versions may be the standard industry practice, the court found that once the
developer knew, or should have known, that the source code would probably be
critical evidence in pending or imminent litigation, a duty arose to preserve it. The
court held that the developer had received a copy of the lawsuit filed by the holder
of the copyright to the computer program but continued to destroy older versions
of the source code. Therefore, the developer had breached his or her duty to pre-
serve the code. Accordingly, the court entered default judgment against the devel-
oper as an appropriate sanction.
Employers beware, for even prelitigation correspondence has been found suf-
ficient to impose a duty to preserve relevant documents, electronic or otherwise
(see the example of William T. Thompson Co. v. Gen’l Nutrition Corp., 593 F.
Supp. 1443, 1446 [C.D. Cal. 1984]). Recently, one court imposed a $1 million sanc-
tion, as well as reimbursement of attorney fees, even though no willful destruction
of electronic records was found (see the example of re Prudential Insurance Co.
Sales Practices Litigation, 169 F.R.D. 598 [D.N.J. 1997]).
To avoid these litigation nightmares, you should implement a consistent reten-
tion policy that includes one or more of the following: routinely archive all email as
it is received on your server for a certain period of time (for example, 30–60 days);
clear the archives after an additional specified time; physically segregate the backup
copies of the email system from backups of the rest of the computer system; auto-
matically erase email from the computer system, including backups, after a short pe-
riod (15–30 days); apply uniform retention and deletion standards and features
outside the server to workstations and laptops; and formulate and distribute a state-
ment that the automatic deletion of electronic records will be suspended and steps
taken to preserve records in the event of investigation or litigation. With such a pol-
icy in place, you may not stay out of the courtroom, but at least you will be prepared
if you ever find your company the target of a lawsuit or subpoena.
Now, let’s look at the development of cross-disciplinary guidelines and stan-
dards for the recovery, preservation, and examination of digital evidence, including
audio, imaging, and electronic devices with regard to the damaging of computer ev-
idence. This part of the chapter proposes the establishment of standards for the ex-
change of digital evidence between sovereign nations and is intended to elicit
constructive discussion regarding the damaging of digital evidence.
320
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

DAMAGING COMPUTER EVIDENCE
To ensure that digital evidence is collected, preserved, examined, and transferred in
a manner that safeguards its accuracy and reliability, law enforcement and forensic
organizations must establish and maintain an effective quality system. Standard
operating procedures (SOPs) are documented quality-control guidelines that must
be supported by proper case records and use broadly accepted procedures, equip-
ment, and materials.
The use of SOPs is fundamental to both law enforcement and forensic science.
Guidelines that are consistent with scientific and legal principles are essential to the ac-
ceptance of results and conclusions by courts and other agencies. The development
and implementation of these SOPs must be under an agency’s management authority.
Rapid technological changes are the hallmark of digital evidence, with the
types, formats, and methods for seizing and examining digital evidence changing
quickly. To ensure that personnel, training, equipment, and procedures continue
to be appropriate and effective, management must review and update SOP docu-
ments annually.
Because a variety of scientific procedures may validly be applied to a given
problem, standards and criteria for assessing procedures need to remain flexible.
The validity of a procedure may be established by demonstrating the accuracy and
reliability of specific techniques. In the digital evidence area, peer review of SOPs by
other agencies may be useful.
Procedures should set forth their purpose and appropriate application. Required
elements such as hardware and software must be listed, and the proper steps for suc-
cessful use should be listed or discussed. Any limitations in the use of the procedure
or the use or interpretation of the results should be established. Personnel who use
these procedures must be familiar with them and have them available for reference.
Although many acceptable procedures may be used to perform a task, consid-
erable variation among cases requires that personnel have the flexibility to exercise
judgment in selecting a method appropriate to the problem. Hardware used in the
seizure and examination of digital evidence should be in good operating condition
and be tested to ensure that it operates correctly. Software must be tested to ensure
that it produces reliable results for use in seizure and examination.
In general, documentation to support conclusions must be such that, in the ab-
sence of the originator, another competent person could evaluate what was done, in-
terpret the data, and arrive at the same conclusions as the originator. The requirement
for evidence reliability necessitates a chain of custody for all items of evidence. Chain-
of-custody documentation must be maintained for all digital evidence.
Case notes and records of observations must be of a permanent nature. Hand-
written notes and observations must be in ink, not pencil, although pencil (including
color) may be appropriate for diagrams or making tracings. Any corrections to notes
Networks
321

must be made by an initialed, single strikeout; nothing in the handwritten informa-
tion should be obliterated or erased. Notes and records should be authenticated by
handwritten signatures, initials, digital signatures, or other marking systems.
Evidence has value only if it can be shown to be accurate, reliable, and controlled.
A quality forensic program consists of properly trained personnel and appropriate
equipment, software, and procedures to collectively ensure these attributes.
International Principles Against Damaging of Computer Evidence
The International Organization on Computer Evidence (IOCE) was established in
1995 to provide international law enforcement agencies a forum for the exchange
of information concerning computer crime investigation and other computer-
related forensic issues. Composed of accredited government agencies involved in
computer forensic investigations, the IOCE identifies and discusses issues of inter-
est to its constituents, facilitates the international dissemination of information,
and develops recommendations for consideration by its member agencies. In addi-
tion to formulating computer evidence standards, the IOCE develops communica-
tions services between member agencies and holds conferences geared toward the
establishment of working relationships.
In response to the G-8 Communique and Action plans of 1997, the IOCE was
tasked with the development of international standards for the exchange and re-
covery of undamaged electronic evidence. Working groups in Canada, Europe, the
United Kingdom, and the United States have been formed to address this stan-
dardization of computer evidence.
During the International Hi-Tech Crime and Forensics Conference (IHCFC)
of October 1999, the IOCE held meetings and a workshop that reviewed the United
Kingdom Good Practice Guide and the Scientific Working Group on Digital Evi-
dence (SWGDE) Draft Standards. The working group proposed the following prin-
ciples, which were approved unanimously by the IOCE delegates present. The
international principles developed by the IOCE for the standardized recovery of
computer-based evidence are governed by the following attributes:
Consistency with all legal systems
Allowance for the use of a common language
Durability
Ability to cross international boundaries
Ability to instill confidence in the integrity of evidence
Applicability to all forensic evidence
Applicability at every level, including that of individual, agency, and country [2]
Furthermore, the following international principles were presented, approved,
and approved again at the IHCFCs in October 1999 and 2001, respectively.
322
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Upon seizing digital evidence, actions taken should not change that evidence.
When it is necessary for a person to access original digital evidence, that person
must be forensically competent.
All activity relating to the seizure, access, storage, or transfer of digital evidence
must be fully documented, preserved, and available for review.
An individual is responsible for all actions taken with respect to digital evidence
while the digital evidence is in his possession.
Any agency that is responsible for seizing, accessing, storing, or transferring
digital evidence is responsible for compliance with these principles [2].
So, do you have a well-documented intrusion-detection response plan? In other
words, if you are attacked, do you have the documentation tools that are needed to
record the attack, so that you can make the proper response? Let’s take a look.
TOOLS NEEDED FOR INTRUSION RESPONSE TO THE
DESTRUCTION OF DATA
It is very important to document and inventory the tools needed for intrusion re-
sponse to the destruction of data—including intrusion detection software, backups,
and file-system-recovery tools. There is also a need to have written requirements
for training IT staff on how to deal with intrusions. This can be System Adminis-
tration, Networking, and Security Institute (SANS) courses, Computer Emergency
Response Team’s (CERT) Software Engineering Institute, training offered for your
intrusion detection tools, or even custom training developed in-house. Training
should also include some form of regular fire drill.
Incident Reporting and Contact Forms
Documenting the intrusion (incident) on destruction of data is very important, not
only as an aid for solving the intrusion problem, but also for an audit trail that may
even be used in criminal proceedings. It is critical to capture as much information
as possible and create forms enabling users who are not intrusion detection spe-
cialists to provide as much information as possible. Some of the important ele-
ments of incident reporting forms are
Contact information for person(s) discovering problem and responsible parties.
Target systems and networks. Know all about the systems under attack, in-
cluding operating system versions, IP addresses, and so on.
Networks
323

Purpose of systems under attack. Know what the systems are used for (payroll,
R&D, and so on), as well as some kind of a ranking of the importance of the
system.
Evidence of intrusion. Discover anything that is known about the intrusion,
method of attacks used, source IP address of attacker, and network contact in-
formation for this address.
List of parties to notify. This can include the technical contacts, internal legal
contacts, and possibly the legal authorities.
Finally, when it comes to hardening your network against hackers, the best de-
fense is to keep abreast of developing threats and to test your system with due dili-
gence. In other words, you need to seal off the leaks.
SYSTEM TESTING
It seems you can’t open a newspaper or listen to the news these days without learn-
ing that yet another company’s network has been broken in to. The truth is that re-
silient new viral strains are popping up every day. Even worse, thanks to the advent
of always-on DSL, ISDN, and cable modem connections, security breaches that
were once limited to large corporations or government facilities are now finding
their way into your homes as well.
Is your network vulnerable? If you do business on the Web or maintain a con-
nection to an outside network, chances are that the answer is yes. Fortunately, it’s
not hard to decrease the odds of attack or intrusion. Statistics show that more than
82% of successful hacks occur because Web technicians fail to install patches for
known and publicized bugs. In other words, a little effort can go a long way toward
securing your network.
Domain Name Service
If you’ve ever used a URL to represent an IP address, you’ve used domain name ser-
vice (DNS)—a distributed database that provides translation capabilities between
domain names and IP addresses. DNSs also provide a standard Internet mechanism
for storing and accessing other types of data, such as MX (mail exchange) records.
The Internet couldn’t operate without DNSs, but the service is also rife with
holes, especially on Unix implementations that use the Berkeley Internet Name
Domain (BIND) variant of DNS. Designed to be a robust, stable system on which
to build a sound organizational naming architecture, BIND (especially in its earli-
est versions) is notorious for its vulnerabilities. In fact, CERT, a federally funded se-
curity research and development center operated by Carnegie Mellon University,
324
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

has declared that all BIND releases prior to Version 8.2.3 are likely to contain haz-
ardous security holes.
To make matters worse, network intrusion programs that automatically scan
networks and query corporate DNS servers looking for holes are becoming in-
creasingly available to hackers, who use these programs to test a system’s locks the
way a traditional burglar might jiggle a doorknob. These programs, which can be
found on most hacker or “cracker” Web sites, require little technical skill.
Once compromised, the DNS server can be used to launch disturbances such as
distributed DoS (denial of service) attacks to disrupt your business. Thankfully, all
it takes is a bit of housekeeping to reduce your chances of becoming a victim. First,
if yours is one of the many companies that runs outdated DNS software, an upgrade
is definitely in order. Install the latest version of your DNS software immediately.
Your next step should be to limit your access to port 53 (the DNS port) on your
firewalls. Although User Datagram Protocol (UDP) packets are required for requests
to and from the Internet DNS, your network’s transmission control protocol (TCP)
transport layer should be locked down except in cases when it’s absolutely required,
such as on primary and secondary servers at opposite sides of the firewall.
Services and File Sharing
Although services and file sharing capabilities are available on both Windows and
Unix, Windows computers receive the brunt of file sharing attacks from trojan
horses and share compromises. Many network administrators use share services to
make data access more convenient, but hackers will often compromise healthy ma-
chines by installing backdoor programs that register themselves as share services
when users start their systems. These shares can then be run from any client ma-
chine with “log on as service” rights.
To prevent unauthorized access through your network services, identify and re-
move all services that are not absolutely necessary. Doing so will also improve net-
work performance. The same rule applies to new services, especially those that begin
automatically at system startup. Nothing extraneous should ever be put into use.
File shares present another potential vulnerability to your network because,
when improperly configured, they can expose critical system files or even give full
file system access to any party that is able to connect to your network. Because Win-
dows’ file-sharing service uses NetBIOS, the same mechanism that permits file shar-
ing can also be used to retrieve sensitive system information, such as user names,
configuration information, and certain registry keys, via a “null session” connection
to the NetBIOS session service. Information can then be leveraged to allow password
guessing or a brute-force password attack against the Windows NT target.
Again, your best defense is diligence. Don’t share files indiscriminately, and
when you have no other choice, be sure to share only the files that absolutely must
Networks
325

be shared. Granted, it’s much easier to share an entire directory or forbid an entire
drive, but the extra effort necessary to provide more granular access privileges will
be well worth it.
Finally, bear in mind that, no matter how carefully you secure your network,
dedicated hackers will always find a way to get in. Even security experts readily
admit that firewalls and anti-virus procedures can offer only casual, “business as
usual” protection. Malicious hackers have gone so far as to bribe insiders to steal
corporate data. There’s no way to secure your network against those kinds of at-
tacks. On the other hand, casual hacking attempts present the greatest danger, if
only because they’re far more common. Any protection is better than none.
SUMMARY
This chapter introduced several solutions to the dilemma of network forensics. As
previously explained, network forensics is the principle of reconstructing the activ-
ities leading to an event and determining the answer to What did they do? and How
did they do it? Protecting your network against hackers need not be a full-time job.
By including a few best practices as part of your organization’s daily routine, you
can prevent leaks from developing—or at the very least, plug them before the dams
break altogether.
Conclusions
One approach to network intrusion detection and network forensics depends
on the development of new data visualization techniques to address the vol-
umes of data collected in a forensics application.
An algorithm used to reasonably collect and retain information about each
and every packet that transits a network is needed. This comprehensive collec-
tion posture results in very large datasets that necessitate the use of data visu-
alization techniques to reasonably analyze events.
Visualization software should be produced to present the IP sessions in a man-
ner that enables visual data mining. This will consist of gaining an understand-
ing of IP session attributes, mapping these attributes to visual resources (x-axis,
y-axis, z-axis, color, shape, thickness, etc.), establishing the connections to the
datasets, and constructing dynamic, data-driven visualization displays.
The resulting visualizations should allow an analyst with a cursory under-
standing of data networks to identify normal patterns of network traffic and
therefore identify deviations from the norm.
326
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The visualizations should allow an analyst to drill through the volumes of data
from the global view down to individual events or transactions.
Different visualizations will be explored with ease of use and data density as the
evaluation criteria.
Acquisition of digital evidence begins with information or physical items that
are collected or stored for examination purposes.
The term evidence implies that the collector of evidence is recognized by the courts.
The process of collecting is also assumed to be a legal process that adheres to
the rules of evidence in that locality.
A data object or physical item only becomes evidence when so deemed by a law
enforcement official or designee.
Data objects are objects or information of potential probative value that are as-
sociated with physical items.
Data objects may occur in different formats without altering the original in-
formation.
Digital evidence is information of probative value stored or transmitted in dig-
ital form.
Physical items are items on which data objects or information may be stored or
through which data objects are transferred.
Original digital evidence is physical items and the data objects associated with
such items at the time of acquisition or seizure.
Duplicate digital evidence is an accurate digital reproduction of all data objects
contained on an original physical item.
Copy is an accurate reproduction of information contained on an original
physical item, independent of the original physical item.
With forensic competency, there is a need to generate an agreement on inter-
national accreditation and the validation of tools, techniques, and training.
Issues need to be resolved that relate to practices and procedures for the exam-
ination of digital evidence.
The sharing of information that relates to high-tech crime and forensic com-
puting is needed, such as events, tools, and techniques.
Simple network management protocol (SNMP) is an extremely useful feature
for recording system error messages from servers and routers, but it can also re-
veal quite a bit of information about your network.
With the volume of network traffic increasing every day, network security re-
mains a top priority. Most instances of unauthorized access result from simple
negligence, so if all your company does is pay attention and adhere to a few
basic routines, you’ll already be ahead of the game.
Networks
327

An Agenda for Action
When completing the Networks Checklist (Table F12.1 in Appendix F), the com-
puter forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional list of actions for
networks. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for which
the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review,
and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems have
been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? The data that will be used for visual analysis consists of network
forensic data describing SNMP sessions.
2.
True or False? The collected network communication metadata should be
stored in a high-capacity data warehouse.
3.
True or False? The visual query interface does not allow the network security ana-
lyst to interactively probe the output of the network forensic data visualizers.
4.
True or False? Network forensic data visualizers are key to an understanding of
the network forensic data.
5.
True or False? To ensure that digital evidence is collected, preserved, examined,
and transferred in a manner safeguarding the accuracy and reliability of the evi-
dence, law enforcement and forensic organizations should not establish and
maintain an effective quality system.
Multiple Choice
1.
The main components of a network forensic data visualizer are as follows,
except for two:
A. Network forensic data and database
B.
Visual query interface
C. Network forensic data visualizers
D. Network forensic interaction
E.
Visual query data
328
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

2.
The international principles developed by the IOCE for the standardized recov-
ery of computer-based evidence are governed by the following attributes, except:
A. Consistency with all legal systems
B.
Allowance for the use of a common language
C. Fragility
D. Ability to cross international boundaries
E.
Ability to instill confidence in the integrity of evidence
3.
The international principles discussed in question 2 were presented, approved,
and approved again at the International Hi-Tech Crime and Forensics Confer-
ences in October 1999 and 2001, respectively. They are as follows, except:
A. Upon seizing digital evidence, actions taken should change that evidence.
B.
When it is necessary for a person to access original digital evidence, that
person must be forensically competent.
C. All activity relating to the seizure, access, storage, or transfer of digital evi-
dence must be fully documented, preserved, and available for review.
D. An individual is responsible for all actions taken with respect to digital ev-
idence while the digital evidence is in his possession.
E.
Any agency that is responsible for seizing, accessing, storing, or transferring
digital evidence is responsible for compliance with these principles.
4.
The following are some of the important elements of incident reporting forms,
except:
A. Private information for person(s) discovering problem and responsible
parties.
B.
Target systems and networks. Know all about the systems under attack, in-
cluding operating system versions, IP addresses, and so on.
C. Purpose of systems under attack. Know what systems are used for (payroll,
R&D, and so on), as well as some kind of a ranking of the importance of the
system.
D. Evidence of intrusion. Discover anything that is known about the intru-
sion, method of attacks used, source IP address of attacker, and network
contact information for this address.
E.
List of parties to notify. This can include the technical contacts, internal
legal contacts, and possibly the legal authorities.
5.
What current intrusion detection systems (IDSs) do is monitor the network
and watch for:
A. Usefulness
B.
Specific patterns
C. Waste of time
Networks
329

D. Good patterns
E.
Bad patterns
Exercise
A CFS team’s (CFST) forensic work regarding the authenticity of a critical piece of
electronic evidence led to the resolution of a multibillion dollar litigation. In the
litigation, the version of the email in the sender’s possession was silent on the issue
of certain contract terms. The recipient’s version of the email explicitly confirmed
those same contract terms. It was alleged that one of the parties had tampered with
its electronic record, which had been sent from a Lotus Notes environment into a
Microsoft Outlook environment. A CFST was retained to determine “who dunnit.”
So, how were they able to determine “who dunnit?”
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
When the CEO of a major company opened his email one morning, he was shocked
to see that overseas hackers were sending him confidential files from his own desk-
top hard drive. The hacker demanded hundreds of thousands of dollars as a “con-
sulting fee,” and threatened to disclose the information and the weaknesses in the
company’s security if the money was not paid. A CFST, working with the client’s
network personnel, preserved the evidence of the attack and assisted in determin-
ing how the attack occurred. How do you think they went about doing that?
Case Project
A major foreign investment company became very concerned when its IT staff de-
termined one Monday morning that a recently terminated trader had gained unau-
thorized entry into the company’s computer system over the weekend. The
company’s firewall logs indicated that the employee had downloaded terabytes of
data, and audit logs indicated that he had corrupted several production databases. It
also appeared that modem scripts on the trading floor had been sabotaged. A CFST
was called in to solve the problem. Explain how you think they solved the problem.
Optional Team Case Project
In March 2004, one of the largest independent Internet securities trading firms
contacted a CFST with a critical problem. For three days, someone had been tar-
geting the firm with denial-of-service attacks, sending packets of data from a re-
mote location that caused the firm’s servers to crash for hours at a time. The
330
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

company suspected an employee, a database programmer who had stormed out of
the business three days before, unhappy with his severance negotiations. Given the
nature of the firm’s business, a prolonged denial of service would have crippled the
firm, while also straining the ability of the firm’s customers to do business. Please
explain how the CFST went about solving this problem.
REFERENCES
[1] Advanced Visual System, World Headquarters, 300 Fifth Avenue,
Waltham, MA 02451, 2002. 
[2] U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, J. Edgar
Hoover Building, 935 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, D.C.
20535-0001, 2002. 
Networks
331

This page intentionally left blank 

Countermeasures:
Information Warfare
IV
T
he fourth part of this book discusses how to fight against macro threats,
defensive strategies for governments and industry groups, the information
warfare arsenal and tactics of the military, the information warfare arsenal
and tactics of terrorists and rogues, the information warfare arsenal and tactics of
private companies, the information warfare arsenal of the future, surveillance tools
for information warfare of the future, and civilian causalities (the victims and
refugees of information warfare).
Part

This page intentionally left blank 

I
nformation warfare (IW), or sneak electronic assaults, could easily crash power
grids, financial networks, transportation systems, and telecommunications,
among other vital services. The National Security Agency (NSA) traces the
macro threat from hostile or potentially hostile governments as well as drug lords,
criminal cartels, and increasingly computer-savvy guerrilla groups. Some of these
rogue organizations are doing reconnaissance today on U.S. networks, mapping
them, and looking for vulnerabilities.
Cyberblitzes like those that briefly knocked out major Web sites a few yeas ago
(including Yahoo! Inc.’s Internet gateway, eBay Inc.’s auction service, and Ama-
zon.com Inc.’s retail site) could easily be copied on a larger scale. Criminals, crack-
ers, foreign governments could all use this technique. And if it should happen, a
future President had better move faster than Bush did during those infamous 7
minutes of pondering what to do when told of the 9-11 attacks. 
Such warnings are not new for the agents at NSA, who have frequently con-
jured up a “digital Pearl Harbor,” a reference to the Japanese surprise attack that
threw the United States into the Second World War. The NSA and other U.S. offi-
cials seem to be stepping up a public awareness campaign, spurred by the spread of
information technology, growing knowledge of malicious computer code, and ever
greater U.S. reliance on networked systems.
IS THE U.S. GOVERNMENT PREPARED 
FOR INFORMATION WARFARE?
The answer is a resounding “no.” A reasonable question that should be asked is
“Why are we vulnerable?” In a recent report, the Defense Science Board Task Force
on Information Warfare, lays the blame at the U.S. government’s own doorstep.
13
Fighting Against Macro
Threats: Defensive
Strategies for Governments
and Industry Groups
335

The reality is that the vulnerability of the Department of Defense (and of the na-
tion) to offensive IW attack is largely a self-created problem. Program by program,
economic sector by economic sector, the U.S. government has based critical functions
on inadequately protected telecomputing services. In aggregate, the U.S. government
created a target-rich environment, and U.S. industry has sold globally much of the
generic technology that can be used to strike these targets. From the standpoint of
psychological operations, it’s not so much exploited technology as it is that the U.S.
government has created a global information system it does not control and does not
understand, and this in turn creates additional targets for exploitation. Most recently,
this problem is being exacerbated by the growing emergence of “always-on” connec-
tions being made to individual homes and small businesses.
Recently, for example, a private security company alerted the FBI that it found
a malicious program on some 3,000 computers that could be remotely activated to
launch an attack on a site of choice—a trojan horse. Many of these computers are
privately owned and are on cable-modem or digital line subscriber (DSL) always-
on connections. In addition to the technological risk posed by many of these com-
puters having very limited or no security, the users of these computers often are
attractive targets for social engineering efforts for a simple reason. The very thought
that they would be targeted for an attack is unbelievable to them.
From an IW perspective, there are three primary target for the attacker using psy-
chological operations (psyops). The attacker can focus on the enemy, those who are
friendly to his or her cause, or those who are neutral, with each target chosen for a
specific purpose. If the attacker is simply a hacker, cracker, or script-kiddie, it might
be for nothing more than to grab a credit card number or prove to friends that he or
she could do it. Unfortunately, the dangers the U.S. government faces are not limited
to those groups. The government also faces the threat of multinational efforts to sub-
vert their defenses and find an economic, diplomatic, or military advantage. These ef-
forts might be aimed not only at the U.S. defense structure, but also at the U.S. utility
infrastructure, transportation, communications, finance, and much more. The U.S.
government also cannot discount the potential entrance of organized crime into the
equation, not to mention political activists and disgruntled employees.
As more individuals (the neutrals) turn to the Internet to help them with tasks
that have usually been served by personal service or other traditional means, tasks
such as banking, tax filing, shopping, and personal communications, the Internet
as a loci for commerce and communication becomes increasingly critical both to
the individual and to the businesses and industries that serve the individual. Al-
though the commercial sector is beginning to realize the importance of security, the
information on virtually unprotected personal machines may very well hold the key
to a crippling attack on any sector simply because those sectors exist to allow the
personal machines to connect to do business.
336
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
337
From a psyops point of view, how is it done? In any attack, finding and exploit-
ing a trust relationship can be a key to success for the attacker. One of the most often
cited examples of a physical trust relationship that was exploited successfully is 
the Mitnick attack. Kevin Mitnick discovered a relationship between host A and
host B. He was able to determine the probable response that host A would give to host
B after receiving the initiating packet in a three-way handshake. He blocked host B
with a denial-of-service attack and sent a packet to A crafted to look as if it came
from B. He then sent the expected response along with a small payload that con-
taminated host A’s .rhost file and caused host A at that point to completely trust
Mitnick’s computer. He dropped the attack on host B and simply accessed A as a
trusted root user.
How might an attacker employ psyops against a trust relationship? One of the
more common examples used to explain trust exploitation is that of the over-
worked call center. Imagine a worker at a large corporate call center. The caller has
done some research and discovered that a new personal report has been commis-
sioned by the CEO. He calls and identifies himself as Bert Jackson, who has just
been hired by the boss. He tells him he’s been working all day researching a project
that the CEO wants a report on in the morning and he needs access to the system
to put the report together. Unfortunately, he’s forgotten his password and it’s al-
ready 11 P.M. Can he get a new password or should he call the CEO and have him
call? In a shop with strong security, that would be an easy call, but it’s easy to see
that, in many cases, the call center worker would simply trust that the caller is who
he says he is and give out a new password. The net result? The attacker gets in and
can probably hide his tracks before the real Bert Jackson complains.
If the company is also a prime contractor for the government, a public utility,
or even a company whose success or failure can severely impact the stock market,
then the attacker has gained a tremendous advantage by simply manipulating in-
formation he or she has gained by infiltrating the system. Assume for this scenario
that a group wanted to create a deleterious impact on the stock market. That group,
perhaps over a period of months, maps IP ranges that are known to belong to pub-
lic Internet service providers (ISPs) providing high-speed, always-on access to in-
dividuals and small businesses and they map for the Netbios ports. As they map, a
second team begins the infiltration process, finding machines that are unprotected
and that contain information such as passwords to personal investment accounts,
banking, and the like. Even though these passwords may be encrypted, with mod-
ern cracking tools being what they are, at the end of the mapping period, they very
well could have discovered thousands of accounts, including Bert Jackson’s, that
could be exploited. Choosing the time to strike, they simultaneously use these ac-
counts to issue massive sell orders to the various brokers and close thousands of
bank accounts with the money transferred to offshore accounts that they may or

may not care about accessing. The distributed nature of this attack would make de-
tection and prevention difficult, if not impossible, and would certainly create an at-
mosphere of fear and distrust that would severely affect the general economy.
Again, the question is why? Let us look at the three basic types of attack:  strate-
gic, consolidation, and battlefield. If the preceding scenario were executed by orga-
nized crime, it would probably fall into the battlefield type because they probably
would be looking to cause a drop in stock market prices where they could step in
and buy cheaply, thus allowing them to see an impressive gain as confidence re-
bounded. If a foreign government perpetrated the attack, it might very well fall into
one of the other two categories. The attackers might be trying to distract the atten-
tion of the current administration away from what they might be attempting else-
where (strategic) or attempting to bring together the economic resources needed to
launch a more serious battlefield attack against us later (consolidation).
What is it that causes you, as a whole, to make it easy for those who would want
to abuse that trust? In a culture where the phrase “trust is earned” is a familiar
maxim, it would seem that you would be more eager to challenge than you really
are. However, trust also seems to be a social construct between two or more indi-
viduals. In both social and business milieus, a need to trust develops out of the need
to foster cooperation to achieve goals and objectives.
If that is the case, then how does the U.S. government overcome this tendency
and protect their critical resources? Part of the difficulty they face here is that their
focus tends to be on strengthening the security of their physical defenses, whether
that be through encryption, perimeter-based defenses, host-based defenses, or,
preferably, a combination of the three. Unfortunately, the U.S. government still has
too few people in system administrative positions who are security-aware enough
to alter default installations on whatever machine they are setting up (whether it be
Microsoft-based or Unix-based) to give an acceptable initial level of protection to
their users. These are technological trust defenses and likely will always be open to
attack. Although hardening those physical defenses is undeniably important, the
U.S. government often overlooks the most dangerous vulnerability (their users),
and that is where they spend the least amount of time in education. Why do com-
puter viruses such as the “I Love You” virus of few years ago work? Because users,
whether corporate, government, or private, haven’t been taught how to protect
themselves and change the paradigm of automatically trusting the email that an-
nounces it comes from Aunt Barbara.
The U.S. government must begin focusing on the end user and on those who
provide connections to the end users. When virtually all private connections to the
Internet were made over modems connecting to a dynamic host configuration pro-
tocol (DHCP) server where each session was served with a different IP address, it
was much less likely that a private machine would be compromised and efforts to
compromise machines tended to be focused on commercial, government, and
338
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
339
educational systems. Today, however, that situation is rapidly changing, and ISPs
must accept the responsibility of advising their customers or requiring them to in-
stall personal firewalls [1] and giving them the advice needed to properly configure
and maintain those firewalls. They also must understand the need to properly filter
their outgoing traffic to block and detect activity coming from within their net-
works that can be harmful to the general Internet community.
Educating the end user is going to be the most daunting task. The recent pro-
liferation of email-related viruses has certainly awakened many to the dangers, but
there must be a broader effort to educate and assist users in protecting themselves
and the U.S. government from the bad guys. To do this, the security community
needs to do a better job educating first the media and then the public through the
media. Psyops can work both ways. The difference between the U.S. government
and the bad guys is that the government has permission—they have the intent to do
what is right. So it is with perception management. The U.S. government can man-
age perception so people will realize the risks they face and take steps to protect
themselves. In helping them to protect themselves, the U.S. government also helps
protect the rest of the users on the Internet who could be attacked by their systems
if they are compromised. Trust is wonderful when exercised in an environment
where it is reasonable. In a global environment where criminals, unfriendly politi-
cal forces, and people who just don’t care about others have the same rights and ac-
cess as anyone, trust can be dangerous.
Education, not legislation, is the key component. The U.S. government can
pass all the laws it wishes, but it won’t affect the traffic that is coming out of coun-
tries such as Korea, China, and Singapore. The government needs to communicate
these messages with intelligence. If the U.S. government knows what needs to be
done and doesn’t communicate it effectively, then whatever else it does is irrelevant.
If the government scattershots their communications without filtering them
through an understanding of the message they need to convey, then all they are
sending out is noise.
ARE OTHER GOVERNMENTS PREPARED 
FOR INFORMATION WARFARE?
Are other governments ready to use information-age tricks against their adver-
saries? Yes, to some extent. Case in point is as follows:
At first, the urgent phone call from the U.S. Transportation Department con-
founded Cheng Wang, a Long Island–based webmaster for Falun Gong, the spiritual
movement that has unnerved Chinese authorities. Why did the department think his
computers were attacking theirs? The answer turned out to be startling. The elec-
tronic blitz hadn’t come, as it seemed, from various Falun Gong Internet sites.

Rather, someone had lifted their electronic identities. Computer sleuths followed a
trail back to the XinAn Information Service Center in Beijing—where an operator
identified it as part of the Ministry of Public Security, China’s secret police.
Web hacking, it seems, isn’t just for amateurs anymore. While the recent rash
of cybervandalism against some of e-commerce’s [2] biggest names has garnered
headlines, that’s only part of the story. From Beijing to Baku, governments and
their surrogates are using the Internet to harrass political opponents and unfriendly
neighbors, to go after trade secrets, and to prepare for outright warfare. Burma’s
military junta, for instance, is blamed for targeting the “Happy 99” email virus at
opponents who use the Net to advance their cause. Dissidents describe the attacks
as inept—proof, perhaps, that dictatorships are still behind the hacking curve.
Cyberwarfare
Burma is not alone in trying. In January 2000, hackers from Azerbaijan with names
like “The Green Revenge” and “Hijack” tampered with dozens of Armenian-related
Web sites, including host computers in the United States. Experts suspect involve-
ment or support from the Azerbaijani government, which imposes tight controls
over Internet use within its borders. Relations are tense between Azerbaijan and Ar-
menia, who fought a war over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, so it
wasn’t long before the Armenians retaliated in kind. It is the first case of a physical
battle going online.
In Cheng Wang’s case, his computers in Hauppauge, New York, were among
the Falun Gong sites around the world hit by a barrage of hacking attempts and
email “bombs” that coincided with a physical crackdown on the group’s practi-
tioners in China. Several of the hacking incidents were traced to the mysterious
XinAn office.
It is often difficult to track down who is to blame, but for networked Ameri-
cans, who own 60% of the world’s computing capacity, such electronic conflict
should be unsettling. True, the scariest scenarios dreamed up by experts, such as a
hostile government disrupting financial markets, haven’t come to pass—yet—but
more than a dozen countries, among them Russia, China, Iraq, Iran, and Cuba, are
developing significant IW capabilities. A senior CIA official cited a Russian general
who compared the disruptive effects of a cyberattack on transportation or electri-
cal grids to those of a nuclear weapon. China is considering whether to create a
fourth branch of its armed services devoted to IW. The Pentagon isn’t sitting still
either. The U.S. military’s offensive cyberwarfare programs are presently being con-
solidated at the U.S. Space Command in Colorado.
Nearly as worrisome as a cyberattack to experts is electronic espionage. From
March 1998 until January 2001, intruders broke into computer systems belonging
to the Pentagon, NASA, the Energy Department, and universities, making away
with unclassified but still sensitive data. One of the worst computer security
340
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
341
breaches in U.S. history that spawned an investigation was named Moonlight Maze.
It pointed to a Russian intelligence-gathering operation.
Successful cyberwar is likely to be like that—no exploding munitions to tell
someone they’re under attack. Tapping into an adversary’s command-and-control
system could yield a gold mine of data about enemy plans. The longer a cyberspy
conceals his or her presence, the longer the intelligence flows. Alternatively, false in-
formation about troop locations and battlefield conditions could be inserted into
enemy computers, causing leaders to make decisions based on bogus information. 
During the Kosovo bombing campaign in 1999, the Pentagon set up a high-
level information-operations cell. All the tools were in place, but the United States
mostly held back. By the time Pentagon lawyers approved cyberstrikes against Ser-
bia, events had overtaken the need for them.
Disadvantages of Cyberwarfare
Cyberwar raises a host of unprecedented legal questions. The line between fair-
game military sites and civilian infrastructure may not exist. There is collateral
damage in cyberspace. If someone tampers with somebody else’s control mecha-
nisms, how assured are those individuals that it would stop right there? The United
States, more dependent on computer networks than anyone, might lose the most in
legitimizing cyberwar. Some countries, including Russia, have proposed what
might be called “electronic arms control,” but the obstacles are daunting: verifying
a treaty would make counting Russian nuclear missiles look easy.
Among the sites hacked in the Caucasus Web war was one belonging to the
Washington, D.C.–based Armenian National Institute, which studies the
1915–1918 Turkish genocide of Armenians. Logging onto http://www.armenian-
genocide.org in late January 2000, one would have been redirected to a site offering
information on Azerbaijan’s president.
One Austin, Texas–based corporation already has its own rules. This corpora-
tion makes powerful search software for such uses as insurance-fraud investigations.
The company will not license the technology to nine countries and three U.S. gov-
ernment agencies because of the potential for privacy abuse [3]. That hasn’t stopped
at least one of those countries from trying. In 1998, a company tried to buy rights to
the technology. It turned out to be a front for the Chinese government.
WHAT INDUSTRY GROUPS HAVE DONE TO 
PREPARE FOR INFORMATION WARFARE
On December 18, 2000, the National Security Council held the first meeting of the re-
cently formed Cyberincident Steering Group, aimed at fostering cooperation between
private industry and government to secure systems from domestic and international

cyberattack. This meeting was an important first step in building computer security
programs for the nation. Among topics discussed were the creation of a rapid response
system and communications between industry and government.
The U.S. intelligence community voiced its concerns with the release of “Global
Trends 2015,” a wide-ranging analysis by the CIA, its sister U.S. spy shops, and out-
side experts. According to the report, foes of a militarily dominant United States,
rather than challenging it head-on, would seek to target an Achilles’ heel in cyber-
space or threaten the use of the deadliest chemical, nuclear, or biological weapons
(see sidebar, “Doomsday Software”).
DOOMSDAY SOFTWARE
After years of surveillance, Tokyo police thought they’d seen everything about Aum
Shinrikyo, the high-tech doomsday sect behind the 1995 nerve-gas attack on that
city’s subway system, but even the cops were surprised after raiding cult facilities in
February 2000 and finding evidence that Aum had developed software programs for
at least 10 government agencies, including the Defense Ministry, as well as some 90
Japanese firms. With their identity hidden behind a web of front companies and
subcontractors, Aum engineers sold as many as 200 systems ranging from databases
for clients to an Internet messaging service.
Although no evidence has yet emerged that Aum installed so-called trapdoors to
secretly gain access to its clients’ data, authorities have reason to worry. In the mid-
1990s, sect members burglarized and stole secrets from Japan’s top defense contrac-
tor and its top semiconductor maker—part of an extraordinary campaign to develop
biological agents, laser guns, and other high-tech weapons. Until now, Japan has
shown an almost unbelievably low sense of its need for cybersecurity. That may
soon change.
Such asymmetric approaches (whether undertaken by states or non-state actors)
will become the dominant characteristic of most threats to the U.S. homeland. Over
time, attacks are increasingly likely to be fired off through computer networks rather
than conventional arms, as the skill of U.S. adversaries in employing them evolves.
FBI Fingers China
Many unnamed countries are developing technologies (previously discussed) to
complicate what the U.S. military refers to as “power projection” and to undermine
morale at home. The interagency, FBI-led National Infrastructure Protection Cen-
ter, uses a slide depicting China’s Great Wall in its standard presentation on cy-
berthreats, along with a quote from Sun Zi, author of a treatise on war in about 350
B.C. “Subjugating the enemy’s army without fighting is the true pinnacle of excel-
342
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
343
lence,” the FBI’s slide quotes the ancient Chinese strategist as saying. In a telltale
update, the slide includes a 1999 quote from a Chinese newspaper referring to IW
as a means of achieving strategic victory over a militarily superior enemy.
Industry Groups Prepare to Fight Cyberattacks
A group of technology heavyweights including Microsoft and Intel have recently un-
veiled a new resource in their efforts to strengthen cybersecurity. The group has es-
tablished a new initiative through which high-tech companies can share information
about the vulnerabilities in their software and hardware products. Participants in the
undertaking, dubbed Information Technology Information Sharing and Analysis
Center (IT-ISAC), exchange information about their security practices.
Board members of IT-ISAC have outlined the goals, mission, and operations of
the new center. In attendance during the outline of the goals were representatives
from Microsoft, AT&T, Oracle, IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Computer Associates, EDS,
Entrust Technologies, KPMG Consulting, Cisco Systems [4], Nortel Networks, and
other companies. Other organizations involved in the new center include the In-
formation Technology Association of America, Veridian, Symantec, RSA Security,
Securify, Titan Systems, and Verisign Global Registry Services. Members have cre-
ated the center in hopes of improving responses to cyberattacks and hacking against
corporate computer networks.
A number of giant companies, including Microsoft, have recently seen their cor-
porate networks hacked. In such attacks, aimed at organizations large and small, some
hackers may deface a Web site with graffiti or more pointed messages. Others toy with
private information such as customer data and personal profiles. Many companies
have increased security measures to safeguard valuable intellectual property, but a
number of reports indicate that most continue to be vulnerable to such incidents.
According to a study by the American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS)
and consulting firm Pricewaterhouse Coopers, Fortune 1000 companies sustained
losses of more than $89 billion in 2003 from the theft of proprietary information—
up from the late 1990s’ estimates by the FBI that pegged the cost at roughly $57 bil-
lion a year. Tech companies reported the majority of those hacking incidents. The
average tech company reported nearly 81 individual attacks, with the average theft
resulting in about $59 million in lost business.
Following a string of attacks on federal systems, President Clinton in 2000
launched a $2 billion plan for combating cyberterrorism that included an educa-
tional initiative to recruit and train IT workers. The plan also included conducting
federal agency vulnerability analyses and developing agency-critical infrastructure
protection plans. With the aftermath of the 9-11 terrorist attacks, the Bush admin-
istration expanded this plan 50-fold.

STRATEGIC DIPLOMACY AND INFORMATION WARFARE
Strategic diplomacy, according to the Department of Defense, is the “art and sci-
ence of developing and using political, economic, psychological, and military forces
as necessary during peace and war, to afford the maximum support to policies, in
order to increase the probabilities and favorable consequences of victory and to
lessen the chances of defeat.” For most people, it is obvious that the political and
economic aspects of the national security policies of the United States are developed
by the national political authorities (the president and Congress) and, in dealing
with foreign states or groups, executed by the Departments of State, Commerce,
Agriculture, and so on.
Policies for developing and using military force are formulated by the national
political authorities and conveyed to the armed forces through the secretary of de-
fense. Few, however, pay much attention to just how and by whom psychological
forces are to be developed to support national policies. More important, what are
psychological forces? Who will use these forces? With what authority? To what ends?
New tools and technologies for communication have created the potential for
a new form of psychological warfare to a degree imagined only in science fiction.
This new form of warfare has become known as information warfare (IW). In other
words, the United States armed forces need to develop a systematic, capstone con-
cept of military knowledge and diplomatic strategy. Such a strategy would include
clear doctrine and a policy for how the armed forces will acquire, process, distrib-
ute, and project knowledge.
The U.S. military is expanding the concept of IW to include psychological op-
erations aimed at influencing the emotions, motives, objective reasoning, and, ul-
timately, the behavior of others. Such an expansion would mirror the evolution of
traditional warfare toward IW. It would also mirror the progressive steps of gener-
ating wealth from agriculture and natural resources in much earlier times, to the
19th- and early-20th-century emphasis on industrial production, to the present
emphasis on generating information products as a major new source of income. As
“first wave” wars were fought for land and “second wave” wars were fought for con-
trol over productive capacity, the emerging “third wave” wars will be fought for
control of knowledge. Because combat in any society follows the wealth-creation
form of that society, wars of the future will increasingly be information wars.
Currently, there is neither formal military doctrine nor official definitions of
IW. Despite the computer jargon involved, the idea of IW has not only captured
the attention of military analysts but also posed important policy questions. De-
spite the lack of an authoritative definition, “netwar” and “cyberwar” are emerg-
ing as key concepts in discussing IW. Originally, these ideas seem to have come
from the science fiction community.
Netwar is a societal-level ideational conflict waged in part through internetted
modes of communication. That is, netwar is most likely to be a nation-against-nation
344
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
345
strategic-level conflict. Netwar is about ideas and epistemology—what is known and
how it is known. It would be waged largely through a society’s communication systems. 
The target of netwar is the human mind. One could argue that certain aspects
of the cold war had the characteristics of a dress rehearsal for future netwar. Con-
sider, for example, Radio Free Europe, the Cominform, Agence France Presse, or
the U.S. Information Agency. Netwar, however, may involve more than traditional
state-to-state conflict. The emerging of nongovernmental political actors such as
Greenpeace and Amnesty International, as well as survivalist militias and Islamic
revivalists, all with easy access to worldwide computer networks for the exchange of
information or the coordination of political pressure on a national or global basis,
suggests that governments may not be the only parties waging information wars.
At first glance, netwar may appear to be a new word for old-fashioned propa-
ganda. It would be comforting to believe that the tried and true methods (and limi-
tations) of propaganda still worked. The Gulf War showed that both Saddam
Hussein and the Alliance were still of the old school. The war contained many ele-
ments of classic propaganda: accusations of bombed baby-milk factories and stolen
baby incubators; inflated rhetoric and inflated stakes of the conflict; the future of the
new world order and “the mother of battles” for the future of Islam; and the classic
us or them polarization in which neutrality or unenthusiastic support was decried.
One element of traditional propaganda was absent, however. While Saddam
Hussein became the new Hitler and President Bush, Sr. was the Great Satan, there was
little demonization or dehumanization of the opponent soldiers. All of that changed,
however, during the second invasion of Iraq in May of 2003 by George Bush, Jr.
Perhaps the multicultural nature of the American-led alliance precluded turn-
ing the Iraqi army into something subhuman. Indeed, there may have been a spark
of netwar genius in treating the Islamic Iraqi soldiers as “brave men put into an im-
possible situation by a stupid leader.” Under such conditions, there is no dishonor
in surrendering. There may have been a glimpse of future netwar: it is rumored that
Baghdad Radio signed on one morning with “The Star-Spangled Banner.”
Traditional propaganda was usually targeted to influence a mass audience.
Contemporary technologies have the potential to customize propaganda. Anyone
who has received individually targeted advertising from a company specializing in
niche marketing has had a momentary shudder upon realizing that some private
companies seem to know everything about our tastes and buying habits. Contem-
porary databases and multiple channels for information transmission have created
the opportunity for custom-tailored netwar attacks. Computer bulletin boards, cel-
lular telephones, video cameras tied to fax machines—all provide entry points and
dissemination networks for customized assault.
A major new factor in IW results directly from the worldwide infosphere of
television and broadcast news. Many people have begun to realize that govern-
mental decisions are becoming increasingly reactive to a “fictive” universe created
by CNN and its various international competitors. This media-created universe is

dubbed fictive rather than “fictional” because although what is shown may be true,
it is not the whole, relevant, or contextual truth, and, of course, the close etymo-
logical relationship between fictive and fictional suggests how easy it is to manipu-
late the message.
Nevertheless, this fictive universe becomes the politically relevant universe in
societies in which the government or its military is supposed to do something. So-
malia gets in the news and the United States gets into Somalia despite the reality of
equally disastrous starvation, disorder, and rapine right next door in Sudan. There
were no reporters with skylink in Sudan because the government of Sudan issued
no visas. The potential for governments, parties in a civil war such as Bosnia, rebels
in Chiapis, or even non-state interests to manipulate the multimedia, multisource
fictive universe to wage societal-level ideational conflicts should be obvious.
Fictive or fictional operational environments, then, whether mass-targeted or
niche-targeted, can be generated, transmitted, distributed, or broadcast by govern-
ments or all sorts of other players through increasingly diversified networks. The
niche-manipulation potential available to states or private interests with access to
the universe of internetted communications, such as the networks over which busi-
ness, commercial, and banking information are transmitted could easily provoke fi-
nancial chaos. The target state would not know what had happened until too late.
Direct satellite broadcast to selected cable systems [5], analogous to central
control of pay-per-view programs, again offers the potential for people in one
province or region of a targeted state to discover that the highest level of their lead-
ership has decided to purge their clansmen from the army. To put it in the jargon
of the infowarriors, info-niche attack in an increasingly multisource fictive universe
offers unlimited potential for societal-level netwar.
Fictive Broadcasts
When the new, but already well-understood, simulation technologies of the tekwar
and MTV generation are added to the arsenal of netwar, a genuinely revolutionary
transformation of propaganda and warfare becomes possible. Traditional propa-
ganda might have attempted to discredit an adversary’s news media showing, for
example, that as the official casualty figures were demonstrably false, all news from
the government was equally false. The credibility of the opponent was the target,
and the strategic intention was to separate the government from the people.
Today, the mastery of the techniques of combining live actors with computer-
generated video graphics can easily create a virtual news conference, summit meet-
ing, or perhaps even a battle that exists in effects though not in fact. Stored video
images can be recombined endlessly to produce any effect chosen [6]. Now, per-
haps, pictures will be worth a thousand tanks.
346
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
347
Of course, truth will win out eventually, but by the time the people of the tar-
geted nation discover that the nationwide broadcast of the conversation between
the maximum leader and George W. Bush, in which all loyal citizens were told to
cease fighting and return to their homes, was created in Hollywood or Langley, the
war may be over. Netwar is beginning to enter the zone of illusion.
This is not science fiction; these are the capabilities of existing or rapidly emerg-
ing technologies. Here’s how it might work: Through hitching a ride on an unsus-
pecting commercial satellite, a fictive simulation is broadcast. Simultaneously,
various info-niches in the target state are accessed via the net. These info-niche tar-
gets, and the information they receive, are tailored to the strategic diplomacy needs
of the moment: some receive reinforcement for the fictive simulation; others re-
ceive the real truth; still others receive slight variations. What is happening here?
This kind of manipulation elevates the strategic potential of infopropaganda to
new heights. This is not traditional propaganda in which the target is discredited as
a source of reliable information. Rather, the very possibility of truth is being re-
placed with virtual reality, that is, information that produces effects independent of
its physical reality. What is being attacked in a strategic level netwar are not only the
emotions, motives, or beliefs of the target population, but the very power of objec-
tive reasoning. This threatens the possibility of state control.
Let us return to the previous scenario to play out its effects. The fictive simula-
tion of the maximum leader’s call to stop fighting would, of course, be followed im-
mediately by a real broadcast in which state exposes the netwar attack as propaganda
invented by culture destroyers in Hollywood. George W. Bush is denounced as a
hoax by the Internet blogs, but the damage has already been done: It is all but im-
possible for the television viewers of the targeted state to tell which broadcast is true
and which is fiction, at least in a timely manner. In a society under assault across its
entire infosphere, it will become increasingly difficult for people to verify internally
the truth or accuracy of anything. Objective reasoning is threatened.
At the strategic level, the ability to observe is flooded by contradictory infor-
mation and data; more important, the ability to orient is weakened by the assault
on the possibility of objective reasoning; decisions are made increasingly in re-
sponse to a fictive or virtual universe and, of course, governmental and military ac-
tions become increasingly chaotic, as there is no rational relationship of means to
ends. It would seem, then, that strategic-level netwar or IW brings one within sight
of that elusive acme of skill wherein the enemy is subdued without killing by at-
tacking their ability to form a coherent strategy.
Reality, however, may be far more complex than the infowarriors yet imagine,
and victory not so neat. The idea of societal-level ideational conflict may need to be
considered with all the care given to the conduct of nuclear war, as the end state of
netwar may be not bloodless surrender but total disruption of the targeted society.
Victory may be too costly, as the cost may be truth itself.

Communication Truth
Any discussion of IW, netwar, cyberwar, or even perception manipulation as a
component of command and control warfare by the armed forces of the United
States at the strategic level must occur in the context of the moral nature of com-
munication in a pluralistic, secular, and democratic society. That is, the question
must be raised whether using the techniques of IW at the strategic level is compat-
ible with American purposes and principles.
Likewise, the question must be raised whether the armed forces of the United
States have either the moral or legal authority and, more important, the practical
ability to develop and deploy the techniques of information warfare at the strategic
level in a prudent and practical manner. There are good reasons to be skeptical.
The moral basis of communication in any society can be discussed in terms of
its substantive, pragmatic, and intoxicant functions. The substantive purpose of
communication is the building or developing of the individual human personality.
It is simultaneously the process by which a substantive, real-world community of
like-minded persons is created, developed, and sustained. It is the glue that binds a
society together.
At the most trivial level, the moral purpose of substantive communication can
be seen in contemporary American efforts to remove sexist or racist language from
accepted use. At a more serious level, the debates in American society about prayer
in the public schools illustrate a recognition of the substantive and formative nature
of communication in society. This is true because many believe that private reli-
gious views must not corrupt the public school formation of character for life in
pluralistic, modern America.
Finally, any real-world society rests on substantive communication and under-
standing among its members. Society is no mere external structure of relation-
ships; it is a cosmion, a universe of meaning illuminated with meaning from within
by the human beings who continuously create and bear it as the mode and condi-
tion of their self-realization.
The efforts of several nations such as China, Iran, and Saudi Arabia to insulate
their societies from the effects of the global communications network, illustrate
their awareness that their cultures and societies may depend on a distinctive shared,
substantive universe of discourse. Even in the West, the French believe the contin-
ued existence of France as a distinctive society organized for action in history may
require state intervention in the substantive content of communication within so-
ciety. That France seeks to limit the percentage of foreign broadcast material and
American films in Europe illustrates the seriousness with which they consider the
substantive nature of communication.
Identifying the pragmatic function of communication in society is reasonably
straightforward. Pragmatic communication is defined by its goal and consists of the
348
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
349
universe of techniques designed to influence other persons to behave in ways the
communicator wishes. Only behavior matters. Most political and commercial com-
munication is merely pragmatic. It is usually indifferent to the substantive moral
content of the communication and intends to mold perception, and, consequently,
behavior, to the purposes of the communicator. This pragmatic use of communi-
cation as an attempt at perception manipulation is, of course, the central essence of
IW. Its use by the government and the armed forces is, thus, the real issue.
Finally, the intoxicant function of communication in American society is
equally straightforward. The addiction of a considerable part of the citizenry to talk
shows, soap operas, romance novels, professional sports broadcasts, high-profile
legal trials, and other well-known forms of distraction and diversion is well catered
to by the entertainment industry.
Civil communication, or public discourse, in contemporary American society
is dominated almost entirely by the intoxicant and pragmatic modes. More impor-
tantly, the absence of substantive communication in public life is defended by
much of the secular and liberal political class in the name of freedom, pluralism,
and multiculturalism.
Pluralistic America is supposed to be a society in which the formation of char-
acter and opinion is left, through the use of various means of communication, to
private initiative. Government attempts at communication in an information war,
especially if prosecuted by the armed forces, would raise serious questions in a plu-
ralistic, multicultural society.
The official military view of diplomatic strategy is the art and science of devel-
oping and using political, economic, psychological, and military force as necessary
during peace and war to afford the maximum support to policies, to increase the
probabilities and favorable consequences of victory, and to lessen the chances of de-
feat. Diplomatic strategy is the means to an end, with military diplomatic strategy
serving political or policy purposes. A slightly different view of strategy, however,
may highlight a problem of IW. If strategy were seen as a plan of action designed to
achieve some end, a purpose together with a system of measures for its accom-
plishment, the limitations of IW thinking are obvious.
Sound military strategy requires influencing the adversary decision maker in
some way that is not only advantageous but also reasonably predictable. The goal
is control, not chaos. A national security strategy of IW or netwar at the strategic
level (that is, societal-level ideational conflict waged in part through internetted
modes of communication) and an operational-level cyberwar or command-and-
control warfare campaign to decapitate the enemy’s command structure from its
body of troops may or may not be advantageous but, more important, is unlikely
to produce effects that are reasonably predictable.
Conflict is about a determinate something, not an indeterminate anything. If the
goal is influencing the adversary’s ability to observe by flooding them with corrupted

or contradictory information and data, disrupting their ability to orient by eliminat-
ing the possibility of objective reasoning, and forcing their decisions to respond to a
fictive or virtual universe, actions will, of course, be produced. However, they may
well be actions that are chaotic, random, nonlinear, and inherently unpredictable, as
there is no rational relationship of means to ends.
The military operational-level of cyberwar or command-and-control warfare
appeals to the infowarrior as an attractive military strategy. Thus, the inherently
unpredictable nature of combat, the notorious fog and friction of real battle, will be
amplified for the enemy in a successful cyberwar.
A successful diplomatic cyberstrategy depends on the ability of the local military
commander to deploy his or her power assets, especially combat forces, not merely
to dominate the enemy’s decision cycle (which, after all, has just been rendered
chaotic), but to exploit opportunities as they evolve unpredictably from the disori-
ented, decapitated, or irrational enemy actions. Whether, then, command-and-
control warfare can shape the battlefield or merely generate chaos remains to be seen.
Diplomatic cyberstrategy is the control of the evolution of the battlefield or the-
ater power distribution to impose the allied commander’s order on the enemy’s
chaos. The threat exists, however, that the destruction of enemy rationality may
collapse battle into mere fighting with no outcome but surrender or death. Merely
defeating hostile military forces may be insufficient.
Whether the Gulf War and the second invasion of Iraq were  strategic victories
or mere battles remains for historians to judge. Operational-level cyberwar may,
then, be that very acme of skill that reduces the enemy will without killing. On the
other hand, it may also be the abolition of strategy, as it attacks the rationality the
enemy requires to decide to terminate the war.
Strategic Diplomatic Implications
The tools, techniques, and strategy of cyberwar will be developed and, during
wartime, should be employed. In many ways, cyberwar is more demanding than
netwar, but the resources, organization, and training needed for cyberwar will be
provided once its war-winning, and casualty-reducing, potential is grasped by the
national political leadership. Such a development would certainly be prudent. On
the other hand, many of the tools and techniques of battlefield cyberwar can be ap-
plied to netwar or strategic-level IW. This application may not be prudent, how-
ever, as there are serious reasons to doubt the ability of the United States to
prosecute an information war successfully.
One reason is that the United States is an open society; it may be too vulnera-
ble to engage in netwar with an adversary prepared to fight back. Our communica-
tions infrastructure, the information highway, is wide open. American society may
be terribly vulnerable to a strategic netwar attack; getting us to believe fictive claims
350
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
351
appears to be what commercial and political advertising are all about, and they
seem to be effective. Also, one may find physical control and security to be impos-
sible. The domestic computer, communication, and information networks essential
for the daily functioning of American society are vulnerable to penetration and ma-
nipulation (even destruction) by determined hackers. In the future, these may not
be amateurs, but well-paid “network ninjas” inserting the latest French, Iranian, or
Chinese virus into AOL or other parts of the Internet.
A strategic IW attack on America’s communication systems, including our mil-
itary communication systems, air traffic control system, financial net, fuel pipeline
pumping software, and computer-based clock and timing systems, could result in
societal paralysis. Currently, for example, over 101,000 Internet databases are being
used by over 543 million people in over 163 nations. Over 44,500 software pirates
are prowling the Internet, some in the employ of hostile commercial or intelligence
services. The spy flap between France and the United States over alleged U.S. at-
tempts to gather data on French Telecom may be indicative of the future.
Infosphere dominance (controlling the world of information exchange) may be
as complex and elusive as escalation dominance appeared to be in nuclear strategy.
It will certainly be expensive: the U.S. business community and the U.S. armed
forces are required to devote ever more resources and attention to computer, com-
munications, and database security. The resources and skills required for battlefield
cyberwar are not insignificant, but the resources and skills required to wage an in-
formation war at the national strategic level would be massive.
The second reason to doubt U.S. ability to prosecute an information war is that
the political and legal issues surrounding IW are murky. What of congressional
oversight? Would one declare information war in response, say, to an Iranian-
originated computer virus assault on the FBI’s central terrorist database? What
about preparing for it? How should the United States develop and implement a
national capability for netwar?
Although, theoretically, a requirement to develop or implement a national IW
strategy, analogous to the nuclear-era single-integrated operations plan, could be
communicated from the president to the executive branch agencies, it is unclear
whether there would be adequate congressional oversight. Which committees of
the House or Senate would have control and oversight of policies attendant to IW?
Which would have the power to inquire into the judgment of a local ambassador or
military commander who wished to use the tools of cyberwar for a perception ma-
nipulation in peacetime that would shape the potential wartime environment?
The U.S. armed forces only execute the national military strategy—they do not
control it. However, they are developing, quite appropriately, the tools and tech-
niques to execute the national military strategy for operational-level cyberwar. They
are simultaneously, albeit unintentionally, developing the tools and capabilities 
to execute a national strategic IW strategy. The former is their job under the 

Constitution; the latter may not be. Congressional oversight of the development of
a national strategic-level information war capability is even more essential than
oversight of the intelligence community.
The third reason to doubt U.S. capabilities in prosecuting an effective infor-
mation war is that such a societal-level ideational conflict waged in part through in-
ternetted modes of communication may simply be beyond the competence of the
executive agencies that would have to determine the substantive content to be com-
municated. Pluralism is a great strength of American society but perhaps a draw-
back in waging information war.
Although diversity may make the formation and execution of domestic and even
foreign policy more complex, the lack of a moral center or public philosophy in Amer-
ican society could render the political leadership incapable of building a consensus on
strategic-level IW policies. Because there is no single view of what is morally accept-
able, but simply a host of contending views, a national security strategy of IW could be
developed by the national security decision makers who lacked a moral consensus.
Technological wizardry does not change the humanity of the target. Unless the
goal of an information war is merely to unhinge people from their ability to reason
objectively, and thereby create an interesting problem for post-conflict reconstruc-
tion, any strategic-level netwar or information war would require the ability to
communicate a replacement for the discredited content of the target society.
If, for example, an information war were to be mounted against China to dis-
rupt its drive for regional hegemony, the goal would be to withdraw the Mandate
of Heaven from the rulers and influence the Chinese leaders and people to adopt
the policies or behavior the United States finds appropriate. Put in terms of such a
concrete policy goal, the philosophically problematic nature of information war be-
comes outrageously obvious. Does anyone really believe that the U.S. national ex-
ecutive agencies, including the armed forces and the CIA, know the substantive
discourse of China sufficiently well to withdraw the Mandate of Heaven?
The final reason, then, can be stated in the form of a question: Does anyone re-
ally believe that anyone in the U.S. government has the philosophical sophistication
to project an alternative discourse to replace the emotions, motives, reasoning, and
behavior grounded in the Chinese reality that the United States proposes to influ-
ence? Would our fictive creation really have virtual effects? The United States might
be able to use the armed forces or the CIA to destroy China’s objective reasoning
through a successful information war. Indeed, the United States might be able to
loose anarchy in a society, but that is not usually the political goal of war.
Second Thoughts
The techniques the armed forces is developing for a more narrowly constrained
operational-level cyberwar were demonstrated in the Gulf War and again in the
second invasion of Iraq. Translated to the strategic level, however, netwar or infor-
352
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
353
mation war is not a prudent national security or military strategy for the simple rea-
son that neither the armed forces nor any other instruments of national power
have the ability to exploit an adversary’s society in a way that promises either ad-
vantageous or predictable results.
Societal-level ideational conflict must be considered with all the care given to
the conduct of nuclear war, as the end state of a netwar may be total disruption of
the targeted society. Conflict resolution, including ending wars this side of blasting
people into unconditional surrender, assumes and requires some rationality—even
if that rationality is the mere coordination of ends with means.
Moral reasoning and substantive communication may not be required; mini-
mal reasoning and pragmatic communication are required. However, a successful
all-out strategic-level information war may have destroyed the enemy’s ability to
know anything with certainty and, thereby, their capacity for minimal reasoning or
pragmatic communication.
In some exercises during the Cold War involving decapitation of the Soviet mil-
itary leadership in a hypothetical nuclear exchange, the intent was to defend the
United States by preventing an escalatory or exploitative strike, nuclear or otherwise.
Precisely how war termination would have been accomplished without an effective
leadership will remain, we can hope, one of the great mysteries. The decapitation of
the leadership is, however, often proposed as a key goal of an information war. That
is, the credibility and legitimacy (even the physical ability to communicate) of the
decision makers will be compromised or destroyed relative to their own population
and in terms of their own worldview. Even if one merely seizes the enemy’s com-
munication system electronically and substitutes their reality into the enemy’s soci-
ety, with whom, then, does one negotiate the end of the conflict?
What confidence does the United States have that a call to surrender, even if
communicated by either the enemy leadership or our net warriors, would be ac-
cepted as real and not another virtual event? Depending on the content, intensity,
and totality of a strategic information war, personalities could be flooded with ir-
rational or unconsciousness factors—the clinical consequence of which is generally
acute psychosis. How does the United States accomplish conflict resolution, war
termination, or post-conflict reconstruction with a population or leadership whose
objective reasoning has been compromised?
Just as the mutually destructive effects of nuclear war were disproportionate to
the goals of almost any imaginable conflict, so may be the mutually destructive ef-
fects of a total information war exchange on the publics exposed and subsequent
rational communication between the sides. As the techniques of cyberstrike prolif-
erate throughout the world, enabling small powers, non-state actors, or even ter-
rorist hackers to do massive damage to the United States, mutually assured
cyberdestruction may result in a kind of infowar deterrence.
Information war, then, may be the central national security issue of the 21st
century. Therefore, the United States must develop a coherent national-level policy

on the military and strategic use of new IW technologies. To facilitate this objective,
the U.S. armed forces are developing, under the rubric of command-and-control
warfare, the technologies and systems that will provide the capability for cyberwar.
It may be possible to control and exploit information to purposely generate
stochastic chaos, though there are some doubts. Many of the same technologies and
systems can be used to develop a national-level capability for strategic netwar. Here,
however, there are genuine doubts. It may not be possible to control and exploit in-
formation and information technologies to impose a form on the remnants of so-
cieties no longer capable of self-organization because their substantive universe of
meaning has been destroyed or corrupted.
Few infowarriors would claim the ability to reorient the former Soviet Union
into a liberal society, or to influence the far more ancient barbarism in Rwanda.
Perhaps strategic-level information war is, indeed, like nuclear war: the capability
is required for deterrence—its employment, the folly of mutually assured destruc-
tion. If the United States is to develop the capacity for information war, in the sure
and certain knowledge that the technologies have already proliferated to both state
and non-state potential rivals, a realistic national consensus must be built.
It is useless to pretend that the proliferation of these technologies will not pro-
vide capabilities that can do serious harm. It is useless to pretend that military-
based command and control warfare capabilities will not be developed, and it is
useless to pretend that cyberwar technologies could not be turned to netwar appli-
cations. It is almost universally agreed that these capabilities are essential on the
contemporary battlefield. It is essential, then, that the president and Congress give
serious and sustained attention to cyberwar, netwar, and information war.
THE ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Information on countries with offensive IW initiatives is less authoritatively docu-
mented, but studies and foreign press reporting help point to international organi-
zations that probably have such an initiative under way. A 1996 U.S. General
Accounting Office (GAO) report on the threat to Defense D systems (otherwise
known as Defense DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency] systems)
stated that the Department of Energy and the National Security Agency estimated
that 120 countries had established computer attack capabilities. At the low end, in
June 1998, the director of central intelligence stated that several countries are spon-
soring IW programs and that nations developing these programs recognize the
value of attaching their country’s computer systems—both on the battlefield and in
the civilian arena. A March 1999 report by the Center for Strategic and Interna-
tional Studies (CSIS) identified Russia, China, the United Kingdom, France, Aus-
tralia, and Canada as countries that have dedicated considerable resources toward
354
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
355
developing IW capabilities. The June 2002 National Communications (NCS) re-
port on the threat to U.S. telecommunications states that the National Intelligence
Council reports that, among these, Russia, China, and France have acknowledged
their IW programs. According to the NCS report, other countries, such as Belari-
ous, Poland, Hungry, Romania, Moldavia, and Ukraine, reportedly have initiatives
focused on developing computer viruses (Table 13.1).
TABLE 13.1
Publicly Identified Foreign Countries Involved in Economic Espionage, and
Information Warfare: Initiatives and U.S. Remediation
Economic
Information Warfare
Major Remediation
Country
Espionage
Initiative
Provider
Belarious
Yes
—
—
Bulgaria
Yes*
Yes
—
Canada
Yes*
Yes
Yes
China
Yes*
—
—
Cuba
Yes*
Yes
Yes
France
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Germany
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Hungary
Yes
—
—
India
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Iran
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Ireland
—
—
Yes
Israel
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Japan
Yes*
—
—
Moldavia
Yes
—
—
Pakistan
Yes
—
Yes
Philippines
Yes
—
Yes
Poland
Yes
—
—
Romania
Yes
—
—
Russia
Yes*
Yes
—
North Korea
Yes*
—
—
South Korea
Yes*
—
—
Taiwan
Yes*
—
—
*Countries identified by NCS as using electronic intrusions usually for economic espionage 
purposes.

An independent review of international press reporting and military press arti-
cles on international organizations’ initiatives points to three other countries among
those engaged in economic espionage (Iran, China, and Taiwan) that are involved in
the development of IW technologies, programs, or military capabilities. All of these
countries publicly acknowledge pursuing defensive IW initiatives to protect their
military information capabilities or national information infrastructure:
India established a National Information Infrastructure-Defensive group sev-
eral years ago, apparently in response to China’s growing interest in IW.
As recently as January 2001, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) acknowledged the
existence of an IW defense unit whose mission is to protect military systems,
but noted that the electric utility had organized its own defense.
Taiwan also recently announced the creation of a task force to study ways to
protect their information infrastructure from the growing IW threat from
China.
Creation of a national defensive information infrastructure program is a good
(and probably necessary) indicator of an international offensive IW initiative. De-
fensive measures (deterrence, protection, and restoration) are difficult to imple-
ment without also developing an understanding of potential adversaries, investing
in computer and software development, and creating a major operational capabil-
ity—all steps directly applicable to creating an offensive IW capability. From a mil-
itary strategic perspective, in an era when offensive IW has many technical advances
over the complexities of cyberdefense, a strong offensive IW capability provides
both a defense and a virtually assured counterstrike capability against potential ad-
versaries that is generally cost-effective.
The presence of a defensive IW initiative, however, is inadequate alone to assess
that a foreign country is also developing its offensive counterpart. To judge that a
country probably has an offensive IW initiative (including military theory, tech-
nology development, operational unit or individual training, or deployed forces)
requires positive responses to at least one of the following questions:
Has a country been reliably identified as participating in offensive IW activities,
especially in “preparation of the battlefield” activities (such as implanting and
using trap doors) that would facilitate computer network attacks in a future
conflict?
Have authoritative, but unofficial, host country sources suggested that a coun-
try has an offensive IW program?
Do specific activities of involving national security or domestic information
technology point to the development of capabilities usually (and preferably
uniquely) associated with offensive IW?
356
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
357
The major foreign providers of software remediation services to Israel and, to
a lesser extent, India, have acknowledged a defensive IW or national information
infrastructure protection program and also meet at least one of the supplemental
criteria. For instance, Israel was involved in the 1991 penetration of U.S. defense
computers and copying of the Patriot missile defense system, according to the NCS
report. Reliable reporting corroborates that Israel is among the leading sources of
intrusion attempts (protected defense information systems and networks).
Ranking the Risks
The results of this analysis point to a tiered set of foreign national risks to U.S. com-
puting and network systems remediation involving the insertion of malicious code.
For example, at the top, the United States, India, and Israel are the most likely
countries to use broad opportunity remediation in light of their historic involve-
ment in economic espionage and the likelihood that they have ongoing offensive
IW initiatives.
On the other hand, France, Germany, Russia, and Taiwan comprise a second
tier of countries that have been identified as participants in economic espionage
against the United States and that have developed initiatives but are not believed to
be major foreign sources of U.S. remediation services. Although their efforts may
have less impact on the national-level integrity of networks, companies and gov-
ernment agencies utilizing services provided by these countries are still at signifi-
cant risk. Also, the governments and companies in countries that have engaged in
economic espionage against the United States may also utilize this unique oppor-
tunity to take advantage of these espionage objectives.
Protecting and Responding
The ability to protect corporate or government systems and networks against these
foreign (and domestic) risks hinges on comprehensive testing and validation of the
integrity of the remediation software by a trusted independent source before it is
implemented. Analysis of the software and testing for trap doors and other accesses
are key elements in this risk reduction.
Besides testing for intended performance analysis, the content of the program
is most important. Evaluators should ensure that all the program code has a legiti-
mate business purpose; any user code should be extracted. Often evaluators will
have access to the object code (the applications-level information used to operate
the software) rather than the program-language source code, which undermines
the effectiveness of content analysis. Customers may want the source code to be
shared with the evaluator so its integrity can be examined. The evaluator needs to
match the object code against what is actually used in the corporate application to
validate the testing.

Preventing unauthorized access in the future is a second essential step in en-
suring the integrity of the system or network. Evaluators can begin by using stan-
dard hacker tools to see if the software displays any access vulnerabilities. At a
second level, a red team approach (actually trying the software) can be taken to ex-
plore more deeply whether trap doors exist. Special attention needs be paid to all
authorized software accesses, such as those for remote system administration that
could result in future introduction of malicious code. These software accesses
should be protected and be able to identify and halt delivery of malicious code.
If malicious code is identified in testing or operation of the remediated soft-
ware, specially trained FBI agents and computer specialists can preserve critical ev-
idence that can be used in identifying and prosecuting the perpetrator. They can
also use such evidence to compare similar events and facilitate the restoration of
protected service to the system. Early FBI involvement in addressing criminal com-
puter intrusions has helped smooth the national computing transition to the next
millennium.
Proposed Cyber Crime Laws Stir Debate Within International Organizations
Lots of countries still haven’t updated their laws to cover Internet-based crimes,
leaving companies in many parts of the world without legal protections from ma-
licious hackers and other attackers who are looking to steal their data. However,
corporate executives and IT managers may not necessarily like the laws that are
starting to emerge in some regions. Of special concern is a proposed cyber crime
treaty being developed by the 41-nation Council of Europe, which some business
groups fear could affect corporate data-retention policies.
For example, the Global Internet Project, an Arlington, Virginia–based organi-
zation that’s trying to head off government regulation of the Internet, in Novem-
ber 2000 claimed that the proposed treaty could actually hamper efforts to stop
cyber crime and to track down people who launch computer-related attacks. Those
concerns were echoed by attendees at a forum on international cyberlaw spon-
sored by McConnell International LLC, the consulting firm that issued the new re-
port on cyber crime laws. Privacy advocates are also raising an alarm, arguing that
the proposed European treaty may tread on privacy rights. They fear that they are
moving toward not too little law but too much law.
What’s clear, however, is that many countries are beginning to wake up to the
issue. There is competition among countries for leadership and excellence in the
digital economy. There is a race to see which countries are going to be the leaders
in this new way of doing business.
The European Cyber Crime Treaty was approved in 2002 and was recently
adopted by the United States and other countries outside of Europe. Its intent is to
help law enforcement officials track down malicious attackers and child pornogra-
358
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
359
phers by easing cooperation among police. The treaty also seeks to prevent data
havens—areas in which laws governing cyber crimes are weak. However, the treaty
has left many companies uncertain about what its legal requirements or liability
risks will ultimately be. There is so much gray area.
A key area of concern is data retention. Internet service providers are worried
that they may face new obligations to hold onto data in response to requests from
law enforcers. For example, the treaty as it now stands could enable countries to de-
mand that companies keep data sought for use in investigations for as long as gov-
ernment officials deem necessary. Clarification on the data-retention issue is going
to be needed.
France appeared on a list of legal laggards, but a recent court ruling in that
country required Santa Clara, California–based Yahoo Inc. to prevent French citi-
zens from trafficking in Nazi paraphernalia. The court action illustrates that there
are too many laws on the books already.
THE ROLE OF GLOBAL MILITARY ALLIANCES
The following discussion highlights what actually constitutes global military al-
liances with regard to information operations. Three terms are examined: military,
information, and operations.
Military
A look into the future of IW indicates an increasing role for information operations
and the emergence of IW as a new paradigm of warfare. Global military planners
must, therefore, prepare to develop information skills and strategies as part of their
immediate capabilities and, ultimately, they must prepare their force for involve-
ment in full-scale information wars through alliances with other countries. These
global planners must also remember that IW is emerging as a paradigm of warfare,
not a paradigm of information. Regardless of the extent that the IW paradigm in-
fluences the future warfare environment, war will still be war, and thus will still in-
volve the human factors that have been associated with conflict since the dawn of
time. Although there may be less bloodshed in an information war, human suffer-
ing will, in all likelihood, result. The legal and diplomatic consequences of war will
also remain much the same. Information technology does not make war any more
acceptable to a civilized society. Therefore, although the information systems, tools,
techniques, and strategies of the military and civilian information warriors may be
common, and, indeed, complementary, a nation as a whole, and the military pro-
fession in particular, must not forget the significance of the military.

Global Information
Although seemingly self-explanatory, understanding the nature of global informa-
tion alliances is important. Information is the product of the processing of data,
whereas data is simply the product of some observation. The processing of data into
information involves placing the data into some context. This context can be the
formation of a sentence or other human-readable form, a machine-readable se-
quence, or the classification of the data against some known measurement, such as
time, height, weight, and the like. The result is information, and this is created and
manipulated to enable decisions to be made. Although most decisions are made by
humans, increasingly, decisions are being made by rules-based or knowledge-based
systems, and, although currently limited in application, some artificial intelligence
systems.
Information, or any developed form of the information, is only one part of an
information technology system. An information technology system consists of data
(both as an initial input and as stored in various parts of the information technol-
ogy systems in the form of information), hardware, software, communications,
people, and procedures. Any one of the individual elements of the information
technology system, as well as the information technology system processes that
convert the raw data into various forms of information, may provide a suitable tar-
get on which influence may be exerted. The information technology system as a
whole, therefore, is the target of information operations, and not just the informa-
tion itself or its associated technology.
Global Operations
Global information operations seek to influence the decision-making process.
Global military information operations (MIOs) alliances are not information tech-
nology support activities, such as system management and system administration.
They are activities directly focused on warfare and include offensive and defensive
activities aimed at all levels of the decision-making process. In the modern warfare
environment, attacking and defending information technology systems is a vital
combat task, and strategies must be considered in conjunction with the wider
global military alliances plan. When correctly applied, offensive global information
operations alliances can be just as lethal as the employment of conventional
weapons. As an example, certain aircraft flight control systems may be shut down
using MIO techniques. The resultant crash will destroy the aircraft, and generally
kill the pilot and crew, just as effectively as the best air-to-air missile.
An MIO is any activity that consciously targets or protects the elements of an in-
formation technology system in pursuit of global military alliances objectives.
360
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
361
MARSHALL LAW AND CYBERSPACE
Realistically, there are a number of scenarios, each of varying degree, in which IW
might be utilized in the future in cyberspace and thus bring about Marshall Law. In
the most apocalyptic scenario, IW will be waged in conjunction with conventional
warfare to determine the hegemon of the Information Age. Many scholars have put
forth arguments concerning the formation and survivability of hegemonic powers.
It is possible, that in this point in time, the instability of information technology re-
quires the constancy only a hegemon can provide. Under this scenario, realist con-
cerns run rampant, as the United States has a vested interest in becoming the
hegemon for the next power cycle. However, a full-scale information war will be
very costly, and it is highly unlikely that the hegemon will be able to salvage any
value from the rubble of battle. A scenario where stability and consistency for in-
formation technologies are derived from cooperative international endeavors to
promote and facilitate global prosperity is more likely. In the Information Age,
third wave nations have legitimate aspirations to create a global information system
that adds value to their existing information infrastructures. Information technol-
ogy is cooperative by nature and tremendous benefits can be derived from greater
interconnectivity. Therefore, nations will seek out ways to integrate their networks
with the international network. Once that integration takes place, each connected
nation will have an interest in maintaining the stability and survivability of the
overall network. Each nation has a vested interest in preventing global IW and
Marshall Law.
Despite collective interests, information terrorism will continue to be a viable
national security concern for all third wave nations. Unfortunately, the U.S. options
concerning terrorism are extremely limited. By increasing security and gathering
intelligence regarding any plans that might be in consideration, the United States
can ensure that the threat of terrorism is contained to isolated incidents from which
this country can recover. Unfortunately, as the 9-11-2001 terrorist attacks on the
World Trade Center and Pentagon showed, the environment under which the
United States currently operates can make no such promise; therefore, it is essen-
tial that this issue is addressed now.
Other likely scenarios include the use of IW for blackmail or for limited short-
term gains. These scenarios present other difficult political dilemmas that must be
addressed at a global level. Will nations allow IW threats to be used as blackmail?
Will the United States allow limited IW in order to pursue strategic or comparative
political and economic gains or is the fear of escalation an adequate deterrent to
such ambitions? These questions must also be addressed.
The Information Age promises to change many aspects of society. Life in cyber-
space is more egalitarian than elitist and more decentralized than hierarchical. It serves
individuals and communities, not mass audiences. One might think of cyberspace as

shaping up exactly like Thomas Jefferson would have wanted: founded on the primacy
of individual liberty and commitment to pluralism, diversity, and community.
As a society, individuals have much to learn about themselves through this
new medium of communication. As a nation, the United States must make sure
that the structure it is building has a strong foundation and that weaknesses in that
structure are not used to destroy it. It is a difficult task, because the constitutionally
guaranteed rights of U.S. citizens must be upheld in the process. However, it is a
task the United States must undertake. These are issues the United States must ad-
dress. If the United States does not address these issues now, the future of our
country will be jeopardized. A handful of concerned citizens attempt to bring issues
surrounding cyberspace to our attention every day. Some of these issues concern
national security; others concern individual privacy.
Cyberspace has empowered the average person to explore and question the
structure of our society and those who benefit from the way it is operated. Funda-
mental issues arise from hacker explorations. The United States must decide how,
as a nation, it wishes to deal with these issues. Recent efforts in cloning produced a
human fetus. The scientists who achieved this remarkable feat immediately halted
research, arguing that a public debate must arise to deal with the ethical and moral
issues surrounding this technology. They argued that before experimentation in
cloning continued, the United States must decide as a society which direction that
the new technology will go, what ends it hopes to achieve, and what the limits on
the use of this new technology should be. A similar debate on the issues of cyber-
space must take place. There is no need to stop the technology, but the United
States must decide what direction it wants the technology to take and what rules
will govern the use of this technology. The United States must do this now, before
the technology starts dictating the rules—before it is too late to make changes in the
basic structure of cyberspace without destroying the whole concept.
The United States certainly is, as former Vice President Al Gore noted, in the
midst of an Information Revolution. Methods of warfare will continue to evolve as
the revolution progresses. Conceptions of national security will have to evolve as well.
IW and information security must be incorporated into the national security agenda
of any nation that is making the transition into the Information Age. Isaac Asimov
(noted science fiction author) notes that waiting for a crisis to force the United States
to act globally runs the risk of making them wait too long. The United States cannot
allow this to be the case where information technologies are concerned, because in-
formation technologies are the foundation of what the United States aspires to be-
come. Similarly, philosophy comes bundled with every new technology; when one is
embraced, the other is there as well. The United States has already embraced the
technology of the Information Age; it must prepare itself to deal with the philosophy
that comes with it. The United States must be prepared to deal with a philosophy that
362
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
363
changes the distribution of power, changes political relationships, and challenges the
essence of nation states. Only then can the United States rightfully justify a leading
role in the Information Age.
THE SUPER CYBER PROTECTION AGENCIES
Some might call it paranoia, but the U.S. government is growing increasingly wor-
ried that foreign infiltrators are building secret trapdoors into government and
corporate networks with the help of foreign-born programmers doing corporate
work—their regular jobs. A CIA (or Super Cyber Protection Agency [SCPA] as they
are called  now) representative recently named Israel and India as the countries
most likely to be doing this because they each handle a large amount of software re-
pair not done by U.S.-born workers. According to the CIA, these two countries
each have plans to conduct information warfare, and planting trapdoors wherever
they can would be a part of that.
As previously explained, IW is a nation’s concerted use of network hacking,
denial-of-service attacks, or computer viruses to gain access to or disrupt com-
puter networks, now the heart of modern society in terms of banking, telecommu-
nications, and commerce.
HERF Guns Work
Though still secretive about the practice, nations are also building futuristic radio-
pulse devices (popularly called high-energy-radio-frequency [HERF] guns) that
can disrupt or destroy electronics in networks, cars, airplanes, and other equipment
by sending an energy beam at them. A homemade version of a HERF gun success-
fully disrupted a PC and a digital camera during a recent demonstration at a session
of an Infowar conference. This conference typically draws a large crowd of govern-
ment spooks and high-tech strategists from around the world.
Israel and India are key suspects for planting software backdoors in American
systems. Russia is also viewed as a threat because it has defensive and offensive IW
programs under way. Cuba and Bulgaria are working on computer virus weapons.
Israel has already hacked its way into U.S. computer systems to steal information
about the Patriot missile.
In the 21st century, the threat of nuclear war is being displaced by that of in-
formation weapons. The United States can’t allow the emergence of another area of
confrontation. Russia is calling for cyberdisarmament. The first step in the cy-
berdisarmament process is to get the nations of the world to discuss the issue
openly. Russia recently requested that the United Nations ask member countries to
recognize the threat and state their views on it.

The U.S. Department of Defense has complained in meetings with congres-
sional subcommittees that it has seen severe network-based attacks coming from
Russia. Congress has become convinced that there’s a big problem—and not only
with Russia. IW is now viewed by the CIA as a bigger threat than biological or nu-
clear weapons. Thus, new hacking tools, such as one called nmap, make it hard to
be sure where a network-based attack is originating because the tool makes it easy
for the attacker to spoof his identity.
HERFs Are Easy to Make
More than traditional hacker techniques comprise infowar. A new type of high-
energy-radio-frequency-pulse weapons that disable electrical flows are under de-
velopment in government labs around the world. People are spending a lot of
money on cyberweapons. How easy is it for terrorists or other criminals to build
their own homemade HERF guns? That has been a topic of much debate, but re-
cently, a California-based engineer, demonstrated that it’s not very hard.
A former engineer at the Naval Air Warfare Center hooked up a 4-foot para-
bolic antenna powered by ignition coils and parts from a cattle stun gun during one
Infowar session. People with pacemakers were asked to exit the room. With not
much more than $900 in parts, he directed a 300-MHz pulse at a computer running
a program. Blasted in this manner from 10 feet away, the computer went haywire
and a digital camera twice that distance away was affected.
It’s high school science, basically. This kind of threat becomes better understood
through research. The computer industry is going to have to sit up and take note. It’s
going to cost an extra nickel or dime to put a shield in a computer where it’s needed.
Corporate Cyber Crime Program
Recently, the FBI (the other Super Cyber Protection Agency) officially announced
the formation of its InfraGard program, a cyber crime security initiative designed
to improve cooperation between federal law enforcement officials and the private
sector (after completing the process of setting up InfraGard chapters at its 59 field
offices). The National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC), an FBI affiliate
that’s based at the agency’s headquarters in Washington, started the InfraGard pro-
gram in 1996 as a pilot project in the Cleveland area. The final local chapter, com-
posed of information security experts from companies and academic institutions,
was put in place in December 2000 in New York.
According to FBI officials, InfraGard offers companies an intrusion-alert net-
work based on encrypted email messages plus a secure Web site for communi-
cating with law enforcement agencies about suspicious network activity or
attacks. The program allows law enforcement and industry to work together and
364
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
365
share information regularly, including information that could prevent potential
intrusions into the U.S. national infrastructure.
However, the NIPC has been criticized for what some have called a fundamen-
tal inability to communicate with the rest of the national security community. The
problem, according to sources, has been that the FBI treats all potential cyber
crimes as law enforcement investigations first and foremost—a stance that effec-
tively bars access to information by other government security agencies. The Infra-
Gard program hasn’t had much of an effect on corporate users thus far.
The InfraGard announcement was one of several rather belated efforts by the
outgoing Clinton administration in 2000 to create new security structures. For ex-
ample, former President Clinton, before leaving office, also announced a plan to
better coordinate federal counterintelligence efforts—a move partly aimed at im-
proving the response of Super Cyber Protection Agencies such as the FBI and the
CIA to information security attacks against companies. These new programs will
have a better chance of survival if they can demonstrate that they’re already ac-
complishing useful objectives.
Nevertheless, the 3FBI has expanded and perfected InfraGard on an ongoing
basis. Even though the InfraGard program hasn’t had much of an effect on corpo-
rate users thus far, more than 900 businesses have already signed up to participate
in the program; and, the FBI is still getting applications daily from companies who
want to go through the motions of being part of a chapter.
InfraGard does have its supporters. The program has had a beneficial impact
because it lets companies share information on security vulnerabilities without cre-
ating the levels of hysteria that usually accompany highly publicized reports of
hacking attacks and other cyber crimes.
SUMMARY
The United States has substantial information-based resources, including complex
management systems and infrastructures involving the control of electric power,
money flow, air traffic, oil and gas, and other information-dependent items. U.S.
allies and potential coalition partners are similarly increasingly dependent on var-
ious information infrastructures. Conceptually, if and when potential adversaries
attempt to damage these systems using IW techniques, IW will inevitably take on a
strategic aspect.
There is no front line. Strategic targets in the United States may be just as vul-
nerable to attack (as we all found out in the 9-11 terrorist attacks) as war zone com-
mand (like Afghanistan, Iraq, etc.), control, communications, and intelligence
targets. As a result, the attention of  participants quickly broadened beyond a sin-
gle traditional regional theater of operations to four distinct theaters of operation:

the battlefield per se, allied “zones of interior” (for example, the sovereign territory
of Saudi Arabia), the intercontinental zone of communication and deployment,
and the U.S. zone of interior.
The post–Cold War “over there” focus of the regional component of U.S. na-
tional military strategy is, therefore, inadequate for this kind of scenario and is of
declining relevance to the likely future international strategic environment. When
responding to IW attacks of this character, military strategy can no longer afford to
focus on conducting and supporting operations only in the region of concern. An
in-depth examination of the implications of IW for the United States and allied in-
frastructures that depend on the unimpeded management of information is also re-
quired in the fight against macro threats—defensive strategies for governments
and industry groups, as follows.
Conclusions
Low entry cost: Unlike traditional weapon technologies, development of 
information-based techniques does not require sizable financial resources or
state sponsorship. Information systems expertise and access to important net-
works may be the only prerequisites.
Blurred traditional boundaries: Traditional distinctions (public versus pri-
vate interests, warlike versus criminal behavior) and geographic boundaries,
such as those between nations as historically defined, are complicated by the
growing interaction within the information infrastructure.
Expanded role for perception management: New information-based tech-
niques may substantially increase the power of deception and of image-
manipulation activities, dramatically complicating government efforts to build
political support for security-related initiatives.
A new strategic intelligence challenge: Poorly understood strategic IW vul-
nerabilities and targets diminish the effectiveness of classic intelligence collec-
tion and analysis methods. A new field of analysis focused on strategic IW may
have to be developed.
Formidable tactical warning and attack assessment problems: There is currently
no adequate tactical warning system for distinguishing between strategic IW at-
tacks and other kinds of cyberspace activities, including espionage and accidents.
Difficulty building and sustaining coalitions: Reliance on coalitions is likely
to increase the vulnerabilities of the security postures of all the partners to
strategic IW attacks, giving opponents a disproportionate strategic advantage.
Vulnerability of the U.S. homeland: Information-based techniques render
geographical distance irrelevant; targets in the continental United States are
just as vulnerable as war zone targets. Given the increased reliance of the U.S.
366
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
367
economy and society on a high-performance networked information infra-
structure, a new set of lucrative strategic targets presents itself to potential IW-
armed opponents.
An Agenda for Action
The likely consequences of strategic IW point to a basic conclusion: key national
military strategy assumptions are obsolete and inadequate for confronting the
threat posed by strategic IW. Major recommendations have emerged that address
this shortcoming. The U.S. government needs to set an agenda for action that goes
beyond the work already done in preparation for the fight against macro threats:
defensive strategies for governments and industry groups.
With the preceding in mind, when completing the Defensive Strategies for
Governments and Industry Groups Checklist (Table F13.1 in Appendix F), the
computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional list of actions
for networks. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for which
the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review,
and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems have
been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? IW, or sneak electronic assaults, could not easily crash power
grids, financial networks, transportation systems, and telecommunications,
among other vital services.
2.
True or False? From an IW perspective, there are three primary target audi-
ences for the attacker using psychological operations (psyops).
3.
True or False? Cyberwar raises a host of unprecedented legal questions.
4.
True or False? New tools and technologies for communication have created the
potential for a new form of psychological warfare to a degree imagined only in
science fiction. This new form of warfare has become known as information
warfare (IW).

5.
True or False? Any discussion of information warfare, netwar, cyberwar, or
even perception manipulation as a component of command and control war-
fare by the armed forces of the United States at the strategic level must occur in
the context of the moral nature of communication in a pluralistic, secular, and
democratic society.
Multiple Choice
1.
The following countries publicly acknowledge pursuing the defensive IW ini-
tiatives goal of protecting their military information capabilities or national
information infrastructure, except for one:
A. India established a National Information Infrastructure-Defensive group
several years ago, apparently in response to China’s growing interest in IW.
B.
An independent review of international press reporting and military press
articles on international organizations’ initiatives points to three other
countries among those engaged in economic espionage (Iran, China, and
Taiwan) that are involved in the development of IW technologies, pro-
grams, or military capabilities.
C. As recently as January 2001, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) acknowledged
the existence of an information warfare defense unit whose mission is to
protect military systems but noted that the electric utility had organized its
own defense.
D. Taiwan also recently announced the creation of a task force to study ways
to protect their information infrastructure from the growing IW threat
from China.
2.
To judge that a country probably has an offensive IW initiative (including mil-
itary theory, technology development, operational unit or individual training,
or deployed forces) requires positive responses to at least one of following
questions, except:
A. Have the major foreign providers of software remediation services to Israel
and, to a lesser extent, India, acknowledged a defensive IW or national in-
formation infrastructure protection program, and have they also met at
least one of the supplemental criteria?
B.
Has a country been reliably identified as participating in offensive IW ac-
tivities, especially in “preparation of the battlefield” activities (such as im-
planting and using trap doors) that would facilitate computer network
attacks in a future conflict?
C. Have authoritative, but unofficial, host country sources suggested that a
country has an offensive IW program?
368
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Fighting Against Macro Threats
369
D. Do specific activities of national security or domestic information technol-
ogy point to the development of capabilities usually (and preferably
uniquely) associated with offensive IW?
3.
At the strategic level, the ability to observe is flooded by:
A. The assault on the possibility of objective reasoning
B.
The decisions that respond increasingly to a fictive or virtual universe
C. Governmental or military actions that become increasingly chaotic
D. The notion that there is no rational relationship of means to ends
E.
Contradictory information and data
4.
The following are conclusions drawn from fighting against macro threats,
except:
A. Low entry cost
B.
Blurred traditional boundaries
C. Expanded role for perception management
D. High entry cost
E.
New strategic intelligence management
5.
Action steps in preparing for defensive strategies for governments and indus-
try groups include the following, except:
A. Leadership
B.
Risk assessment
C. Waste of time
D. Government role
E.
National industry strategy
Exercise
An accounting firm was conducting an audit of a publicly owned company when they
came upon some accounting irregularities. The irregularities were serious enough to
potentially necessitate a re-stating of earnings. Considering the many scandals cur-
rently blighting the corporate sector, the accounting firm wished to confirm their
findings before sounding any public alarms. They retained a computer forensics spe-
cialist (CFS) to conduct large-scale data mining to get to the bottom of the irregular-
ities. How did the CFS go about performing his or her forensics examination?

HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A bank suspected an employee of downloading sensitive files from the bank’s com-
puter network using his bank laptop computer from home while on leave of absence.
The bank sent the computer to a CFS team (CFST) for a forensic examination. How
did the CFST go about conducting their examination?
Case Project
A computer forensic company’s CFS conducted a forensic investigation to deter-
mine if an executive who accepted a job with a competitor stole proprietary infor-
mation. How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation? 
Optional Team Case Project
A woman employed by a large defense contractor accused her supervisor of sexu-
ally harassing her. She was fired from her job for “poor performance” and subse-
quently sued her ex-boss and the former employer. How did the CFS go about
conducting the investigation?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Firewalls: Jumpstart for Network and Systems Administra-
tors, Elsevier Digital Press, Burlington, MA, 2004.
[2] Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce, 3rd ed., Charles River Media, Hing-
ham, MA, 2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
[4] Vacca, John R., High-Speed Cisco Networks: Planning, Design, and Imple-
mentation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
[5] Vacca, John R., The Cabling Handbook, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, New York,
2001.
[6] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
370
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

371
The Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics 
of the Military
14
T
he growing reliance on computer networks makes the networks themselves
likely sites for attack. What is more, civilian and military networks are be-
coming increasingly intertwined, so the U.S. military’s focus has shifted from
protecting every network to securing mission-critical systems. Current efforts in-
clude software agent–based systems (for real-time detection and recovery from a
cyberattack) and network-level early-warning systems (for monitoring suspicious
online activity).
As tensions continue to mount in the Middle East because of the continued oc-
cupation of U.S. forces in Iraq and the recent death of Palestinian leader Yasser
Arafat, a different sort of pitched battle is being waged behind the scenes. With all
the fervor of their comrades in arms, computer-savvy patriots on both sides have
managed to infiltrate and disable enemy Web servers.
The prospect of cyber warfare, or information warfare (IW), is a deadly serious
matter in military circles. The electron is the ultimate precision-guided weapon. In-
deed, the more heavily we come to rely on computer networks, the greater the fear
that adversaries will attack the networks themselves. In the very worst case (what
some have termed an electronic Pearl Harbor) a sudden, all-out network assault
would knock out communications as well as financial, power, transportation, mil-
itary, and other critical infrastructures, resulting in total societal collapse.
Civilian and military networks are increasingly intertwined. The advent of the
Internet means there really isn’t an outside anymore. Even when Air Force IW per-
sonnel are planning a mission, it coexists within the World Wide Web infrastruc-
ture. Another concern is that the military’s push toward commercial off-the-shelf
technology is exposing vital networks to attack. Many decisions are being made that

will affect the future of IW, but they’re being made in Washington State (home of
Microsoft Corporation.), not in Washington, D.C.
Military networks tend to be favored targets for hackers. The Pentagon figures
it fends off something like a half-million attacks a year. Annoying and costly as that
may be, it’s not the chief worry. The odd idiot or random rogue trying to break in—
that happens all the time. The Pentagon’s primary concern is the government that’s
prepared to invest heavily in coordinated strategic attacks on U.S. military and
civilian networks. Although the line between cybercrime and IW often blurs, what
separates the two is that the latter is state sponsored.
For the information warrior, the basic issues are protecting oneself from attack,
identifying the attacker, and then responding. By far the most effort has gone into the
first area, network security. Here, commercial firms have led the way, producing a
host of off-the-shelf hardware, software, and services, from firewalls [1] to intrusion
sensors to encryption schemes. For the civilian world’s take on IW, see Chapter 19.
The U.S. military is generally regarded as being farthest along in its IW pre-
paredness. A fairly recent recognition has been that it is not possible to simultane-
ously defend the myriad military, civilian, and commercial networks. A further
recognition has been that simply trying to “keep the bad guys out” is futile. No sys-
tem is perfect—somebody’s always going to get in.
Nowadays the focus is on keeping so-called mission-critical networks up and
running and detecting intruders early on, before any real harm is done. Work is
now going into developing early-warning systems for information networks, akin
to the radar and satellites that watch for long-range missile attacks. A system ad-
ministrator typically only has local knowledge of the health of his own system.
A bird’s-eye view, by contrast, would allow analysts to correlate attacks from the
same IP addresses, from those having the same mode of operation, or from those oc-
curring in a certain time frame. Achieving such a network-wide perspective is the
aim of Cyberpanel, a new Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
program, as discussed in Sidebar, “Renegotiating the Human–Machine Interface.”
RENEGOTIATING THE HUMAN–MACHINE INTERFACE
Creating inherently secure and robust information technologies for the U.S. military
is one of the chief aims of the information technology systems (ITS) office at
DARPA, in Arlington, Virginia. The work at the DARPA ITS office is defensive,
rather than offensive, in nature. They’re like the people who worry about seatbelts in
cars, rather than the designers of large, fast engines.
Historically, DARPA not only was significant in generating technologies such as
the Internet, but also in developing methods for protecting these systems. Funda-
mental protocols such as TCP/IP (transmission control protocol/Internet protocol)
372
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

were meant for a very benign environment, and they’re very leaky. DARPA spent the
early to mid-1990s patching the holes in these initial systems. They now need to start
investing in the next-generation architecture.
One problem is that DARPA is moving ground. The sort of network attacks of
two years ago were not nearly as sophisticated, serious, or numerous as what they are
seeing now. In looking at the next-generation networks, they have to work iteratively
so that functionality and security are negotiated in tandem.
Until recently DARPA didn’t have any experience in designing for large-scale
systems in an operational environment. Their attitude was, They fund this work,
which leads to commercial products, which the Department of Defense (DoD) then
buys, and that’s how they fulfill their defense mission. However, the DoD has prob-
lems that aren’t addressed by the commercial world, such as having to deploy large,
heterogeneous systems.
Thus, DARPA is now working with the Pacific Command, which covers about
53% of the earth’s surface. They’ve moved out from the laboratory and developed their
tools in their operational environment. Nothing will test what they do more than that.
WHICH TECHNOLOGIES LOOK PROMISING FOR IW?
DARPA sees great potential in optical networking. Eventually, an all-optical network
might look like a telecommunications network with a single switch from one person
to you and with a central hub. Thus, things like distributed denial-of-service attacks
are ruled out. Also, it is almost impossible to detect the connection, because the sig-
nal is highly multiplexed over several wavelengths. It’s clear they can do that for local
area networks (LANs). If DARPA can field these advanced systems for a DoD envi-
ronment, which would involve about a hundred thousand nodes, they could be the
precursors of what will enter the commercial market.
Right now, a typical defense analyst who wants to gain an understanding of the
enemy will spend most of his or her time scouring databases, rather than doing what
humans do best, which is using deep cognitive abilities. The defense analyst is not
only looking for needles in a haystack but also pieces of needles. And as the world
moves much faster, humans really can’t keep up.
Thus, DARPA has to start assigning to machines more of the job of searching
data, looking for associations, and then presenting to the analyst something he or she
can understand. It’s like a prosthesis, except it doesn’t just assist the analyst; it lets the
analyst do a 40-foot pole vault. It amplifies what the human is good at.
In the future, DARPA will operate with increasingly heterogeneous forces—
human soldiers alongside robotic forces. So how does a machine understand a com-
mander’s intent? To allow them to communicate, DARPA needs a machine
prosthesis to do the translation.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
373

In the summer of 2000, the computer network in one of the DoD’s battle man-
agement systems came under attack. Erroneous times and locations began showing
up on screen; planes needing refueling were sent to rendezvous with tankers that
never materialized, and one tanker was dispatched to two sites simultaneously.
Within minutes, though, a recovery program installed on the network sniffed out
the problem and fixed it.
The DoD itself staged the attack as a simulation to demonstrate the first-ever
“real-time information recovery and response” during an IW attack. In the demo,
software agents were used to catch data conflicts in real time, allowing the system
to remain online (see sidebar, “Agent-Based Systems”).
AGENT-BASED SYSTEMS
Software agents are defined very broadly: enabling real machine-to-machine com-
munications, allowing machines to understand content, send messages, do negotia-
tions, and so on. DARPA agent markup language (DAML) is a fairly large project to
create a next-generation Web language, a successor to extensible markup language
(XML). It’s aimed at semantic interoperability—to make more of what’s online
machine readable. Right now, when a machine gets to a Web page, it sees natural
language, photos, and so on, none of which are easy for machines to process. You
can’t ask it to do a content-based search for you, because it can’t understand the
content.
Making more readable content would involve anything from describing what’s
on the page (“this is a homepage,” “this is an advertisement”) all the way up to “this
page is about such-and-such and it relates to the following facts.” The better
machines are at recognizing content, the more they can share content, and the more
agent-based systems can be built.
MILITARY APPLICATIONS OF DAML
One of the military applications of DAML is in intelligence for collecting facts and,
more important, for linking facts. Different communities have different terms for the
same thing, or the same term for different things. One community may refer to a
Russian fighter plane as a MIG 29A, and another group may call it a Hornet. On the
current Web, you can’t search on one term and find the other.
The other domain for DAML is command and control, where DARPA is trying to
recognize what information relates to which entities. A famous failure of that system
is the U.S. bombing of the Chinese embassy in Kosovo. An agent who could have said
“this map is old” might have allowed the U.S. to recognize what was really going on.
374
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

All that only works if DARPA’s systems, which were built by different people
speaking different languages and using different approaches, can be integrated. In
one of DARPA’s other projects (control of agent-based systems [CoABS]), they’re
trying to set up middleware that makes it easy for systems, including legacy systems,
to communicate. The ability to quickly throw together systems in a command cen-
ter or on the battlefield is crucial. Both CoABS and DAML are aimed at creating that
kind of infrastructure, for much richer machine-to-machine communication and
understanding.
BROAD ACADEMIC–INDUSTRY–GOVERNMENT COLLABORATIONS
In DAML, for example, DARPA is working very closely with the World Wide Web
Consortium. They’re also funding a group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy (MIT) who are helping refine the language. They’re making sure DARPA learns
from their experiences.
That last step is key. One has to ensure the flow of information to the informa-
tion warrior. Network recovery also means preserving the so-called minimum es-
sential data, the basic set of information one would need to regenerate a system
should it be disabled.
New information technology will undoubtedly open up new attack routes,
alongside whatever desirable features it may offer. Take wireless technology [2].
Jamming remains the tried-and-true mode of attack, but what if, instead of block-
ing signals, the enemy were to infiltrate communications links and send out false
data? Just detecting such a radio frequency (RF) attack is tricky.
Unlike the Internet protocol (IP) world, there are no virus checkers or intrusion
detectors and there are a lot of different types of radios and tactical data links. For ex-
ample, Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS) will support, in a single downstream box,
all the legacy waveforms and provide interoperability among all existing and envi-
sioned tactical radios. It also features software-defined cryptographic capabilities.
Being computer-based, however, it introduces a whole new threat to radios.
Of course, an offensive side of IW also exists: striking back. Given that you’re
able to determine the culprit, what is the appropriate response? Obviously, you’d
have one response for a teenage hacker at a university in the United States and quite
a different one for somebody abroad who is working for a government.
Not surprisingly, the military is rather tight-lipped about its offensive IW
capabilities. It’s safe to assume, though, that the arsenal includes all the tactics
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
375

deployed by ordinary hackers (worms, viruses, trapdoors, logic bombs), as well
as surveillance technology for intelligence purposes.
Here it may be helpful to distinguish between weapons of mass destruction
(which in the case of IW, would be a wide-scale assault on assorted military and
civilian networks) and “weapons of precision disruption.” The latter include lower-
level strikes on specific targets carried out over months or years by, for example, an
insider whose cooperation has been volunteered, bought, or coerced by a foreign
state. That slow-drip mode of attack can be both harder to detect and more dam-
aging over time. Pulling off an electronic Pearl Harbor, on the other hand, would
mean not only bringing down vast and disparate networks, but also keeping them
down long enough to inflict real harm.
IW may also be waged as a social engineering campaign. Attacks on important,
highly visible sites (the NASDAQ, for example) might shake public confidence. If
you could plant a lot of bogus earnings reports out there, so that you see a 50% sell-
off in a single day, that would be enough to spook even long-term investors. There-
fore, this type of attack is what the military is most vulnerable to, and should be
their greatest concern.
How vulnerable is vulnerable? Not all agree with the dire claims made about
IW. Anyone still caught uttering “electronic Pearl Harbor” is either an ex-cold war-
rior trying to drum up antiterrorism funding through the clever use of propaganda
or a used-car salesman or white-collar crook of some type.
It’s a problem, but not a crisis. Any time you institute a new technology, there
are going to be downsides. You buy boilers, you get heat, but they may blow up.
Thus, the way to have the positives and not the negatives is to attend to the safety
and security issues. Computer networks are no different. If the national security of
the United States were really on the line, there’s a lot people could do that they
haven’t done yet. Diligent use of encryption and authentication, better policing of
network activity, and air-gapping (keeping critical networks separate from non-
critical ones) are all possible right now.
This is not to say that you shouldn’t have a few cops on the beat to keep an eye
out for anomalous online activity, but life is not risk-free. Now, let’s get down to
specifics and look at the military tactics themselves.
OVERVIEW OF MILITARY TACTICS
The planning, security, and intelligence considerations of military information
warfare tactics (MIWT) must be present in all aspects of the military information
operations (MIO) development process, as discussed in Chapter 13. These issues
are fundamental to the success of MIWT.
376
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Planning
MIWT operations, like most operations, can only be effective when adequate at-
tention is given to the overall objective to which they are being applied. Develop-
ing an MIWT strategy requires careful adherence to planning philosophies, starting
with the development of an achievable goal. The main objective of planning is to
ensure that information operations within the MIWT environment are focussed on
the wider military strategies and, therefore, the security objectives of the nation.
This requires the development of formalized planning procedures.
Security
Military operations are most effective when they surprise an enemy. Surprise can
only be achieved when security procedures deny enemy access to friendly inten-
tions, strategies, and capabilities. This applies to the MIWT environment as much
as it does to any other discipline of warfare. Security, therefore, must be considered
throughout an MIWT program. The integrity of friendly software, hardware, com-
munications, procedures, people, and strategies is an essential part of the MIWT
environment. Developing a detailed strategy for information operations is pointless
if that plan is known to enemy forces.
Security measures for ITS must rely on one particular aspect of that system. For
instance, many new systems are being created with built-in software security sys-
tems. These systems will alert users if infiltration into the system is suspected. Al-
though these systems might be useful in highlighting the amateur infiltrator, skillful
warriors may either attack the warning software before attacking the main software,
or, conversely, they may attack the system via an alternative element, such as the
hardware. Therefore, information security must address each of the elements of 
the ITS, including the people. Getting routine procedures right, and addressing the
cultural issues associated with security, will often reap greater benefits than using
the most elaborate software- or hardware-protection devices. Information security
is a significant activity in the MIWT process. Unless this activity is successfully ac-
complished, the rest of the MIWT effort may well be doomed to failure.
Intelligence
Intelligence provides IW practitioners with assessments of an enemy’s ITS and their
likely reactions, both human- and machine-directed, following the commence-
ment of an information attack. ITS are dynamic and their configuration can be
changed with minimal effort. Planning attacks against such systems requires re-
finement in response to such changes, often at the last minute and occasionally dur-
ing an attack. Accordingly, employment of successful MIWT strategies demands
comprehensive and real-time intelligence support.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
377

OFFENSIVE RUINOUS IW TOOLS AND TACTICS
The U.S. military has a new mission: Be ready to launch an offensive ruinous cyber-
attack against potential adversaries, some of whom are stockpiling cyberweapons.
Such an attack would likely involve launching massive distributed denial-of-service
assaults, unleashing crippling computer viruses or trojans, and jamming the enemy’s
computer systems through electronic radio-frequency interference.
A few of years ago,  an order from the National Command Authority (backed
by President Bush and Secretary of Defense Colin Powell) instructed the military to
gear up to wage cyberwar. The ability of the United States to conduct such warfare
still doesn’t exist today.
The military sees three emerging threats: ballistic missiles, cyberwarfare, and
space control. The U.S. Space Command, the agency in charge of satellite commu-
nications, has begun to craft a computer network attack strategy. This strategy
would detail actions to be followed by the Unified Commanders in Chief (CINC)
if the president and the secretary of defense order a cyberstrike. The CINCs are se-
nior commanders in the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines, deploying U.S. forces
around the world.
The IW strategy is detailed in a defense plan called “OPLAN 3600.” This plan re-
quires unprecedented cooperation with commercial enterprises and other organizations.
Other countries, including Russia, Israel, and China, are further along in building
their IW capabilities.
The United States may end up with a new type of weaponry for launching mas-
sive distributed denial-of-service attacks and computer viruses. The Chinese are al-
ready moving along with this.
In addition to the possibility of cybercombat between nations, the military ac-
knowledges that terrorists without the backing of any country can potentially use
cyberweapons to disrupt U.S. telecommunications or banking systems, which are
largely electronic. That’s one reason the U.S. Space Command is joining with the
FBI to build an IW strategy. This requires a close relationship between the military
and law enforcement. The FBI will have to help determine if any cyberattack (see
sidebar, “Cyberoffense Mired in Cold War”) suffered by U.S. military or business
entities calls for a military or law enforcement response.
CYBEROFFENSE MIRED IN COLD WAR
The absence of a catastrophic cyberattack against the United States has created a false
sense of cybersecurity and has allowed costly Cold War–era Pentagon programs to
378
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

siphon money from critically needed information technology (IT) and security pro-
grams. The United States is still mired in a Cold War–era defense-spending mentality.
The rapid advance of IT has created real and potentially catastrophic vulnerabilities.
The consequences of a cyberterrorist attack could be devastating.
PERCEPTION OF THE PROBLEM
Senior security officials are battling a perception problem according to IW experts.
Without a clear-cut example of an electronic Pearl Harbor, where a surprise cyber-
attack cripples financial markets and other critical systems, it’s difficult to convince
top military and political leaders that IT research and development should be a big-
ger priority in the budget process.
Cyberterrorism is not an abstract concept. Although attacks historically have
been labeled as “nuisances,” that may not be the correct way to look at the problem.
The government is dealing with an enormous educational deficit when it comes to IT
security. Part of the problem is that DoD remains committed to lobbying Congress
for money to pay for programs such as the F-22 Joint Strike Fighter instead of
increasing funding for IT programs. That is not affordable even in this age of sur-
pluses. DoD’s assumptions about future budget gains are wrong. More money
should be spent on advanced sensors, precision-guided weapons, and other IT pro-
grams. That type of investment would preclude the need to buy costly systems such
as the F-22.
Even events such as the outbreak of the “love bug,” which reportedly cost the
U.S. economy billions of dollars, have not convinced people in and out of govern-
ment that the problem is real. Usually, when a major crisis costs people a lot of
money, it leads to many visits to Capitol Hill and requests for help. That never hap-
pened after the love bug outbreak.
Some experts have questioned the government’s liberal use of the term terrorism
to describe acts of mass disruption of the Internet. However, when asked about the
seeming lack of interest in cyberattacks by well-known terrorists such as Osama bin
Laden, a senior White House official said the focus should not be on what bin Laden
does or does not do, but on being proactive and understanding that a major attack
may be coming. The United States is attempting to be proactive, but many believe
that the United States is going to get seriously nailed.
The National Security Agency (NSA) is one of the federal entities that has taken
a proactive approach toward security cooperation between government and indus-
try. However, one of the biggest challenges facing the nation, highlighted during the
love bug incident, remains convincing industry that security is as important as mak-
ing money. Vendors and users have to treat information assurance as a fundamen-
tal precept of doing business. It has to become part of the business case.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
379

The Internet is ubiquitous. It allows attacks from anywhere in the world. At-
tackers can loop in from many different Internet providers. It could start across the
street but appear to be coming from China. Something that might look like a
hacker attack could be the beginning of cyberwarfare.
A cyberattack can include espionage using computer networks.
The growing bullets-and-guns conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, with
Islamic supporters elsewhere, is being accompanied by cyberattacks from each side
against the other. It’s serious enough that the FBI issued an alert about it to the U.S.
Space Command, giving U.S. forces warning that the action on the cyber front
could affect them as well.
OFFENSIVE CONTAINMENT IW TOOLS AND TACTICS
Of all the activities that have emerged with the evolution of IW and information
operations, command and control warfare (C2W) has attracted the most attention.
The United States’ approach to C2W is comprehensive. This country has commit-
ted substantial resources to the development of technologies, doctrine, strategies,
and organizations that will equip it to meet an information threat in any future
conventional war. Countries like Australia, however, like most non-superpower
nations of the world, will not be able to commit the substantial resources needed to
follow the American model. Therefore, the general approach discussed in this chap-
ter is tempered by the economic realities that will dictate the degree to which mid-
level powers can invest in these strategies.
Command and control warfare (C2W) is the approach to military operations that
employs all measures (including but not limited to Electronic Warfare [EW], mil-
itary deception, psychological operations [psyops], operations security, and target-
ing) in a deliberate and integrated manner, mutually supported by intelligence and
ITS, to disrupt or inhibit an adversary’s ability to command and control his or her
forces while protecting and enhancing our own.
C2W is the war-fighting or tactical application of MIWT and is usually aimed
at a specific and defined battlespace, although it may be conducted in conjunction
with other MIWT that may be focused on strategic information targets. There are
five elements of C2W, covering both offensive and defensive applications:
Operations security
Military deception
Psychological operations
380
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Electronic warfare
Targeting
Operations Security
Operations security (OPSEC) is a term that appears in many military documents in
almost as many contexts, with several apparently different meanings. OPSEC is a
process used for denying adversaries information about friendly disposition, in-
tentions, capabilities, or limitations. It requires the employment of specialist equip-
ment, including software, the adoption of suitable procedures, and most
important, the development of a pro-security organizational culture. OPSEC is
equally important as a defensive posture as it is in developing offensive strategies.
By denying a potential enemy an understanding of the capabilities of friendly sys-
tems, possible hostile C2W will be more likely to miscalculate the friendly infor-
mation capabilities and be ineffective.
Military Deception
Military deception is used to inject ambiguity and create false assessments in the
decision-making process of the enemy. The objectives of employing military de-
ception are to create a false deduction of friendly intentions, capabilities, or dispo-
sitions by the enemy. The target of deception is the enemy decision maker, that is,
the individual who has the necessary authority to make a decision. There is no
point to influencing a decision if, in the event of ambiguity, the decision maker
passes the decision to a higher authority. In this case, the higher authority must also
be the target of deception.
Psychological Operations
Psychological operations (psyops) are operations that are planned activities in
peace and war directed to enemy, friendly, and neutral audiences to influence at-
titudes and behavior affecting the achievement of political and military objec-
tives. The objective of psyops is to cause enemy, friendly, and neutral personnel
to act favorably toward friendly organizations. Psyops have been used through-
out history to influence adversary leaders and groups. The expansion and devel-
opment of IT, and associated global media coverage, has enhanced modern
psyops opportunities.
Electronic Warfare
Electronic warfare (EW) is the military action involving the use of electromagnetic
energy to determine, exploit, reduce, or prevent hostile use of the electromagnetic
spectrum. This action retains friendly use of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
381

Targeting
Targeting is not just a process, nor is it just focused on destructive ends. Targeting
is a capability that emphasizes the requirement to collect, process, and interpret in-
formation regarding decisive points in an enemy’s C2 system and then selects the
most effective option of incapacitating them. There are many hard- and soft-kill
options available to a commander. Soft-kill options include the use of EW, strate-
gic computer operations, and information weapons, whereas hard-kill options refer
to the various means of physically destroying targets.
Hard or soft destruction requires the capability to remove selected targets from
an enemy’s order of battle. These targets include vital communication nodes, na-
tional infrastructure, vital personnel, and specific military equipment. Destruction
may be achieved by any arm of the military. Physical destruction carries the high-
est risk and, unlike the other elements of C2W, tends to be permanent; that is,
buildings are destroyed and people are killed. This can be either a desirable or un-
desirable outcome, and so must be considered when strategies are being developed.
The diplomatic recovery time for physical destruction is usually considerably
longer than that of the other elements. Accordingly, even though it is often the
most effective method of demonstrating resolve, physical destruction is generally
used as a last resort. However, a commander must have the option of employing
hard- and soft-kill options to accomplish a desired C2W effect.
The Objective of C2W
Until the 1991 Gulf War, the C2W elements had rarely been used in conjunction
with each other to specifically target an enemy’s ability to command and control its
forces. In the Gulf War post-mortem, the advantages of combining the five ele-
ments in pursuit of a single objective were realized and true C2W was born.
The ultimate objective of C2W is to decapitate the enemy’s command structure
from its body of combat forces while ensuring the integrity of friendly C2 systems.
C2W aims to reduce the uncertainty of combat by creating a battlespace that be-
comes more predictable for friendly forces as the C2W effort increases, while be-
coming exponentially less predictable for the enemy. C2W activities are designed to
lift the fog of war for friendly forces while thickening the fog for the enemy. C2W
strategies focus the five elements specifically on the decision cycles of both friendly
and enemy forces. Therefore, the aim of C2W is to gain, maintain, or widen a gap
in the effectiveness of C2 in favor of friendly forces throughout a campaign and
particularly at decisive points in a battle.
C2W and the OODA Loop
The often-quoted observation, orientation, decision, action (OODA) loop has
been adopted as the focal point of C2W. The concept of the OODA loop has its
382
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

origins in the Korean War, where an American pilot identified the advantages of
having good visibility and sensitive controls on board the U.S. Sabre jet fighters.
Although the Russian MIG 15s were faster, more powerful, more maneuverable,
and could sustain greater bank angles, the American jets were consistently victo-
rious in air-to-air engagements. The U.S. pilots simply had a shorter total period
between observing an event, orientating themselves to the possible ramifications
of the event, making a decision, and acting. The value of a relatively short decision
cycle was realized. Since the inception of air-to-air combat, staying inside the
enemy’s decision loop has been a consistent objective. This has been a recognized
objective of many forms of warfare.
The OODA loop concept is now applied to most aspects of modern warfare,
from land maneuvers to strategic missile developments. The OODA loop can also
be seen to operate in the business world. Those who are quick to observe an op-
portunity, recognize the opportunity, and exploit the opportunity are more fre-
quently the successful or victorious business persons. The OODA loop theories can
be found in the heart of modern C2 systems and, consequently, in modern C2W
strategies. Successful C2W operations will, therefore, increase the enemy’s decision
cycle (his or her OODA loop) to such a point that he or she will become increas-
ingly vulnerable to attack.
C2W in the Gulf War
In the 1991 Gulf War, the Coalition forces attacked the Iraqi C2 system from the
outset. Even before the war had commenced, EW, psyops, and deception were em-
ployed to influence the Iraqi people and hierarchy. During the first hours of the air
attacks in Iraq, ITS and communication devices were targeted, and in many cases
physically destroyed, leaving the huge force that had occupied Kuwait completely
cut off from the commanders in Baghdad. The Iraqi air defense system was virtu-
ally shut down by coalition activity within hours of the commencement of Opera-
tion Desert Storm. The extant Iraqi air defense system was among the most
extensive in the world. Shutting such an extensive system down with apparent ease
was a significant achievement and the result of a calculated offensive involving all
of the C2W elements. This early success gave the coalition forces air supremacy. In
turn, this supremacy significantly reduced the potential for coalition air fatalities
and allowed the coalition air forces to strike Iraqi ground targets almost at will. The
coalition forces effectively destroyed the ability of the Iraqi military commanders to
observe, and the Iraqi OODA loop was significantly lengthened.
In the 2003 Operation Iraqi Freedom, defense of friendly C2 systems and at-
tacks on enemy systems were of paramount importance. The United States had the
shortest decision cycle and thus had a decisive advantage. A confused army leads to
another’s victory.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
383

DEFENSIVE PREVENTIVE IW TOOLS AND TACTICS
Eight years after the military pioneered intrusion detection systems, the DoD now
requires its massive networked systems to be protected by round-the-clock intru-
sion detection monitoring to defend against hacker and denial-of-service attacks.
The DoD has developed a policy that mandates the use of intrusion detection sys-
tems in all military networks. The DoD has more than 69,000 computer networks
that handle everything from weapons systems C2 to inventory to payroll. Roughly
15% of DoD networks, such as satellite links, are considered mission-critical.
Under this draft policy, every DoD entity needs to have a computer network-
detection service provider, which could be a DoD entity or a commercial entity.
Thus, the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) is responsible for defining
the intrusion detection plan. Whether the Navy, Army, or Air Force should buy
commercial intrusion detection software or entrust network protection to an out-
side service provider should be decided on a case-by-case basis.
The military helped pioneer intrusion detection systems by building its own
software from scratch in 1996. Since then, various parts of the military have de-
ployed products from vendors that include Internet Security Systems, Symantec,
Cisco [3], and Network Ice. Today, still only a small percentage of the military’s
overall networked systems are guarded by any form of intrusion detection. When
the final decision on the mandatory intrusion detection systems will arrive is still
unclear, but deliberations taking place among the military’s Joint Chiefs of Staff un-
derscore their determination to do whatever it takes to prevent hackers and denial-
of-service attacks from disrupting its networks.
Some defense-related agencies, such as the secretive NSA in Fort Meade, Mary-
land, already require round-the-clock monitoring of computer hosts and networks.
Every system within the NSA is monitored. In the Defense Intelligence Agency, it’s
the same sort of situation.
One difficulty in deploying intrusion detection software is that it must be reg-
ularly updated to include new attack signatures, because new hacker exploits are
discovered all the time. In addition, intrusion detection software can record “false
positives,” a false alarm about trouble, and software occasionally needs to be fine-
tuned to work correctly. These types of challenges, along with the difficulty in hir-
ing security experts to manage intrusion detection, is spurring security services in
which intrusion detection is done remotely in the service provider’s data centers or
with hired help onsite.
Not all attempts by the federal government to put large-scale intrusion detec-
tion systems in place have succeeded. In 2000, President Clinton unveiled his goal
of creating the Federal Intrusion Detection Network as part of what was called the
National Plan for Information Systems Protection. FIDNet, as it was called, was en-
visioned by the White House as a government-wide intrusion detection network to
384
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

monitor activities across civilian and defense networks. The idea, though, generated
a firestorm of criticism from civil liberties groups that argued that FIDNet’s mon-
itoring of citizens would constitute an invasion of privacy [4]. Although the Gen-
eral Services Administration (GSA) issued a draft RFP for FIDNet, GSA indicates
the idea has been shelved.
Others are just not sold on the idea of outsourcing security to services
providers. They’ve opted not to go with managed security. With managed security
services, you give away the keys to the castle in some respects. Therefore, any orga-
nization that wants to take advantage of managed security services has to share de-
tailed knowledge about its operations so that intrusion detection systems can be
properly used.
DEFENSIVE RUINOUS IW TOOLS AND TACTICS
In 2002, the Pentagon formed five technology centers, which are staffed by re-
servists who work in the private sector by day and spend one weekend per month
defending the DoD against cyberattacks through the use of defensive ruinous IW
tools and tactics. The deputy secretary of defense approved a plan that would es-
tablish five joint reserve virtual information operations (JRVIO) and information
assurance organizations. The centers’ mission is to ensure that American war fight-
ers dominate the computer information domain in future conflicts, according to
the Pentagon.
Information operations has emerged as an area that is extremely well suited to
the integration of reserve capabilities. Members of the reserves and National Guard
are often way ahead because of the very nature of their civilian employment, trained
in their workplaces to exploit technology.
The DoD has long been battling a high-tech brain drain spurred by a boom-
ing economy and the lure of higher-paying jobs in the private sector. The change
has made the National Guard and reserves a repository of high-tech skills. At the
same time, the Pentagon is facing an increase in cyberattacks and intrusions and
has increased its focus on using cybertactics to fight future conflicts. The teams
could be involved in a wide range of efforts, including enemy computer network
attacks, defense of U.S. critical infrastructures, psychological operations, intelli-
gence support, vulnerability assessments, and reviews of Pentagon Web sites for
sensitive information.
The Pentagon expects 526 reserve officers and enlisted personnel to staff the
five JRVIOs during fiscal 2005 and 2006 in Maryland, Virginia, and Texas. How-
ever, from 2007 to 2011, that number is expected to expand to more than 1,000.
The initiative is a result of a two-year Pentagon study called “Reserve Component
Employment 2006.” That study recommended the formation of a cyberdefense
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
385

unit that would consist of people with IT skills who could work in different loca-
tions instead of at a single center. The study also urged the department to recruit
high-tech-savvy people from the private sector.
DEFENSIVE RESPONSIVE CONTAINMENT
IW TOOLS AND TACTICS
One of the more recent additions to the military commander’s toolbox are defen-
sive responsive containment IW tools. Computers and associated technology have
helped change the face of modern information warfare tactics by providing the ca-
pabilities to generate and process massive amounts of data and disseminate the re-
sultant information throughout the battlespace. However, computers provide more
than just an information-processing capability. They may also be used as weapons
in their own right. The most common examples of computer operations include
hacking, virus planting, and chipping. These techniques are primarily aimed at tar-
geting the enemy’s broad information environment. However, they may also be
used to attack the enemy’s computer-based weapon systems and computer-based
platforms, such as “fly-by-wire” aircraft. Although generally strategic in nature,
computer operations may be applied to the tactical and operational components of
the conventional warfare environment, either in support of C2W operations or in
direct support of air, land, or sea operations.
Hacking
The term computer hacker is now synonymous with computer criminal, although,
arguably, this merging of terms is not justified. Someone who uses a computer to
rob a bank is a criminal, not a hacker. The genuine computer hackers are still doing
what the original computer hackers were doing 43 years ago—exploring the
bounds of computer science.
Unfortunately, exploring today’s computer science often means entering other
people’s systems. There are many computer hackers around the world who enter
other people’s systems on a daily basis. Most simply gain access to the systems,
snoop around for a while, and leave. Some hackers like to explore the logic flow in
systems. A few like to exploit these systems for either their own gain or simply to
make life difficult for the users of that system. The genuine hackers, while invading
system privacy, rarely damage the systems into which they have hacked. However,
most users of systems understandably find it an unacceptable invasion of their pri-
vacy to have people intruding into their systems.
Hackers present a genuine problem to most organizations today and a specific
threat to military security. Hackers have historically found the challenge of breaking
386
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

into so-called secure military systems one of the more satisfying aspects of their
hobby. Accordingly, the first and foremost aim of any information strategy for mil-
itary forces must be to defend their own system integrity.
Once access is gained into a system, hackers can generally manipulate whatever
files they wish. They will often set up personal accounts for themselves in case they
wish to return again in the future. A hacker can, of course, collect very important
information. In the business domain, intelligence can be gained about a competi-
tor’s product. In the government service domain, sensitive personal information
can be obtained (or altered), which can later be used against individuals. In the mil-
itary domain, classified information such as capabilities, vulnerabilities, strategies,
and dispositions may be extracted or manipulated. A hacker can also change the file
structure, amend the logic flow, and even destroy parts of the system.
Hacking is no longer simply a pursuit of misfits and computer scientists; it is
now a genuine method of obtaining information by government agencies, criminals,
and subversive organizations. There have been several reports about government
sponsorship of such activity. Many of the world’s secret security organizations are
now passing industrial secrets to their nation’s domestic businesses. The basic tool
kit of today’s industrial spy consists of a PC and a modem. The industrial spy is sim-
ply a hacker who intrudes into someone else’s computer system and then exploits
the information obtained. Neither domestic nor international laws adequately ad-
dress all of the issues surrounding hacking. Therefore, in the unlikely event that
hackers are caught, in many situations prosecution is impossible.
The impact on those involved in developing MIWT is that hacking presents a
genuine threat to the security and integrity of both military and civilian informa-
tion systems. Defense against hacking can be successful to varying degrees. Most
defensive strategies are system dependent; therefore, listing them in this chapter
would be pointless. However, defense against hacking needs to be considered by
anyone who manages or operates an IT system.
The other reason national security forces should become involved in hacking is
the potential benefits that can be derived by employing hacking techniques as an of-
fensive tactic. Intelligence collection of information stored in an enemy’s databases
as well as the specific system capabilities, vulnerabilities, and architecture can be ac-
complished successfully using hacking techniques. In future wars, information de-
rived from hacking will form a large part of intelligence databases and, thus,
manipulation of the enemy’s decision-making support systems will become routine.
Viruses
A virus is a code fragment that copies itself into a larger program, modifying that
program. A virus executes only when its host program begins to run. The virus
then replicates itself, infecting other programs as it reproduces. Protecting
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
387

against computer viruses has become a part of using modern ITS. Viruses are
passed from computer to computer via disks and reportedly via the more recent
practice of electronic file transfer, such as email. Although statistics concerning
viruses are often difficult to substantiate, some specialists estimate that there are
as many as 11,233 viruses currently existing on the Internet, with cures being
available for only 4,583. Although virus screening software should prevent
known viruses being brought into a system, they will not prevent all virus at-
tacks. The most effective method of minimizing the risk of virus attack and min-
imizing the damage caused by viruses in the event of an attack, is by employing
sound and rigorous information-management procedures.
Isolating Internet systems from operating systems where practical is vital, and
minimizing computer-to-disk-to-computer transfers, particularly if the origin of
that data is the Internet, will reduce the chances of picking up a virus. The use of the
most recent anti-virus software and the screening of disks every time they are placed
in a computer will reduce the risk of disk infections being passed onto systems.
Careful selection and management of passwords may deter a potential intruder from
accessing a system and planting a virus, while the maintenance of comprehensive
system backups can minimize the impact of viruses, should one find its way onto a
system. Viruses, however, can also be backed up, and a dormant virus can infest any
backup files and can be reintroduced when a system is recovered. Accordingly, a lay-
ered backup strategy is imperative. Anti-virus strategies are aimed at minimizing the
chances of getting a virus and minimizing the damage that viruses can cause if they
are introduced. Users of today’s ITS must be aware of the virus threat. Simple pro-
cedures will often be enough to avoid viruses, but a single failure to comply with
anti-virus procedures can result in systems becoming inoperable.
Virus planting is clearly a suitable and attractive weapon for military forces and
is a valuable addition to the offensive information operations inventory. If a simple
virus can be injected into the systems of a potential enemy, the need to expend ef-
fort in physically attacking that system may be eliminated.
Chipping
Most people are aware of the vulnerability of software to hostile invasions such as a
virus attack. Few, however, are aware of the risk to the essential hardware compo-
nents of an ITS. Chipping refers to unexpected events that can be engineered into
computer chips. Today’s chips contain billions of integrated circuits that can easily
be configured by the manufacturer to initiate unexpected events at a specific time or
at the occurrence of specific circumstances. This may explain why some electronic
goods fail a short time after the warranty has expired. There is almost no way of de-
tecting whether a chip contained within a piece of equipment has been corrupted.
388
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

One way to minimize the risk of chipping is to self-manufacture all important
chips, such as those used as part of an aircraft’s flight control system. Economically,
this is often not feasible. Most chips used within today’s high-technology equip-
ment are manufactured in countries where labor costs are low. Establishing an in-
digenous manufacturing capability would increase the cost of acquiring the
equipment. A risk assessment must be made when purchasing vital equipment
from overseas, by comparing the risk of vital equipment failing once hostilities
commence to the cost of producing chips internally or developing rigorous quality
control of imported chips.
Chipping represents a simple way to develop a conventional military advantage
by those countries that regularly export military equipment. In the event of any
hostilities with recipients of their chipped equipment, that equipment could be in-
capacitated without having to use conventional force. This makes economic as well
as military sense. The legal and ethical aspects are a separate issue.
Many other computer weapons can be used in conjunction with or instead of
chipping, viruses, and hacking. These weapons have many different descriptive
names such as worms, trojan horses, and logic bombs and are commonplace in
today’s information society. They are all examples of computer operations that
may be adapted to suit the IW environment. A detailed description of all of these
techniques is beyond the scope of this chapter. Suffice to say that computer
weapons should be an integral part of any IW operations strategy. They should be
considered valid alternatives to conventional weapons both in offense and defense.
COUNTERING SUSTAINED TERRORIST IW TACTICS
Terrorism is, among other things, a weapon used by the weak against the strong.
The United States has moved into the 21st century as a preeminent, global power
in a period of tremendous flux within societies, among nations, and across states
and regions. Terrorism will accompany changes at each of these levels, as it has in
other periods of flux in the international environment. To the extent that the
United States continues to be engaged as a global power, terrorism will have the po-
tential to affect American interests directly and indirectly, from attacks on U.S. ter-
ritory (including low-probability but high-consequence “superterrorism” with
weapons of mass destruction) to attacks affecting the United States’ diplomatic and
economic ties abroad or the United States’ ability to maintain a forward military
presence or project power in times of crisis. The United States will also have a
unique, systemic interest in terrorism as a global problem (including acts of do-
mestic terrorism confined within state borders, which make up the bulk of terror-
ism worldwide) even where the United States is not directly or even indirectly
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
389

targeted. In one way or another, terrorism can affect the United States’ freedom of
action, not just with regard to national security strategy narrowly defined, but
across a range of compelling issues, from drugs and money laundering to informa-
tion and energy policy.
Many of the United States’ high-priority national objectives have been shaken
by the recent experience of terrorism. The Oklahoma bombing and the 9-11 World
Trade Center and Pentagon terrorist attacks struck at the United States’ sense of se-
curity within its borders. Attacks against U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia raise questions
about the United States’ strategy for presence and stability in an area of critical im-
portance for world energy supply. The bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya
and Tanzania and of the U.S.S. Cole in Yemen raise questions about the exposure
that comes with active engagement in world affairs and point to the risks of pri-
vately sponsored terrorism. The assassination of Prime Minister Rabin, the in-
creased campaign of suicide bombings in Israel, the death of Yasser Arafat, and the
refusal of the Bush administration to deal seriously with the Palestinians continues
to put the Middle East peace process in serious jeopardy, threatening a critical and
long-standing U.S. diplomatic objective. Elsewhere, terrorism has destabilized allies
(in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Turkey) and has rendered counternarcotics relation-
ships difficult (in Colombia and Mexico). Where societies and regions are funda-
mentally unstable, and where political outcomes are delicately poised, terrorism
will have a particular ability to affect strategic futures.
Overall Observations
Most contemporary analyses of terrorism focus on terrorist political violence as a
stand-alone phenomenon, without reference to its geopolitical and strategic context.
Similarly, counterterrorism policy is rarely discussed in terms of its place in broader
national security planning. Prior to the specter of superterrorism, using weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism, however horrible, never posed a threat to U.S. security.
With the important exception of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism still does
not pose a grave threat to America’s future as it does to many other societies around
the world. However, many types of terrorism do pose a threat to U.S. interests, from
homeland defense to regional security and the stability of the international system.
As a global power, the U.S. perspective on terrorism is bound to differ in substantial
ways from that of others, including allies such as Britain, France, and Israel, whose
experiences provide lessons, but not necessarily direction for U.S. counterterrorism
policy. In light of the preceding IW arsenal and tactics analysis of the military, cer-
tain overall sustained terrorist IW tactics observations stand out:
Terrorism
Geopolitics of terrorism
Counterterrorism versus new terrorism
390
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

U.S. Exposure
Comprehensive counterterrorism strategy
Terrorism
Terrorism is becoming a more diverse and lethal problem. Contemporary terrorism
occupies an expanded place on the conflict spectrum, from connections to drug
trafficking and crime to its use as an “asymmetric strategy” by state and non-state
adversaries in a war paradigm. For a variety of reasons, primarily the rise of religious
cults with transcendent agendas, but also the hardening of established political
groups, terrorism has become more lethal. With the potential for catastrophic ter-
rorism using weapons of mass destruction, lethality could increase dramatically.
Geopolitics of Terrorism
The geopolitics of terrorism are changing. Over the next decades, the prevailing
image of terrorism affecting U.S. interests as a problem emanating largely from the
Middle East is likely to be overtaken by a more diverse set of risks. The Balkans, the
former Soviet Union, and Latin America are set to emerge as significant sources of
terrorism aimed at or affecting U.S. civilian and military activities. Moreover, the
vast bulk of global terrorism will continue to be confined within the borders of af-
fected states. More anarchic futures in the third world could fuel this type of ter-
rorism, threatening America’s systemic interests as a global power and placing
constraints on the United States’ international engagement.
Counterterrorism Versus New Terrorism
Much counterterrorism experience is losing its relevance in light of the “new” ter-
rorism. Many established images of counterterrorism policy, especially the use of
force against state sponsors, are losing their relevance as traditional forms of ter-
rorist behavior and organization (largely a product of the ideological and national
liberation movements of the 1960s–1980s) give way to new patterns. The new ter-
rorism often lacks a detailed political agenda against which the use of violence can
be calibrated. It is therefore more lethal. It is less hierarchical in organization, more
highly networked, more diffuse in membership and sponsorship, and may aim at
disruption as well as destruction. The absence of clear-cut sponsorship, above all,
will complicate the task of deterrence and response. It will also compel a reorienta-
tion of policy to target nonstate sponsors and individual suspects.
U.S. Exposure
Foreign experts see U.S. exposure increasing but view the problem in narrower
terms. A survey of expert British, French, and Israeli perspectives yields a gloomy
outlook with regard to U.S. exposure to terrorist risks, which are widely seen as
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
391

increasing, particularly with regard to U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf. Policy mak-
ers and observers in these allied countries are not surprisingly focused on specific
national risks, few of which are analogous to risks facing the United States at home
and abroad. With the limited exception of France, which has a global and expedi-
tionary outlook in strategic terms, terrorist challenges are generally viewed in nar-
rower, but starker, terms. Notably, experts in all three countries share a degree of
skepticism about technology as a solution in counterterrorism.
Comprehensive Counterterrorism Strategy
A comprehensive counterterrorism strategy should have core, environment shaping,
and hedging components. Treating terrorism as one of many national security chal-
lenges suggests a multidimensional approach. Core, longer-term strategy must a
ddress the political, economic, and social roots of international terrorism; make de-
terrence relevant to non-state actors as well as state sponsors; and reduce the risk of
truly catastrophic terrorism using weapons of mass destruction. The environment-
shaping aspect aims to create conditions for successfully managing terrorist risks,
making terrorism more transparent, shrinking “zones of chaos,” harnessing key 
alliances to the counterterrorism effort, reducing U.S. exposure, and cutting off 
terrorism’s resources. Finally, the United States can hedge against inevitable terrorism
by hardening policies as well as targets and preparing to mitigate the effects of 
increasingly lethal terrorist acts.
Implications for Military Strategy and the U.S. Air Force
In many instances, air and space power will not be the best instruments in the U.S.
counterterrorism arsenal, and air power will rarely be used independently against
terrorism. However, air and space power can play a role in intelligence and covert
action. There will also be instances, as in the past, where air and space power will be
instruments of choice in the fight against terrorism. Moreover, terrorism and coun-
terterrorism policy are changing in ways that will significantly affect the future con-
tribution of air- and space-based instruments.
Events in Sigonella (Sicily) and Afghanistan as well as Operation El Dorado
Canyon may be key models for the future. Air power in the service of counterter-
rorism will include, but will also go beyond, the surveillance and punishment of state
sponsors. Deterrence and response will likely evolve in the direction of a more “per-
sonalized” approach, emphasizing the monitoring and attack of key nodes in ter-
rorist networks and the forcible apprehension of terrorist suspects—with or without
the cooperation of local states. Future demands on air power may be driven as much
by requirements for intercepting and extracting suspects as by the need to attack ter-
rorist training camps and strike regimes supporting the export of terrorism.
392
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Air and space power will help make terrorism (an inherently amorphous phe-
nomenon) more transparent. The ability to identify and to target terrorist-related
activity and to help expose terrorism and its sponsors to policy makers and inter-
national opinion will be key contributions of air- and space-based assets. As ter-
rorism becomes more diffuse and its sponsorship increasingly hazy, finding the
“smoking gun” will become more difficult but essential to determine strategies and
build a consensus for action. Space-based sensors, surveillance by Unmanned Aer-
ial Vehicles (UAVs), and signals intelligence (SIGINT) will facilitate the application
of air power and other instruments in the service of counterterrorism.
Gaining leverage in addressing the new terrorism will be a key strategic and
technical challenge. Future requirements for counterterrorism will be part of a
broader need to tailor air and space power to challenges posed by non-state actors,
including networks of individuals. At the same time, policy instruments, including
air and space power, will need to concentrate on detecting and preventing the use of
weapons of mass destruction by terrorists—whether as a stand-alone apocalyptic act
or as a low-tech delivery system in the hands of adversaries.
Much terrorism (and counterterrorism action) will focus on urban areas, with
strong political and operational constraints. Terrorism is increasingly an urban
phenomenon worldwide. One explanation for this is that the political fate of most
modern societies is determined by what happens in cities. Terrorists seeking to in-
fluence political conditions have many incentives to attack urban targets. Terrorists
with transcendental objectives will, similarly, find symbolic and vulnerable targets
in urban settings. The use of air power in a counterterrorist mode introduces the
more general problem of operating in an urban environment (the difficult Israeli
experience in Beirut and South Lebanon is instructive). Terrorists and their facili-
ties will be difficult to locate and target. Operations against them or to rescue
hostages will pose severe challenges for the use of air power, not least the risk of
placing uninvolved civilians in harm’s way. The viability of air power as an instru-
ment in such settings may depend on the capacity for discriminate targeting and
the use of less-than-lethal technologies.
Air power’s pervasiveness and speed are advantages in the face of transnational
and transregional terrorism. In an era in which terrorist acts may take place across
the globe and where sponsors cross national and regional lines, counterterrorism
strategies will become “horizontal” in character. Where terrorists and their spon-
sors can be identified and attacked with purpose, the global sight and reach of air-
and space-based assets will be valuable to national decision makers.
Air and space power will have a synergistic effect on other counterterrorism in-
struments. Air and space power can be used in concert with covert action, diplo-
macy, economic instruments, and joint military operations. The notion of “parallel
warfare,” developed in relation to attacks on infrastructure in war, will also be
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
393

relevant to counterterrorism operations. Operations using a range of instruments
can be designed to act, in parallel, on terrorist supporters, terrorist infrastructure
and networks, and the terrorists themselves.
DEALING WITH RANDOM TERRORIST IW
During the 1970s and 1980s, political extremism and terrorism frequently focused
on “national liberation” and economic issues. The collapse of the Soviet bloc and
the end of its covert funding and encouragement of terrorism led to a decline in the
militant and violent left-wing terrorist groups that were a feature of the age.
The 1990s through the present have seen the development of a new terrorism:
random terrorist IW. This is not to say that state-backed terrorism has ceased, but
rather that the spectrum of terrorism has widened. This new extremism is fre-
quently driven by religious fervor, is transnational, sanctions extreme violence, and
may often be millenialist. The new terrorism may seek out military or government
targets, but it also seeks out symbolic civilian targets, and the victims have mostly
been innocent civilians (Alfred P. Murrah Building, Oklahoma City; World Trade
Center, New York; AMIA Headquarters, Buenos Aires; etc.).
Growing concern about this new terrorism has been paralleled by concern about
the employment of the new information and communication technologies (ICTs).
ICTs offer a new dimension for political extremists and terrorists. They allow the dif-
fusion of C2, they allow boundless new opportunities for communication, and they
allow the players to target the information stores, processes, and communications of
their opponents. The sophistication of the modern nation-state, and its dependency
on computer-based ICTs make the state ever more vulnerable.
The use of ICTs to influence, modify, disrupt, or damage a nation-state, its in-
stitutions, or population by influencing the media or by subversion has been called
“netwar.” The full range of weapons in the cyberspace armory can be employed in
netwar—from propaganda campaigns at one level to interference with databases
and networks at the other. What particularly distinguishes netwar from other forms
of war is that it targets information and communications and may be used to alter
thinking or disrupt planned actions. In this sense, it can be distinguished from ear-
lier forms of warfare—economic wars that target the means of production and po-
litical wars that target leadership and government.
Netwar is therefore of particular interest to those engaged in nonmilitary war
and those operating at the sub-state level. Clearly, nation-states might also consider
it as an adjunct to military war or as an option prior to moving on to military war.
So far, however, it appears to be of greater interest to extremist advocacy groups
and terrorists. Because there are no physical limits or boundaries, netwar has been
adopted by groups who operate across great distances or transnationally. The
394
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

growth of such groups, and their growing powers in relation to those of nation-
states, suggests an evolving power-based relationship for both. War in the future is
more likely to be waged between such groups and states rather than between states.
Most modern adversaries of nation-states, in the realm of low-intensity con-
flict—such as international terrorists, single-issue extremists, and ethnic and reli-
gious extremists—are organized in networks, although their leadership may
sometimes be hierarchical. Law enforcement and security agencies therefore often
have difficulty in engaging in low-intensity conflict against such networks because
they are ill-suited to do so. Their doctrine, training, and modus operandi have, all
too often, been predicated on combating a hierarchy of command like their own.
Only now are low-intensity conflict and terrorism recognized as strategic
threats to nation-states, and countries that, until very recently, thought terrorism
was something that happened elsewhere have become victims themselves. The
Tokyo subway attack by the Aum Shinriko, the Oklahoma City bombing and the 
9-11 terrorist attacks, would have been unthinkable a generation ago. Not only was
the civil population unprepared, but so was the law enforcement population, de-
spite clear warning signs that such attacks were in the offing.
Cyberspace is becoming a new arena for political extremists: the potential for
physical conflict to be replaced by attacks on information infrastructures has
caused states to rethink their concepts of warfare, threats, and national assets at a
time when information is recognized as a national asset. The adoption of new in-
formation technologies and the use of new communication media, such as the In-
ternet, create vulnerabilities that can be exploited by individuals, organizations,
and states.
Also, the arrival of the Internet has provided the first forum in history for all the
disaffected to gather in one place to exchange views and reinforce prejudices. It is
hardly surprising, for example, that the right-wing militias’ favorite method of
communication is email and that forums on the Internet are the source of many
wild conspiracy theories that drive the media.
Preeminent among the extremists and terrorist groupings who have entered cy-
berspace faster and more enthusiastically than others, are the far right, that is white
supremacists and neo-Nazis and radical Islamists. Others, such as eco-extremists
and the far left appear to be slower in seizing the opportunities available.
What characterizes these two groups are their transnational natures. The far
right is increasingly active in the United States and Europe, but, in contrast to its ide-
ological roots in the 1920s and 1930s, it seeks now to unite a white Anglo-Saxon, or
Europe-originating, entity in a rear-guard action to oppose centralized democratic
government and return to some imagined past world in which an armed, racially
pure, white man can live untroubled by the police, the Internal Revenue Service, and
the world banking system. The Islamist diaspora, now spread worldwide, seeks a re-
turn to divine-ruled states (or even one transnational state) in which all Muslims will
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
395

live under the norms and laws of the Saudi Arabian peninsula in the first and second
centuries of the Common Era. These types of organizations make them ideal users
of networks and proponents of netwar. Their ideas and their use of cyberspace will
be further discussed in Chapter 15.
Although the use of ICTs to enhance C2 and enhance communication is ap-
parent among Islamist extremists and among the militia movement and far right in
America, it is less so among far right and other extremists in other parts of the
world. This clearly reflects the more widespread ICT access in North America. Fears
by Western governments that their national infrastructures may be a target for IW
or cyberterrorism may be well founded, but the evidence so far is that sub-state
groups at least use ICTs mainly for propaganda, secure communications, intelli-
gence gathering, and funds management.
One observer noted that the Internet has not replaced other communication
media for the far right and that its largest use in this regard has been to advertise the
sale of non-Internet-related propaganda, such as books, audiotapes, and videos.
Nor has the Internet led to an increase in mobilization. The Seattle-based Coalition
For Human Dignity observed that far right events in the United States, which were
heavily promoted on the Internet only, were failures.
For some on the American far right, the Internet has become an end in itself.
Surfing the Net has replaced real action. It is a measure of how degenerate and weak
the U.S. movement has become that some people actually think this is a good thing.
Not only do individuals want risk-free revolution, they now want people-free revo-
lution. Here lies the great danger of the computer for everyone who uses it. It allows
individuals to spend their lives interacting with a machine rather than with people.
However, it does not pay to be complacent; extremists and terrorists are in-
creasingly IT literate. Unless law enforcement and national security agencies can
move quickly, they will leave national infrastructures defenseless. For example,
these terror networks understand the Internet and know that law enforcement
agencies lag far behind in both skills and available technologies.
Therefore, what is significant for the far right and its use of the Internet is that
it possesses the potential to offer the relatively small numbers of people involved a
means to communicate, develop a sense of common purpose, and create a virtual
home symbolically. The Internet combines both intimacy and remoteness. These
properties make it uniquely suitable for maintaining relationships among groups
that are prone to attrition, because forms of association can be established at a so-
cial and geographical distance.
Although some futurists warn of an electronic Pearl Harbor, the reality is that
terrorists have not yet resorted to strategic IW. What is apparent, however, is that
warfare is shifting toward attacking civilian targets and that sub-state terrorists and
other extremists are increasingly targeting civilian infrastructures. Increasingly, the
perpetrators and the victims of netwar will be from the civilian sphere. It is there-
396
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

fore the civilian infrastructure that is the most vulnerable; the military can protect
its own infrastructure, despite media reports that it is vulnerable and a constant vic-
tim of hacking.
Governments are becoming increasingly concerned about protecting their own
national infrastructures, but global connectivity has grown to such an extent that it
is now possible to talk only of a global informational infrastructure. There is only a
global information infrastructure. There is no way to draw a line around the con-
tinental United States and say that the information infrastructure belongs to the
United States. This is true because there is no way to sever the United States from
the information infrastructure that connects the rest of the world. What that means
is that the U.S. infrastructure is accessible not only to their friends around the
world but also to their potential foes. It is just as easy now to engage in a cyberat-
tack from Tehran as it is from Pomeroy, Ohio.
Countering Sustained Rogue IW
Countering sustained rogue IW is envisioned as a new dimension of IW, bringing
rogue conflict into the Information Age. Rogue IW offers combatants the ability to
execute asymmetrical attacks that have nonlinear effects against an adversary. By
targeting or exploiting information and information processes, an attacker can use
limited resources to reap disproportionate gains. Furthermore, rogue IW offers
weaker enemies (even at the sub-state level) a strategic alternative to attrition—an
attractive feature, especially when facing an opponent with significantly stronger
conventional forces. Such potential adversaries could perpetrate a rogue IW attack
against the United States, using relatively limited resources, exploiting the U.S. re-
liance on information systems. Targets of such attacks might include C2 networks,
satellite systems [5], and even the power grids of the continental United States.
Such an attack could potentially have a strategic impact on the national security of
the United States.
In contrast, terrorism has been used by states and sub-state groups for millen-
nia. As an instrument to pursue political or social objectives where the user lacks
the strength or the political wherewithal to use conventional military means, ter-
rorism has been especially attractive. The intended target of a terrorist act goes be-
yond the immediate victims. Terrorists create a climate of fear by exploiting the
information dissemination channels of its target population, reaching many by
physically affecting only a few. The United States experienced a tragic example of
this effect in the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut, the USS Cole
in Yemen in 2000, and the 9-11-2001 terrorist attacks, where a small terrorist
group, clearly weaker than the U.S. military, nevertheless executed an effective
strategic attack against the United States.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
397

The problem of rogue IW is not lack of capabilities, but of management and or-
ganization. The capabilities are out there already; they just are not being tapped.
This problem has only recently emerged as a potentially new warfare area for most
defense planners. The problem of terrorism, on the other hand, has been in the
headlines and in the social consciousness for decades, especially since the techno-
logical advance of intercontinental flight. This section briefly examines these two
phenomena conceptually, operationally, and organizationally, seeking commonali-
ties. If comparisons are substantiated as more than circumstantial, then the lessons
that might be applied to rogue IW defense from successes and failures of 33 years
of countering terrorism should be examined closely. Within the context of these
comparisons, this section will also attempt to ascertain whether there is an emer-
gent structure or organization that suggests a correct approach to countering sus-
tained rogue IW.
The bombing of the Murrah Building in Oklahoma City and the 9-11 terrorist
attacks were two of many major events to remind the military that the continental
United States no longer offers sanctuary from terrorism. Geographical borders
probably will never offer sanctuary from rogue IW attacks. The military should or-
ganize and prepare for potential rogue IW attacks against them without necessar-
ily having a formal definition and without having to experience a massive
information attack. Establishing a rogue IW focal point involves a partial framing
of the problem, at least  identifying key contributors to its solution. A wide-scale in-
formation attack could involve systems under the responsibility of agencies across
the government and even the commercial sector. A solution will draw on contri-
butions from areas broader than simply military and law enforcement. In the case
of the Oklahoma City bombing, organizations such as Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Firearms (ATF) and the FBI investigated the incident, and the Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency (FEMA) responded with crisis mitigation using both
federal and local resources. In a “digital Oklahoma City,” who would take FEMA’s
place for crisis mitigation? Will local support be available? At present, no frame-
work coordinates a response to rogue IW attacks, and establishing an ex post facto
framework in response to an attack is unwise.
Clearly, rogue IW defense will demand many resources throughout the federal
government. This does not, however, justify creation of an all-encompassing body
tasked with jurisdiction and execution over all aspects of rogue IW. For example,
terrorism policies under President Reagan suggested that such an organized U.S.
counterterrorism agency (whether newly created or placed within an existing
agency) would not have been feasible. This solution fails to take into account the
nature of terrorism and the influence of bureaucratic politics. Terrorism is a com-
plex phenomenon requiring a comprehensive response. No agency within the U.S.
government possesses the vast array of capabilities needed to combat terrorism ef-
fectively. It would be difficult, if not impossible, to create a single department with
398
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the needed jurisdiction to control the U.S. response to terrorism and would lead to
even greater policy and process problems.
These problems are also inherent in organizing for rogue IW defense (IW-D).
Furthermore, the distributed nature of the problem implies a distributed response
from the agencies owning the appropriate capabilities. This distributed response,
however, should be overseen by a higher office so that the left hand knows what the
right hand is doing and so these complex activities are coordinated. An IW-D Over-
sight Office should be endowed with an independent budget and tasking authority
to coordinate the decision-making process, identify capabilities needed to respond,
and inform the agencies that own the capabilities as to their defensive rogue IW
roles. Staffing this office would be “point members” of the represented agencies,
who would then coordinate requirements within their respective agencies. This
type of organization resembles, at a much broader range, the joint staff of the DoD,
but with a budget as well as tasking authority for IW-D. Furthermore, the office
could solicit and coordinate intelligence requirements from the various members of
the intelligence community.
DoD has also articulated a similar concept for an office within the Executive
Office of the President, organized for countering terrorism, as a potential focal
point for the oversight of the U.S. antiterrorist program. This office would be a per-
manent body with a White House perspective; such a staff could monitor and co-
ordinate activities of the line agency and departments, identify needed capabilities,
identify special resources that might be mobilized if an international incident oc-
curs, pull together current intelligence and ongoing analysis and research efforts,
identify terrorist incidents, develop scenarios, and formulate plans. It would see
that the necessary resources and capabilities are there when they are needed. In an
actual crisis, it could function as a small battle staff for decision makers.
An Executive IW-D Oversight Office would be in a prime position to identify
and coordinate the investigative agencies, defense organizations, and all elements of
the intelligence community that would be in positions to recognize and respond to
attack. An IW-D Oversight Office might be led by a director with cabinet rank and
a seat on the National Security Council (NSC). Such an office should also interact
with the commercial sector, reflecting the extent to which commercial interests
would be affected in IW and the contribution industry can make to solutions. Such
interaction with the private sector might not be possible with existing agencies be-
cause of the baggage that extant agencies might bring to the table.
In addition to reorganizing the bureaucracy, an IW-D Oversight Office might
reorganize priorities. Response strategies should not focus on protection as the
only priority. One-hundred percent protection of an infrastructure is virtually im-
possible. Detection capabilities must drastically improve, along with crisis response
and mitigation. These capabilities are fundamental to any indications and warnings
system and are especially crucial in IW because protection is so fluid. Finally, not all
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
399

crisis response and mitigation is technical. A policy for public awareness and edu-
cation in the event of an information crisis (regionally coordinated in an organiza-
tion similar to FEMA) might stave off panic, alert the public to measures they could
take to assist, and lessen immediate public pressure on government officials to “do
something.” Such pressure in the history of countering terrorism has resulted in
hasty responses of overbearing lawmaking and bloody reprisals.
The past 37 years have shown the United States the paradox that “low-
intensity conflict” has posed to the world’s mightiest military power. However, it
is as yet unclear exactly where rogue IW falls in the spectrum of violence. As stated
in the beginning, analogies can be useful, but at a certain point, relying on them
for analysis becomes harmful. Although the organizational issues of rogue IW
defense and counterterrorism might be similar, this similarity might fail for
solutions to other common issues. The unfortunate lesson of terrorism is that as
long as the United States is unwilling to cede their liberty to prevent violence,
there are no total solutions.
What the United States has achieved based on the lessons of terrorism is im-
proved crisis control and policies that demonstrate an awareness of the complex
nature of terrorism: its ability to affect any sector or jurisdiction of a free society
and the implications that come with those sobering realities. IW has yet to emerge
from its dogmatic stage and still offers more slogans than lessons, yet in retrospect
of 37 years of fighting terrorism in a concentrated national and international effort,
it is unclear whether an electronic Pearl Harbor would elicit a federal response
other than the ad hoc overreactions and short-term task forces that have charac-
terized U.S. counterterrorism policy. Such knee-jerk reactions have the potential to
do much greater harm in IW than they have in countering terrorism: heavy-
handed, short-sighted, and hasty government measures in the information space
might have unintended consequences ranging from stymied economic develop-
ment to unconstitutional regulation to disastrous technical failures. Preempting a
rogue IW attack with a multiagency policy of coordination could save the United
States from their adversaries, and it might even save them from themselves.
Fighting Against Random Rogue IW
History shows that terrorism more often than not has little political impact and
that when it has an effect, it is often the opposite of the one desired by the terror-
ists. Terrorism in the 1990s and the present time is no exception. The 1991 assas-
sination of Rajiv Gandhi as he campaigned to retake the prime ministership
neither hastened nor inhibited the decline of India’s Congress Party. Hamas’ and
Hezbollah’s stepped-up terrorism in Israel undoubtedly influenced the outcome
of Israeli elections, and it achieved its immediate objective of setting back the
peace process on which Palestine Authority President Yasser Arafat had gambled
400
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

his future. Is a hard-line Likud government really in these groups’ best interests?
On the other side, Yigal Amir, the right-wing orthodox Jewish student who assas-
sinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1996 because he disapproved of the peace
agreement with the Palestinians, might well have helped elect Rabin’s dovish
second-in-command, Shimon Peres to a full term had the Muslim terrorists not
made Israeli security an issue again.
Terrorists caused disruption and destabilization in other parts of the world,
such as Sri Lanka, where economic decline has accompanied the war between the
government and the Tamil Tigers. However, in Israel and in Spain, where Basque
extremists have been staging attacks for decades, terrorism has had no effect on the
economy. Even in Algeria, where terrorism has exacted the highest toll in human
lives, Muslim extremists have made little headway since 1993, when many pre-
dicted the demise of the unpopular military regime.
Some argue that terrorism must be effective because certain terrorist leaders
have become president or prime minister of their country. In those cases, however,
the terrorists had first forsworn violence and adjusted to the political process. Fi-
nally, the common wisdom holds that terrorism can spark a war or, at least, prevent
peace. That is true, but only where there is much inflammable material: as in Sara-
jevo in 1914, so in the Middle East and elsewhere today. Nor can one ever say with
certainty that the conflagration would not have occurred sooner or later in any case.
Nevertheless, terrorism’s prospects, often overrated by the media, the public, and
some politicians, are improving as its destructive potential increases. This has to do
both with the rise of groups and individuals that practice or might take up terrorism
and with the weapons available to them. The past few decades have witnessed the
birth of dozens of aggressive movements espousing varieties of nationalism, religious
fundamentalism, fascism, and apocalyptic millenarianism, from Hindu nationalists
in India to neofascists in Europe and the developing world, to the Branch Davidian
cult in Waco, Texas. The earlier fascists believed in military aggression and engaged
in a huge military buildup, but such a strategy has become too expensive even for su-
perpowers. Now, mail-order catalogs tempt militants with readily available, far
cheaper, unconventional as well as conventional weapons—the poor man’s nuclear
bomb, Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani called them.
In addition to nuclear arms, the weapons of mass destruction include biologi-
cal agents and man-made chemical compounds that attack the nervous system,
skin, or blood. Governments have engaged in the production of chemical weapons
for almost a century and in the production of nuclear and biological weapons for
many decades, during which time proliferation has been continuous and access
ever easier. The means of delivery (ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, and aerosols)
have also become far more effective. While in the past missiles were deployed only
in wars between states, recently they have played a role in civil wars in Afghanistan
and Yemen. Use by terrorist groups would be but one step further.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
401

Until the 1970s, most observers believed that stolen nuclear material consti-
tuted the greatest threat in the escalation of terrorist weapons, but many now think
the danger could lie elsewhere. An April 2000 DoD report says that “most terrorist
groups do not have the financial and technical resources to acquire nuclear weapons
but could gather materials to make radiological dispersion devices and some bio-
logical and chemical agents.” Some groups have state sponsors that possess or can
obtain weapons of the latter three types. Terrorist groups themselves have investi-
gated the use of poisons since the 19th century. The Aum Shinrikyo cult staged a
poison gas attack in March 1995 in the Tokyo subway; exposure to the nerve gas
sarin killed 10 people and injured 5,000. Other, more amateurish attempts in the
United States and abroad to experiment with chemical substances and biological
agents for use in terrorism have involved the toxin that causes botulism, the poiso-
nous protein rycin (twice), sarin (twice), bubonic plague bacteria, typhoid bacteria,
hydrogen cyanide, vx (another nerve gas), and possibly the Ebola virus.
To Use or Not to Use?
If terrorists have used chemical weapons only once and nuclear material never, to
some extent the reasons are technical. The scientific literature is replete with the
technical problems inherent in the production, manufacture, storage, and delivery
of each of the three classes of unconventional weapons.
The manufacture of nuclear weapons is not that simple, nor is delivery to their
target. Nuclear material, of which a limited supply exists, is monitored by the UN-
affiliated International Atomic Energy Agency. Only governments can legally pro-
cure it, so even in this age of proliferation, investigators could trace those abetting
nuclear terrorists without great difficulty. Monitoring can overlook a more primi-
tive nuclear weapon: nonfissile but radioactive nuclear material. Iranian agents in
Turkey, Kazakhstan, and elsewhere are known to have tried to buy such material
originating in the former Soviet Union.
Chemical agents are much easier to produce and obtain, but not so easy to keep
safely in a stable condition; their dispersal depends largely on climatic factors. The
terrorists behind the 1995 attack in Tokyo chose a convenient target where crowds
of people gather, but their sarin was apparently dilute. The biological agents are far
and away the most dangerous: they could kill hundreds of thousands of people,
whereas chemicals might kill only thousands. They are relatively easy to procure,
but storage and dispersal are even trickier than for nerve gases. The risk of conta-
mination for the people handling them is high, and many of the most lethal bacte-
ria and spores do not survive well outside the laboratory. Aum Shinrikyo reportedly
released anthrax bacteria (among the most toxic agents known) on two occasions
from a building in Tokyo without harming anyone.
402
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Given the technical difficulties, terrorists are probably less likely to use nuclear
devices than chemical weapons and least likely to attempt to use biological
weapons. Difficulties could be overcome, however, and the choice of unconven-
tional weapons will in the end come down to the specialties of the terrorists and
their access to deadly substances.
The political arguments for shunning unconventional weapons are equally
weighty. The risk of detection and subsequent severe retaliation or punishment is
great, and although this may not deter terrorists, it may put off their sponsors and
suppliers. Terrorists eager to use weapons of mass destruction may alienate at least
some supporters, not so much because the dissenters hate the enemy less or have
greater moral qualms, but because they think the use of such violence counterpro-
ductive. Unconventional weapon strikes could render whole regions uninhabitable
for long periods. Use of biological arms poses the additional risk of an uncontrol-
lable epidemic. And although terrorism seems to be tending toward more indis-
criminate killing and mayhem, terrorists may draw the line at weapons of
superviolence likely to harm both foes and large numbers of relatives and friends,
for example, Kurds in Turkey, Tamils in Sri Lanka, or Arabs in Israel.
Furthermore, traditional terrorism rests on the heroic gesture, on the willing-
ness to sacrifice one’s own life as proof of one’s idealism. There is not much hero-
ism in spreading botulism or anthrax. Because most terrorist groups are as
interested in publicity as in violence, and because publicity for a mass poisoning or
nuclear bombing would be far more unfavorable than for a focused conventional
attack, only terrorists who do not care about publicity will even consider the appli-
cations of unconventional weapons.
Broadly speaking, terrorists will not engage in overkill if their traditional
weapons (the submachine gun and the conventional bomb) are sufficient to con-
tinue the struggle and achieve their aims, but the decision to use terrorist violence
is not always a rational one; if it were, there would be much less terrorism, because
terrorist activity seldom achieves its aims. What if, after years of armed struggle and
the loss of many of their militants, terrorist groups see no progress? Despair could
lead to giving up the armed struggle or to suicide. It might also lead to a last des-
perate attempt to defeat the hated enemy by arms not tried before. Their only hope
lies in their despair.
Post Apocalypse
Terrorist groups traditionally contain strong quasi-religious, fanatical elements,
for only total certainty of belief (or total moral relativism) provides justification
for taking lives. That element was strong among the prerevolutionary Russian ter-
rorists and the Romanian fascists of the Iron Guard in the 1930s, as it is among
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
403

today’s Tamil Tigers. Fanatical Muslims consider the killing of the enemies of God
a religious commandment and believe that the secularists at home as well as the
State of Israel will be annihilated because it is Allah’s will. Aum Shinrikyo doctrine
held that murder could help both victim and murderer to salvation. Sectarian fa-
naticism has surged during the past decade, and, in general, the smaller the group,
the more fanatical the group.
As humankind survived the end of the second millennium of the Christian era,
apocalyptic movements failed to rise to the occasion. Nevertheless, the belief in the
impending end of the world is probably as old as history, but for reasons not en-
tirely clear, sects and movements preaching the end of the world gain influence to-
ward the end of a century, and all the more at the close of a millennium. Most of the
preachers of doom do not advocate violence, and some even herald a renaissance,
the birth of a new kind of man and woman. Others, however, believe that the
sooner the reign of the Antichrist is established, the sooner this corrupt world will
be destroyed and the new heaven and earth foreseen by St. John in the Book of Rev-
elation, Nostradamus, and a host of other prophets will be realized.
Extremist millenarians would like to give history a push, helping create world-
ending havoc replete with universal war, famine, pestilence, and other scourges.
Those who subscribe to such beliefs number in the millions. They have their own
subcultures, produce books and CDs by the thousands, and have built temples and
communities of whose existence most of their contemporaries are unaware. They
have substantial financial means at their disposal. Although the more extreme
apocalyptic groups are potentially terrorist, intelligence services have generally
overlooked their activities; hence, the shock over the subway attack in Tokyo and
Rabin’s assassination, to name but two recent events.
Apocalyptic elements crop up in contemporary intellectual fashions and ex-
tremist politics as well. For instance, extreme environmentalists, particularly the so-
called restoration ecologists, believe that environmental disasters will destroy
civilization as they know it (no loss, in their view) and regard the vast majority of
human beings as expendable. From such beliefs and values, it is not a large step to
engaging in acts of terrorism to expedite the process. If the eradication of smallpox
upset ecosystems, why not restore the balance by bringing back the virus? The
motto of Chaos International, one of many journals in this field, is a quotation
from Hassan I. Sabbah, the master of the Assassins, a medieval sect whose members
killed Crusaders and others in a religious ecstasy: everything is permitted, the mas-
ter says. The premodern world and postmodernism meet at this point.
Future Shock
Scanning the contemporary scene, one encounters a bewildering multiplicity of
terrorist and potentially terrorist groups and sects. The practitioners of terrorism,
404
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

up to the present time, were nationalists and anarchists, extremists of the left and
the right, but the new age has brought new inspiration for the users of violence.
In the past, terrorism was almost always the province of groups of militants that
had the backing of political forces such as the Irish and Russian social revolution-
ary movements of 1900. In the future, terrorists will be individuals or like-minded
people working in very small groups (like the 9-11 terrorists), on the pattern of the
technology-hating Unabomber, who apparently worked alone sending out parcel
bombs for over two decades, or the perpetrators of the 1995 bombing of the federal
building in Oklahoma City. An individual may possess the technical competence to
steal, buy, or manufacture the weapons he or she needs for a terrorist purpose; he
or she may or may not require help from one or two others in delivering these
weapons to the designated target. The ideologies such individuals and minigroups
espouse are likely to be even more aberrant than those of larger groups. Terrorists
working alone or in very small groups will be more difficult to detect (like the 9-11
terrorists) unless they make a major mistake or are discovered by accident.
Thus, at one end of the scale, the lone rogue terrorist has appeared, and at the
other, state-sponsored terrorism is quietly flourishing in these days when wars of
aggression have become too expensive and too risky. As we begin a new century,
terrorism is becoming the substitute for the great wars of the 1800s and early 1900s.
Proliferation of the weapons of mass destruction does not mean most terrorist
groups are likely to use them in the foreseeable future, but some almost certainly
will, in spite of all the reasons not to. Governments, however ruthless, ambitious,
and ideologically extreme, will be reluctant to pass on unconventional weapons to
terrorist groups over which they cannot have full control; the governments may be
tempted to use such arms themselves in a first strike, but it is more probable that
they would employ them in blackmail than in actual warfare. Individuals and small
groups, however, will not be bound by the constraints that hold back even the most
reckless government.
Society has also become vulnerable to a new kind of terrorism in which the de-
structive power of both the individual terrorist and terrorism as a tactic are infi-
nitely greater. Earlier terrorists could kill kings or high officials, but others only too
eager to inherit their mantle quickly stepped in. The advanced societies of today are
more dependent every day on the electronic storage [6], retrieval, analysis, and
transmission of information. Defense, the police, banking, trade, transportation,
scientific work, and a large percentage of the government’s and the private sector’s
transactions are online. That exposes enormous vital areas of national life to mis-
chief or sabotage by any computer hacker, and concerted sabotage could render a
country unable to function. Hence, the growing speculation about infoterrorism
and cyberwarfare.
An unnamed U.S. intelligence official has boasted that with $6 billion and 70
capable hackers, he could shut down America. What he could achieve, a terrorist
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
405

could too. There is little secrecy in the wired society, and protective measures have
proved of limited value: teenage hackers have penetrated highly secret systems in
every field. The possibilities for creating chaos are almost unlimited even now, and
vulnerability will almost certainly increase. Terrorists’ targets will change: why as-
sassinate a politician or indiscriminately kill people when an attack on electronic
switching will produce far more dramatic and lasting results? The switch at the
Culpeper, Virginia, headquarters of the Federal Reserve’s electronic network, which
handles all federal funds and transactions, would be an obvious place to hit. If the
new terrorism directs its energies toward IW, its destructive power will be expo-
nentially greater than any it wielded in the past—greater even than it would be with
biological and chemical weapons.
Still, the vulnerability of states and societies will be of less interest to terrorists
than to ordinary criminals and organized crime, disgruntled employees of big cor-
porations, and, of course, spies and hostile governments. Electronic thieves, whether
engaged in credit card fraud or industrial espionage, are part of the system, using it
rather than destroying it; its destruction would cost them their livelihood. Politically
motivated terrorist groups, above all separatists bent on establishing states of their
own, have limited aims. The Kurdish Workers Party, the IRA, the Basque ETA, and
the Tamil Tigers want to weaken their enemies and compel them to make far-
reaching concessions, but they cannot realistically hope to destroy them. It is also
possible, however, that terrorist groups on the verge of defeat or acting on apoca-
lyptic visions may not hesitate to apply all destructive means at their disposal.
All that leads us well beyond terrorism as has the military has known it. New de-
finitions and new terms may have to be developed for new realities, and intelligence
services and policy makers must learn to discern the significant differences among
terrorists’ motivations, approaches, and aims. The Bible says that when the Old Tes-
tament hero Samson brought down the temple, burying himself along with the
Philistines in the ruins, “the dead which he slew at his death were more than he slew
in his life.” The Samsons of a society have been relatively few in all ages. But with the
new technologies and the changed nature of the world in which they operate, a
handful of angry Samsons and disciples of apocalypse would suffice to cause havoc.
Chances are that of 100 attempts at terrorist superviolence, 99 would fail, but the
single successful one could claim many victims, as on 9-11, do more material dam-
age, and unleash far greater panic than anything the world has yet experienced.
The Menace of Amateur Rogue IW
According to DoD government analysts, with a member base of 79,000, the amateur
rogue CyberArmy (hackers) may have the biggest armament the Net has ever seen,
rallying to take down Web sites that “abuse” the World Wide Web—and removing
406
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

power from governments. Some missions include hunting for, and taking down,
child pornography Web sites.
The CyberArmy wants to regulate the Internet so that the government doesn’t
come in and regulate it. The CyberArmy started off as a small group of advocates
promoting free speech and Internet deregulation. Growing to a full size army of
“Netizens,” the group has since shifted its views—because of privacy issues and
government intervention. Now they believe in Internet self-regulation. If you
deregulate, you end up with anarchy. In other words, the CyberArmy is set up just
like a game. Members have to solve puzzles (which is usually breaking codes and
encryption) to move on to the next commanding level.
Commanding ranks give a member more power and involvement in the orga-
nization’s missions. Some missions include hunting for, and taking down, child
pornography Web sites. The commanding structure begins at the bottom with
troopers, rising through the ranks of 2nd Lieutenant, Lieutenant, Captain, Major,
Lt. Colonel, Colonel, General, and Marshal. Each division within CyberArmy has
its own job to complete, with one of the divisions devoted solely to child pornog-
raphy Web sites.
This division has taken down about four dozen child porn sites in the last few
years, and was also instrumental in bringing down the Wonderland Club child porn
ring recently. The group is an advocate of ordinary citizens policing the Internet. Be-
cause the Internet is global, governments aren’t the right authority to police it. 
Hacktivists
In defending the “hacktivist” title that the CyberArmy group has been branded
with, the group doesn’t believe in defacing a Web site just for the fun of it. If a site
is defaced it’s usually in the form of protest.
The group was a bit more “hackerish” in 2000—they were considered an ama-
teur menace for a time. However, they’re moving away from that. There are more
social minded people on the Net now, which is good. Many people join CyberArmy
because they are sick and tired of child pornography and Net censorship. Cyber-
Army’s mission is to prove that there are good hackers, not just Script Kiddies. The
CyberArmy site also posts discussion boards and Internet tools for users and has a
section dedicated to teaching network security.
SUMMARY
The problem of defending against an IW arsenal and tactics is real. U.S. citizens and
the organizations that provide them with the vital services they need can find no
sanctuary from these attacks. The low cost of mounting these attacks has enlarged
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
407

the field of potential adversaries and complicated efforts to collect intelligence and
array U.S. military defenses. The consequences of a well-planned and coordinated
attack by a relatively sophisticated foe could be serious. Even the threat of such an
attack or digital blackmail is a distinct possibility. How the public will respond to
the threat of IW infrastructure attacks or to actual attacks is unclear but will be a
major determinant of future policy and actions.
This situation is getting worse with the rapid proliferation of information tech-
nology and know-how. U.S. citizens are becoming increasingly dependent on au-
tomation in every aspect of their lives. As information technology becomes an
essential part of the way organizations and individuals create products and provide
services, the need for interconnectivity and interoperability increases. With this in-
creased need for exchanges of information (and products), vulnerabilities increase.
Finally, the increased reliance on commercial off-the-shelf products or commercial
services makes it more and more difficult for organizations and individuals to con-
trol their own security environment.
Given this situation, you need to focus on two goals. First, you need to find a
way to protect yourself against catastrophic events. Second, you need to build a
firm foundation upon which you can make steady progress by continually raising
the cost of mounting an attack and mitigating the expected damage of the IW arse-
nal and tactics of the military. The conclusions are as follows.
Conclusions
Information warfare (IW) has become virtually synonymous with the revolu-
tion in information technologies and its potential to transform military strate-
gies and capabilities.
There is a growing consensus that national prosperity, if not survival, depends
on one’s ability to effectively leverage information technology. Without being
able to defend vital information, information processes, and information sys-
tems, such a strategy is doomed to failure.
IW is often thought of as being defined by a particular target set of decision
makers, information, information processes, and information systems.
The battlespace associated with IW has been a constantly expanding one, mov-
ing far beyond traditional military situations.
In some quarters, IW has even been associated with the leveraging of informa-
tion technologies to achieve greater effectiveness and efficiency. This has
stretched the meaning of IW to the breaking point and has sowed more confu-
sion than enlightenment. For this reason, this treatment of the subject uses the
term information strategies to refer to the recognition and utilization of infor-
mation and information technologies as an instrument of national power that
can be independent of, or complementary to, military presence and operations.
408
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The scope, or battlespace, of information warfare and strategy (IWS) can be de-
fined by the players and three dimensions of the nature of their interactions,
the level of their interactions, and the arena of their interactions.
Nation-states or combinations of nation-states are not the only players. Non-
state actors (including political, ethnic, and religious groups; organized crime;
international and transnational organizations; and even individuals empow-
ered by information technology) are able to engage in information attacks and
to develop information strategies to achieve their desired ends.
The term war has been used so loosely in recent times (War on Poverty, War on
Drugs, War on Crime) that it should be no surprise that IW has evolved over
the past several years to become a catch-all term that encompasses many dis-
parate activities, some of which have long been associated with competition,
conflict, and warfare, and others that are of more recent origin. These include
activities that range from propaganda campaigns (including Media War), to at-
tacks (both physical and nonphysical) against commanders, their information
sources, and the means of communicating with their forces.
Under this rather large umbrella that has become known as IW, one can find
activities long associated with military concepts and operations, including de-
ception, command and control warfare (C2W), and psychological operations
(psyops).
Technological advances have added new forms such as electronic warfare (EW)
and “hacker warfare.”
The term defensive information warfare (IW-D) is used here to refer to all ac-
tions taken to defend against information attacks, that is, attacks on decision
makers, the information and information-based processes they rely on, and
their means of communicating their decisions.
Strictly speaking, because these attacks can be launched during peacetime at
nonmilitary targets by nonmilitary groups, both foreign and domestic, the term
IW-D should be IWS-D. However, IW-D is currently in wide use.
This overview of IW-D does not attempt to deal with the problems of defend-
ing against all of the different kinds of information attacks, but rather focuses
its attention on the subset of IW that involves attacks against information in-
frastructure, including what has become known as “hacker warfare” and in its
more serious form, “digital warfare.”
An Agenda for Action
The cornerstone of the military’s efforts to combat IW will be the efforts of all global
military organizations to protect their own systems and information. Some military
organizations have been worrying about this for a long time and have developed and
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
409

implemented plans to keep on top of this increasingly serious set of threats. Other
military organizations have more work to do. It might be helpful, even for those mil-
itary organizations that feel they are well prepared, to review the list of suggested ac-
tion steps to determine what they need to do to be better prepared for the future.
The United States government needs to set an agenda for action that goes be-
yond the work already done in preparation for the IW arsenal and tactics of the mil-
itary. With the preceding in mind, when completing the Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics of the Military Checklist (Table F14.1 in Appendix F), the com-
puter forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional list of actions for
networks. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for which
the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review,
and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems have
been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Information warfare (IW) has not become synonymous with the
revolution in information technologies and its potential to transform military
strategies and capabilities.
2.
True or False? There is a lessening consensus that national prosperity, if not sur-
vival, depends on one’s ability to effectively leverage information technology.
3.
True or False? Information warfare is often thought of as being defined by any
target set of decision makers, information, information processes, and infor-
mation systems.
4.
True or False? The scope, or battlespace, of information warfare and strategy
(IWS) can be defined by the players and three dimensions of the nature of their
interactions, the level of their interactions, and the arena of their interactions.
5.
True or False? The battlespace associated with IW has been a constantly
expanding one, moving far beyond traditional military situations.
Multiple Choice
1.
Which one of the following is not an individual element of C2W, covering
both offensive and defensive applications?
410
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

A. Operations security
B.
Commercial deception
C. Psychological operations
D. Electronic warfare
E.
Targeting
2.
In light of the IW arsenal and tactics analysis of the military, the following
overall sustained terrorist IW tactics observations stand out, except one:
A. Terrorism
B.
Geopolitics of terrorism
C. Counterterrorism versus new terrorism
D. U.S. exposure
E.
General counterterrorism strategy
3.
A core, longer-term strategy must do the following, except:
A. Attempt to deal with the problems of defending against all of the different
kinds of information attacks
B.
Address the political, economic, and social roots of international terrorism
C. Make deterrence relevant to non-state actors as well as state sponsors
D. Reduce the risk of truly catastrophic terrorism using weapons of mass
destruction
4.
DoD has also articulated a similar concept for an office within the Executive
Office of the President, organized for countering terrorism, as a potential focal
point for the oversight of the U.S. antiterrorist program. This office would be
a permanent body with a White House perspective; such a staff could perform
the following, except one:
A. Monitor and coordinate activities of the line agency and departments.
B.
Identify unneeded capabilities.
C. Identify special resources that might be mobilized if an international inci-
dent occurs.
D. Pull together current intelligence and ongoing analysis and research efforts.
E.
Identify terrorist incidents.
5.
Nation-states or combinations of nation-states are not the only players. Which
of the following non-state actors is not able to engage in information attacks or
develop information strategies to achieve their desired ends?
A. Political, ethnic, and religious groups
B.
Organized crime
C. Law enforcement organizations
D. International and transnational organizations
E.
Individuals empowered by information technology
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
411

Exercise
The board of directors of a technical research company demoted the company’s
founder and chief executive officer. The executive, disgruntled because of his de-
motion, was later terminated; it was subsequently determined that the executive
had planned to quit about the same time he was fired and establish a competitive
company. Upon his termination, the executive took home two computers; he re-
turned them to the company five days later, along with another company computer
that he had previously used at home. Suspicious that critical information had been
taken; the company’s attorneys sent the computers to a CFS team (CFST) for ex-
amination. How did the CFST go about conducting the forensics examination?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A senior member of a major organization was under suspicion of downloading thou-
sands of pornographic images from the Internet. He strongly denied it all, but the case
against him looked very grim. How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation?
Case Project
A major high-tech company took-over a smaller subsidiary in a related, but non-
competing, business area. The smaller company was merged into the larger as a new
business unit. Most of the previous management team was bought-out and left the
company; others were persuaded to stay on to manage the new subsidiary. Two
years later, the individuals who left had already started another company in the
same market segment as their old company, in possible breach of the buy-out
agreement. Business results of the new subsidiary had simultaneously begun to de-
teriorate. The CEO of the new subsidiary, (who had originally held the same posi-
tion in the bought-out company) renegotiated a new contract, under highly
favorable conditions, and then immediately resigned, triggering certain beneficial
clauses in the contract. How did the CFST go about conducting their examination?
Optional Team Case Project
An insurance company was contesting a claim for $400,000 for loss of all data from
a company’s central computer. The computer had allegedly been flattened by a
large industrial magnet and all the data had disappeared from the hard disk. How
was the CFST able to help the insurance company?
412
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Firewalls: Jumpstart for Network and Systems Administra-
tors, Elsevier Digital Press, Burlington, MA, 2004.
[2] Vacca, John R., Wireless Broadband Networks Handbook, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., High-Speed Cisco Networks: Planning, Design, and Imple-
mentation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
[4] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
[5] Vacca, John R., Satellite Encryption, Academic Press, New York, 1999.
[6] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
413

This page intentionally left blank 

415
The Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics of
Terrorists and Rogues
15
T
he information warfare (IW) arsenal and tactics of terrorists and rogues have
become increasingly transnational as the networked organizational form has
expanded. When terrorism’s mentors were the Soviet Union and the Eastern
Bloc, they imposed their own rigid hierarchical structure on terrorist groups. Now
that terrorism is increasingly substate, or semidetached, networking and intercon-
nectivity are necessary to find allies and influence others, as well as to effect com-
mand and control.
As discussed in Chapter 14, information and communication technologies
(ICTs) have facilitated this and have enabled multiple leaders to operate parallel to
one another in different countries. It therefore might be said that a shift is taking place
from absolute hierarchies to hydra-headed networks, which are less easy to decapi-
tate. An analogy, using the Palestinian example, may be that the more networked
form of Hamas now that Arafat is dead, is replacing the hierarchical structure of the
PLO. In many ways the Afghan War was a seminal event in promoting the networked
form in that it showed that fluidly organized groups, driven in this case by a religious
imperative, could defeat an experienced hierarchically structured army.
Geographical dispersion, both physical and in cyberspace, provides extra security.
A rigid hierarchical structure is more easily penetrated and neutralized. Israel’s admis-
sion that it had not yet found a way to deal with Hamas’s decentralized and interna-
tionalized command and control structure, which uses encrypted Internet messages,
suggests it has had difficulty in this matter. An investigation by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation into terrorist activity in the United States indicated that part of Palestin-
ian Islamic Jihad’s command and control system was located in Tampa, Florida. Like-
wise, Hamas allegedly has some of its fundraising infrastructure in London and the
United States and publishes its main Arabic journal, Filistin al Muslima, in London.

Islamist terrorists may be said to fit the network ideal. Many supportive expatri-
ate communities are based in sympathetic or neutral states, enabling political activists
and terrorists to operate within the safe haven that modern democracies provide.
It is not the intention here that the term “Islamists” should refer only to terrorist
organizations, but rather to those Muslim militants who believe that Islam is in-
complete without its own state, one in which Shariah provides the system of gover-
nance, and who campaign for its imposition.
Among Islamists, it is the Jihadists (religious warriors) who are of particular in-
terest in this chapter. The followers of Hasan al Banna, Sayyid Qutb, and Abdul Ala
Maududi, the organizations they founded, Ikhwan al Muslimoon and Jamaat Is-
lami, and the ideological off-shoots these have spawned, give rise to the Jihadist ide-
ology. Although the concept of Jihad may be interpreted on different levels, it often
incorporates violence when applied to Islamists.
The ultimate experience is, of course, Jihad, which for Islamists means armed bat-
tles against communists (Afghanistan) or Zionists (Palestine and Israel) or, for the
radicals, against renegades and the impious.
Jihad in the modern Islamist sense knows no political space or state; its space is
that of the Umma, the community of Muslims, wherever they may be. An example of
the networked form among such Islamist organizations is that of the Algerian Armed
Islamic Group, the GIA. Allegedly responsible for a bombing campaign in France, it
appears to have had a command and control center in Britain for some years prior to
the expulsion of some members by the British authorities. At the same time, sympa-
thizers were also safe-housing some of its weapons and explosives in Belgium.
Algerian terrorists have been able to communicate with their sympathizers and
members by use of the Internet and have used the services of Muslim news agen-
cies, which republish their postings. Foremost among them is MSANEWS. On their
site were published communiqués from the GIA, Front Islamique de Salut (FIS),
and many other Islamists.
The MSANEWS also posts articles and communiqués from non-Islamist Muslim
and non-Muslim sources, claiming that it has condemned terrorism and that it no
longer reposts communiqués of organizations that advocate terrorism.
The site of the Campaign for the Defense of Legitimate Rights (CDLR), the
Saudi opposition group, also contains postings from groups not directly connected
with it, as do London-net@Muslimsonline and the pro-Iranian Muslimedia Inter-
416
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

national, which, like other sites, reposts interviews with Osama bin Laden, the exiled
and wanted dead or alive Saudi terrorist leader (see sidebar, “Bin Laden Uses Web to
Plan”). As with some other Islamist groups, Muslimedia International also pro-
motes antisemitism and Holocaust denial and provides links with the American
Holocaust denier, Michael Hoffman II and his Campaign for Radical Truth in His-
tory, thereby highlighting the interconnectivity possibilities between totally different
ideologies sharing a perceived common enemy.
BIN LADEN USES WEB TO PLAN
Osama bin Laden and other Muslim extremists are using the Internet to plan more
terrorist activities against the United States and its allies. Recently, U.S. law enforce-
ment officials and other experts disclosed details of how extremists hide maps and
photographs of terrorist targets in sports chat rooms and on pornographic bulletin
boards and other popular Web sites. Instructions for terrorist activities also are
posted on the sites, which the officials declined to name. To a greater and greater
degree, terrorist groups, including Hezbollah, Hamas, and bin Laden’s al Qaeda, are
using computerized files, email, and encryption to support their operations—like
the train bombing in Madrid in the winter of 2004. According to various unnamed
officials and investigators, the messages are scrambled using free encryption pro-
grams set up by groups that advocate privacy on the Internet. It’s something the
intelligence, law-enforcement, and military communities are struggling to deal with.
The operational details and future targets, in many cases, are hidden in plain view on
the Internet. Only the members of the terrorist organizations, knowing the hidden
signals, are able to extract the information.
An Islamist site that particularly aims its message to the outside world is that of
Hizb-ut-Tahrir, the Islamic Liberation Party. Their first U.K.-based site was hosted
by Imperial College, London, but following complaints to the college authorities,
the site was closed down. They now post in their own name as Hizb-ut-Tahrir, and
as Khilafah, providing Internet-based access to their hard copy material, literature,
and their regional activities. Al-Muhajiroun (The Emigrants) whose U.K. leader,
Omar Bakri Mohammed, was the founding leader of Hizb-ut-Tahrir in Britain, and
from which he split claiming differences with the Middle-East-based leadership,
also provides details of its activities, as well as lists of its hardcopy publications and
contacts. In 1998, Mohammed reported the communiqués of Osama bin Laden, for
whom he claims to act as a spokesman. As a consequence of his endorsement of the
bombings of the U.S. embassies in Dar-es-Salaam and Nairobi, his postings are no
longer carried by MSANEWS.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
417

Hamas and its supporters and sympathizers have been among the most prolific
users of the Internet. MSANEWS provides a list of Internet resources about Hamas,
including copies of its covenant, its official communiqués (at Assabeel On-line),
and communiqués of its military wing, the Izz al-Din Al-Kassam Brigades. Infor-
mation about Hamas may also be accessed in various different ways: via MSANEWS,
the Palestine site, and the Islamic Association for Palestine. Hamas’ own site, which
posts in Arabic, is the Palestine Information Centre.
Religious luminaries from one country sometimes act as the higher legal and
moral authority in another country. Sheikh Yusuf al-Qaradawri of the Egyptian
Ikhwan al-Muslimoon (Muslim Brotherhood) lives in Qatar and serves as the
Imam (religious leader) for the Palestinian Hamas. Sheikh Ibn Qatada, a Jordanian
Palestinian living in London, serves as the Imam for the Algerian GIA. Sheikh Abu
Hamza, an Egyptian national and former Afghan Jihad volunteer, serves as a pro-
pagandist for the Algerian GIA and Imam for the Yemeni Jihad group but lives in
London. Now, their messages of guidance and support find an outlet most fre-
quently via ICTs.
Although some commentators have argued that modern cultural forces, such
as ICTs, serve to undermine Islamization in Muslim society, it is equally easy to
argue that they provide a new and growing medium by which Islamism is dissem-
inated. Even if they do not reach the poorer sections of Muslim society, they cer-
tainly reach many educated expatriate communities among whom they find
support. The growing number of advertisements, on the Internet and in Muslim
papers and journals, for conferences to discuss the use of the Internet to promote
Islam, or Islamism, supports the thesis that many activists and religious teachers see
these developments as positive ones to be recommended and encouraged.
Combining religious injunctions with strategic commands is a feature of such
Islamist leaders and their groups. Calls to carry out Jihad are frequently cloaked in
religious and pseudo-religious language, but the implication is clear for the target
audience. Thus, for example, Osama bin Laden’s Ladenese Epistle, which was orig-
inally faxed to his London contact, Khalid al Fawaz and then posted to MSANEWS
in August 1996 by the London-based Saudi dissident groups CDLR and MIRA, is
recognized as providing general guidance for anti-American terrorism. For exam-
ple, bin Laden’s Ladenese Epistle reads,
The sons of the land of the two Holy Places had come out to fight against the Russ-
ian in Afghanistan, the Serb in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and today they are fighting in
Chechenia and—by the Permission of Allah—they have been made victorious
over your partner, the Russians. By the command of Allah, they are also fighting
in Tajakistan.
418
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

I say: Since the sons of the land of the two Holy Places feel and strongly believe that
fighting (Jihad) against the Kuffar in every part of the world, is absolutely essential;
then they would be even more enthusiastic, more powerful and larger in number
upon fighting on their own land.
The Nida’ul Islam site, based in Australia, promotes an uncompromising mes-
sage of both Jihad and of suicide terrorism. A recent posting, “The Islamic Legiti-
macy of the Martyrdom Operations,” states that martyrdom is forbidden in Islam,
but cites approvingly those martyrs who willingly gave their lives for Muslim causes
and then transposes these causes to contemporary issues. It attempts to demon-
strate with quotes from the Quran and the Sunnah that Islamic bombing assaults
and martyrdom attacks are legitimate and fall within the framework of Islam.
Azzam Publications, named after Abdullah Azzam, a Palestinian who became
a military leader in Afghanistan and who was assassinated in Pakistan in 1989, has
also published calls for Jihad volunteers:
The Saudi Government does not intend to help the Muslims in Kosova and it has
prevented its nationals from going there to fight. This means that the Jihad in
Kosova is now a greater responsibility on Muslims with western nationalities... Re-
distribute this e-mail message all over the world...telephone the nearest Saudi Em-
bassy or Consulate to protest against this crack-down and tell everyone to do so
until it jams the lines of the Saudi Consulates around the world...e-mail the Saudi
Embassy in Washington with messages of protest...begin to prepare yourselves to
go and fight in Kosova to make up for the lack of manpower that was heading
there from Saudi Arabia. Wait for the Kosova bulletin from Azzam Publications.
Among the far right, the U.K.-based national revolutionary group, The Inter-
national Third Position, illustrates graphically the adoption of ICTs to enhance a
position. The group is tiny, but its foreign contacts are numerous, widespread and
growing. In just over one year its Final Conflict email newsletter has grown in size
and scope to reflect the news of, and messages from, its worldwide contacts.
Final Conflict also acts as a news agency for Holocaust deniers (in much the
same way as MSANEWS does for Islamists), many of whom are also far right ex-
tremists. For example, the email newsletter reposts communiqués from David Irv-
ing and Fredrick Toben’s Australian Adelaide Institute, which like the
California-based Institute for Historical Review, attempts to provide a scholarly ve-
neer for denial. Some invitees to a conference held by the Adelaide Institute were
refused permission to visit Australia by its Department of Immigration, but the easy
access to the Internet and video links facilitated conference presentations that oth-
erwise might not have taken place.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
419

The far right has also used the Internet to post bomb-making manuals that are
not otherwise available in Europe. The British neo-Nazi, David Myatt, of the Na-
tional Socialist Movement posted his Practical Guide to Aryan Revolution in No-
vember 1997 at the Web site of Canadian Bernard Klatt in order to evade police
scrutiny. The chapter headings included: “Methods of Covert Direct Action,” “Es-
cape and Evasion,” “Assassination,” “Terror Bombing,” “Sabotage,” “Racial War,”
“How to Create a Revolutionary Situation,” “Direct Action Groups,” and so on.
The contents provided a detailed step-by-step guide for terrorist insurrection with
advice on assassination targets, rationales for bombing and sabotage campaigns,
and rules of engagement. Although he may have committed no indictable offence
in Canada, Klatt was forced to close down his site in April 1998. Myatt is currently
the subject of a British criminal investigation for incitement to murder and pro-
motion of race hatred.
Police forces in Britain and France recently investigated an international neo-
Nazi network that issued death threats against French celebrities and politicians
from their British-based Internet site. Herve Guttuso, the French leader of the
Charlemagne Hammer Skins, was arrested in Essex at the same time as eight mem-
bers were arrested in the South of France. The French members of the network were
charged with making death threats, and Guttuso was the subject of a French extra-
dition request to the British courts. According to the French Interior Ministry, po-
lice in Toulon traced the London address of the Internet site, which was being
accessed about 7,000 times a month. The investigation enabled the police to iden-
tify 3,500 people sympathetic to the neo-Nazi group in various countries including
Britain, Greece, Canada, America, and Poland. The investigators found that the
Charlemagne group appeared to be one of the largest and best organized neo-Nazi
groups yet uncovered, with a coordinated international structure and logistical cen-
ters for disseminating violent racist propaganda, based principally in Britain and
America. Although the group gave a postal address in London as their center, their
material was disseminated via Klatt’s FTC Net (as have been the postings of Marc
Lemire, Paul Fromm, Doug Christie, The Heritage Front, and other neo-Nazi and
white supremacist groups).
The British far right may have been slower to realize the command and control
possibilities of ICTs than their U.S. or German co-ideologies, but they appear to be
catching up. Although in recent years it is the violent skinhead music scene that has
provided the main medium through which they promote liaison, it is clear that for
some the future lies with ICTs.
In 1999, the Pentagon had to admit that there had been a major assault on its
computer systems. Zionist Occupational Government (ZOG) observers (or Penta-
gon observers) have increasingly warned that the frequency and sophistication of the
hack attacks will only increase as dissident groups realize that they can strike at the
very heart of ZOG at the touch of a few buttons. It doesn’t matter what government
420
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

specialists invent to counter the techno-terrorist; there is always a way around their
antihacker programs, and the more ZOG relies on computers, the more damage can
be done by attacking their systems.
Zionist Occupied (Occupational) Government, or ZOG, is a term used to refer to the
belief that the United States government is controlled by “Zionists” where the word
“Zionists” is sometimes used as a euphemism for “Jews.” Some groups are more di-
rect and refer to the Jewish Occupied Government. The term is often rendered as
“Zionist Occupation Government” or even “Zionist Occupational Government.”
THE TERRORIST PROFILE
Sid-Ra, a 6-foot-4-inch, 350-pound giant of a man, paces between his “subjects” in
the smoke-filled Goth club Click + Drag, located in the old meat-packing district of
Manhattan. Inside the club are leather-clad, black-lipped females and young men
dressed in women’s underwear. Sid is a hacker-terrorist and an acknowledged “so-
cial engineer” with curious nocturnal habits. There are thousands of people like
him, who by day are system and network administrators, security analysts, and start-
up cofounders. When night comes, they transform into something quite different.
Is this the profile of a “wanna-be” terrorist? Perhaps! These are the self-
proclaimed freedom fighters of cyberspace. They even have a name for it: hac-
tivism. Political parties and human rights groups are circling around to recruit
hactivists into their many causes. Recently, for example, the Libertarian Party set 
up a table at the HOPE (Hackers on Planet Earth) conference. The San Fran-
cisco–based Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) collected donations, and mem-
bers of civil-rights groups, including the Zapatistas, a Mexican rebel group, spoke
up at one of two sessions on hactivism.
Even without such civil-liberties groups trying to organize them, hactivists have
been busy on their own. They have formed privacy-related software companies
such as ZeroKnowledge Systems USA Inc. in Montreal. They’re developing anony-
mous, inexpensive email and Web-hosting services through the DataHaven Project
Inc. (http://www.dhp.com), and they’re trying to get the Internet out to third world
human rights organizations through groups such as Cult of the Dead Cow Com-
munications (cDc; http://www.cultdeadcow.com/).
URLs are subject to change without notice.
Sid feels hactivism’s pull so strongly that he makes a dramatic claim: “The In-
ternet is the next Kent State, and we’re the ones who are probably going to get shot.”
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
421

From Vietnam Marches to Cyberdisobedience
Like any social engineer, Sid exaggerates. Except for the four-year jail terms handed
down to Kevin Mitnick and Kevin Poulsen, sentencing for even criminal hacking in
2003–2004 has been relatively light (mostly probation and fines) because of the sus-
pects’ young ages.
Kevin Mitnick is one of the most famous hackers to be jailed and convicted. Mit-
nick’s last arrest was by the FBI on February 15, 1995—he was charged with
breaking into some of the United States’ most “secure” computer systems. Kevin
Poulsen’s hacker handle was “Dark Dante.” He worked for SRI International by
day, and hacked at night. He trained to be the complete hacker and even taught
himself lock picking. Among other things, he reactivated old Yellow Page escort
telephone numbers for an acquaintance who then ran a virtual agency. He was fi-
nally arrested in April 1991. Poulsen is now a journalist and serves as editorial di-
rector for SecurityFocus.
However, the comparison to the psychedelic hippies of the 1960s who spoke out
against the Vietnam War may not be so far off the mark—only this time, the hackers
are Goths and hedonists, and they’re using the Internet to rid the world of tyranny.
The government tries to put electronic activism into the peg of cyberterrorism
and crime with its infowar eulogies (IW success stories),  but E-Hippies, cDc, and
others aren’t criminals. The Internet just multiplies their voices. Another group
reaching out to hackers and technologists is the EFF. In 1999, the EFF successfully
argued in the infamous Bernstein ruling, which stated that software code is pro-
tected as a form of speech.
Hackers question conventional models. They don’t just look at technology and
say, “This is how it works.” They say, “How can I make it better?” They look at so-
ciety that way too—their government, their schools, and their social situations.
They say, “I know how to make this better,” and they go for it.
In the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) case, staffers at 2600
Enterprises Inc., based in Middle Island, New York, were threatened with impris-
onment if they didn’t remove a link on the 2600 Web site to the code used to crack
DVD encryption. Because the link was editorial content, it set Sid off on another
diatribe.
The Libertarian Party also recruits hackers and technologists. At HOPE, the
party’s New York State committee (http://www.cownow.com) handed out fliers,
signed up recruits, and took a “sticker” poll of party affiliations. The poll got
hacked, but about half the stickers were yellow—for libertarian, anarchist, or inde-
pendent. Many party members are programmers. They’re trying to rally hackers
422
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

around encryption, privacy, and freedom-of-communication planks. Hackers can
offer them freedom, because the Internet routes around tyranny.
Hackers have ways beyond the Internet to electronically spread their message.
Take a young dude named Alpha Underflow, for instance, who late one night broke
the lock to a lit-up roadside-construction sign and reprogrammed it to read, “Hack
Planet Earth” in support of the 2600 Magazine staff, but then, he also likes to use his
reprogrammed garage-door opener to pop open his neighbor’s garage doors.
The Older Generation
This moral confusion is typical of the younger hacking crowd, but most of the
older hackers (30 years old and up) have grown up. In the mid-1990s, there was
more disillusionment as more bleeding-edge hackers ended up going to jail for
cracking. That bummed out their whole theme, but now they’ve learned some lim-
its and they can still operate within them.
That means the older hackers do develop some scruples. For example, the EFF
Web site (http://www.eff.org) was a popular target of punk hackers in the mid-
1990s, with hacks and defacements occurring weekly. Now it’s rarely hacked. When
the site did get hacked, a message was posted about it on 2600’s bulletin board, and
the hackers who responded called that hacker a lamer. The process that turned the
hippie of 1968 into the employed investor of 1985 is similarly going on here today.
With luck, the hippie-to-yuppie disillusionment won’t happen to hackers, too.
Who are the real cyberterrorists? Are they for real?
Will the Real Cyberterrorists Stand Up
The debate over whether the United States faces imminent danger from cyberter-
rorist attacks took a new turn recently when the National Security Council declared
that terrorism may be too strong a word when describing potential cyberthreats. Al-
though it would be a tough call to tell the difference between an attack by hackers
and one launched by terrorists intent on disrupting national security, the adminis-
tration’s cyberdefense programs are battling a perception problem that stems from
the misuse of the word terrorism.
Maybe we shouldn’t be saying “cyberterrorism.” Maybe we should be saying “in-
formation warfare.” In the end, we’re going to know it when we see it—the difference
between joy-riding hackers and state-sponsored cyberattacks.
Experts agree that, to date, most of the major cybersecurity incidents are best
described as nuisance attacks, although many fear that a devastating surprise attack,
sometimes referred to as an “electronic Pearl Harbor,” is inevitable. Although the
government tries to be proactive, the United States is going to get nailed seriously—
sooner rather than later. By not preparing for the worst-case scenario, the United
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
423

States may be endangering the public’s civil liberties. A lot of people are going to be
willing to throw civil liberties out the window in an effort to recover from an attack
that cripples large portions of the nation’s critical infrastructure.
Preparation is crucial, and, in the current legal system, defensive measures are
more “workable” than offensive ones. Overall, however, cyberdefense is not well
understood and is not talked about sufficiently. Pretending the threats are not there
is not a solution. Rogue groups have made numerous efforts to acquire encryption
algorithms and sophisticated tools. One presidential administration after another
has lulled the American people into a false sense of security.
The Internet has become a new form of the “dead drop” (a Cold War–era term
for where spies left information) for terrorists and, bin Laden, the dissident and
wanted Saudi businessman who has been indicted for the 1998 bombing of two
U.S. embassies in East Africa, the 9-11 attacks in 2001, the bombing of the USS Cole
destroyer in Yemen, and the 2004 train bombing in Madrid, Spain, has taken ad-
vantage of that Internet dead drop zone.
Four alleged bin Laden associates went on trial recently in federal court in New
York for the embassy bombings. Officials say bin Laden began using encryption in
1996 but recently increased its use after U.S. officials revealed they were tapping his
satellite [1] phone calls in Afghanistan and tracking his activities.
Thus, bin Laden meets the requirements for the new terrorist profile: he will
use whatever tools he can (emails, the Internet, etc.) to facilitate jihad against the Is-
raeli occupiers and their supporters, according to Ahmed Yassin, the founder of the
militant Muslim group Hamas. Bin Laden has the best minds working for him.
WHY TERRORISTS AND ROGUES HAVE AN ADVANTAGE IN IW
Governments have neither the financial resources nor the technical know-how to
stay on top of hackers and computer terrorists. This is why terrorists and rogues
have an advantage in IW. The private sector must itself take much of the action that
is necessary to prevent attacks being made on the Internet. It’s no longer possible
for governments to provide the resources and investment necessary to deal with
these kinds of issues.
There are no cookie-cutter solutions; every network is different. At the top of
chief information officer’s (CIOs) lists of concerns are denial of service (DoS) at-
tacks, which recently brought Yahoo, Amazon.com, eBay, and other high-profile
Web sites to their knees. DoS attacks are a key concern because the only way that is
currently available to prevent them is to catch the perpetrators.
Second on the list of concerns is attacks that reach into networks to steal valu-
able corporate data. Firewalls [2] are the best way to prevent data theft that origi-
nates outside of a network, whereas cryptography can help protect data from
424
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

internal theft. There is a real danger of terrorists and hostile rogue nations using
computer networks to wage international warfare. In other words, most of the
major terrorist organizations have their own Web sites, and therefore have the fa-
cility to carry out the same sort of action that was carried out with the release of the
“I Love You” virus. Cyberterrorism can be more effective and more costly to gov-
ernments than the classic methods of bomb attacks and assassination. It is a serious
threat to everyone in all societies.
Solutions seem harder to come by today than solutions to the problems just
discussed. Governments, businesses, and research institutions must band together
to find the best technologies and courses of action to defeat cyber crimes. Compa-
nies must be more willing to invest in security systems to protect their networks. A
few of these companies called on software companies and service providers to make
their products more secure. Default settings for software products sold to con-
sumers should be at the highest level of security. You wouldn’t build a swimming
pool in the center of town and not put a fence around it. Basically, that’s just what
the software companies are doing.
Although security firms have financial incentives for promoting security is-
sues, for the average corporation, the benefits of spending millions of dollars to bol-
ster security in networks aren’t immediately obvious, thus making them slow to act.
If you have a choice of spending five million dollars on getting 693,000 new cus-
tomers, or five million dollars on better serving the ones you already have, that’s a
difficult value proposition. Most companies would take the additional customers.
The severity of attacks could get worse, though, and businesses would be wise to
make precautionary investments now. Most businesses have been lucky so far.
Cyberattack Risks If You’re a Superpower
IW and other security threats simply come with the territory when your country is the
world’s only remaining superpower. This is what is called a “superpower paradox.”
There is no other country that can challenge the United States directly. Instead, some
countries look for indirect ways to challenge the United States. This challenge could
come in the form of nuclear (see sidebar, “Stopping Nuclear Blackmail”), chemical,
biological (see sidebar, “Chemical and Biological Terrorism”), or even cyberwarfare
(see sidebar, “Hacker-Controlled Tanks, Planes, and Warships”) attacks.
STOPPING NUCLEAR BLACKMAIL
Bill Clinton used to say that no Russian missiles are targeted at the United States, but
there is every reason to believe that there are, or soon will be, North Korean missiles
targeted at this country—missiles capable of delivering nuclear or chemical and bio-
logical warheads. In a few years, and without much warning, Iranian and Iraqi missiles
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
425
q

could also be targeted at us and our allies. What can the United States do to stop such
missiles once they are launched? Not a thing.
None of this was clear in 1998; it is undeniable now. The question is whether the
U.S. government will build a missile defense system to protect their cities, military
bases, and oil fields—and to block the kind of nuclear blackmail suggested by
China’s threat, during the Taiwan Strait crisis of 1996, to bomb Los Angeles.
A full warning came in a 1998 report of the commission on missile threats
headed by Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. This was a bipartisan commission,
with members who have often disagreed on weapons issues. The panel had access to
all U.S. intelligence sources, and its conclusion was unanimous: rogue states could
inflict major destruction on the United States within five years of deciding to do so,
and with little or no notice to us.
This contradicted the Clinton administration line that the United States would
have plenty of notice of a missile attack. That conclusion was based on a 1995
national intelligence estimate that said there would be no threat to the 48 contigu-
ous states for the next 15 years.
Evidently, the administration didn’t think that the constitutional obligation to
“provide for the common defense” applied to Alaska and Hawaii.
The Rumsfeld report at first seemed to do little to change the views of President
Clinton’s top defense advisers. Five weeks after the report was released, Gen. Henry
Shelton, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, wrote that “the intelligence com-
munity can provide the necessary warning” of hostile missile development and
added, “We view this as an unlikely development.” A week after that, North Korea
launched a 3,000-kilometer range, two-stage Taepo Dong 1 missile over Japan. The
launch indicates that North Korea has made progress in building the Taepo Dong 2,
whose 10,000-kilometer range includes not only Alaska and Hawaii but also much
of the continental United States. No matter: all but four Senate Democrats blocked
action on a bill sponsored by Thad Cochran, a Republican from Mississippi, and
Daniel Inouye, a Democrat from Hawaii, that would have forced the administration
to deploy a missile defense system as soon as technologically feasible.
A NEW WORLD
The case against rapid deployment rests on three arguments: (1) the threat isn’t real,
(2) the technology is impossible, and (3) it is more important to maintain the
antiballistic missile treaty signed with the Soviet Union in 1972, which bars most
missile defense systems. The Rumsfeld report demolished argument 1. Argument 2
is still raised by some who note that the United States has spent large sums on missile
426
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

defense since Ronald Reagan proposed it in 1983, with disappointing results, but
stopping a few rogue-state missiles with the computers of 2005 is much easier than
stopping hundreds of Soviet missiles with the computers of 1983. As for argument
3, the strategic environment in which the antiballistic missile treaty was adopted no
longer exists. The argument for the treaty was that a missile defense system might
provoke a Soviet or American first strike. However, the proximate missile threats
now come from states that might risk such a strike.
CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL TERRORISM
In For Your Eyes Only, James Bond’s irrepressible quartermaster, Major Boothroyd
(a.k.a. Q) demonstrates his latest toy: a rather lethal umbrella. Using a faceless man-
nequin, one of Q’s assistants illustrates how the umbrella looks and acts like it should
until struck by water (as umbrellas are wont to do from time to time). Suddenly,
sharp metal hooks extend all along the edge of the umbrella as it swiftly closes upon
the victim’s neck. The motion is quick and precise, but one can’t help but imagine
the far messier spectacle if a human being were caught under it in a rainstorm.
Unfortunately, the fictional version of MI6 portrayed in the James Bond films is
not the only place one can find a deadly device masquerading as protection against
the elements. In September 1978, the Bulgarian secret service shot a Bulgarian exile,
Georgi Markov, with just such a device. Disguised as an umbrella, the surreptitious
gun inserted a small pellet into Markov’s thigh. The pellet contained only a few hun-
dred millionths of a gram of the deadly poison ricin (supplied by the KGB), but it
was enough. Markov died four days later in a London hospital. Another Bulgarian
defector, Vladimir Kostov, was similarly attacked in Paris the month before. Kostov
was shot in the back and suffered a high fever, but survived. He sought medical treat-
ment after hearing of Markov’s death and doctors removed from his back a small
pellet identical to the one used to kill Markov.
Not satisfied with leaving such methods solely in the hands of the secret agent-
types, the Aum Shinrikyo cult tried a simpler version during their chemical and bio-
logical escapades. In their infamous sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway, Aum
operatives chose the decidedly low-tech dissemination method of dropping bags of
liquid sarin on the floor, puncturing them with the sharpened ends of their umbrel-
las, and then beating a hasty retreat as the nasty stuff spilled out onto the ground.
Despite their primitive dissemination methods, Aum managed to murder 12 people,
injure over a thousand, terrorize several thousand more, and spark a national
weapons of mass destruction counterterrorism industry in the United States.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
427
q

Analysts have long commented on the copycat nature of terrorists and terrorist
groups. Once a new method of attack (from car bombings to airplane hijackings to
planes being used as bombs to hostage-taking for ransom money) has met with suc-
cess, other terrorist groups are bound to emulate it. Given such a phenomenon
among terrorists, is the United States witnessing any evidence of an increase in the use
of umbrellas in terrorist operations—especially those involving chemical and biolog-
ical weapons? Should the United States be calling for an international embargo on
umbrella sales to Afghanistan to prevent Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda organi-
zation from acquiring such dangerous, dual-use technology? Probably yes.
For one thing, Aum has inspired many follow-up attacks that analysts had pre-
dicted shortly after their March 1995 attack. Although the jury is still out, Aum may
have been unique. Even the Minnesota Patriots Council, which developed ricin
because they believed it to be used by the CIA and the KGB, never conceived of using
it in the same manner as the Bulgarian secret service. Rather than use an umbrella,
the MPC experimented with using hand lotion as a means of dissemination.
For another, an umbrella (even one involving a chemical or biological weapon)
simply does not offer the same level of destruction, the same “bang for the buck” as
other terrorist methods. Not even the Weather Underground, whose name would
seem to imply an interest in such methods, showed evidence of ever considering
using umbrellas in any of their attacks. Instead, they chose the symbolic bombing of
the imperialist power structure. So the answer is yes, the standard terrorist arsenal is
now the gun, the bomb, the plane bomb, box cutters, and even the umbrella or any-
thing else they can get their hands on. As all of us witnessed on 9-11, Osama bin
Laden did try such a method of attack, and it brought a whole new meaning to his
“umbrella terrorist network.”
HACKER-CONTROLLED TANKS, PLANES, AND WARSHIPS
Army officials are worried that sophisticated hackers and other cyber criminals,
including military adversaries, may soon have the ability to hack their way into and
take control of major military weapon systems such as tanks and ships. The poten-
tial exists for hackers to infiltrate the computer systems used in tanks and other
armored vehicles. Unlike in the past, today’s modern tanks and ships are almost
entirely dependent on computers, software, and data communications links for
functions such as navigation, targeting, and command and control.
Although the Pentagon has had computer security issues to deal with for a long
time, they’ve never had computers in tanks and armored personnel carriers before.
In fact, the Defense Department (DoD) has already tested and proven that hackers
428
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

have the ability to infiltrate the command and control systems of major weapons,
including Navy warships. According to a training CD-ROM on information assur-
ance, published by the Defense Information Systems Agency, an Air Force officer sit-
ting in a hotel room in Boston used a laptop computer to hack into a Navy ship at
sea and implant false navigation data into the ship’s steering system.
Yes, this actually happened. The CD-ROM instructs military personnel taking the
course. Fortunately, this was only a controlled test to see what could be done. In reality,
the type of crime and its objective is limited only by people’s imagination and ability.
Although there are well-known security gaps in the commercial systems that the
Army plans to use on the battlefield, hacking into tanks and other weapons may be too
difficult for an enemy engaged in battle. The problem for the enemy is that computer
security vulnerabilities will almost certainly prove fleeting and unpredictable. Such tac-
tics would be nearly impossible to employ beyond the random harassment level.
It is imperative for the United States to study what it means to be a superpower
in the Information Age. In addition to the two dozen countries known to be pur-
suing technologies that would enable them to produce weapons of mass destruc-
tion, threats to the nation’s critical infrastructure from cyberattacks are also high on
the present administration’s list of things to prepare for.
Other countries are forming cells of professionals dedicated to finding ways to
interrupt the United States’ information infrastructure. If you can shut down the
United States’ financial system, if you could shut down the transportation system, if
you could cause the collapse of an energy production and distribution system just by
typing on a computer and causing those links to this globalization to break down,
then you’re able to wage successful warfare, and the United States has to be able to
defend against that. The United States is presently taking on those defense measures.
U.S. Government Agencies Shape Cyberwarning 
Strategy Against Terrorists and Rogues
Under pressure from Congress to better coordinate the government’s response to
computer viruses and other cyberattacks by terrorists and rogue states, the National
Security Council (NSC) has developed a plan outlining roles and responsibilities for
federal cybersecurity organizations. Under the plan, the National Infrastructure Pro-
tection Center (NIPC), working with the General Services Administration’s Federal
Computer Incident Response Capability Office, will take the lead in alerting agencies
to cyberattacks and will coordinate any immediate response.
The memo describing this plan identifies the organizations and agencies to be
involved in various kinds of attacks and defines the criteria for NIPC to call a meet-
ing of the full cybersecurity community. According to the plan The NSC will step
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
429

in whenever a security response requires a broad policy decision. This institution-
alizes how the United States will share information, both at an operations level and
at a policy level when cyberincidents occur. Many observers have called for coordi-
nation among organizations such as NIPC, the Critical Infrastructure Assurance
Office (CIAO), and NSC.
NIPC, based at the FBI, was established in 1998 to serve as the government’s
central organization to assess cyberthreats, issue warnings, and coordinate re-
sponses. The CIAO was set up to help agencies develop and coordinate security
policies and plans. The proliferation of organizations with overlapping oversight
and assistance responsibilities is a source of potential confusion among agency per-
sonnel and may be an inefficient use of scarce technical resources. The calls for co-
ordination became louder after the “I Love You” virus affected almost every federal
email server and taxed many agencies’ resources. The lack of formal coordination
and communication led to many more agencies being affected by the incident than
necessary, according to the Government Accounting Office.
Although the many warning and response organizations work together, the NSC
memo lays out a standard process for coordination. In the past, that type of coordi-
nation happened on an ad hoc basis. Now, as laid out in the memo, the process is set
so that it can last into the next administration in 2005 and possibly to 2009.
Some of the formal mechanisms that existed were frankly ineffective in the
tasks they were meant to do. For circumstances that are extraordinary, the United
States now has a process by which the NIPC will coordinate the operational re-
sponse, and the NSC will head the policy response.
THE DARK WORLD OF THE CYBER UNDERGROUND
It was nearly Christmas (1998) when Dionne Smith received an alarming letter
that dampened her holiday spirit—to say the least. The anonymous note warned
Smith, 31, an employee of a Los Angeles parking company, that by opening the en-
velope she had just exposed herself to the biotoxin anthrax, a livestock bacteria that
can be fatal if inhaled. The 1998 Christmas incident was a horrible and frightening
experience—which was one of approximately 220 nuclear, biological (see sidebar,
“Bioterrorists on the Green”), and chemical scares (including some 140 anthrax
false alarms) in this country alone.
BIOTERRORISTS ON THE GREEN
Will the next terrorist attack be against plants, not people? At the urging of the
White House, the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the FBI are looking at the
430
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

threat of agricultural bioterrorism—an assault on the country’s efficient but fragile
system of giant single-crop farms. The fear is that if some party wanted to, they
could damage a major crop—and the economy—by introducing a plant pathogen
that doesn’t normally exist here. Likely bioweapons include plant-killing fungi, such
as soybean rust, or infectious microbes that induce plants to produce toxins. If the
group were sophisticated enough, they could genetically engineer a highly patho-
genic strain, produce it in large quantities, and sneak a lot of it in.
In wild plants, natural genetic diversity helps limit the spread of disease. Ninety-
nine percent or more of the genes in crops are the same across the United States, and
that uniformity makes an epidemic much more likely. Once unleashed here, a super-
bug could spread like wildfire before researchers identified it and figured out how to
keep it in check. Even then, spores could survive and infect the next year’s crop. They
could also be spread by the wind, from field to field, or even state to state. It would
be a continuing, recurring problem, like a permanent bomb going off.
Even though so far they’ve all been fakes, the feds are on edge. Their major
worry is that terrorists are adding chemical and biological weapons to their arsenal
of arms, and that, one day, they’ll make good on their threats. So the government
has begun taking precautions and has poured billions of dollars into creating a net-
work of programs designed to respond to such attacks. The ambitious plans include
amassing antidotes to potential bioagents such as anthrax and other bacteria and
viruses and to chemical weapons such as the nerve agent sarin. The government is
training medical response, fire, police, and rescue teams; beefing up local health de-
partments to care for civilians in case of a major attack; and gathering intelligence
on terrorist groups believed to be interested in acquiring such weapons. These new
programs have helped make counterterrorism one of the fastest-growing parts of
the federal budget, even as terrorist acts plunged to a 33-year low prior to the 9-11
attacks, according to congressional budget analysts. Total U.S. antiterrorism spend-
ing could exceed $90 billion in 2005, up from $60 billion in 2002. The question is
whether it’s money well spent.
A recent report by the General Accounting Office, Congress’s watchdog, says
no, claiming that lawmakers have dumped money into fighting a threat yet to be
fully assessed and probably less dangerous than widely believed, considering how
tough it is to acquire, process, and use the deadly toxins. A growing number of gov-
ernment and private counterterrorism experts agree. They say that federal officials
are so spooked by the possibility of a chemical or biological attack that they are de-
liberately hyping the threat to get Congress to cough up coveted cash for prevention
programs, and most lawmakers are buying it wholesale. It’s Mom, apple pie, and
terrorism. In 1997, a jittery Congress ordered the DoD to conduct multiagency
training exercises in the nation’s 120 largest cities against so-called weapons of mass
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
431

destruction. Today, there are some 400 training courses run by myriad agencies, in-
cluding the Energy and Justice Departments, the Environmental Protection
Agency, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In just how
many different ways is the United States going to set out to accomplish the same
thing, because many of the programs are redundant?
The most eye-popping example of out-of-control spending, detractors say, is
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). In 1996, HHS spent $7 mil-
lion on its “bioterrorism” initiative. In 2004, it requested $785 million. Most no-
tably, the department intends to create a national stockpile of millions of doses of
vaccines and antibiotics, a potential boon for pharmaceutical companies that are
among those eagerly lobbying for more antiterrorism measures. Government Ac-
counting Office investigators have repeatedly questioned the department’s empha-
sis on vaccines for smallpox, pneumonic plague (airborne bacteria that cause
respiratory failure), and tularemia (bacteria that cause a disabling fever in humans).
None of these potential killers appear on the CIA’s list of biggest germ threats from
terrorist groups. Still, HHS is doing the right thing by focusing on them. Tularemia
and pneumonic plague are very easy to develop. The easiest to develop is anthrax.
Other agencies are clamoring for a piece of the pie, leading to tremendous in-
ternecine fighting. FEMA wants a chunk of the training and equipment money, as
does the Justice Department’s Office of Justice Programs, whose mission is to dole
out federal anticrime money to states and localities. The Department of Veterans
Affairs wants to wrest stockpiling duties away from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, and the National Guard, a powerful lobby on Capitol Hill, is cre-
ating its own hazardous materials response teams, even though there are already
more than 800 state and local hazardous material (HAZMAT) units, plus addi-
tional crews in the Army, Marine Corps, EPA, and Coast Guard. Then there’s the
Energy Department, which is pushing for $80 million to research palm-size bug
and poison detectors and other antiterrorism products. Not to be left out, the
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and the Office of Personnel Manage-
ment want $6 million apiece, and the Smithsonian Institution is asking for $7 mil-
lion to bolster security against potential terrorist attacks.
When Congress first began considering this issue in 1995, the debate was dri-
ven by the belief that terrorists, although more likely to use guns and bombs, would
eventually turn to lethal chemical and biological agents. The 1995 Tokyo subway
gas attack by the cult Aum Shinrikyo was a shot across the bow. So were reports that
Osama bin Laden—accused of masterminding the bombings of two U.S. embassies
in East Africa—had tried to get his hands on unconventional weapons.
The only major case of bioterrorism in the United States was in 1984 by followers
of the Indian guru Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, who had set up a commune in Oregon.
Hoping to sway a local election, they unleashed salmonella poisoning in 10 restaurants
432
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

in a nearby town, sickening 751 people but killing none. Still, law enforcement officials
are convinced that the risk merits whatever preventive measures the government can
afford. This is not on the top 100 list of things you’re going to die from, but if you’re a
national security expert, this is on the top 3 list of things to worry about.
One reason there have been no attacks is that it’s so tough to effectively use bi-
ological weapons,  but a dozen hostile nations now either possess or are actively
pursuing bioweapons. Most counterterrorism and intelligence experts agree that
other countries would think hard before striking, because they know the United
States would retaliate with stunning force. They also agree that terrorists cannot
carry out large-scale lethal attacks without the backing of a foreign government.
However, they can do damage. The question is, how much? Nobody knows, be-
cause few have bothered to assess how real the threats are. No one, though, wants
to be caught asleep at the switch—just in case. It’s one of those things it’s hard to
say no to. It’s like fallout shelters in the 1950s. Was that wrong to do? You have to
look at the world you’re operating in.
THE CRIMINAL CAFÉ IN CYBERSPACE
Not long ago, if a terrorist wanted to cause a blackout in, say, New York, it would
have taken some work. He or she might have packed a truck with explosives and
sent it careening into a power plant. Or he or she might have sought a job as a util-
ity worker to sabotage the electrical system. Now, intelligence experts say, it’s pos-
sible for a trained computer hacker to darken Gotham from the comfort of home
or a cybercafé (at a coffee house). Worse, his other home might be as far away as
Tehran, Iran. Worse yet, he or she may enjoy the full backing and technical support
of a foreign government.
In a closed briefing to Congress, the CIA reported that at least a dozen coun-
tries, some hostile to America, are developing programs to attack other nations’ in-
formation and computer systems. China, Cuba, Russia, Korea, and Iran are among
those deemed a threat, sources later declared. Reflecting official thinking no doubt,
the People’s Liberation Daily in China noted that a foe of the United States only has
to mess up the computer systems of its banks by high-tech means. This would
disrupt and destroy the U.S. economy. Although the specifics are classified, a new
National Intelligence Estimate reports at least one instance to date of active cyber-
targeting of the United States by a foreign nation.
Officials are worried because so much of America’s infrastructure is either dri-
ven or connected by computers. Computers run financial networks, regulate the
flow of oil and gas through pipelines, control water reservoirs and sewage treatment
plants, power air traffic control systems, and sustain telecommunications networks,
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
433

emergency services, and power grids. All are vulnerable. An adversary capable of im-
planting the right virus or accessing the right terminal can cause massive damage.
In 1996, a Swedish hacker wormed his way through cyberspace from London
to Atlanta to Florida, where he rerouted and tied up telephone lines to 11 counties,
put 911 emergency service systems out of commission, and impeded the emer-
gency responses of police, fire, and ambulance services. There have been many do-
mestic cyberattacks as well. The number of pending FBI cases involving computer
crimes (a category that includes computer infrastructure attacks and financial
crimes) increased from 451 in 1999 to about 1,100 in 2004.
In 1997, intelligence officials got a glimpse of what’s possible during an infor-
mation warfare exercise named “Eligible Receiver.” The secret war game began
with a set of written scenarios in which energy and telecommunications utilities
were disrupted by computer attacks. In one scenario, the attackers targeted the 911
emergency phone system by telling Internet users there was a problem with the sys-
tem. The scenario posited that people, driven by curiosity, would phone 911 and
overwhelm the system.
“Eligible Receiver” culminated when three two-person “red teams” from the
National Security Agency used hacker techniques that can be learned on the Inter-
net to penetrate DoD computers. After gaining access to the military’s electronic
message systems, the teams were poised to intercept, delete, and modify all mes-
sages on the networks. Ultimately, the hackers achieved access to the DoD’s classi-
fied network (see sidebar, “Espionage By Keystroke?”) and, if they had wished,
could have denied the Pentagon the ability to deploy forces. In another exercise, the
DoD found that 74% of test attacks on its own systems went undetected.
ESPIONAGE BY KEYSTROKE?
Forget about signal sites and dead drops (like the recent FBI Russian mole case of
suspected spy Robert Phillip Hanssen). The classic tropes of the spy game have gone
the way of the Model T. When an FBI computer jock finally hacked his way into
Aldrich Ames’s personal computer a few years ago, investigators were dumbfounded
by the number of secrets he’d purloined from the CIA—hundreds of stolen docu-
ments and classified reports. FBI brass called Ames the worst case of treason in U.S.
history.
The preceding could be peanuts compared to the Wen Ho Lee case. Govern-
ment officials confirmed that scientist Wen Ho Lee, suspected of stealing classified
data from a secret weapons laboratory, downloaded reams of classified nuclear
weapons information from a high-security computer system to one that could be
accessed with relative ease.
434
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Actually, reams doesn’t begin to describe the dimensions of it. The FBI is talk-
ing about millions of lines of computer code here, data bits gathered during the
course of 53 years of research and more than 5,000 nuclear tests—information that
shows how the nation’s most sophisticated nuclear weapons work. With a few sim-
ple computer strokes, in other words, someone made America’s national-security
crown jewels available to any reasonably sophisticated person in possession of a
computer, a modem, and the file names under which the information was stored. It
is flabbergasting. There’s just no other word for it.
The someone in question was Wen Ho Lee, a Taiwan-born scientist employed,
until recently, at the Department of Energy’s weapons laboratory in Los Alamos,
New Mexico. Lee was dismissed from his job in 1999 for security breaches after it was
disclosed that he was the subject of an FBI espionage investigation. Prosecutors have
not charged Lee with spying, and he has asserted his innocence, but when FBI agents
searched Lee’s computer after his dismissal, officials say, they discovered that he had
transferred an incredibly large amount of nuclear data from the Energy Department’s
high-security computers to the more accessible network, dumped the information
under bogus file names, then tried to erase the evidence from his hard drive. The
transfers occurred between 1983 and 1995, but accelerated in 1994 and 1995, when
Los Alamos began installing a new system designed to impede such transfers.
The evidence gathered to date does not show that the security breach resulted in
damage on a massive scale, but it is huge nonetheless. The FBI is still investigating
whether anyone accessed the data from the low-security network to which Lee trans-
ferred the information. Some officials say that may never be known for sure.
Like every espionage investigation, the Lee case is rife with peculiarities. Lee first
came under suspicion in 1996, after the CIA obtained a document showing that
China’s military had obtained classified information about the size and shape of
America’s newest miniaturized nuclear warhead, the W-88. The FBI was slow to
investigate Lee, in part because Lee’s wife was working as a confidential informant
for the bureau, but there were other problems. When agents in the FBI’s Albu-
querque field office pressed for a search warrant in Washington, lawyers at the Jus-
tice Department rebuffed the request. The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
has almost never rejected a search warrant request, and bureau officials indicate this
rejection was unwarranted. In any case, by that time the damage was done.
In 1998, the FBI raided the homes of two California high school sophomores.
Their hacker assaults on the Pentagon, NASA (which was very easy), and a U.S. nu-
clear weapons research lab were described as the most organized and systematic at-
tack on U.S. computers ever discovered. To make the Pentagon attack hard to trace,
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
435

the hackers routed it through the United Arab Emirates. They were directed by a
teenage hacker in Israel.
To help industries fend off hacker attacks, both foreign and domestic, the gov-
ernment has created the National Infrastructure Protection Center, to be staffed by
458 people from the FBI, other agencies, and industry. Recent events make clear
that tighter defenses are needed. In 1997, a 13-year-old boy with a home computer
disabled control-tower communications at a Worcester, Massachusetts, airport for
nine hours. The loopholes the teenager exploited have been closed, but no com-
puter environment is totally secure. Preventing hacker attacks is like a never-
ending journey. You will never get to your destination.
Chinese Cyber Criminal Café Hacktivists Spin a Web of Trouble at Home
In the university district of Beijing, a bunch of 20-year-olds calling themselves the
“Web Worms” slouch around in an apartment stacked with old issues of PC mag-
azine. Chinese computer networks are easy to break into. Ninety percent of them
are not secure.
From the moment in 1995 that a commercial Internet provider first gave Chi-
nese citizens access to the Web, the government has tried to maintain what some
cybersurfers derisively call “the Great Firewall of China.” This elaborate control sys-
tem is supposed to block sites that the Communist Party considers morally or po-
litically degenerate, from Penthouse to Amnesty International to CNN, but with a
few simple tricks, ordinary Internet users are now making a mockery of the Great
Firewall, tapping easily into forbidden foreign sites.
Sabotage
Sophisticated hackers, meanwhile, are breaking into sensitive Chinese computers (see
sidebar, “Cyberspace Incidents on the Rise in China”). Members of the Hong Kong
Blondes, a covert group, claim to have gotten into Chinese military computers and to
have temporarily shut down a communications satellite last year in a “hacktivist”
protest. The ultimate aim is to use hacktivism to ameliorate human rights conditions.
CYBERSPACE INCIDENTS ON THE RISE IN CHINA
Intelligence and security experts are warning foreign firms in China of a growing
threat of Internet-related crimes, government surveillance, and loss of proprietary
data, but some U.S. companies said they view those threats as exaggerated. The latest
warning comes from a report published in 2004 by a network security firm founded
by two former U.S. Navy intelligence officers. The report cautions companies that the
436
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

government-controlled Internet environment in China could put the integrity of
their networks at risk.
The most important consideration is that, in one way or another, the govern-
ment is involved in the operation, regulation, and monitoring of China’s networks.
As a result of this and other factors, such as tensions with Taiwan, U.S. companies
could see an increase in scans, probes, and attacks that could be aimed at gaining
technical information.
Representatives from companies with major operations in China indicate that
they have never had problems and don’t plan to run scared now. The companies dis-
count most of the alarmist reports. The real focus of the control efforts is what the
Chinese call “black and yellow,” or political and pornographic, material. How seri-
ous an issue economic espionage is depends on who you are and what business
you’re in, and economic espionage isn’t unique to China.
Nevertheless, other companies are not convinced that the Chinese government
is overtly (or, for that matter, covertly) engaging in corporate espionage via the
Internet. Yet U.S. intelligence experts warn that China’s vast intelligence-collecting
apparatus has a voracious appetite for any U.S. technology that could help speed the
People’s Republic’s military modernization and boost the country’s economy. That
puts high-tech vendor companies particularly at risk.
Businesses operating in China are up against a national government that has
essentially unlimited resources and a long track record of industrial and eco-
nomic espionage. Every business in China is run by the government; any effort to
develop intelligence and promote those industries is a national effort. Scans,
probes, and attacks against U.S. firms in China are statistically confirmed and
growing and could be Chinese tests of offensive IW tactics or the work of Chinese
virus writers.
The U.S. firms that may be at the greatest risk of losing proprietary data include
companies that have set up development laboratories in China, but those compa-
nies, eager to gain a foothold in China’s burgeoning information technology (IT)
market, don’t necessarily share the fears of intelligence experts.
Nonetheless, there are more controls in place in China than in some other coun-
tries, but they have not been put in place to foster espionage. Although the Chinese
view controls and regulations as necessary to facilitate an orderly Internet market
and to protect the country from subversion and other Internet crimes, the controls
are partially the result of political rigidity and bureaucratic inertia. Human nature is
the same everywhere in the world. The thought that there are lots of people with
time on their hands to explore what the 50 million Internet users in China are doing
is totally impractical.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
437

Free speech also is proliferating in China. A political journal called Tunnel
(http://www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Bay/5598/) is said to be edited secretly in
China and sent by email each week to an address in the United States, from which
it is then emailed anonymously back to thousands of Chinese readers. Big Reference
(http://www.ifcss.org/home/) is another online challenge to the authorities. One re-
cent issue extolled individualism and paid tribute to the mother of a student killed
when troops crushed the pro-democracy protest in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
The Internet provides not only speed and efficiency but also cover. If you tried
to publish a traditional newsletter promoting democracy in China, you’d surely get
arrested. If only the authorities were smart enough to realize what’s going on, all the
political activities on the Internet would really have them scared.
Perhaps they are smart enough. Regulations introduced in 1997 imposed stiff
penalties (including jail sentences) for using the Internet to damage state interests,
spread rumors, or publicly insult others. Nonetheless, China’s wired population has
grown to 7.731 million according to government figures. Although that is a tiny
portion of an overall population approaching 4 billion, China’s Internet users are
virtually by definition the country’s most educated and modern elite. To watch over
them, a new force of more than 500 “Internet security guards” has been assigned to
patrol computer networks at state companies and ministries. What the Chinese
government is really afraid of is political infiltration. The government’s goal is to
have a security guard in every work unit.
Perhaps most worrisome to the authorities, young Chinese are using the Net to
coordinate political campaigns. On August 17, 1998, Indonesia’s independence
day, hackers in China broke into Indonesian government Web sites and posted
messages protesting violence against ethnic Chinese there. Chinese security officials
ignored the demonstration until it reached the streets. That day, about 200 students
rallied outside the Indonesian Embassy, carrying photographs of rape and murder
victims that they had downloaded from the Web. The incidents weren’t written up
in the Chinese news, but were posted on the Web.
Recently, the government has taken even more drastic action. In Shanghai, a
computer engineer named Lin Hai faces charges of inciting the overthrow of state
power by providing 60,000 email addresses to Big Reference. And at the end of 2000,
the publishers of Tunnel went into hiding.
THE SUPER COMPUTER LITERATE TERRORIST
During the next 20 years, the United States will face a new breed of Internet-enabled
terrorists, super computer literate criminals, and nation-state adversaries who will
launch attacks not with planes and tanks, but with computer viruses and logic
bombs. America’s adversaries around the world are hard at work developing tools to
438
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

bring down the United States’ private sector infrastructure. The United States faces
an increasingly wired but dangerous world, as evidenced by the following:
Many countries have programs to develop cyberattack technologies and could
develop such capabilities over the next decade and beyond.
The Unites States, Russia, China, France, and Israel are developing cyberarse-
nals and the means to wage all-out cyberwarfare.
Terrorist groups are developing weapons of mass destruction.
Russia has become a breeding ground for computer hackers. The Russian
equivalent of the U.S. National Security Agency and organized crime groups re-
cruit the best talent.
Electronic stock scams, robberies, and extortions are proliferating.
A report by the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Stud-
ies (CSIS) went even further, warning of a future cyberarms race and the rise of ter-
rorist groups supported by super computer literate youngsters bent on disrupting
the Internet. China is of particular concern here, because it’s devising strategies for
unrestricted electronic warfare. Officials say critical infrastructures in the United
States could be targeted in the future as revenge for incidents like the 1999 acci-
dental bombing of the Chinese embassy in Serbia. The Chinese government has
even suggested having every person in China send one email to an address of in-
terest in the United States or use hacker tools easily available on the Internet to sup-
port a mass denial-of-service attack.
Online extortion and falsification of shipping manifests by criminals and at-
tempts by countries to use hacking techniques to evade trade sanctions are a rising
concern. DoD officials are also becoming increasingly concerned about the prolif-
eration of “always-on” Internet appliances such as modems and network printers.
Hackers are finding ways to penetrate these devices and possibly use them as
launching pads for more devastating distributed denial-of-service attacks. For ex-
ample, in 2000, a hacker cracked into a printer at the Navy’s Space and Naval War-
fare Center and rerouted a potentially sensitive document to a server in Russia.
Therefore, the real threat comes from the design of the U.S. infrastructure and
the people who run it. Companies build these systems and their business models on
the assumption that things will always work. If a major attack is made on the infra-
structure, it’s going to happen from the inside.
The aforementioned reports hold a powerful message for the national cyberse-
curity effort. However, that future preparedness will be determined by how much
emphasis companies and the government place on fixing known vulnerabilities,
training and education, and enforcing good security policies.
Although the threat of terrorists groups attacking the infrastructure is real, a
word of caution is needed. It’s scary, but it’s really hard to bring down the Internet.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
439

THE NEW SECURITY PROFESSIONALS
At a table equipped with two computers, Mark Coletta (not his real name to
protect his privacy) plies his trade. The intense, lanky 27-year-old is hunting for
holes in a corporate network. Mark seeks clues that will reveal operating sys-
tems, firewalls, or user names. Any one of these could become a key for break-
ing into the system. He thinks purely as a brilliant but nasty rogue hacker, but
Mark is no malicious rogue hacker. He’s a security engineer at an information
security company where he’s paid to tinker with clients’ networks and uncover
their vulnerabilities.
With cyber crime increasingly making news headlines, services such as vulner-
ability assessments, integration of firewalls and other security components, and
subscription-based managed security are in high demand. That demand is spawn-
ing a lucrative market. IT security services will generate up to $13.1 billion world-
wide in 2006 and are growing at a per-year compound rate of 54%, according to
predictions of the research firm GartnerGroup.
Most other security people are vulnerability experts who have switched their
black rogue hacker hats for white hats. Many ex-hackers have become security con-
sultants. Their vision now is to simplify the security process, using the Internet by
documenting the best security practices and then providing them to clients over the
Web. Tying security into a company’s e-commerce [3] strategy also is key. Most
people in this business are just out of school.
Meetings with prospective clients begin with a knowledge test of what and
whom the security specialist knows. Once some sort of connection is established,
the client will pose technical questions about any number of areas, such as data-
bases, Unix, or the Novell platform. What makes the security professional differ-
ent from other IT professionals is that they have to know something about
everything. Some clients, influenced by media reports of computer crimes or by
upper management pushing a security plan, are ready to “pull the trigger” im-
mediately. Others, though, are hit with sticker shock. They don’t understand how
much security costs. Mark has to provide a clear return on investment statement.
It’s the same problem an insurance agent has. Mark has to identify the probabil-
ity that something will happen—it’s the downstream effect.
To devise a security plan for a client, Mark makes a technical assessment of
a network and combines it with his own interviews and observations. He assesses
a company’s “pain threshold,” or how much security risk it can endure before
the business would shut down. Once completed, a security plan can be 700 pages
long. Mark then either implements the plan or recommends how the client can
enact it.
440
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

THE MIDDLE EAST CYBERWAR
Palestinian supporters use a combination of hacking tools and viruses to gain what
appears to be the upper hand in the Middle East’s ongoing cyberwar. How Pales-
tinian hackers watch and what they know will determine the success of this cyber-
war for them.
They distribute the tools and viruses for destroying Israeli sites using a recently
created attack site. Visitors to the site are greeted with the message, “I swear that I
will not use these programs on anyone but Jews and Israelis.” The site comes com-
plete with a list of directions on how to use the attack tools. LoveLetter, Chernobyl
(CIH), and the Melissa Virus (along with 12 Word macro viruses) form the arsenal
for attacking Israeli sites. Apparently, it’s an effective system.
According to sources at iDefense, an international security firm monitoring 
the situation, pro-Palestinian hackers use a variety of tools to orchestrate a well-
organized attack against the 400 or more Israeli Web sites that have been hit dur-
ing the conflict. It is hard to say for sure who is winning, but it appears that the
pro-Palestinian hackers have successfully affected more sites. The pro-Palestinians
have been much more aggressive in scope. Instead of just targeting specific sites,
they have methodically worked through all the sites, thus broadening their agenda.
Over 559 Web sites have been targeted by both sides for denial-of-service at-
tacks, attempts to gain root access, system penetrations, defacements, and a variety
of other attacks. Many sites have been indirectly affected because of the strain that
the attacks have placed on the Net infrastructure in the Middle East.
The conflict began on October 6, 2000, when pro-Israeli hackers created a Web
site to host FloodNet attacks. Since then, both sides have sustained blows to vital in-
formation and financial-resource sites such as the Palestinian National Authority
site and the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. Sixteen tools have been identified as those ac-
tively distributed among attackers, with many others being discussed or suspected
of already being deployed. One such tool is called the EvilPing, believed to have
been created especially for this war. The tool launches a “ping of death attack” that,
when utilized by several users against the same target, crashes the system.
Then there is QuickFire, an attack tool that sends 32,000 emails to the victim
from what appears as the same address. Used simultaneously by multiple attackers,
the tool crashes an email server. QuickFire strength is that it does not relent, con-
tinually firing off thousands of emails until the server is shut down and the address
blocked. It is believed to be the tool used for hack attacks on the Israeli Foreign
Ministry site and its Webmaster’s email address.
A group called Hackers of Israel Unite originally used another popular tool
called WinSmurf, which also uses mass pinging to bring down a site. Borrowing
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
441

amplifying power from broadcast sites, the hackers send out pings that are boosted
10,000-fold or more. According to the group, they were able to shut down Alma-
nar.org using one computer with a 56K modem and an ADSL line.
According to Netscan.org, a site that provides a list of broadcast sites with an
average amplification of times five, a dial-up user with 28.8 kbps of bandwidth,
using a combination of broadcast sites with an amplification of 40, could generate
1152.0 kbps of traffic, about two-thirds of a T1 link. With tools like these, a 56K can
become a powerful weapon and your bandwidth is irrelevant. Netscan.org creators
call themselves a small group of concerned network administrators who got fed up
with being smurfed all day, but they recognize that their site has also become a
hacking tool.
Pro-Palestinians recently turned the tables by using broadcast-site attack tools
against Israeli sites. Although the leaders in the war (groups such as UNITY, DoDi,
and G-Force Pakistan) remain in the limelight, many previously unknown hackers
are taking the cyberwar to another level. Hackers are making moves to gain root ac-
cess to Israeli computers and servers. Root access is the ultimate possession; it
means doing whatever you want with a system. In essence, a hacker who gains root
access control of a computer can scan, delete, and add files, use it as an attack tool
against others, and even view and hear users whose computers are equipped with
cameras and microphones.
With no end in sight to the Middle East cyberwar, talk of targeting U.S. inter-
ests on the Web has been popping up in chat rooms and Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
channels frequented by pro-Palestinian hackers. Hackers such as DoDi have come
out and said that the current war isn’t just against Israeli, but the United States as
well. Arab activists such as Mustapha Merza believe the American media continues
to portray Arabs as terrorist aggressors, even in cyberspace.
The irony is that the number of times that U.S. government sites have been tar-
geted by Israelis are more numerous than those times they were targeted by pro-
Palestinians, yet the American media fails to identify the real perpetrators and
victimizes the Arabs as usual. For its part, the National Infrastructure Protection
Center (a division of the FBI concerned with cyberwarfare, threat assessment, warn-
ing, and investigation) lists both Israeli and Arab sites that promote the cyberwar.
How Israelis Watch and What They Know
A group of self-described ethical hackers are taking the reins of Israel’s Web net-
works into their own hands in the Middle East’s cyberwar. Known as the Israeli In-
ternet Underground (IIU), the coalition of anonymous online activists from
various Israeli technology companies has set up a Web site to disseminate infor-
mation concerning the ongoing battle in cyberspace.
According to the IIU mantra, they are dedicated to the Israeli spirit and united to
protect Israel on the Internet against any kind of attacks from malicious hacking
442
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

groups. The site claims to provide a comprehensive list of sites that were hacked by
Arab attackers since the cyberwar went into full swing in October 2000. Listed are
over 80 Israeli sites that have been defaced and vandalized by various hacking groups.
The number coincides with estimates provided by officials at iDefense. IIU also pro-
vides a list of Israeli sites that they believe run services with commonly known secu-
rity holes such as BIND NXT overflow, IIS 4 holes, and FTP format string bugs.
Examples of defacements by Arab hackers such as the one perpetrated on the
homepage of Jerusalembooks.com, one of the largest Jewish booksellers on the Web,
serve as a warning to those Israeli sites with suspect security. The Jerusalembooks.com
text and graphics were recently replaced with the word “Palestine” in flaming letters
and with text asking Israelis if the torah teaches them to kill innocent kids and rape
women. The site is currently under reconstruction because of the attack.
Taking credit for the attack is the group GForce Pakistan, a well-known activist
group that has joined forces with Palestinians and other Arab hackers in fighting
the cyberwar against Israeli interests. Working alongside the group is the highly
skilled Arab hacker named DoDi. On November 3, 2000, DoDi defaced an Israeli
site and stated he could shut down the Israeli ISP NetVision, host of almost 80% of
the country’s Internet traffic.
Though petty defacements and racial slurs have been the norm on both sides of
the battle, Arab hackers like DoDi have promised to kick the war into high gear in
the coming years, implementing what they refer to as phases three and four of their
“cyber-jihad.”
The Muslim extremist group UNITY, with ties to Hezbollah, laid out a four-
part plan for destroying the Israeli Internet infrastructure at the onset of the cyber-
war. Phase four culminates in blitzing attacks on e-commerce sites, causing
millions of dollars of losses in transactions. IIU said there is already evidence of
phase-four attacks, such as the destruction of business sites with e-commerce ca-
pabilities, which they believe caused a recent 12% dip in the Israeli stock exchange.
The current onslaught of cyberattacks against Israel’s key Web sites is perhaps
the most extensive, coordinated, and malicious hacking effort in history. ISPs and
e-businesses must recognize the need to install protection that goes beyond fire-
walls to provide real security against application-level assaults.
In order to thwart future attacks, IIU has created what they call the SODA 
Project (sod is Hebrew for secret). The stated goal of the project is to inform and
provide solutions wherever the IIU can and, therefore, protect their sites against
political cybervandalism. It lists those Web sites with security vulnerabilities, mak-
ing them susceptible to future attacks by Islamic groups.
The SODA Project formed an alliance with the Internet security firm 2XS Ltd.,
which is linked to the site and agreed to provide security advice for casualties of the cy-
berwar. 2XS Ltd., however, does not accept responsibility for IIU actions. On Novem-
ber 3, 2000, IIU contacted 2XS Ltd. to share their idea of creating a site for publishing
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
443

vulnerability alerts. Another link on the SODA Project is the Internet security infor-
mation forum SecurityFocus.com, a resource guide to online security links and ser-
vices based in San Mateo, California. The site is not taking any sides in the Middle
Eastern war.
Typically, the odds are heavily in the attackers’ favor—the attacker can launch
attacks against any number of sites at little to no cost. They only need to find one
vulnerable victim to succeed, perhaps after checking thousands of potential victims.
Because both Arabs and Israelis are launching volley after volley against the
others’ sites, neither faction gets to play the victim in this war. The victims end up
being citizens and businesses in the affected area. Unfortunately, that’s not un-
common in that part of the world.
THE NEW TOOLS OF TERRORISM
Despite increasing concern about cyberterrorism, the tactics and goals of the
world’s terrorist organizations remain low-tech. Although the terrorist’s toolbox
has changed with the advent of the Information Age, the objectives of the world’s
terrorist organizations have not. A growing percentage of terrorist attacks are de-
signed to kill as many people as possible. Guns and conventional explosives have so
far remained the weapons of choice for most terrorists.
However, terrorists are adopting information technology as an indispensable
command-and-control tool. Raids on terrorist hideouts, for example, are increas-
ingly likely to result in the seizure of computers and other IT equipment. Instead of
just finding a few handwritten notebooks and address books, counterterrorism au-
thorities are faced with dozens of CD-ROMs and hard drives. Likewise, terrorists’
increasing use of advanced encryption tools often delays the process of finding key
files and information.
Terrorists groups, such as the Osama bin Laden organization, have yet to
demonstrate that they value the relatively bloodless outcome of a cyberattack on a
nation’s critical infrastructure, but the threat remains real. The warning signals are
out there. If the United States fails to recognize this, then the United States will pay
another high price like they did on 9-11.
Information Weapons
There are several weapons or tools currently available that can negate, destroy, or in-
capacitate information systems, with many more being rapidly developed. In this
section, these are broadly grouped into three main types: high energy radio frequency
(HERF) guns, electromagnetic pulse (EMP), and other information weapons.
444
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

HERF Guns
A HERF gun (as discussed briefly in Chapter 13) is a device that directs high-power
radio energy at an electronic target. Electronic circuits are vulnerable to overload;
a HERF gun simply overloads particular circuits to disable specific pieces of equip-
ment that are dependent on that circuit. A HERF gun can be designed to cause
varying degrees of damage from shutting a system down to physically destroying
equipment. Pointed at a computer, a HERF gun may either permanently or tem-
porarily terminate its operations. A HERF gun pointed at a “fly-by-wire” aircraft
may trigger a catastrophic failure.
Although currently limited in range and destructive capacity, in the near fu-
ture, HERF guns are likely to be substantially more capable and freely available and,
therefore, must be taken seriously. HERF guns represent an excellent addition to
the offensive military inventory of a nation and a significant threat if possessed by
an enemy. The defensive measures that can be employed to reduce the risks of
HERF attacks are not well developed at this stage but include using Gaussian shield-
ing, gaseous discharge devices, and the maintenance of physical separation.
Electromagnetic Pulse
EMP has been described as the next great weapon to evolve in modern warfare.
Initially discovered as a side effect of nuclear tests, the phenomenon has now been
extended to nonnuclear generators. Such generators can create an EMP that 
will disable unshielded electronic systems. A development beam generator with a 
1 gigawatt capacity could be used to develop a line-of-sight EMP that would knock
out most unshielded electronic devices within a radius measurable in tens to hun-
dreds of meters, depending on the employment method. High-power microwaves
and communications, computer, navigation, and data processing systems would be
most affected by such weapons. The current limitations of these weapons are power
generation and capacitor storage capability, but these can be expected to be over-
come in the future.
Research is well advanced, with EMP warheads recently being fitted on U.S. Air
Force air-launched cruise missiles. EMP weapons are less discriminatory than
HERF guns and could be used to shut down a general area rather than a specific sys-
tem. Again, with the exception of screening techniques such as Gaussian shielding,
defensive measures are not common.
Other Information Weapons
Several weapons are currently being developed that do not fit in the HERF or EMP
categories. Some already are in service with various military forces; others remain
on the drawing board. The following weapons are described in a variety of freely
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
445

available publications and give an indication of the technologies being developed
and the possible capabilities that may result.
Low-Energy Lasers
These lasers can be used to damage the optical systems of sensors (including data
collection devices), thus attacking the information systems at the data collection
level. Low-energy lasers have already been fitted on rifles and armored vehicles and
were deployed during the Gulf War. A number of systems are reported to be under
further development in the United States and United Kingdom.
Electric-Power Disruption Technologies
An electric-power disruption weapon was first used during the Gulf War in 1991.
The technology originated after an accident on the U.S. West Coast when chaff cut
power supplies to the city of San Diego in 1985. The weapon uses light conductive
carbon fibers that wrap around transmission lines and distribution points to cause
a massive short circuit. Even when power is restored, the fibers must be removed
because any breeze can result in another short circuit. This weapon can be delivered
by cruise missiles, as was the case in the Gulf War, or from manned aircraft.
Individually, each of the military information operations (MIO) tools (dis-
cussed in Chapter 13) and techniques just described will present a military com-
mander, whether operating in the conventional or IW environment, with a
substantial force multiplier. Collectively, they offer a decisive addition to military
power. As more MIO capabilities are developed, the effectiveness of the MIO strat-
egy will increase exponentially, reflecting the synergistic relationship that exists be-
tween individual elements of the MIO environment. Accordingly, nations
developing information strategies should consider investing, both intellectually and
financially, across the gamut of information operations.
New Arsenals, Old Rivalries
Could a small country develop the capability to hit the United States with a long-
range unconventional weapon? Most certainly one could, but whether such a state
would be inclined to try is an entirely different matter.
The risk is real. Congress learned in 1998, according to “The Report of the
Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States” [4], that the
United States has entered “a new nonproliferation environment” in which there is
a far greater availability of ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction. As
previously mentioned, the report was the work of a private commission headed by
Donald Rumsfeld, secretary of defense under President Reagan and the second
President Bush.
446
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

To begin with, the report refers to a club of renegade nations that appear to
work with one another to dodge the strictures of nonproliferation agreements. The
states trade with one another and build on the progress of other members of the
club to advance their own systems. Indeed, it is arguable that the recent North Ko-
rean firing of a Taepo Dong missile was meant to further its own missile develop-
ment and to serve, in effect, as a marketing demonstration to attract buyers from
other countries outside the international nonproliferation framework.
Another factor, the report points out, is that access to information on a global
scale keeps growing exponentially, as the bounds of the Internet in particular re-
main uncharted. What’s more, there has been an easing of access to what the Rums-
feld Commission terms the rudimentary technologies that were employed in early
generations of U.S. and Soviet missile systems.
There is a fourth factor: the flexibility with which technical personnel from the
West, and especially from the former Soviet Union, can move to a potential prolif-
erator. Because so many third world countries now have ballistic missiles of their
own and, therefore, are interested in upgrades, whether of guidance or range, they
are less pressed to acquire whole systems.
They are also well aware that it is the acquisition of such whole systems that
garners the most international attention and is most easily policed by the web of
agreements, such as the Missile Technology Control Regime, that the United States
and its allies have spun to guard against proliferation. Instead, what many nations
are focusing on is brainpower, people who are intimately familiar with technical
data packages, who can advise on both long-term improvements and quick fixes,
and who can offer recommendations on everything from guidance systems to ma-
terials technology to quality control to integration.
Many such scientists and technicians, particularly in the former Soviet states,
are willing and eager to improve their material lot by helping renegade nations en-
hance systems that were often acquired from the Soviet Union or that are deriva-
tives of such systems. Although Western nations recognize the destabilizing impact
of peripatetic unemployed scientists working in countries that “show them the
money,” they can produce few options. Other than propose alternative employ-
ment, the United States and its allies have little to offer, particularly to those moti-
vated by ideological or religious ideals. A significant number of missile owners are
potential adversaries of the United States, and, many of the third world powers have
mutual supranational interests. Should a Muslim nation, for example, be taken
over by extremists, it could seek support in other Muslim nations from like-minded
elements that might not necessarily have seized power but would be in a position to
offer the new regime intellectual assistance and perhaps financial aid.
Certainly, even the availability of resources, and of willing foreign technologists,
combined with nefarious intentions, does not in itself suffice for the successful
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
447

pursuit of a program for intercontinental ballistic missiles. Otherwise, Libya would
long ago have been in a position to threaten the United States. Nevertheless, the
ability of lesser powers to mount such a threat over the next two decades cannot be
ruled out.
Furthermore, as the recent North Korean and Iranian missile tests demon-
strated yet again, a third world country whose leadership is determined to advance
its capabilities will not be deterred by nonproliferation regimes. It will find ways to
draw upon outside resources in support of its program, and, no less important, it
will do so well in advance of the timetables set forth by Western intelligence.
Stolen Thunder Tools
Like a neutron bomb (whose design Chinese agents allegedly stole), the Cox report
demolished any doubt that China engages in espionage against the United States
(see sidebar, “China Grabs U.S. Technology to Modernize Its Military”), but it left
standing a whole array of big questions and small mysteries.
CHINA GRABS U.S. TECHNOLOGY TO 
MODERNIZE ITS MILITARY
The request to a Massachusetts defense contractor seemed innocent enough: China
needed fiber-optic gyroscopes, the latest in navigation equipment, for a new high-
speed rail system, the buyers allegedly said. The deal might have gone through if not
for a small hitch: the manufacturer recalled that the men, using a different company
name, had tried earlier to get a U.S. license to export the gyroscopes to China—and
had been turned down.
In 1999, U.S. Customs agents in San Diego arrested a Chinese national named
Yao Yi for criminal export violations. Yi has pleaded not guilty; his coconspirator,
Collin Shu, a Canadian, was also arrested and pleaded not guilty. The two are
accused of conspiracy to illegally export items designed for military purposes. The
gyroscopes are generally used for guiding missiles or maneuvering fighter jets. To
put these in a train is like putting an F-14 engine in a Cessna.
INTENSE DEBATE
The gyroscope case is one of the latest incidents illuminating Beijing’s voracious
appetite for high-end U.S. technology that has military capabilities. Also in 1999, a
man was arrested in Detroit for allegedly trying to illegally ship to China a riot-
control vehicle. A report by a panel chaired by Rep. Christopher Cox (R-Calif.), in
1999, suggested that China may have married U.S. computer technology with
nuclear weapons designs it stole in the 1980s from U.S. labs. The report presented no
448
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

hard evidence of this, but it will almost certainly add fuel to an already intense debate
over exports of high-speed computers to Beijing.
Proponents of the sale of high-tech goods to China say they help open the coun-
try to influences like American television shows beamed off U.S.-manufactured
satellites. They add that U.S. electronics firms need foreign markets like China if they
are to stay healthy in the face of stiff foreign competition.
The present and past administrations have generally supported this view, but in
1999, in a surprising turnaround, Clinton advisers blocked California satellite maker
Hughes Electronics Corp. from sending two $670-million satellites to be launched in
China. Various officials offered different explanations for the decision, but the gov-
ernment told Hughes the launches could transfer too much militarily significant
know-how.
Critics of high-tech exports to China say they have other concerns as well: the
same technology that is already turning China into a land of ATM machines and cell
phones could help the People’s Liberation Army begin to master IW. Pentagon offi-
cials counter that nobody is assessing the impact of the fiber-optic lines, electronic-
switching gear, computers, and satellites pouring into China. Some examples follow.
In March 1996, as Beijing was threatening Taiwan with missiles, the State and
Defense departments approved the export to China of two satellite receiving stations
worth $7.3 million. The recipient, documents show, was China Electronic Systems
Engineering Company, part of China’s military. The stations came equipped with
ports to plug in Chinese-made encryption devices. The National Security Agency
signed off on the deal, but congressional critics say the sale deserves a second look.
China buys nearly half of the supercomputers the United States exports to high-
risk countries. Experts point out that the Chinese can evade U.S. export controls by
harnessing together less powerful machines—or buying high-capacity machines on
a Russian Internet site. Industry groups plan to lobby Congress to allow more pow-
erful machines to be exported, arguing that 1995 limits are already outdated. The
Cox report calls for greater scrutiny, including spot checks in China to ensure the
best machines are used only for civilian purposes. There are two trains rushing down
the track directly at each other on this.
Experts say China’s rapidly modernizing military is still years from catching up
with the United States, at best, but some worry that China will put high-tech imports
to their best military uses and turn into a surprising adversary.
The most sensational charge in the 872-page Cox report—that China has ob-
tained secret data on every warhead in the U.S. nuclear arsenal—is based on a sin-
gle document that a Chinese agent deliberately fed the CIA in 1995. Why would
China’s spy masters tip their hand? Maybe they bungled, giving away too much in
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
449

an effort to plant a double agent. Maybe they were warning Washington to butt out
of China’s touchy relationship with Taiwan, or maybe, they were just following the
1,500-year-old advice of the military philosopher Sun Tzu to “sow confusion in the
enemy’s camp.”
The release of the bipartisan Cox report in 1999 certainly did that. Its overall
conclusions are chilling. For two decades, it says, China has used spies, front com-
panies, and scientific exchanges to filch some of America’s most precious secrets,
but on closer reading, it is still unclear how much damage has been done to U.S. na-
tional security. In most cases, it seems, Beijing got helpful hints, not blueprints.
Democrats on the congressional panel, which was led by Republican Rep.
Christopher Cox of California, unanimously approved the report, but they also
questioned its alarmist tone. There are, unfortunately, a number of places where the
report reaches to make a point and, frankly, exaggerates.
On the other hand, concrete advances from spying sometimes don’t show up in
weapon systems until years later. It’s possible, as Cox and some Pentagon officials
argue, that the sum of China’s technological thievery is even larger than its parts. So
how worried should Americans be? Here’s what the report does and does not say:
Nuclear Warheads
China stole classified design data on the W-88, a miniaturized nuclear warhead
that is the most advanced in the U.S. arsenal. The CIA discovered this in 1995
when a Chinese “walk-in” (an agent who came forward voluntarily) handed over
a Chinese document stamped “secret.” The unclassified version of the report
does not reveal the contents of the document, but an administration official at the
time said it contained two quite specific and detailed bits of data on the W-88.
One was the size of the “package” containing the nuclear device, whose yield (ex-
plosive power) was already available from open sources. Although useful, that
knowledge is a far cry from a detailed plan for a nuclear weapon. It’s more like
looking at a car’s engine compartment and knowing how much horsepower the
block can produce.
Because the CIA later determined that the walk-in was a double agent acting on
the orders of China’s intelligence service, it is unclear whether the Chinese had al-
ready milked the information or never considered it all that important. The Chi-
nese document, dated 1988, also described the size and yield of four other U.S.
warheads, but that may have come from publicly available sources.
Why does China covet America’s nuclear secrets? The Cox committee con-
cluded that U.S. technology would help China build smaller warheads to sit atop a
new generation of lighter, mobile missiles, but the upgrade has been in the works
for 23 years. Most experts think that its goal is to ensure China’s “second-strike ca-
pability”—the ability to retaliate for a nuclear attack, not to launch a first strike.
450
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Beijing’s leaders have good reason to worry about the reliability of their current
strategic-missile force: fewer than 20 aging, 1950s-era rockets.
The first of the new missiles, the DF-31, won’t be able to reach most of the ter-
ritory of the United States, but could it intimidate China’s neighbors or make the
United States hesitate to defend Taiwan in a crisis? Definitely.
Rocket Technology
The Cox panel was established partly to look into allegations that two U.S. aero-
space firms, Hughes and Loral, helped China improve the reliability of its Long
March booster rockets. The report says the two companies ignored restrictions on
technology transfers and gave away sensitive information while helping China in-
vestigate a series of failed attempts to launch the firms’ satellites into space.
What, exactly, did Chinese scientists learn? How to build better “fairings,” the
nose cone that protects the satellite during launch. How to compensate for the vi-
olent winds that buffet rockets in flight. How to fix the Long March 3B’s guidance
system. How to better investigate failed launches. This information has improved
the reliability of Chinese rockets useful for civilian and military purposes.
Still, it is unclear how quickly China will be able to make those improvements.
In the past, China has sometimes had difficulty absorbing Western technology.
The spying and technology transfer is of enormous concern, but, having it in your
hand doesn’t mean you know how to use it or effectively deploy it.
Computers
There is no mystery about how China got advanced computers. The question is
what it does with them. Under relaxed export rules, China has legally bought 1,236
high-speed, American-made computers since 1996. The Cox report says they have
been used in nuclear weapons applications, such as modeling hypothetical explo-
sions rather than conducting real ones after Beijing signed the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty in 1996. The congressional panel recommended spot checks to monitor
the use of U.S. computers in the future, rather than cutting off sales.
Radar
The Cox report also asserts that classified U.S. radar research stolen by the People’s
Republic of China could be used to threaten U.S. submarines, but the White House
produced a letter from the Navy to the Justice Department stating, It is difficult to
make a case that significant damage has occurred from the alleged disclosure.
China has never aspired to a large nuclear arsenal. One possible explanation for
Beijing’s disclosure of its own espionage is that Chinese leaders wanted the world to
know they could build a large, modern arsenal—if they wanted to. It’s deterrence
on the cheap. If that was the plan, it just might have worked.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
451

WHY TOOLS ARE EASY TO GET AND USE
Why are hacking and IW tools and weapons of mass destruction easy to get and
use? Easy answer: They can be stolen.
For example, investigators at Los Alamos National Laboratory, in 2000, dis-
covered that computer hard drives containing nuclear weapons data and other
highly sensitive material stored in a vault at the laboratory had disappeared, ac-
cording to several United States Government officials. The hard drives were stored
in locked containers inside a vault in the nuclear weapons division of the national
laboratory. Officials reported that the hard drives were missing on June 1, 2000,
after officials went to search for them following forest fires in the area. The con-
tainers remained in the vault, but the hard drives were gone.
The material, stored in the vault of the laboratory’s X Division, where nuclear
weapons are designed, contained what officials described as nuclear weapons data
used by the government’s Nuclear Emergency Search Team, or NEST, which re-
sponds to nuclear accidents and nuclear-related threats from terrorists. The mate-
rial includes all the data on American nuclear weapons that the team needs to
render nuclear devices safe in emergencies. In addition, the missing material in-
cluded intelligence information concerning the Russian nuclear weapons program.
The Energy Department’s security czar at the time, Eugene E. Habiger, con-
ducted an intensive search and investigation at Los Alamos but did not find the
data. He has written a secret report on the matter, and the FBI has been brought in
to assist with the investigation. Officials said they remained uncertain whether the
data has been misplaced or stolen.
This disappearance of the nuclear weapons data represents a major embarrass-
ment for a laboratory that had already spent the past year under scrutiny for lax se-
curity in connection with the Wen Ho Lee case. As previously mentioned, Dr. Lee was
a scientist at Los Alamos who was fired in March 1999 for security violations after
being the subject of a counter-intelligence investigation that looked into evidence that
China had stolen American nuclear secrets. Dr. Lee was never charged with espi-
onage, but after he was dismissed, investigators accused him of downloading and
copying vast amounts of secret nuclear weapons data from a secure computer at Los
Alamos into an unclassified computer network and onto portable tapes. Dr. Lee was
arrested in December 1999 on charges of mishandling classified material.
The discovery of Dr. Lee’s unauthorized downloads in April 1999 prompted
then Energy Secretary Bill Richardson to order a shutdown of the lab’s computer
systems, while mandating security training sessions for Los Alamos employees.
Congress later passed legislation creating a new nuclear weapons agency within the
Energy Department to oversee Los Alamos and the nation’s other nuclear weapons
laboratories. The new security breach is believed to have occurred long after Dr. Lee
was dismissed.
452
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Energy Department officials indicated that they notified the FBI as soon as they
discovered that the material was missing, but some law enforcement officials say
that officials at the lab downplayed the fact that the data was missing from the vault
and assumed that the hard drives would turn up somewhere else in the lab. The of-
ficials are said to have assumed that the material was in use somewhere in the lab
by Los Alamos scientists. The fact that the missing data included intelligence re-
ports has led law enforcement officials to become skeptical that the material was
simply misplaced. The hard drives were eventually found near a trash-can. Ques-
tions remain: Who took them and how much classified material was downloaded
before they were eventually found?
WHY NASTY PEOPLE ARE SO HARD
TO TRACK DOWN AND CAPTURE
When a pair of suicide bombers crippled the destroyer USS Cole in a Yemeni port
in mid-October 2000, killing 17 American sailors, top U.S. counterterrorism offi-
cials had a fearful intuition: This is revenge for Albania. In mid-1998, the CIA,
working with Albania’s intelligence service, had rolled up a terrorist cell guided by
wanted dead or alive Saudi exile Osama bin Laden. A deadly bombing of the U.S.
Embassy in Albania’s capital, Tirana, was barely averted. The Middle Eastern plot-
ters were sent home to face prosecution. They have not forgotten that, and they’re
still looking for payback.
The United States has yet to nail all of those responsible for the Cole attack
(even though a few suspects have been detained), but that first guess made a
macabre sort of sense to those waging the interminable war against terrorism. Few
Americans realize the full extent and intensity of what has become an around-the-
clock, across-the-globe campaign against fundamentalist Islamic terrorists, a con-
fusing web of groups and names fused only by their hatred for the United States
and, often, their shared experience fighting the Soviet Union’s occupation of
Afghanistan in the 1980s.
This war is waged largely in the shadows, a cat-and-mouse contest between ter-
rorists and intelligence agencies that only rarely comes into public view. Much of
the vast U.S. national security machinery (and a ballooning budget) is trained on
the threat. Fragmentary bits of data gleaned from eavesdropping satellites, human
informers, friendly governments, and old-fashioned police work are pieced to-
gether to deter and disrupt terrorist attacks on a regular basis.
High Alert
Recently, U.S. intelligence agencies warned that U.S. naval forces in Italy and the
airbase in Incirlik, Turkey, were being targeted. The posts went on high alert, and
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
453

the aircraft carrier USS Truman was diverted from Naples to Crete. Meanwhile, the
State Department sent a global alert to all its posts, ordering them to review secu-
rity procedures.
The war comes out of the shadows when U.S. intelligence and law enforcement
agents lose a battle, such as in the Cole attack or the 1998 bombings of two U.S. em-
bassies in East Africa (see sidebar, “Putting Terror Inc. on Trial”). As traumatic as they
are, though, for each such loss there is many an unheralded success—dashing terror-
ists’ hopes of more bloodied bodies and battered buildings on the world’s TV screens.
PUTTING TERROR INC. ON TRIAL
Ali Mohamed is a man of many faces: Egyptian intelligence agent, U.S. Army para-
trooper, FBI informant, and aide to wanted dead or alive terrorist mastermind
Osama bin Laden. Before bombs shattered U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania,
Mohamed says, he scouted possible targets and personally brought bin Laden pho-
tos of Nairobi sites. Bin Laden looked at the picture of the American Embassy and
pointed to where a truck could go as a suicide bomber.
Mohamed, 51, is now poised to play a new role—as the Justice Department’s
star witness in the long-awaited trial of bin Laden’s alleged followers, which started
in January 2001 in New York City. A sweeping 319-count indictment charges bin
Laden and 20 others with a terrorist crime spree dating back to 1991. Among the
charges: bombings, perjury, and conspiracy to murder Americans around the globe.
The attacks include not only those on the U.S. embassies in 1998 (which left over 220
dead and 5,000 injured), but also attacks on U.S. troops in Somalia and Saudi Ara-
bia. Although bin Laden remains at large (with a $100 million U.S. reward on his
head), five of those indicted are now in U.S. custody—as is Mohamed, who pleaded
guilty in October 2000.
INFIDELS
The October 2000 suicide bombing of the USS Cole and the 9-11 attacks (tied by
investigators to bin Laden’s network) have added fresh urgency to the government’s
efforts to thwart the wanted dead or alive Saudi exile, now hiding in the badlands of
Afghanistan or nearby in Pakistan. Led by Mohamed’s likely testimony, the trial
promised an unprecedented look at America’s most wanted terrorist and at al-
Qaeda, the fanatic organization that he guides. The indictment imparts an image of
a paranoid, virulently anti-American network determined to purge Muslim lands of
“infidels.” To achieve this, bin Laden’s men strove to obtain chemical and even
nuclear weapons, according to prosecutors.
454
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Proving a grand conspiracy may be difficult. Prosecuting international terrorists
is often a delicate balance between law enforcement’s need for evidence and the
intelligence world’s need to protect sources and methods. Through electronic eaves-
dropping, for example, U.S. officials quickly learned of bin Laden’s involvement in
the embassy blasts, but they are loath to introduce such sensitive records into court.
HOLY WAR
Such concerns may explain the indictment’s at times tenuous links among the
alleged terrorists. Prosecutors tie bin Laden to the conspiracy largely through his
funding of al-Qaeda and his calls for holy war against the West. For some defen-
dants, their work with al-Qaeda appears to be enough. For others, it is their work in
bin Laden’s businesses in Sudan, from construction and agriculture to an investment
house, which prosecutors call fronts for terror. Still others are tied to al-Qaeda’s rul-
ing council, where terrorist plots (like the 9-11 attacks) are said to be hatched.
With his guilty plea, Mohamed has made the prosecution’s job far easier. Under
oath, Mohamed already has done more than tie bin Laden directly to the embassy
bombings. He strongly hinted he could connect the dots to the five others in cus-
tody, who have all pleaded not guilty. 
Two of the defendants, Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-Owali and Khalfan Khamis
Mohamed, face the death penalty if convicted, as prosecutors have the strongest evi-
dence tying them to the embassy attacks. Al-Owali, a Saudi Arabian, allegedly filmed
a statement before the bombing celebrating his “martyrdom,” and rode in the pickup
carrying the Nairobi bomb; he was found later in a hospital with keys to the truck’s
padlock nearby. Prosecutors say Khalfan Mohamed, a Tanzanian, helped grind up
TNT and load the truck used in the Dar es Salaam bombing. A third defendant, Sad-
diq Odeh, a Jordanian, is allegedly tied to TNT and detonators used in Tanzania.
A fourth man, Mamdouh Mahmud Salim, allegedly purchased the 1998 Toyota
Dyna truck that carried the bomb in Nairobi. His case was recently severed from the
others after he stabbed a prison guard in the eye. Investigators are hoping a fifth
defendant, Wadih el-Hage, will follow Ali Mohamed’s lead and cooperate. A tire
store manager in Arlington, Texas, he acted, prosecutors contend, as a bag man and
passport fixer while working as bin Laden’s personal secretary.
TARGETS
Ali Mohamed’s testimony, which will likely earn him a reduced sentence, may prove
particularly damning to el-Hage. Mohamed, a former U.S. Army sergeant, a natu-
ralized American citizen born in Egypt, claims he worked with el-Hage in Nairobi
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
455
q

and that during a visit to el-Hage’s house, bin Laden’s security chief told him to con-
duct surveillance on American, British, French, and Israeli “targets” in Senegal.
Defense attorneys on the case know they’re facing tough odds. Mohamed’s guilty
plea has thrown a wrench into their strategies. For defendants facing the death penalty,
their lawyers’ primary focus is to stop them from getting killed. If Ali Mohamed does
indeed take the stand, his credibility will likely come under fire. The talkative terrorist
has a record of shifting loyalties and admits to lying to investigators in the past.
El-Hage, a naturalized U.S. citizen, certainly seems to be feeling the pressure.
Five days after Mohamed’s testimony, he suddenly also attempted to plead guilty.
The plea, offered without consulting with prosecutors, was thrown out because el-
Hage told the judge he was acting not out of guilt, but because he wanted to escape
the humiliation of a trial. Should el-Hage decide to flip with prosecutorial blessing,
his testimony could offer a trove of information. Court documents place the 43-
year-old el-Hage within a rogues’ gallery of terrorists. The Lebanese native is
allegedly tied not only to the embassy bombs but also to a string of criminal acts,
including attempted arms sales to those later convicted in the 1990 murder of radi-
cal Rabbi Meir Kahane and the 1993 World Trade Center bombing.
Further revelations may come from Ali Mohamed, who is cooperating with the
FBI. Terrorism experts already are pondering his assertion that through the mid-
1990s, bin Laden’s al-Qaeda maintained close ties to Hezbollah, the Iranian-backed
militia, and to Iranian security forces. Al-Qaeda and its allies received explosives
training at Hezbollah camps in Lebanon, Mohamed claimed, and received bombs
disguised to look like rocks from the Iranians. The implications are troubling. Iran
is an untold story in this. How many elements have they kept out of this indictment?
Perhaps several. Ties to the USS Cole bombing may well emerge from trial tes-
timony, and a further indictment in New York (this one under seal) names even
more alleged bin Laden conspirators. Clearly, the trial will be but one act in an ongo-
ing and altogether grim play.
In November 2000, for instance, authorities in Kuwait, who thought they
had radical Islamists under control, got a nasty shock. They uncovered a tiny ter-
rorist cell plotting to bomb U.S. and Kuwaiti facilities and quietly called in the
CIA, which helped trace the plot beyond Kuwait’s borders. A suspect, Mo-
hammed al-Dosary, led investigators to a desert weapons cache that held 293
pounds of high explosives, 1,450 detonators, and, for good measure, 5 hand
grenades. They were in the final stages of casing targets, claims a U.S. official.
Even more worrisome, the plotters had helpers in Kuwait’s government, one of
the closest U.S. allies in the Persian Gulf.
456
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Publicly, the face of the adversary is bin Laden’s, but focusing on one man
misses the full picture. Bin Laden has tapped into what U.S. officials sardonically
call the “Afghan Veterans Association,” Arabs who answered the call to holy war
against the Soviets two decades ago—at the time, with backing from the CIA. The
threat posed by the Jihadist network didn’t become clear until five years ago, with
the U.S. arrests of those behind the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. That case
sounded the first broad alarms that thousands of Arab veterans from the Afghan
war had now trained their sights on the West.
Terror Inc.
Bin Laden finances and motivates a “network of networks,” co-opting homegrown ter-
rorist groups, from Egyptian Islamic Jihad to the Abu Sayyaf group in the Philippines
to the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. It’s like winding up little dolls and sending
them back to their own countries and letting them create their own movements. The
United States government was slow to recognize what bin Laden was doing. Bin Laden
was doing something much more than spreading the money around.
Without fanfare, Washington in 1999 opened a new front in the war. The strat-
egy: go on the offensive and hound and disrupt terrorist cells wherever they can be
found. U.S. intelligence agencies routinely tip off local security services to problems
they didn’t even know they had. Cells are placed under surveillance or, using a
legal process called “rendition,” suspects are forcibly returned to their home coun-
tries. In Albania, Algeria, Pakistan, Syria, and elsewhere, bin Laden devotees have
been booted out, often on immigration charges and with little publicity. More than
two dozen suspects have been brought to justice. The war on terror is fought down
in the weeds. It’s guys talking to their sources, pulling people in for questioning,
and digging for telephone records. It’s the slow, dirty, grunt police work that goes
on every day.
In 2000, the CIA launched the largest counterterror operation in U.S. history,
working with counterparts in Jordan and other countries to thwart a multiconti-
nent “terrorist spectacular” during the millennium celebrations. CIA operatives in
more than 60 countries pressured, pleaded, and paid local authorities to crack
down on Islamic radicals. The message was, It’s crunch time. This cost the agency
a great deal of money and resources.
Like battling the mythical Hydra, though, an eliminated terrorist cell only
seems to regenerate, sometimes in the same place. Bin Laden and his organization,
al-Qaeda, are still itching to pull off an attack in pro-Western Jordan, and though
U.S. and Kenyan authorities busted up an al-Qaeda operation in Nairobi in early
1998, the victory was only temporary. They immediately came back in. They were
able to use the infrastructure that was in place, spin up a new cell, and go after the
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
457

target. The August 7, 1998, blasts at the U.S. embassies in Nairobi and Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania, killed more than 220 people.
Just as sobering is what officials call the “mujahideen underground railroad,” a
vast effort to move young recruits to terrorist training camps in Afghanistan. An es-
timated 40,000 recruits have gone to Afghanistan since 1996. Using professionally
forged documents and Hotmail Internet accounts to keep in touch, network mem-
bers move people through Italy, the Balkans, Turkey, and Dubai.
Recruitment
The Finsbury Park Mosque sits in a gritty part of London, not far from the Arsenal
soccer stadium. Inside, the only sign of Islamic activism is a hand-made sign
protesting Russia’s war in Muslim Chechnya, but U.S., British, and Yemeni officials
say the mosque is a recruitment station for terror camps and that its fundamental-
ist imam, Abu Hamza al-Masri, has ties with terror groups abroad.
Often, the process begins when a potential recruit visits a local mosque and
makes a small donation. While some of the funds may go to legitimate Islamic
charity work, bin Laden receives a steady stream from mosques, charities, and
schools. The way to get rich is to come up with a scheme to get everyone to pay you
5 cents a month. That’s what he’s done. The United States has tried to block the
money flow but has made little progress.
Despite the nature of the quarry, progress is being made in the war on terror-
ism. The United States is certainly holding their own. There’s a chance that the
United States is even gaining ground, but not very much. Bin Laden’s success (due
to the 9-11 attacks) has spurred unprecedented international law enforcement co-
operation. Jordanian officials alerted U.S. agencies to the millennium threat. Even
Russia, which fears radical Islam in Chechnya and Central Asia, now works regu-
larly, if quietly, with U.S. counterparts. This is a dramatic turnaround. Neverthe-
less, some U.S. agencies still dropped the ball in not being able to prevent the 9-11
terrorist attacks.
Through eavesdropping and, increasingly, informants, Western spy agencies
are gaining a clearer picture of the structure of bin Laden’s network and his inner
circle, but penetrating the distinct cultures in which the terrorists operate is diffi-
cult. The CIA has begun a special program to recruit Muslims, in hopes of worm-
ing its way inside. One advantage: the terrorist networks’ decentralized structure.
They are vast, but they’re not real tight. The CIA is more aggressive but is hampered
by 1995 regulations restricting recruitment of sources with unsavory backgrounds.
The CIA claims the rules don’t block operations.
Nor have the terror fighters been able to get bin Laden himself, who still moves be-
tween homes, residences, and underground bunkers in Afghanistan or in neighboring
Pakistan. He is protected by what a Pentagon official calls “double walls of security.”
458
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

One is provided by his dwindling Taliban hosts, and his own personal security detail
includes an elder son who is said to rarely leave his side but now is presumed dead.
Recently, terror fighters were further embarrassed by the elusiveness of bin Laden,
when he showed up at his elder son’s wedding in full view of international media
cameras.
The terrorists do their own spying. They do exploit our weaknesses. The Cole
attackers slipped through a small window (four hours every other month) as U.S.
ships refueled in Yemen. They hit the United States in exactly the right place. Some-
times, terrorists dispatch walk-ins, “informers” who proffer false information to
U.S. agents. Bin Laden previously used an INMARSAT satellite telephone—on
which U.S. spy agencies eavesdropped and quickly established his role in the East
Africa bombings. When that fact became public, he switched to a system of mule
messengers and code words.
Still, U.S. high-tech wizardry plays a key role in combating terrorists who are
increasingly high-tech themselves. When Khalil Deek was arrested in Pakistan in
December 1999, U.S. and Jordanian officials weren’t sure how much of the millen-
nium plot they’d unraveled. Deek (who denies involvement) had computer files
locked with a commercially available encryption program. U.S. agents rushed the
computer to the Fort Meade, Maryland, campus of the code-breaking National Se-
curity Agency. It was a race against time. The National Security Agency had to
know whether Deek had operational information such as where and how the at-
tacks were planned.
That threat was thwarted, but others keep coming: an average of 40 each week,
according to the FBI. Fighting terrorism is like being a soccer goalie. You can block
99 shots, but you miss one and you lose the game.
THE IW GAMES
The number of cyberattacks and intrusions into Pentagon computer networks in
2004 is expected to top off at 68,000, an increase of 9% from 2003, according to the
DoD. However, the overwhelming majority of those intrusions occur because of
known vulnerabilities and poor security practices. Ninety-nine percent of the suc-
cessful attacks and intrusions can be attributed to known vulnerabilities and secu-
rity gaps that have gone unfixed and poor security practices by defense agencies.
Malicious hackers and other criminals penetrated Pentagon network security at
least 76,271 times during the first seven months of 2004. Hackers stung the Penta-
gon at least 66,366 times in 2003 and 58,493 times in 2002. These incidents will
have served a constructive purpose if the Pentagon learns from them. By exposing
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
459

and highlighting vulnerabilities, the attacks can actually help inoculate the system
for times of crisis—but only if the appropriate lessons are learned now.
The number of successful attacks raises questions about the Pentagon’s pre-
paredness to withstand more skilled adversaries. The Pentagon is currently operat-
ing in a relatively benign international environment, yet they were hard pressed to
deal with the detected hacks. The Pentagon has a raging case of technological hubris
and is ready to be taken to the cleaners by a savvy adversary.
In addition to weak security practices by DoD network administrators, the in-
crease in the number of attacks can be attributed to the greater availability of so-
phisticated hacker tools on the Internet. Someone with a very limited amount of
computer skills can do a lot of damage. The increase in the number and the so-
phistication of the attacks poses a significant threat to DoD plans to use computer
networks as part of its overall strategy to fight future conflicts, a concept known
throughout the Pentagon as “network-centric warfare.”
Despite claims by senior officials that DoD’s classified systems are immune
from attack, there are several connections between the Pentagon’s top secret and se-
cret networks and the unclassified network that connects to the global Internet that
make them vulnerable. However, sophisticated encryption devices designed by the
National Security Agency protect the classified networks. All of the Pentagon’s var-
ious layers of networks are connected. Regardless of classification, there are con-
nections and the Pentagon is dependent on that infrastructure.
However, legal restrictions have hampered the DoD’s ability to respond to at-
tacks and track down hackers. Due to legal and privacy [5] restrictions, the depart-
ment is prohibited from pursuing hackers beyond its networks. The agency can
take defensive measures to stop a hacker, but to actively catch and prosecute a
hacker, it must go through the FBI. The agency doesn’t go outside of their firewalls,
but they’d like to.
One solution that the department is working on is a concept called “legal hot
pursuit.” Pentagon criminal investigators are searching for a legal framework that
would enable them to use one search warrant to track hackers back through the
multitude of Web sites they often use as launching pads for their attacks. Today,
these investigations require separate search warrants for every system used as part
of a distributed denial-of-service attack.
How Other Countries Are Getting into the IW Games
According to the CIA, other countries are developing cyberattack capability. The
United States could become a target of cyberattacks from a growing list of terror-
ists and foreign countries, including Russia, China, and even Cuba (see sidebar,
“Has Cuba Joined the IW Games?”)
460
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

HAS CUBA JOINED THE IW GAMES?
These must be jittery times for anyone in the military who uses the Internet. Not only
do they have to guard against Love Bug worms and security holes in Microsoft  Out-
look, but also they’ve got to worry about Fidel Castro hacking into their computers.
According to the Defense Intelligence Agency, the 78-year-old communist dic-
tator may be preparing a cyberattack against the United States. Castro’s armed forces
could initiate an IW or computer network attack that could disrupt the military.
One can say there is a real threat that Cuba might go that route. There’s certainly
the potential for Cuba to employ those kinds of tactics against the United States’
modern and superior military. Cuba’s conventional military might is lacking, but its
intelligence operations are substantial.
In addition to Cuba, terrorists such as Osama bin Laden are now using the
Internet and encryption to cloak communications within their organizations. They
recruit people on Internet sites and use encryption. They send their operational
planning and judgments using encryption. They raise money. Bin Laden allegedly
uses encryption (and a variant of the technology, called steganography) to evade U.S.
efforts to monitor his organization. Also, bin Laden and his global network of lieu-
tenants and associates remain the most immediate and serious threat to America.
And what about Castro? It might seem odd to view a country best known for
starving livestock, Elian Gonzalez, and acute toilet paper shortages as a looming
threat, but the Pentagon seems entirely serious. Cuba is not a strong conventional
military threat, but their ability to use asymmetric tactics against the United States’
military superiority would be significant. They have a strong intelligence apparatus,
good security, and the potential to disrupt the U.S. military through asymmetric tac-
tics. Asymmetric tactics is military-ese for terrorist tactics when your opponent has
a huge advantage in physical power.
The CIA is detecting with increasing frequency, the appearance of doctrine and
dedicated offensive cyberwarfare programs in other countries. They have identified
several countries, based on all-source intelligence information, that are pursuing
government-sponsored offensive cyberprograms.
IW is becoming a viable strategic alternative for countries that realize that, in
conventional military confrontation with the United States, they will not prevail.
For instance, a cyberattack against a national target such as a transportation center
or electrical power distribution center would, by virtue of its catastrophic conse-
quences, completely overlap with the use of weapons of mass destruction.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
461

The United States can make the enemy’s command centers ineffective by
changing their data system. The enemy’s headquarters can then be used to make in-
correct judgments by sending mis- or disinformation. The enemy’s banking system
and even its entire social order can also be dominated.
Cyberwarfare represents a viable strategy for countries that are outmanned in
conventional warfare. These countries perceive that cyberattacks, launched from
within or outside the United States, represent the kind of asymmetric option they
will need to level the playing field during an armed crisis against the United States.
With the advent of the cyberthreat, the United States is faced with the need to func-
tion in the medium of cyberspace, where it will conduct its business in new and
challenging ways.
The technology to launch cyberattacks is already well known. The same means
that the cybervandals used recently (in a much-publicized denial-of-service cyber-
attack that temporarily shut down several large Web sites) could also be used on a
much more massive scale at the nation-state level to generate truly damaging in-
terruptions to the national economy and infrastructure.
Both the Chinese and Russians have expressed interest in some form of interna-
tional effort to place curbs on such attacks. The Russians have gone so far as to formally
propose via the Secretary General of the United Nations the development of an inter-
national legal regime to combat information crime and terrorism. Organizations such
as Interpol have the structure in place to facilitate in sharing IW data between coun-
tries, but a common basis of legislation, policy, and procedures is still needed.
SUMMARY
Terrorists and rogues have often targeted the United States. They attack American
interests and citizens abroad because of the wealth of opportunities, the symbolic
value, and the exposure from the world’s most extensive news media. Because of its
role in American power projection, the Air Force can be a target, as with the bomb-
ing of Khobar Towers, the USAF barracks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
The Air Force has also been called on to counter the IW arsenal and tactics of
terrorists and rogues, as it did in striking targets in Afghanistan and Sudan after the
August 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. Highly publicized
attacks such as the World Trade Center bombing, the use of chemical weapons in
the Tokyo subway, and Hamas suicide attacks in Israel have led some to argue that
terrorism is an increasing threat.
Others point to “cyberterror,” weapons of mass destruction, or other alarming
scenarios. A multifaceted Project AIR FORCE (PAF) study put such issues in strate-
gic perspective, tracing the evolution of international terrorism against U.S. civil and
military targets, identifying key trends, and proposing strategies for containment.
462
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Although this is not an issue for the Air Force alone, this chapter recommended a
number of specific steps that could better prepare the U.S. military and private com-
panies to confront “the new terrorism” and its IW arsenal and tactics, as follows.
Conclusions
The past decade has seen extraordinary change in the international security en-
vironment, yet much discussion of terrorism remains tied to images from pre-
vious epochs; it assumes the same kinds of actors using a new and more
threatening arsenal of weapons.
The PAF team found that changing technologies and tactics accompany equally
important changes in the motives and structure of terrorism itself. These un-
derlying changes are making terrorism more lethal. Although the number of
incidents worldwide declined during the 1990s, the number of fatalities rose.
Several factors account for this new lethality. Some terrorists believe that ever
more spectacular and lethal acts are necessary to capture public attention.
Terrorists have also become more adept at killing, with deadlier weapons made
more easily available through alliances with rogue states and private sponsors.
During the 1980s, for example, Czechoslovakia reportedly sold over 40,000
tons of Semtex, a plastic explosive, to countries sponsoring international ter-
rorism. Assistance from such governments often enhances the capabilities of
terrorist groups.
With bomb-making and other information now widely available, the number
of “amateur” participants has increased. They can be just as deadly as their pro-
fessional counterparts and, without a central command authority, both harder
to anticipate and less concerned about indiscriminate casualties.
A final trend is perhaps the most striking: the rise of religiously motivated ter-
rorism has brought increased lethality. In the 1960s and 1970s, when modern
international terrorism arose, it was motivated almost exclusively by ethnic,
nationalist-separatist, or ideological causes. This began to change in the 1980s,
and since then a significant share of terrorist groups has been motivated at least
partly by religion. Such groups are an important force behind terrorism’s rising
lethality, presumably justified in the terrorists’ minds by the transcendent cause.
In 1996, for example, the year of the Khobar Towers attack, religiously moti-
vated terror accounted for 10 of the 13 extremely violent and high-profile acts
that took place worldwide.
Counterterrorism today requires diverse responses to an increasingly diverse
challenge.
Mainstream ethnic, separatist, and ideological groups will deviate little from es-
tablished patterns. They will largely rely on the gun and the bomb, as they have
for a century. The sophistication of their weapons will be in their simplicity:
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
463

clever adaptation of technology and materials that are easy to obtain and diffi-
cult to trace.
State-sponsored terrorism has been the most conservative in terms of tactics;
almost without exception these acts have been carried out with a conventional
arsenal of weapons. New entities with systemic, religious, or apocalyptic moti-
vations and greater access to weapons of mass destruction may present a new
and deadlier threat.
High-tech weapons and nuclear materials from the former Soviet Union are
increasingly available, and chemical and biological warfare agents are easily
manufactured.
Amateurs, in particular, who may be exploited or manipulated by professional
terrorists or covert sponsors, may be willing to use these weapons.
In addition to becoming more lethal, the terrorist threat is changing in another
dimension as well—one driven by computer and communication networks.
The most striking development here is not attacks on America’s information
infrastructure. It is the way that terrorists are organizing themselves into new,
less hierarchical networks and being sponsored by secret, private backers. This
change, enabled by the information revolution, makes detecting, preventing,
and responding to terrorist activity more difficult than ever before.
Analysis of terrorist organizations in the Middle East also suggests that the
more active and lethal of these make extensive use of IW techniques.
Future terrorism may often feature information disruption rather than physi-
cal destruction. PAF found that many terrorist entities are moving from hier-
archical toward information-age network designs.
Terrorists will continue using advanced information technology to support
these organizational structures.
More effort will go into building arrays of transnationally internetted groups
than stand-alone organizations. This is likely to make terrorism harder to fight.
Hierarchies in general have a difficult time fighting networks. There are exam-
ples across the conflict spectrum, including the failings of governments to 
defeat transnational criminal cartels engaged in drug smuggling and narco-
terrorism, as in Colombia.
The persistence of terrorist movements, as in Algeria, in the face of unremitting
state opposition, also shows the robustness of the network form, including its
ability to spread to bases in Europe.
Arrests in the United States just before New Year’s Eve 1999 suggest the ability
of such networks to operate across regions. The PAF study notes that this
change is part of a wider move away from formally organized, state-sponsored
groups to privately financed, loose networks of individuals and subgroups that
may have strategic guidance but enjoy tactical independence.
Conventional counterterrorism techniques may not work well against such
groups.
464
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Retaliation directed at state sponsors, for example, may be effective against tra-
ditional terrorist groups but will be likely to fail against an organization with
multiple, dispersed leaders, and private sources of funding.
Implications for the Air Force: how can the United States respond to more
lethal, more diverse, and increasingly privatized patterns of terrorism?
An Agenda for Action
The United States needs to formulate a clear, realistic, and realizable national strat-
egy that can evolve with the changing terrorist threat. The PAF team identified four
core elements to that strategy: reducing systemic causes, deterring terrorists and
their sponsors, reducing the risk of “superterrorism” such as attacks involving
weapons of mass destruction, and retaliating where deterrence fails. This strategy
leads to key implications for the use of air- and space-based assets.
With its increasing lethality, possible access to weapons of mass destruction, and
the shift to flexible and robust network organization, terrorism is a more formidable
problem than ever before. Air and space power will be critical elements in defending
U.S. interests—including U.S. Air Force forces—against this evolving threat.
The U.S. government needs to set an agenda for action that goes beyond the
work already done in preparation for defending against the IW arsenal and tactics
of terrorist and rogues. With the preceding in mind, when completing the Infor-
mation Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorist and Rogues Checklist (Table F15.1
in Appendix F), the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the pro-
visional list of actions for networks. The order is not significant; however, these are
the activities for which the researcher would want to provide a detailed description
of procedures, review, and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number
of these systems have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? The past decade has seen extraordinary change in the national
security environment.
2.
True or False? The PAF team found that changing technologies and tactics
accompany equally important changes in the motives and structure of terror-
ism itself.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
465

3.
True or False? Terrorists have become more adept at killing, with deadlier
weapons made more easily available through alliances with rogue states and
private sponsors.
4.
True or False? Counterterrorism today requires diverse responses to a decreas-
ingly diverse challenge.
5.
True or False? Mainstream ethnic, separatist, and ideological groups will devi-
ate quite a bit from established patterns.
Multiple Choice
1.
The United States faces an increasingly wired but dangerous world, as evi-
denced by the following, except:
A. Few countries have programs to develop cyberattack technologies and
could develop such capabilities over the next decade and beyond.
B.
The U.S., Russia, China, France, and Israel are developing cyberarsenals
and the means to wage all-out cyberwarfare.
C. Terrorist groups are developing weapons of mass destruction.
D. Russia has become a breeding ground for computer hackers. The Russian
equivalent of the U.S. National Security Agency and organized crime
groups recruit the best talent.
E.
Electronic stock scams, robberies, and extortions are proliferating.
2.
You can wage successful warfare if you can do the following, except:
A. Shut down Halliburton
B.
Shut down the United States’ financial system
C. Shut down the transportation system
D. Cause the collapse of energy production and distribution systems just by
typing on a computer
E.
Cause links to globalization to break down
3.
The past decade has seen extraordinary change in:
A. Information attacks
B.
International terrorism
C. State sponsors
D. International security environment
4.
The PAF team found that changing technologies and tactics accompany equally
important changes in:
A. The line agency and departments
B.
Unneeded capabilities
C. Special resources that might be mobilized if an international incident occurs
466
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

D. Ongoing analysis and research efforts
E.
The motives and structure of terrorism itself
5.
Terrorists have also become more adept at killing, with deadlier weapons made
more easily available through alliances with:
A. Political, ethnic, and religious groups
B.
Organized crime
C. Law enforcement organizations
D. Rogue states and private sponsors
E.
Individuals empowered by information technology
Exercise
A public institution was the victim of a hacker. The subject got into the network
and placed several large media files on several computers and changed the desktop
configurations. Management decided against calling law enforcement initially (be-
cause of media attention) and instructed the IT department to get a CFS to pri-
vately investigate. How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A local lumber company went up in flames in late September. The fire safe where
they kept their backups had been left open that night after closing. A CFS team
(CFST) received three backup tapes and the hard drive from the system. How did
the CFST go about conducting their examination?
Case Project
In a U.S. Appeals case concerning email retrieval, the plaintiff used basic recovery
and was only able to recover 269 emails in five and a half months. The plaintiff
claimed that if there were no responsive emails for 10/04–12/04, it was either be-
cause there were no responsive emails from that date or because they did not exist
on the accessible backup tapes. How did the CFS that was hired go about retrieving
the emails?
Optional Team Case Project
With help from a CFS, a high-quality large-format imaging firm recently won its
case against a former general manager and an investment banker. Prior to leav-
ing the format imaging firm to form his own digital imaging company with his
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
467

codefendant, the defendant emailed the format imaging firm’s customer database
to his home computer in an attempt to steal intellectual property. They firmly de-
nied the allegations put forth by the format imaging firm, believing that no one
would find out since they had deleted the email and the attachment containing
the customer database from their home computer. How was the CFS able to go
about conducting the email and database recovery?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Satellite Encryption, Academic Press, New York, 1999.
[2] Vacca, John R., Firewalls: Jumpstart for Network and Systems Administra-
tors, Elsevier Digital Press, Burlington, MA, 2004.
[3] Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce, 3rd ed., Charles River Media, Hing-
ham, MA, 1999.
[4] “The Report of the Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the
United States,” Pursuant to Public Law 201, 104th Congress, [Members of
the Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to the United States
were nominated by the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, the
Majority Leader of the U.S. Senate and the Minority Leaders of the U.S. Sen-
ate and the U.S. House of Representatives: The Honorable Donald H. Rums-
feld, Chairman, Dr. Barry M. Blechman, General Lee Butler, USAF (Ret.),
Dr. Richard L. Garwin, Dr. William R. Graham, Dr. William Schneider, Jr.,
General Larry D. Welch, USAF (Ret.), Dr. Paul D. Wolfowitz, The Honor-
able R. James Woolsey and appointed by the Director of Central Intelli-
gence], 
(http://www.house.gov/hasc/testimony/105thcongress/BMThreat.
htm), July 15, 1998.
[5] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
468
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

469
The Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics of
Private Companies
16
A
lthough the military establishment has put in place certain safeguards from
information warfare (IW) attacks, the state of preparation of private com-
panies is way behind. Even though the military has some responsibility in re-
lation to its own affairs, some responsibility must lie on the private sector. In
addition to the private sector having its own interests in reducing vulnerability in
cyberspace, the integration of military and private sector interests in the informa-
tion revolution demand it.
IW of a sort is by no means a new issue for the private sector. Unscrupulous
companies have always been delighted to take advantage of new opportunities to
sabotage or steal from a dangerous competitor. The development of information
networks and vulnerable points of attack merely emphasizes this and increases the
opportunities. In addition to industrial espionage activities, internal moles or dis-
affected employees may destroy information networks, and outside groups such as
political activists can also cause significant damage.
Economic and industrial espionage is a global industry with a growing workforce.
Private corporations are just as dependent on the infrastructures that form the
basis for modern economy—such as telephony, computer networks, electric power,
energy and transportation networks—as are military organizations. Various as-
pects of society are being transferred to cyberspace:
Informational activities: For example, educational activities, processes and
results of research, engineering designs and industrial processes, and mass
information and entertainment media, in addition to private and public

records. Often the electronic version is held in preference to and in the absence
of paper records.
Transactional activities: Commercial business, financial transactions, and
government activities are now being carried on via computer networks, espe-
cially in the absence of paper records.
Infrastructure activities: Physical and functional infrastructures are increas-
ingly being controlled by electronics and software rather than mechanical or
electrical means.
Such information is vulnerable to both intentional and unintentional attacks.
In addition, the distinctions between warfare, crimes, and accidents are increasingly
blurred yet all may have the same damaging results. There are three general cate-
gories of attack, especially applicable to a private enterprise:
Data destruction
Penetration of a system to modify its output
System penetration with the goal of stealing information or sensitive data
The means to mount such an attack are by no means difficult to come by. Pro-
grams are available free of charge on the Internet to crack passwords or grab key
strokes to recognize them, and there is commercially available software to exploit
network file system applications that allow file sharing. An increase or the opening
of a too large number of sessions in a given time can crash or disable a computer. A
user or a system may be disabled by “bombing” it with identical and repeated mes-
sages and attached files. There is also a means of attack known as “spamming”—
sending numerous emails to a large number of users that can overload a system.
Because of the nature of the competitive market, various programs may be released
without proper assessment or testing, which may leave exploitable gaps.
Also, the collapse of the former Soviet Union into what could be termed a
“transnational kleptocracy” has led to some fundamental changes in the interna-
tional security environment:
Large numbers of unemployed, underemployed, or otherwise disaffected secu-
rity and KGB operators are now available for hire.
Large numbers of highly trained and professional scientists and computer ex-
perts may no longer have jobs.
Some countries into which the former Soviet Union (FSU) disintegrated have
a nuclear capability or reserves of highly enriched uranium.
470
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Some estimates claim that 73% of the Russian economy is under the control of
criminal enterprises. These enterprises have spread beyond the borders of any
particular state.
Estimates claim that 89% of Russian banks are under criminal control.
Certain Russian “power ministries” may no longer be serving the interests of
the State.
Russian organized crime has been identified, in particular, in the following
transnational areas: money laundering, drug trafficking, and commercial fraud.
It must be stressed that at this stage, Russian organized crime (ROC) is in what
could be termed a “nascent state.” Although it holds much sway in Russia, ROC has
yet to reach a truly transnational existence.
Furthermore, the interplay of corporations and private enterprise with avowed
terrorist groups should not be underplayed. Here a problem arises: if a terrorist or-
ganization has an identifiable and compassing ideology (or proto-strategy), such an
ideology would be general in nature. Also, such an ideology would directly estab-
lish broad principles, rather than issues that would provide analysts with a solid
foundation.
The artificial and superficial equilibrium imposed by the Cold War has been de-
stroyed, and that ROC and FSU instability needs to be added to the countries that
have always used terrorism as a form of  diplomacy and an adjunct to their foreign
policies. In this new world disorder, smaller states can gain access to a much cheaper
form of diplomacy in the use of terrorism—either state sponsored or state condoned.
New and dangerous players have emerged in the international arena. The level
of instability and concomitant violence is further heightened by the rise to interna-
tional political significance of non-state actors willing to challenge the primacy of
the states. Whether it be the multinational corporation or a terrorist group that
targets it, both share a common characteristic. They have each rejected the state-
centric system that emerged 175 years ago at the Congress of Vienna.
All these factors have accelerated the erosion of the monopoly of the coercive
power of the state as the disintegration of the old order accelerates. This process in
all probability, gains even greater momentum because of the wide-ranging and
growing activities of criminal enterprises. These enterprises include everything
from arms traders to drug cartels, which will provide and use existing and new
weapons in terrorist campaigns as a part of their pursued profit and political power.
In sum, present and future terrorists and their supporters are acquiring the ca-
pabilities and freedom of action to operate in the international jungle. They move
in what has been called the “gray areas,” those regions where crime control has
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
471

shifted from legitimate governments to new half political, half criminal powers. In
this environment, the line between state and rogue state, and rogue state and crim-
inal enterprise will be increasingly blurred. Each will seek out new and profitable
targets through terrorism in an international order that is already under assault.
There is an appreciation that the multinational corporation shares a common
characteristic with terrorists, that is (to a certain extent) a rejection of the state-
centric system. This rejection is by no means complete (both corporations and ter-
rorists exist at a substate level to some degree). The corporation may seek the
protection of the law of a state, and many terrorist organizations will rely on the
protection and assistance of states—whether it’s overt, or semiovert, or more covert.
Although some might argue that multinational corporations and terrorist
groups stand at either end of a spectrum, the spectrum would still be that of a
movement away from “state-centrism” and the concentration of coercive power
in the state—with the danger that they each move so far away from one another
and that they meet up again. Any ambivalence in allegiance or identification on
the part of a non-state quasi-criminal or terrorist organization toward a corpo-
ration could easily find its way into violent activity directed at the multinational
corporation. Such an ambivalence (and an appreciation of the vulnerability of a
corporation) would be brought to the fore, were a corporation to hire the same
cyberterrorists to undermine its competitors. A corporation willing to use such
agents and to expose its insides to them puts itself at their mercy should the flow
of money dry up or should the cyberterrorists then sell their services to a com-
petitor or another organization that bids higher. In addition, the multinational
corporation, through its simultaneous existence on many planes of definition,
can at any time be seen to be on a similar plane with a substate or non-state
actor, as well as being on a nation-state plane—thus attracting criticism and vio-
lence that would have been directed toward the identifiably “official” organs of
the nation-state in previous times.
As potential targets continue to be hardened in urban areas, the visible aspects
of multinational corporations are strengthened and protected. At this point, activ-
ities may then move to rural or less protected areas.
Many multinational corporations have now “desegregated their operations”
(to borrow a term from another context) and have placed various aspects of their
operation in different geographical areas (and even different countries). A failure to
strengthen and protect a particular part of that operation may cause incalculable
damage to a multinational corporation’s network should a weak network node be
attacked and disabled.
472
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Overview of Defensive Tactics Private Companies Can Use
This section deals with some technical issues relating to attacking computer and in-
formation networks and defensive measures that private companies can take in
stopping or hindering attacks. This section will also briefly cover some discrete
problems that may be encountered in applying traditional forms of risk treatment
to what is essentially a new form of risk, and it will then discuss the possible need
for a new or revised approach to the risk-management system of a corporation in
light of the new form of threat represented by computer terrorism. It will also dis-
cuss what has become known as “information peace-keeping” (IPK). The three el-
ements of IPK are
Open source intelligence
Information technology
Electronic security and counterintelligence
Interestingly, IPK must rely almost entirely on the private sector for sources
and services that will require the development of a new national intelligence and se-
cure approach to take into account what has hitherto been an area in which the pri-
vate sector has not participated. Perhaps the most important aspect of information
operations in the 21st century is that it is not inherently military; instead, civilian
practitioners must acquire a military understanding and military discipline in the
practice of information operations if they are to be effective. This is known as the
enmeshing phenomenon.
Information peacekeeping is the exploitation of information and information tech-
nology to achieve national policy objectives.
Common to all aspects of information operations (IPK, IW, and all source intel-
ligence) is open source intelligence. This means that the involvement of the private
sector will become more critical in defense terms in the 21st century. Along with this
must go an increasing identification of the private sector with the defense establish-
ment, both in its own perception and in the perception of outsiders. IPK is not
Application of information or information technology in support of conven-
tional military peacekeeping operations (contrary to what some may consider
revolution in military affairs [RMA] thinking)
Traditional psychological operations or deception operations
Covert media manipulation
Clandestine human intelligence operations or overt research operations
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
473

Attempts to avoid the enmeshing phenomenon or to protest that private cor-
porations are essentially that, private, and rely on this as a defense is unwise. It may
also be futile. In any event, what is also important is the perception of the other en-
tities with which the private corporation may come face to face (such as substate
and non-state terrorist groups, the military forces of other nation-states, and cor-
porate competitors).
Defensive Tactics to Thwart the Threat of Business Spies
Threats to the security of business information are numerous and they come from
all directions, including organized crime syndicates, terrorists, and government-
sponsored espionage, and most global high-technology companies have little idea
of the array of hostile forces targeted against them. U.S. businesses that are in-
creasingly expanding their operations into foreign lands are finding the situation
challenging because the nature of such threats and how to protect against them is
not taught in business school.
Some of the threats might be obvious, as well as the strategies that companies
can mount against them, but others might not be so cut and dried. In a world in
which countries measure themselves in terms of economic might, many intelli-
gence services around the world are shifting their emphasis and targets to business.
Government-sponsored intelligence operations against companies seek informa-
tion about bids on contracts, information that affects the price of commodities, fi-
nancial data, and banking information.
Furthermore, government intelligence services want technological production
and marketing information, and they usually share what they get with their coun-
try’s companies. To get this sensitive information, government intelligence services
use many of the techniques developed during the Cold War. That includes bugging
telephones and rifling through papers left in hotel rooms by visiting businessmen
and businesswomen. In addition, government intelligence services are known to
plant moles in companies and steal or surreptitiously download files from unse-
cured computers. Several also have highly sophisticated signal intelligence capabil-
ities to intercept even encrypted company communications. Messages that are not
encrypted with the latest technology are especially vulnerable. These include tele-
com and computer communications, including email.
Though the French intelligence service is probably the most egregious offender,
it is far from alone. Russia, China, South Korea, India, Pakistan, Germany, Israel,
and Argentina all have some type of intelligence-gathering operation for the bene-
fit of companies in their countries, and many more countries are doing the same.
The United States, however, is not among them.
No American intelligence agency conducts industrial espionage against for-
eign companies for the advantage of U.S. companies. What the U.S. intelligence
474
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

community (CIA, NSA, etc.) does is support the efforts of their own government,
and that information is not shared with American companies.
Reports originating in Europe, especially France, that the United States is using
signal intelligence capabilities as part of a program called “Echelon” to attack Euro-
pean companies for the economic advantage of U.S. companies is simply not true.
Another threat comes from the dozens of intelligence services in developing coun-
tries that have profited from the training they received from the Soviet Union, East-
ern European countries, and the CIA during the Cold War. The result of this history
is that the reservoir of professionally trained intelligence mercenaries is growing.
Other threats include terrorism, organized crime, and inside operations carried
out by disgruntled employees and hackers. Some of these groups are looking for the
greatest amount of destruction, and an attack on the critical information infra-
structure of the United States would satisfy that goal.
Business needs to understand that the criminal and terrorist threat worldwide
is changing and is now both more sophisticated and more dangerous than anyone
would have thought. Vulnerabilities that all the different types of attackers exploit
include open systems, plug-and-play systems, centralized remote maintenance of
systems, remote dial-in, and weak encryption. Companies could provide substan-
tial information security protection for relatively low cost.
Companies should review security measures in sensitive areas of their opera-
tions such as research and development, talk to traveling executives who carry
company laptops about using precautions to prevent theft, and examine commu-
nications with overseas facilities with an eye toward installing commercially avail-
able encryption that is all but impossible to crack. The new algorithm recently
approved by the Department of Commerce, for example, is so strong that it would
take an estimated 149 trillion years to unscramble.
Company executives should also limit physical access to sensitive data and pro-
grams and regularly change computer passwords. It’s all obvious, but every one
knows how many companies are lax in their actual implementation.
A basic rule is to take time to identify company-critical information, whether it
is technology, a production technique, basic research and development, financial in-
formation, or marketing strategy, and take steps to protect it. What is required first
is simply awareness by CEOs and boards of directors that there is a threat and then,
second, response using a common-sense way to protect themselves. These are mea-
sures that make good business sense even if you are not a target of a government in-
telligence service, a competitor, a criminal organization, a terrorist, or a hacker.
Cybersecurity Progress in the Private Sector
Many companies have made significant progress since 2000 to protect their infra-
structures from attack, but others still face an uphill battle. Nevertheless, the gov-
ernment and private firms must work together to bolster cybersecurity.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
475

The banking and energy industries remain ahead of many other sectors in se-
curity preparedness. Other sectors, including telecommunications, transportation,
and waterways, face difficult challenges stemming from a vast array of factors such
as deregulation and market fluctuations.
However, progress hasn’t proceeded at the same pace in all sectors. There are
some sectors that are ahead of others. Nonetheless, private companies accept the
challenge that the government has given them to protect the networks that run
their infrastructure.
Obstacles
The information technology (IT) sector has been moving very aggressively. Any
perceived slowness is due to a genuine desire by industry to protect proprietary and
sensitive information on behalf of their companies, shareholders, and clients.
Corporate concerns regarding shareholder value and increased competition
may be getting in the way of security progress at some banks, airlines, and telecom-
munications companies. Despite the banking industry’s perceived success in the
area of security, a recent spate of money laundering schemes, including a $5.8 bil-
lion scam against Citigroup Inc. and Commercial Bank of San Francisco that lasted
13 years, raises serious questions about the status of security in the industry.
Likewise, the airline and telecommunications sectors have come “under siege”
as a result of deregulation and the current climate of mergers and acquisitions.
Years of a systematic underinvestment in electric power grid capacity, combined
with the effects of wholesale deregulation, have created a potentially perilous secu-
rity situation.
Security protections against cyberattacks in natural gas and electric industries
are being addressed constantly, although the national effort lacks a useful gauge of
how much security is enough. If you aren’t attacked, it’s easy to let the program slip.
SURVIVING OFFENSIVE RUINOUS IW
The principal actors in any cyberterrorist attack on a corporation, and the levels on
which the attack may be made have already been discussed. This section deals with
surviving offensive ruinous IW by looking at the mechanics of attack and defense.
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) has produced a report on infor-
mation security and computer attacks at the Department of Defense. It identifies
the following means of attack:
Sendmail program: Installation of a malicious code in an email message sent
over a network machine. As the sendmail program scans the message for its
address, you will execute the attacker’s code. Sendmail operates at the system’s
476
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

root level and therefore has all privileges to alter passwords or grant access
privileges to an attacker.
Computer-searching programs: Password cracking and theft is much easier
with powerful computer-searching programs that can match numbers or al-
phanumeric passwords to a program in a limited amount of time. The success
depends on the power of the attacking computer.
Packet sniffing: An attacker inserts a software program at a remote network or
host computer that monitors information packets sent through the system and
reconstructs the first 125 keystrokes in the connection. The first 125 keystrokes
would normally include a password and any logon and user identification. This
could enable the attacker to obtain the password of a legitimate user and gain
access to the system.
Access: Attackers who have gained access to a system can damage it from
within, steal information, and deny service to authorized users.
Trojan horses: An independent program that when called by an authorized
user performs a useful function but also performs unauthorized functions,
which may usurp the user’s privileges.
Logic bomb: An unauthorized code that creates havoc when a particular event
occurs (for example, the dismissal of an employee).
It is becoming increasingly difficult for “low-knowledge” attackers to use rela-
tively cheap, “high-sophistication” attack tools to gain access to what was, histori-
cally, a relatively impregnable system. The addition to this ready availability of
high-technology attack tools of an increasingly networked global economy, and
the integration of corporations within that networked global economy, expedien-
tially increases the risk of attack and the ability of any attacker to cause damage.
Surviving a Misbehaving Enemy
Article 99 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice defines misbehavior in the face
of the enemy as any person who, before or in the presence of the enemy:
Runs away
Shamefully abandons, surrenders, or delivers up any command, unit, place, or
military property that it is his or her duty to defend
Through disobedience, neglect, or intentional misconduct endangers the safety
of any such command, unit, place, or military property
Casts away his arms or ammunition
Is guilty of cowardly conduct
Quits his place of duty to plunder or pillage
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
477

Causes false alarms in any command, unit, or place under control of the armed
forces
Willfully fails to do his utmost to encounter, engage, capture, or destroy any
enemy troops, combatants, vessels, aircraft, or other thing, which it is his or her
duty to encounter, engage, capture, or destroy
Does not affect all practical relief and assistance to any troops, combatants, ves-
sels, or aircraft of the armed forces belonging to the United States or their al-
lies when engaged in battle
Shall be punished by death or such punishment, as a court-martial shall direct
Now, you’re wondering what this has to do with network security, IW, or your-
self—because you are not at war. Let me assure you that it does apply to network
security, IW, and to you—and you most certainly are at war.
Every day, someone from a subculture other than your own is waging a battle
against you and your systems. As network professionals, you are the propagators of
your own doom. You are guilty of misbehavior in front of the enemy by not admit-
ting your own fallibility, by not passing critical information to your own team, and
from your sheer arrogance in thinking that you can’t be bested by some punk kid.
Remember: misbehavior in the face of the enemy. True, it is not life or death, and
hacked systems aren’t really your enemy, but the concept is the same. In neglecting to
raise the alarm and warn the others, you are guilty of this cowardly act. Open com-
munication is your enemy’s greatest advantage and your greatest weakness.
SURVIVING OFFENSIVE CONTAINMENT IW
Using layered biometric tools to boost security is now part of the latest arsenal and
tactics private companies use against offensive containment IW. In the race to im-
prove security infrastructures faster than hackers can invent methods to penetrate
firewalls [1], it is important to ascertain a user’s identity before permitting access to
protected data. Given the pervasive use of passwords and personal identification
number codes for user authentication across all aspects of our daily life, attackers
have developed powerful password-cracking tools.
New technologies that aim to directly strengthen user authentication include
the use of tokens and smart cards combined with digital certificates. The most
compelling and intriguing authentication technologies involve biometrics match-
ing the measurement of physical and behavioral characteristics such as facial struc-
tures, voice patterns, and fingerprints.
Recently, biometrics technology has rapidly pushed through barriers that have
slowed its adoption in mainstream environments. Performance, accuracy, and reli-
ability have increased among all types of biometrics methods, and prices for capture
478
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

devices have plunged, making biometrics an attractive addition to security systems.
The remaining challenge for biometrics is to address the requirements for large-scale
deployments in complex governmental, institutional, and commercial systems.
To gain widespread acceptance in businesses, multiple individual biometrics
methods must coexist in a single-system solution, and the underlying architecture
must better support the conditions of interoperability, scalability, and adaptability
that govern the total cost of ownership calculations. A multitiered authentication
system built around these notions is one solution.
At the center of the authentication system, a server orchestrates interaction
among client devices, an authentication validation policy system, multiple authen-
tication matching engines, and databases housing user information. Applications
and transaction systems request a centralized authentication server to confirm or
deny a user’s identity. The server receives incoming requests for authentication
and directs actions to gather appropriate user credentials and evaluate them against
a set of validation criteria.
The policy system might maintain extensive rules to meet security require-
ments that may differ depending on the user, application, or transaction task. The
authentication security policy may require many biometrics for validation. Thus,
the validation system must be able to layer biometrics approaches, balance match-
ing scores from each matching process, and interpret these results in light of preset
policies. This process is computationally expensive. It’s critical that companies scale
with system demand. Because each biometrics method requires a different matching-
process engine, the authentication system should distribute the matching task to
the correct algorithm and thread the processes across a farm of processors.
The user-interaction tier collects credentials from live users in real time. To col-
lect a new biometric sample, a prompting system must request a specific user ac-
tion, such as presenting a particular finger for scanning or repeating a voice phrase
in a microphone. Many types of point-of-service access devices, such as desktops
and laptop computers, mobile phones [2], wireless pocket devices [3], and airport
kiosks, may be used at any time by end users. Each device may have limited capa-
bilities to request and gather a specific biometric from the user. Therefore, the au-
thentication server must dynamically determine what biometric to request, based
on the client device.
To complete the process, a user’s credentials must be evaluated against a stored
pre-enrolled user information profile, such as biometrics templates, digital certifi-
cate keys, and text passwords. Repositories of this information may be centralized
in protected databases or decentralized within personal tokens or smart cards. With
the use of a smart card that contains the enrollment data, the authentication server
would also prompt users to present their template cards instead of accessing them
from a central database.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
479

Although there are advantages to using biometrics, authentication should not
forego other methods as part of the overall authentication solution. Even old-
fashioned PIN codes and passwords provide an extra layer of protection and may
be preferable in lower-risk security systems. Other security technologies, such as
public key infrastructure, also perform critical roles in an overall security model.
PARTICIPATING IN DEFENSIVE PREVENTIVE IW PLANNING
An attack on any one of several highly interdependent networks can cause collateral
damage to other networks and the systems they connect. Some forms of disruption
will lead merely to nuisance and economic loss, but other forms will jeopardize
lives. One need only note the dependence of hospitals, air-traffic-control systems,
and the food-processing industry on computer controls to appreciate the point.
Stopping DoS Attacks Together
The most recent round of denial-of-service (DoS) attacks shows that cyberterror-
ism is alive and well, and that e-businesses and their service providers aren’t doing
enough to stop it. Unfortunately, all corporate America and Internet service
providers (ISPs) seem to be focused on is who to blame. After the recent attack on
Microsoft shut off access to everything from Expedia to Hotmail, the company at-
tributed the problem to one employee’s misconfiguration of a router, yet experts
noted that a failure to distribute domain name service (DNS) servers made the
company vulnerable to begin with.
If a private company is going to minimize the number and effect of DoS at-
tacks, what’s required is a spirit of cooperation between companies and their ISPs,
as well as among the ISPs themselves. ISPs are starting to tackle the subject of
network-wide security, but they’re doing it by laying out requirements for their
corporate customers. In many cases, customers either follow the ISP’s security
guidelines or find themselves a new ISP; there’s no room for negotiation. It’s high
time ISPs and their clients started sharing information about what works (and
doesn’t work) in terms of network architecture, data access, and security systems.
ISPs must ask themselves whether they’re doing everything possible from a
network monitoring and warning perspective. They should give serious thought to
the latest security tools that can stop DoS attacks at their routers. After all, once an
attack gets through the ISP, it’s a lot tougher for an individual site to fend it off.
Everyone along the e-business food chain has something to lose when a DoS
attack succeeds. The site that’s been hit loses traffic, revenue, and customer loy-
alty. The ISP loses customer confidence and significant resources in combating
480
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the attack. Ultimately, every site that relies on the ISP must spend time and re-
sources rethinking its security levels.
ISPs must communicate the types of attacks they’re experiencing. They also
must be prepared to notify one another of attacks and even coordinate their re-
sponses when they do get hit. With so much at risk, it’s hard to imagine why these
conversations haven’t been taking place all along.
Approaching IW Planning with IW Games
It’s Independence Day 2006. Glitches in air-traffic-controller screens cause a deadly
mid-air collision above Chicago’s O’Hare Airport, killing over 456 people in both
planes, and over 1,500 people on the ground when the planes plunge into a nearby
crowded shopping center. Five weeks later, the company that controls California’s
power grid somehow misplaces an electrical energy order to Northern California’s
electric company, leaving three-fourths of Sacramento in the dark. Then in Octo-
ber, a high-power microwave burst fries the electronics at an ebola virus lab re-
search building at Fort Deterick (Frederick, Maryland).
Hypothetical IW planning exercises like these are being played out around the
country in preparation for what politicians, the military, and law enforcement of-
ficials fear will be an orchestrated cyberattack on critical U.S. private infrastructure
companies (see sidebar, “Five Easy Steps to Planning and Launching a Cyberat-
tack”). The theory goes that if a well-funded, organized series of cyberattacks were
to strike at a target’s economic and structural nerve centers, it would send the tar-
get society into chaos and make it difficult for the military to communicate and
move troops.
FIVE EASY STEPS TO PLANNING AND 
LAUNCHING A CYBERATTACK
Here’s how a computer invader plans and launches an attack on information systems:
Recon: Invader uses information-gathering programs and techniques to sniff
traffic at the network gateway, then scans ports or vulnerable services.
Profile target: Invader gets passwords, then identifies machines and software
running on the network.
Attack: Invader gains root or administrative privilege of unclassified systems,
then seeks and modifies information.
Cover tracks: Invader hides the evidence trail and slips away.
Wait for results: Invader watches CNN to see what damage he or she wrought.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
481
q

The weak areas are in predicting when someone is gathering information for a
later attack, and once a company has been attacked, the problem is in recovery.
Researchers are working on ways to tie an algorithm into other technologies also
being researched, including advanced forensics and a tracking system to follow a live
evidence trail. Don’t be surprised if algorithms eventually wind up in the private sector.
This particular information war game was played out among 119 IT executives
attending an IW workshop at NSA Headquarters in Fort Meade, Maryland. In the
worst-case scenario, every major industry sector would be affected.
Most of the targets in the NSA IW games are private-sector companies.
When you’re talking about IW, you’re talking about IT systems used to cripple
the government and economy. Close to 95% of those critical infrastructure com-
panies are privately owned and operated.
Since 1999, IW preparedness has moved forward the fastest in the highly regu-
lated and well-organized financial, energy, and telecommunications sectors, but IT
leaders in the private sector say they’re hesitant to report incidents to agencies such
as the NSA and the FBI. Still, the agencies need this information for intelligence and
predictive analysis.
Although the impact of IW bears the same uncertainty as Y2k did, many IW ex-
perts say cyberterrorism and cyberwarfare are inevitable. In 2000, hacking hobby-
ists showed how easy it is to propagate viruses throughout Internet-connected mail
systems. They’ve also shown they can hack armies of unwitting computers and
make those computers do their bidding. Now, the U.S. government is thinking
about what terrorists with more resources could accomplish. So are countries such
as China and Russia, which are developing their own IW capabilities.
In spite of these indicators, IW thinkers say a cyberwar is years away. Clearly, the
eventuality of such an attack is present. That’s what motivated the Bush administra-
tion to move forward with a national plan, but it’s doubtful that anyone has the cyber
capability today to launch an attack that would cripple the nation’s infrastructure.
The presidential directive predicts that such a scenario is still years away.
BENEFITING FROM AND SURVIVING DEFENSIVE RUINOUS IW
Users are drowning in computer passwords. Let’s count them for a typical worker.
At the office he needs one to log-on to his computer. He needs still another to access
his corporate email. He also need three for separate databases within his company:
482
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

one for a legal research database (a corporate lawyer), and two to get information on
his retirement plan and benefits. When he gets home, he needs a password to log on
to his home computer and a handful more to use online services. Amazon.com and
other online merchants also require a password to make purchases. To get cash from
an ATM, he needs his PIN number.
With as unique a fingerprint as a password, corporations can be sure that a per-
son logging on to a computer network is who he or she claims to be. As previously
discussed in this chapter, you can benefit from and survive defensive ruinous IW by
using biometric technology (which uses unique human characteristics such as fin-
gerprint, voice, face, or iris patterns to verify a person’s identity), which is making
rapid inroads into corporate America. According to Gartner Group, within three or
four years about 88% of all corporations will use fingerprint readers or some other
kind of biometric device.
The scramble to commercialize biometrics stems primarily from changes in
how companies organize their information technology. The 1990s switch to net-
work computing, which moved important data from mainframe computers to
servers, increased the flow of information within a company, but in the process, it
made that information more vulnerable to theft and tampering. A recent FBI sur-
vey found that system penetration by corporate outsiders and unauthorized access
by corporate insiders are both on the rise.
Corporate networks are not the only potential commercial application for bio-
metrics. Credit card issuers want to reduce losses from fraud. In recent small tests,
MasterCard began using fingerprints as a substitute for a signature. Biometrics
holds the ultimate security key to future payment systems. The explosion of e-
commerce [4] has also created a gigantic need to authenticate the identity of buyers.
The price of biometric devices has plummeted. In 1994, the smallest fingerprint
reader sold by Identicator Technology was the size of a telephone and cost $2,000;
today it’s the size of a sugar cube and sells for $64. In five years, a similar fingerprint
reader may cost $10.
It’s likely that more than one biometric technology will emerge. Fingerprinting
will snag the lion’s share in the fast-growing corporate computer network market, but
technology using voice identification can be easily integrated into already existing tele-
phone services such as automated call centers that answer queries about credit cards,
bank accounts, and benefits. Facial recognition technology also has its advantages.
The ultimate goal for biometrics manufacturers is to get into the homes of mil-
lions of consumers, with the PC being the likely point of entry. About 11% of all
new PCs, including some laptops, are already equipped with cameras, suggesting
that facial recognition may eventually play a role on the Web.
Privacy concerns are a big hurdle. Consumers may decide that using a face or
a fingerprint as a password will jeopardize privacy more than protect it.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
483

BENEFITING FROM AND SURVIVING 
DEFENSIVE RESPONSIVE CONTAINMENT IW
In 2000, hackers launched the now-famous DoS attacks that cost high-profile Web
sites about $3 billion in revenue. The events during that 48-hour period in February
2000 were especially fearsome to service providers, who found out just how vulner-
able they were. As a result, some ISPs have begun issuing ultimatums to corporate
customers: Meet certain security standards or take your business elsewhere.
To be sure, most service providers have not created a formal list of security re-
quirements, but many have some kind of policy that dictates what companies can
and cannot do as customers and the kinds of security systems that must be in place
before they can purchase services.
These service providers want to see IT managers install encryption and au-
thentication products, firewalls that interact with intrusion detection software, ded-
icated servers, and virtual private network (VPN) links to secure data. They also
want IT shops to use tools such as anti-virus software, specified intrusion detection
systems, and anti-spam content filtering. All these security installations are being
implemented with the hope that private companies will benefit from and survive
defensive responsive containment IW.
Precisely when ISPs started getting tougher is hard to determine, but it’s clear
that ISPs weren’t making these types of security demands before the DoS attacks
began. The attacks made service providers aware that it’s not just corporate cus-
tomers getting hacked. The ISPs’ systems were commandeered and used to launch
virus attacks and DoS attacks, as well as to commit vandalism and theft. That’s why
some of the most common requirements of the ISPs have to do with customers’
outgoing traffic—which can directly affect the ISPs. From the ISPs’ point of view,
their own customers or prospective customers are now security threats. This new
approach by ISPs is being felt by IT shops.
Now, all architecture has to be approved by the security desk before services are
offered, and a customer with single-tier access won’t be approved, even though
many want to be. They have to lease a site-to-site VPN or a dedicated T1 link. The
VPN (the cheaper of the two options) costs an additional $790 per month.
The ISP demands don’t always result in higher costs for corporate customers
because of their financial status in the corporate community. Sometimes providers
want to look under the hood.
ISPs’ fears may be justified. According to a survey in 2004 by the Computer Se-
curities Institute (CSI) and the San Francisco FBI Computer Intrusion Squad, 83%
of CSI’s 929 member companies detected unauthorized use of their systems during
the previous year, up from 106% in 2003. The rate of hacking is growing faster than
e-commerce itself. CSI has 973 security professionals onboard (more than one IT
484
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

person per company in some cases), and 95% consider disgruntled employees to be
the biggest security threat.
Insiders, many service providers agree, are the ones who send spam and launch
viruses and DoS attacks. The FBI reports that there are now 500,000 known com-
puter viruses, and that at least 73% of American companies reported that they have
been plagued by some type of computer virus.
As far as the ISPs are concerned, viruses are among many security problems
they face. In the past year, ISPs have set up entire departments devoted to fielding
phone calls and handling subpoenas from individuals and companies claiming that
ISP customers are spamming, sending viruses, vandalizing Web sites, and launch-
ing DoS attacks.
Service providers, in effect, are establishing rules that make it clear that they no
longer want to bear the burden of the risks corporate customers are willing to take.
They say it’s no longer up to clients to determine how risk-free they want to be
when it comes to e-commerce. Ultimately, companies that want ISPs to deliver any
service at all (even a simple pipe to the Net) will pay more in hard costs, internal
policy changes, infrastructure, and business processes.
How much more companies will pay depends on how secure the ISP thinks its
customers’ network should be, but the ISP is, in many cases, dictating the terms.
Whether the customer buys the needed security technology from the ISP or else-
where, this technology will have to be bought before network services begin. This
could mean a huge cash outlay before service even starts.
Fighting Back
IT managers may be told to spend more on security prerequisites, but there’s still
room for negotiation. This is an emerging trend, not a government regulation, so
it’s entirely fair for IT managers to bark back, particularly when many ISPs still
can’t deliver the security services they’re asking customers to have up front.
For example, security is something companies must buy from security  man-
agement companies, not ISPs. If a company must go elsewhere for security, it then
begs this question: What level of security does the ISP offer corporate customers? If
ISPs demand that customers walk into the relationship with higher levels of secu-
rity, corporate customers can turn the tables and demand the same of the ISPs.
Corporate customers should be encouraged to push back. When an ISP tells you to
open up your system so they can look around and see if you meet their standards,
tell them you want them to do the same.
The ISPs must either ensure that their security mechanisms will work or be re-
sponsible for damages, so ask about their network-monitoring tools and alert
mechanisms. Once companies open up the conversation to include both sides, it
becomes more of a negotiation and less of an ultimatum.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
485

Before a company gives an ISP access to its entire network for inspection, it
should ask the ISP if it’s actually going to manage every aspect of the network. If
they’re not going to manage a certain aspect of your network, like a certain server,
then they don’t need access.
It may prove to be more trouble for ISPs to deliver security if parts of a po-
tential customer’s network are unknown to them, but that’s the ISP’s problem. Be-
sides, it’s the ISP’s responsibility to monitor a customer’s outgoing traffic, so the
ISP already has access to what it needs to know to protect itself. If the ISP’s mon-
itoring tools aren’t robust enough to give it intelligent reporting, traffic analysis,
and alerts to red flags, that’s something corporate customers should try to get the
ISP to deliver.
The best way to protect the company is to handle these issues in the service level
agreement (SLA). The ISPs have the leverage to force customers to implement se-
curity, but customers also have a certain leverage. The ISP market is more compet-
itive than ever.
According to Gartner Group, there are now tens of thousands of full-service
ISPs, up from less than 1,000 since 1999. The competition means it’s in the ISP’s
best interest to offer corporate customers as much value-added as possible. There’s
one caveat, however: the idea is to get the ISP to concede some points—for exam-
ple, help with making the company’s network compatible with the ISP’s or on-site
tech support.
The reality is that even if ISPs can dictate security policies, they will be eager to
offer value-added services. If you do the negotiating in the context of drafting an
SLA agreement, it shows the ISP you’re a serious customer and gives them an op-
portunity to offer you fee-based services over the long term.
A good SLA won’t get the company out of paying more for application service
providers (ASP) and ISP services in the end. In fact, it can end up costing more—
but it will at least get the company the most bang for the buck. The truth is that ISPs
will dictate how much security customers will have because they can. They are the
conduits to the networks.
IT managers should understand that pushing back at the ISPs will only do so
much. This is a trend that’s here to stay. The ISPs started the trend, but it won’t
end with them. Business partners and regulators will step in and give the secu-
rity push even more teeth, including standards such as best practices and default
security requirements.
Ultimately, the ISPs will protect themselves from outgoing traffic by shutting
Web sites down that have been commandeered for DoS and other attacks. The
ISPs that survive will start offering security services. It’s only during this interim pe-
riod that the onus will be on companies that use ISPs to pick up the slack. Whether
486
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the time period is six months or six years is hardly important. Companies that
want to do business with top-tier providers had better get serious about security.
PROTECTION AGAINST RANDOM TERRORIST IW TACTICS
Are ASPs and hosting providers selling customer information? How can private
companies protect their data against random terrorist IW tactics? The answer lies
between the implementation of data-protection techniques and firewalls—both
are briefly covered in this section.
An information security officer for the New York State Office of Mental Health
is considering the ASP model, but he’s afraid patient data could end up in the
wrong hands.
Data security concerns, too, tarnish ASPs’ allure for government clients. Think
of the commercial windfall if any of these hosting companies started selling social
services data or any other government agencies’ data. It’s unacceptable, but it could
happen. And indeed it does.
According to a recent industry survey, 33% of application-hosting providers
were selling their customers’ data. What is most disturbing is that the hosting com-
panies all had privacy policies in place, which they were violating.
The would-be gatherers of the stolen data aren’t always advertising agencies or
marketing firms. They could be random terrorists seeking out corporate data (any
data) to destroy as part of an IW tactic. For example, one ASP executive reported
software vendors asking him to host their applications for vertical market cus-
tomers so they could mine the customers’ databases. At least, that’s what they
claimed to be doing. The vendors wanted to act as purchasing agents between the
members of those vertical markets, enabling them to sift through the members’
databases for information to cross-sell between the member companies. If the cus-
tomers agree, it could be great, but that is a big if. Most companies don’t want any-
one mining their data.
Selling customer data is taboo for most ASPs, whose executives cringe at the
prospect and chalk it up to a few bad apples who will soon be out of business. If
it is happening, it could have terrible implications for the rest of the industry, but
most ASPs view their customers’ data as their sacred asset and would never con-
sider selling it. An ASP should also be bound to a privacy policy as part of the ser-
vice contract.
Prevent your data from being sold up front by making the ASP sign a contract
that says they can’t sell it. Make sure you take a close look at the wording to see what
constitutes a sale or transfer of data (see sidebar, “Data Protection Measure Tips”).
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
487

DATA PROTECTION MEASURE TIPS
APPLICATION-HOSTING PROVIDERS
Consider working with a lawyer or auditing firm when writing a privacy con-
tract.
Limit staff access to data and set up multiple levels of security.
Require employees to sign a statement that they will abide by security and pri-
vacy policies.
Separate the data center from corporate offices.
Have one-door access to the data center.
Install security cameras in the data center.
CUSTOMERS
Examine a privacy policy’s wording to understand what constitutes a sale or
transfer of data.
Keep the “what-ifs” in mind: If providers go bust or are acquired, what happens
to the data?
Do a background check on the provider and check references.
Look for seals of approval.
What if the hosting provider goes out of business? Is it permissible to sell its
customers’ information as an asset (as online retailer Toysmart.com tried before
being rebuffed by the Federal Trade Commission)? What if the ASP is acquired?
Will the acquirer stick to the same privacy agreement (see sidebar, “Privacy Agree-
ments”)? An ASP should be able to answer all these questions.
PRIVACY AGREEMENTS
What’s stopping hosting providers from selling their customers’ data? Ethics and lit-
tle else, according to industry watchdogs. Companies are tempted to sell valuable
information at their disposal because there are no set legal ramifications to doing so.
Right now, a lot can be bought and sold rather freely, and that includes the business
sector. The pressure right now to sell data applies to business information as well as
to consumer data. People tend to overlook that.
488
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

Hosting providers can be held accountable if they violate their privacy policies,
but privacy policies often are more vaporware than reality. Privacy policies have
more holes than Swiss cheese.
Customers must take some of the blame for flimsy privacy policies because
many only skim over privacy statements in their rush to sign on with an ASP. A lot
of ASPs offer free services. They say, “Sign up now and get the first few months free.”
In their rush to sign on, customers don’t even look at the privacy policy.
However, the ASP industry aims to police itself. The ASP Industry Consortium
is working with the World Intellectual Property Organization to establish dispute
resolution procedures between ASPs and their customers, covering such areas as
copyright and proprietary rights infringement and loss of data or data integrity.
Companies hosting data also should take measures to prevent internal and ex-
ternal marauders from gaining access to customer information. Many ASPs, for ex-
ample, check the backgrounds of the data center staff and restrict their access to
data. Often, the customer, not the ASP, chooses who gets access.
Another safeguard is making data center employees pass through several secu-
rity levels, including physical security guards, key-card door access, and even bio-
metric hand scans. A common mistake made by ASPs is housing the data center in
the same facility as a corporate office. For example, it’s too easy to say, “I work with
the company,” flash an ID and walk right in.” It’s easier to be able to bypass exter-
nal data center security measures by pretending to be a member of a nightly clean-
ing crew and telling a security guard that he or she was with a group already in the
building.
To test an ASP’s privacy policy and security measures, customers should hire
an outside auditing firm. Customers should also test an ASPs’ security measures up
front and use an auditing firm to test them on an ongoing basis. Some ASPs even
get in on the auditing act.
Another data safety avenue for ASPs are seals of approval from such organi-
zations as the Better Business Bureau and TrustE. TrustE, of San Jose, California,
gives out privacy seals of approval, called “trustmarks,” to Web sites. It’s also
considering expanding the program to include software companies. To get a pri-
vacy seal of approval, software companies have to disclose their data-gathering
and dissemination practices. That might become more common. ASP clients
are sharpening their scrutiny of data privacy. Customers of ASPs are taking a
long look at privacy policies. Most won’t work with ASPs that don’t have a solid
one in place.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
489

WHAT TO DO WHEN TERRORISTS KEEP ATTACKING
Today, e-commerce and information sites worldwide remain vulnerable because there
are (still) no strong defenses deployed—thus, terrorists keep attacking. Although re-
peated attacks have increased awareness of the problem, and technologies for dealing
with DoS attacks are seemingly on their way, the attacks have become more sophisti-
cated—and the problem is not going away. At least one tester of anti-DoS technology
(a major Internet provider) has estimated that anywhere from 9 to 14% of the traffic
on its networks is, in reality, data sent by vandals intent on a DoS attack.
The attacks have gone from just Web servers to enterprises and infrastructure.
Private companies cannot become complacent. So, what do you do when terrorists
keep attacking?
Solutions on the Way
Several groups are attempting to work together to fight DoS attacks. The Internet
Engineering Task Force has started working on a technology to trace the origin of
a piece of data back to its source. So-called ICMP Traceback Messages, or itrace,
could turn DoS attackers from anonymous vandals into easily tracked criminals.
Other groups are forming to share information about attacks, to be better pre-
pared to defend against them.
The Information Technology Association of America, with 23 other major
technology companies, has formed the Information Technology Information Shar-
ing and Analysis Center, or IT-ISAC. By sharing attack data, members are better
prepared for future DoS attacks (among other Internet threats) and are better able
to track attacks to the source.
Such tracking is difficult today because the tools used by the vandals who start
such attacks can be modified to appear to come from a completely different source
than the real one. Called “IP spoofing,” such a technique requires every company
whose server routes data to cooperate to pinpoint the attacker. Without such co-
operation, an attacker may be difficult to find, but stopping the attack is possible.
The Holy Grail is to have a ubiquitous deployment all throughout the Internet.
Today, customers are more interested in keeping their connection to the In-
ternet up and working than prosecuting an attacker. The customers’ first priority is
not to make these things go away. They just want to keep on doing business.
Everyone Must Work Together
While some companies want just to keep on doing business and not solve the com-
puter attacker prosecution problem, others believe the problem won’t be solved
without Internet-wide cooperation. The only solution is to trace things back and
490
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

turn them off, and that requires a lot of cooperation. Any technology like these has
to be widely deployed. It has got to be a community effort.
DoS attacks seem to (and in some cases, actually do) come from dozens or
hundreds of locations at the same time. Without Internet service providers coop-
erating, tracking the attacks is impossible. Cooperation has become critical because
the Internet is still rapidly growing, and more, rather than fewer, mistakes are being
made. There are more and more machines out there, and consequently, that means
more and more vulnerable machines. The attacks on Microsoft have shown that
hackers are more than willing and able to carry out successful attacks. Until com-
panies act together to make the Internet more reliable, business on the Net is at risk.
Hack Back
“Hacking back” is another tactic that private companies can use when terrorists
keep attacking. However, some companies have become either virtual vigilantes or
packet pacifists. Network executives have mixed feelings about whether to retaliate
against an attack.
In December 1999, when protesters were rampaging through Seattle in an at-
tempt to disrupt the World Trade Organization (WTO) summit meeting, other ac-
tivists were launching a DoS attack on the WTO Web site. The WTO’s
Web-hosting service spotted the attack and repelled it, bouncing the flood of page
download requests back to the origin server, which was run by a group calling itself
“electrohippies.” The e-hippies coalition, based in the U.K., never publicly ac-
knowledged that the attack had been turned back on its own server, but the next
day, a notice appeared on the e-hippies site apologizing for people having problems
getting through to its site.
To retaliate or not to retaliate? In cyberspace, there is no simple answer.
Conxion, the San Jose hosting service that reversed the attack on the WTO
server, recognized the attack was coming from a single IP address belonging to the
e-hippies server. Conxion then redirected their filtering software to redirect any
packets coming from these machines back at the e-hippies Web server. Conxion
was so proud of having given the attackers a dose of their own medicine that it is-
sued a press release about the incident. However, the reaction among IT profes-
sionals to the counterstrike was decidedly mixed.
According to industry analysts, most IT professionals will not strike back in cy-
berspace, for fear of hitting an innocent bystander, but they’re not averse to taking
some action when they’re sure of the perpetrator’s identity.
If vendor tools are any indication, fighting back may indeed be gathering ac-
ceptance in the IT community. Intrusion detection tools, for example, can be con-
figured to reverse attacks. New reactive tools are also popping up in the marketplace,
and freeware attack-reversing tools abound on the Web. Nevertheless, brace your
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
491

networks for more distributed attacks, nastier viruses, and more chaos until these
issues sort themselves out. Cyber crime is going to get worse before it gets better.
COUNTERING SUSTAINED ROGUE IW
Corporate reputations have taken a sustained beating from rogue Internet mes-
sages, fake press releases, and “gripe sites.” Of course, critical opinions are legally
protected as free speech, but when the messages are false, defamatory, or designed
to manipulate stock values, corporate America fights back.
To do that, companies are hiring Internet IW monitoring firms that use soft-
ware that scans the Internet to find out what’s being said about business clients.
They’re also hiring private investigators to track the perpetrators, but that’s not
something you want to do if you’re merely aggravated about the messages, because
the investigation can be very expensive—for example, $70,000 to $80,000.
The investigations usually turn up former employees, disgruntled insiders, or
stock manipulators. The big challenge is identifying the people behind the anony-
mous screen names. A flurry of messages may actually be the work of only one or
two people who use different handles to make it look like they’re a crowd.
One approach is to file a “John Doe” lawsuit and use subpoena power to obtain
the identity of the mischief maker from his or her Internet service provider. It
should be a serious lawsuit, based on a cost-benefit analysis.
Another technique employs “forensic psycholinguists” (the same folks who an-
alyze hate mail sent to the White House), who look for signs that the messages came
from the same poison keyboard. In one recent case, a psycholinguist studied 40
messages from three screen names and concluded that they came from the same
writer because they had the same format: a question in the headline and the answer
in the body. The messages also used the same vulgarities.
Based on the analysis, the psycholinguist surmised that the writer was probably
40, white, professional, and perhaps a day trader. Furthermore, the analysis indi-
cated that he or she suffered from low self-esteem and felt his or her regular job was
threatened by the acquisitions of the company he or she was berating.
Private eyes can also engage suspects in online conversations to seek clues
about their identities, but there’s a danger that the undercover gumshoe could tip
his or her hand or cross the line into entrapment. There are even better investiga-
tion tricks. For example, perpetrators may have left some electronic footprints be-
hind by filling out a Web site guest book with the same cybersignature they use later
for derogatory messages.
Sometimes the text of a message itself provides clues. If they say it’s snowing
outside, you can check weather records to find out where on the planet it’s
snowing right now, to narrow the suspect pool. If they say they have a blue
492
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Jaguar and live in Ohio, you can get a database that lists every blue Jaguar owner
in the state.
Apparently, private companies are willing to go to great lengths to identify In-
ternet content that besmirches their corporate reputation or infringes on their in-
tellectual property, but such services can be used for much more than just
defending against sustained rogue IW in the form of defamation and piracy. Clients
start off having a defensive mindset, but then they transition to more of an offen-
sive approach.
In other words, they begin to use Internet surveillance for benchmarking and
competitive intelligence, such as finding out when a competitor adds a new feature,
such as online customer chat, to its Web site. Internet surveillance can even help
companies gather soft information such as “marketing buzz” from the world’s
largest focus group.
Law enforcement’s new weapons for protection against random rogue IW, with
regard to electronic detection, have spurred privacy proponents to strike back, but will
these shifting tactics by law enforcement agencies really protect private companies?
PROTECTION AGAINST RANDOM ROGUE IW
The growing availability of powerful encryption has, in effect, rewritten the rule
book for creating, storing, and transmitting computer data [5]. People everywhere
rightly regard confidentiality as essential for conducting business, protecting against
random rogue IW, and ensuring personal privacy [6]. Governments worldwide have
been sent into a spin for fear secret encryption keys will add to the weapons of ter-
rorists and other criminals. Some nations have even attempted to control the tech-
nology by constructing a maze of regulations and laws aimed at blocking the import,
export, or use of encryption software. Such bans have largely failed.
Recently, the war over encryption has moved beyond controlling the technol-
ogy itself. Now, some governments are granting law enforcement agencies new
powers and funding the development of new tools to get at computerized data,
encrypted or otherwise. Rising to that challenge, privacy proponents are striking
back with new techniques for hiding data and preserving anonymity in electronic
communications.
New Legislation
One legal tactic being used by states is to require owners of encrypted files to de-
crypt them when asked to by authorities. So far, only Singapore and Malaysia have
enacted such laws, with Britain and India about to follow suit.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
493

In Britain, two recent bills would give law enforcement officers the authority to
compel individuals to decrypt an encrypted file in their possession under pain of a
two-year jail term. Further, anyone given such a command would have to keep the
giving of the notice, its contents, and the things done in pursuance of it secret—on
penalty of a six-year jail term. The bills broadly define encryption, even including
what some consider to be mere data protocol.
Straightforward though it seems, the approach is technically flawed. After all, a
suspect may truly be unable to decrypt an encrypted file. He or she may have for-
gotten or lost the key. If public-key encryption was used, the sender of a file will
have the key used to encrypt the file, but rarely, if ever, the decryption key, which
remains the exclusive property of the intended recipient. If symmetric key encryp-
tion was used, and the sender’s hard disk crashes, the key will likely be wiped out
along with all the other stored data. This flaw in the legislation was demonstrated
by a British group that mailed an ostensibly incriminating document to a govern-
ment official and then destroyed the decryption key, making it impossible for that
official to decode the file, even if “compelled.”
Moreover, according to the latest version of the Cyberspace Electronic Security
Act (CESA), police would be at liberty to present a text in court and claim it was the
decrypted version of an encrypted file, without revealing to the defendant exactly
how they arrived at the plaintext. This means the defendant may have a hard time
defending himself and makes it a lot easier for the police to fabricate evidence. The
ability to receive a fair trial could be at stake.
Escrowed Encryption
Another controversial scheme for letting law enforcement in on encrypted data is
known as escrowed encryption. Here, a third party is appointed by the state to keep
a copy of the decryption keys (in escrow, as it were) for the state to use to decrypt
any file sent to or by any user. In other words, encrypted files would be protected—
except from the state.
Needless to say, many people abhor the mere idea. Even if a sound case could
be made for revealing the decryption key to government personnel, what is to pre-
vent them from reusing that key in the future to look at other documents by the
same user? Furthermore, drug traffickers, terrorists, and others of most concern to
law enforcement are the least likely to use encryption that is openly advertised as
readable by the government.
Then, too, given the transnational nature of the Internet, a global key-escrow
system would need to be established. Sovereign states, with their own interests to
protect, would object to such a system; this happened with the escrow scheme
known as the “Clipper Chip,” which was heavily promoted by the U.S. government
but largely dismissed by other states. The logistics of who keeps the escrowed keys,
494
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

who has authority to demand their release, under what conditions, and so on, be-
comes unwieldy when vast numbers of encryption keys, states, and legal systems are
involved. In view of such concerns, official support for escrowed encryption has all
but died in the United States and elsewhere.
Global Surveillance
The ineffectiveness of legal constraints on encryption appears to have persuaded
many governments to change direction. They are instead seeking to capitalize on
the unencrypted nature of most digital traffic and to derive information by moni-
toring that traffic. Even encrypted messages tend to leave unencrypted who is com-
municating with whom and when.
Officially, most states deny the existence of electronic surveillance networks,
but extensive claims of their existence persist. Echelon and the Federal Intrusion
Detection Network (FIDNet) are two such alleged intelligence-gathering efforts
that have been frequently described in the mainstream press and debated in official
hearings by government legislatures. Echelon is, according to the Washington,
DC–based Federation of American Scientists, a global network that searches
through millions of interceptions for preprogrammed keywords on fax, telex, and
email messages.
The same sort of public inquiries have been made about the Federal Intrusion
Detection Network (FIDNet) that the U.S. National Security Council has proposed
creating. It would monitor traffic on both government and commercial networks,
with the stated goal of safeguarding the critical U.S. information infrastructure. Al-
though the House Appropriations Committee did away with funding for it last
summer, FIDNet supporters continue to push the program, arguing that it would
not intrude on individuals’ communications. Meanwhile, a number of civil rights
groups, including the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), in Washing-
ton, DC, and the American Civil Liberties Union, based in New York City, have
challenged FIDNet’s constitutionality. The plan demonstrates that privacy con-
cerns are being swept under the carpet.
Computer Forensics
As society relies increasingly on computers, the amount of crime perpetrated
with the machines has risen in kind. To law enforcement’s delight, electronic
records have proved to be a fertile ground for detectives. Indeed, in their present
shape, computers, the Internet, and email are the most surveillance-friendly
media ever devised.
This development has given rise to an entirely new industry: computer foren-
sics. Its purpose is not only to find out what files are stored in a computer, but also
to recover files that were created with, stored in, sent by, received from, or merely
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
495

seen by that computer in the past, even if such files were subsequently “deleted” by
the user.
The ability to resurrect electronic paper trails from supposedly deleted files stems,
in large part, from the features built into many computer programs. For example, the
delete command in most software does not delete. It merely marks the space that such
a file occupied in a disk as being available in the future to be overwritten.
If it was really deleted, then undelete commands would not work.
Also, many Windows applications save temporary versions of a file being
worked on, just in case the computer crashes. Even if a user were to deliberately
overwrite the original file, the temporary version still lurks in some part of the disk,
often with an unrecognizable name and occasionally even invisible from the con-
ventional directory.
Electronic paper trails are also left behind by the fast save function, which saves
the latest version of a word-processing document as the original plus the sequence
of changes made to it. A recipient of the electronic end result can see how the doc-
ument evolved over time—not the kind of information most people care to share.
Internet-related applications, like many other software programs, do a lot of in-
ternal housekeeping that involves writing information onto the hard disk. For ex-
ample, the popular Web browser Netscape Navigator creates a file called
netscape.hst, which gives a chronological listing of almost everything its user has
done with the browser since it was installed.
Simply surfing the Web pushes other data into computer memory, in the guise
of “cookies” and as documents “cached” on one’s disk. Web sites visited can learn
the visitor’s Internet service provider, Web browser, and a lot more. A remote Web
site could even gain full access to a visitor’s hard disk, depending on how aggressive
that remote site elects to be and how extensive the protective measures taken by the
visitor are.
Software tools now make it fairly straightforward to get a computer to cough
up information that its owner may not realize is there. Not to be outdone, com-
puter programmers have developed numerous tools that can defeat most computer
forensics tools. Although such counterforensics programs will remove most traces
of sensitive data from a computer, it is extremely difficult to remove all traces that
may have been left behind. In the absence of a thorough schooling in the esoteric
details of computers, the odds favor the competent computer forensics investigator.
Also favoring the forensics expert are new laws legalizing the accessing of com-
puters by law enforcement agencies. In December 1999, for example, the Australian
Parliament passed a bill giving the Australian Security Organization the power to
obtain warrants to access computers and telecommunications services and, if nec-
essary, to delete or alter other data in the target computer and conceal the fact that
496
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

anything had been done under the warrant. As of February 2000, Dutch authorities
are permitted to use bugging devices in computers to retrieve text.
Countermeasures
The various legal roadblocks and technical wizardry contrived by governments and
law enforcement to block encryption’s spread have, of course, curbed neither the
need for the technology nor the ingenuity of privacy-loving programmers. As a re-
sult, a number of countermeasures have been engineered to augment or replace en-
cryption. Among them are anonymizers, which conceal the identity of the person
sending or receiving information, and steganography, which hides the information.
The need for anonymity in a democratic society has long been recognized, to
shield whistleblowers and political dissenters from retaliation, to protect the
records of medical patients, and so on. Less dramatic situations also justify
anonymity, such as placing a personal ad or seeking employment through the In-
ternet without jeopardizing one’s current job. To be sure, anonymity can be ex-
ploited by sociopaths seeking to avoid accountability for their actions, but, in
general, it serves a useful social function.
Anonymous and pseudonymous remailers are computers that are accessible
through the Internet that launder the true identity of an email sender. Most are op-
erated at no cost to the user. A pseudonymous remailer replaces the sender’s email
address with a false one and forwards the message to the intended recipient. The re-
cipient can reply to the sender’s pseudonymous address, which, in turn, forwards
the response to the sender’s true address.
Anonymous remailers come in three flavors: cypherpunk, mixmaster, and Web-
based. Cypherpunk remailers strip away the message header, which describes where
the message came from and how it got there, before forwarding the message to the
recipient. Conceivably, someone with physical access to such a remailer’s phone
lines could correlate the incoming and outgoing traffic and make connections.
Mixmaster remailers avoid that problem by using stronger encryption and
tricks for frustrating traffic analysis, such as padding messages to disguise their true
length. But even mixmasters can be compromised. For example, through a con-
certed effort, it would be possible to detect a correlation between Mr. A sending an
encrypted message through a remailer, and Ms. B receiving a message at some vari-
able time afterwards.
Web-based anonymizers range from sites offering conventional anonymizer ser-
vices to others where the connection between the user’s computer and the anonymizer
is itself encrypted with up to 128-bit encryption. The job is done using the standard se-
cure socket layer (SSL) encryption built into all Web browsers of recent vintage.
For extra privacy, a message may be routed through a series of remailers. For
example, the Onion Router project (see the site at http://www.onion-router.net) of
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
497

the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, offers another way to string to-
gether remailers. What’s more, it allows anonymized and multiply encrypted Web
browsing in real time.
Onion routing is a two-stage process. The initiator instructs router W (in this
case, a proxy server at the firewall of a secure site) to create an onion, which con-
sists of public-key-encrypted layers of instructions. Router X peels off the first layer
of the onion, which indicates the next step in the path and supplies a symmetric de-
crypting key for use when the actual message comes through later. The onion then
goes to Routers Y and Z, depositing keys at each stop. Once the connection is es-
tablished, the encrypted message is sent through and successively decrypted, arriv-
ing at the recipient as plaintext. To respond, the recipient sends the message to
Router Z, which encrypts the text, onion-style, and sends it back through the al-
ready established path.
Hiding Data
The microdot used by German spies during World War II to transmit strategic in-
formation is an example of steganography, used to hide data in plain view. The mi-
crodot consisted of a greatly reduced photograph of a page of text, which was
pasted over a period in an otherwise innocuous document. A more modern appli-
cation is the digital watermark, used for identifying official copies of copyrighted
images and recordings. Unlike encryption, which hides the content of a message in
an obvious manner, steganography hides the mere existence of anything hidden.
The commercially available computer-based steganography programs popular
today rely on three techniques:
Merging the information to be hidden into a “cover” sound file by changing the
least significant bit of each digitized sample of the file. The resulting file sounds
the same to the human ear and is the same length as the original file.
Merging the information to be hidden into a cover image file by changing the
least significant bit of the digitized value of the brightness of each pixel. Typi-
cal images use 256 levels of brightness, with 8 bits per pixel for black-and-white
images and 8 bits for each of the three primary colors (red, green, and blue) per
pixel for color images. A lot of data can lurk in a 1024  768-pixel image.
Hiding data in the areas of a computer floppy disk or hard drive that are normally
not accessed. A computer disk is divided into clusters, each of which holds from
512 to over 32,000 bytes. When a file is saved, it uses a portion of one or more
clusters; because DOS and Windows store only one file per cluster, the space left
over between the end of a file and the end of the cluster (called the slack) is avail-
able to hide data in. This scheme is extremely easy to detect, however.
498
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The Future of Encryption
Encryption today is as strong as it is because there is no need for it to be any
stronger. Of course, the underlying mathematical assumptions might be challenged
by a breakthrough, such as a solution to factoring large numbers into their prime-
number components. Meanwhile, an encryption method can be strengthened by
merely adding bits to the encryption key.
Nevertheless, several schemes under development may eventually find use for
electronic communication and storage: elliptic curve encryption, voice encryption
(already freely available and used worldwide over the Internet), quantum cryptog-
raphy, and DNA cryptography.
Few microprocessors have been specially designed to run encryption software.
Most personal computers can accommodate the hardware and software require-
ments of modern encryption, but most hand-held devices cannot. For these de-
vices, a new class of algorithms, known as elliptic curve encryption, is claimed to
provide encryption strength equal to that of the standard algorithms in use today,
while using a smaller key and arithmetic that is easier on microprocessors and that
needs much less memory. Being a new type of encryption, its security has yet to
withstand the concerted scrutiny of experts.
Voice encryption is a response to the increasing flow of audio traffic over the
World Wide Web, which has led, among other things, to the merging of strong en-
cryption with Internet telephony. Given appropriate software, anyone today can carry
on fully encrypted conversations with any other user connected to the Internet.
Perhaps the most advanced such software is Speak Freely, which is available
worldwide free of charge (see http://www.speakfreely.org). Some mainstream voice-
over-the-Internet services do not offer encryption, though. Instead, they route the
data through the company’s servers, thereby opening up a security weakness.
Quantum cryptography is not in itself an encryption algorithm. Rather, it is a
means for creating and securing the distribution of private keys. Based on the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the idea is that communicating photons cannot
be diverted from the intended recipient to the unsought-for interceptor without
creating an irreversible change in the quantum states of the system.
The precepts of quantum cryptography date from the early 1970s, and research
has been ongoing for the past decade at universities such as Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity, in Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of Geneva in Switzerland; at
U.S. national laboratories such as Los Alamos; and in the corporate sector, at
British Telecom and elsewhere.
In DNA cryptography, each letter of the alphabet is converted into a different
combination of the four bases that make up human deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
A piece of DNA spelling out the message to be encrypted is then synthesized, and
the strand is slipped into a normal fragment of human DNA of similar length. The
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
499

end result is dried out on paper and cut into small dots. As only one DNA strand
in about 30 billion will contain the message, the detection of even the existence of
the encrypted message is most unlikely.
Shifting Attitudes
If, as seems likely, encryption and related products continue to develop for personal
and commercial uses, countries will have to rethink their policies toward the tech-
nology. In what may be a sign of things to come, the German government an-
nounced in May 1999 that it would fund the development and free distribution of
open-source encryption software that the government itself will be unable to break
(see http://www.gnupg.org). The Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology re-
leased a report stating that Germany considers the application of secure encryption
to be a crucial requirement for citizens’ privacy, the development of electronic
commerce, and the protection of business secrets.
Also in 1999, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin announced a similar shift,
saying that his country would scrap any key escrow plans in favor of free use of
cryptography. In both cases, the motivation seems to have been the realization that
protecting data from foreign parties outweighs any law enforcement concerns, and
that the use of strong encryption furthers, rather than hinders, national security.
Independently, the Canadian government announced in October 1999 that it
would not seek to regulate the domestic use of encryption. The significance of
such trends is clear: the global reach of the Internet has made it extremely easy for
encryption software to travel between countries, with or without controls, and if
one or more major countries elects not to enforce controls, the technology will
spread even more easily. Society’s transformation into a computer-based econ-
omy makes protecting corporate and personal information not only desirable
but also necessary.
How then does one balance privacy and confidentiality with security? Govern-
ments are undoubtedly obligated to protect their citizens from terrorism and out-
and-out criminality. A partial solution may be to criminalize the use of encryption
only in the commission of generally recognized serious crimes and to encourage its
use elsewhere.
Attempting to control encryption, however, has proved to be an ineffective
means of preventing crime and may actually hurt vital national interests. Similarly,
the granting of new policing powers to law enforcement agencies will do less to pro-
tect a country’s critical infrastructure than building better security technology. If
greater security is truly what governments are after, then much can be done with
the tools already at hand: encrypting all important data and communications
makes their illegal retrieval and interception useless to the thief.
500
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

KEEPING THE AMATEUR ROGUE OUT OF THE CYBERHOUSE
Finally, how do you keep amateur rogues out of the cyberhouse? Today, you prob-
ably can’t, but, tomorrow (see Chapter 17, “The Information Warfare Arsenal of
the Future”)—well, that’s another matter.
Today however, motivated amateur rogue “hacktivists” have grabbed headlines,
announcing they’ve collected credit card and other personal data on some 58,800
business and political leaders. Increasingly, these amateur social activists have turned
to hacking to make their point, breaking into computer systems and wreaking havoc
on organizations they oppose. The Internet has turned out to be a remarkable tool
for nonviolent protest on a scale activists could only dream of before.
The term hacktivist was first applied to supporters of the Zapatista rebels in
Mexico’s southern state of Chiapas, who have sabotaged Mexican government Web
sites since 1998 and held “virtual sit-ins” designed to overload servers. More re-
cently, the tactic has been used in Serbia, Pakistan, and India—and by both Pales-
tinians and Israelis in the Middle East. In one case, Palestinian sympathizers broke
into a Web site operated by a pro-Israel lobbying group in the United States, steal-
ing credit card information and email addresses.
The theft of private data is a relatively new tactic, which goes beyond defacing
Web sites and electronic bombardment of servers. Antiglobalist protesters contend
the WTO’s trade treaties benefit big corporations and rich countries at the expense
of the environment and workers. Protesters who showed up in person were largely
stymied by a heavy police presence at the recent Davos meeting. Online, however,
they effectively surmounted physical barriers.
Another Frontier
The Net is another frontier for people to engage in these types of activities. The at-
tacks against forum organizers showed just how far hacktivists could reach. They
obtained the travel itineraries (including flight numbers) of politicians from
around the world and published them on the Web. This poses operational security
problems and goes beyond what’s been seen before.
Finally, almost every major corporation and organization has been hit at one
time or another by hacking, with McDonald’s, Starbucks, and the WTO being fa-
vorite targets of hacktivists. In some respect, it is really quite clever and quite funny.
SUMMARY
The development of the Internet presents serious threats to the security of private
companies, in addition to the much-touted opportunities it provides. The more
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
501

extreme scenarios discussed in this chapter may never occur. The possibility that
they may, however, must be appreciated. It is not advisable for any risk-management
approach to disregard the threats previously discussed on the basis that they are far-
fetched and fanciful. In addition to the threats being technically feasible, either now
or in the next two decades or so, the ability of intruders to gain entry to computer
systems and disguise the very fact of entry makes this a peculiarly difficult threat to
appreciate. The undetectability of many attacks may lead private companies to a
false sense of security and leave the companies vulnerable to serious disruption or
total disablement in the event of an attack.
The possibility of means of attack this presents to aggressors can help realisti-
cally guide the process of moving forward in dealing with the IW arsenal and tac-
tics of private companies.
Conclusions
As competition for profit increases between corporations and consumer expec-
tations grow, there may soon be a time that, for some private companies, even a
limited disablement may be fatal, or nearly fatal, to its continued existence, surely
one of the most important post-threat outcomes of any risk-management plan.
The growth in the number of aggressors must also be appreciated.
Added to the traditional aggressors identified by private companies are the
ones that may now see the companies as a visible surrogate of an entity that is
either impregnable from attack or that it is inadvisable to attack.
Some private companies have always been the target of aggression, and the
identity and number of aggressors may stay the same.
It must be appreciated that new, and very powerful, tools of aggression may
now be available to those traditional aggressors.
Traditional forms of risk management are, it is argued, not particularly suitable
to the dynamic, desegregated forms of aggression.
The approach to determining risk and how to protect against and prevent net-
work attacks must be revised. A fundamental rethinking of the way private
companies organize themselves, and the way they leave themselves at risk, will
also be necessary.
Traditional forms of risk management represent an approach positioned in a
hierarchical paradigm, which may not deal adequately or at all with new forms
of threat posed to a dynamic network.
Until these fundamental issues are addressed, no private company can truly say
that it has identified all forms of risk that are or will be relevant to that organi-
zation. Nor will it be able to say that it has treated them. These must be imper-
atives in an environment where any single risk could conceivably threaten the
entity’s survival.
502
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

An Agenda for Action
Management of cyberterrorism risk must be considered an important issue for all
aspects of society, not only for private companies. However, in view of the way in
which the information network has developed, and the almost complete immersion
of much of private enterprise in it, a company should analyze its vulnerabilities re-
gardless of societal views.
The dangers in failing to recognize the risk could be serious. The dangers in rec-
ognizing the risk but not treating it, could be equally serious.
The U.S. government needs to set an agenda for action that goes beyond the
work already done in preparation for protecting the IW arsenal and tactics of pri-
vate companies. With the preceding in mind, when completing the Information
Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies Checklist (F16.1 in Appendix F),
the computer forensics specialist (CFS) should adhere to the provisional list of ac-
tions for networks. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for
which the researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures,
review, and assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these systems
have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case proj-
ect. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? As competition for profit increases between corporations and
consumer expectations grow, there may soon be a time when, for some private
companies, even a limited disablement may be fatal, or nearly fatal, to its con-
tinued existence, surely one of the most important post-threat outcomes of any
risk-management plan.
2.
True or False? The decrease in the number of aggressors must be appreciated.
3.
True or False? Added to the traditional aggressors identified by private compa-
nies are the ones that may now see the companies as a visible surrogate of an
entity that is either impregnable from attack or that it is inadvisable to attack.
4.
True or False? Traditional forms of risk management are particularly suitable
to the dynamic, desegregated forms of aggression.
5.
True or False? The approach to determining risk and how to protect against
and prevent network attacks must be revised.
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
503

Multiple Choice
1.
Various aspects of society are being transferred to cyberspace, except:
A. Informational activities
B.
Transactional activities
C. Architectural activities
D. Infrastructure activities
2.
There are three general categories of attack especially applicable to a private
enterprise, except:
A. Data destruction
B.
Information attacks
C. Penetration of a system to modify its output
D. System penetration with the goal of stealing information or sensitive data
3.
The collapse of the former Soviet Union into what could be termed a “transna-
tional kleptocracy,” has led to some fundamental changes in the international
security environment, except:
A. Small numbers of unemployed, underemployed, or otherwise disaffected
security and KGB operators are now available for hire.
B.
Large numbers of highly trained and professional scientists and computer
experts may no longer have jobs.
C. Some countries into which the former Soviet Union disintegrated have a
nuclear capability and/or reserves of highly enriched uranium.
D. Some estimates claim that 73% of the Russian economy is under the con-
trol of criminal enterprises. These enterprises have spread beyond the bor-
ders of any particular state.
E.
Estimates claim that 89% of Russian banks are under criminal control.
4.
The three elements of IPK are, except:
A. Open source intelligence
B.
Information technology
C. Electronic security and counterintelligence
D. Political, ethnic, and religious groups
5.
IP is:
A. Internet protocol
B.
Application of information or information technology in support of con-
ventional military peacekeeping operations (contrary to what some may
consider revolution in military affairs [RMA] thinking)
504
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

C. Traditional psychological operations or deception operations
D. Covert media manipulation
E.
Clandestine human intelligence operations or overt research operations
Exercise
In the preliminary stages of an employment dispute case, a CFS was brought in by
a large computer services corporation to perform a forensic recovery on an em-
ployee’s desktop computer. The client suspected the employee, who was a foreign
national, of hacking into other classified computer systems based on information
generated by the client’s external auditing software program. How did the CFS go
about conducting the investigation?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
After finding pornography downloaded on its network server and a number of in-
dividual office computers, a client began to build a case for employee dismissal. A
CFS team (CFST) was hired to locate any deleted files and verify certain illicit and
non-work-related contents of the hard drives in question. How did the CFST go
about conducting their examination?
Case Project
After being sued for negligence, a client was about to settle a multimillion dollar
suit and rewrite their entire software package because the plaintiff was charging that
the installation of the software in question had permanently damaged/erased exist-
ing files; the irreplaceable data was not recoverable by any means and the plaintiff
could not access files in a specific software application critical to running his busi-
ness. How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation?
Optional Team Case Project
Five fire-damaged UNIX server drives were literally shoveled out of the debris from
a large auto dealership. The backup tapes (plastic-material) had been co-located
with the server drives and were themselves destroyed. All financial data (inventory,
accounts payable and receivable, W-2s, customers and loan information) was de-
stroyed. How was the CFS able to go about recovering the data?
The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of Private Companies
505

REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Firewalls: Jumpstart for Network and Systems Administra-
tors, Elsevier Digital Press, Burlington, MA, 2004.
[2] Vacca, John R., i-mode Crash Course, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002.
[3] Vacca, John R., Wireless Broadband Networks Handbook, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2001.
[4] Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce, 3rd ed., Charles River Media, Hing-
ham, MA, 2001.
[5] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[6] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
506
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

507
The Information Warfare
Arsenal of the Future
17
T
errorists take control of the New York Stock Exchange? Terrorism over the
Internet? Computer viruses in the arsenal of Hizballah? As discussed in pre-
ceding chapters, such possibilities are currently being discussed by strategic
analysts under the catch-all title of “information warfare.” To date, the defense es-
tablishment has yet to agree on the exact definition of the term information warfare.
Only the entertainment industry, in the form of films and novels, has popular-
ized the notion of an electronic doomsday scenario in which covert terrorist groups
manage to penetrate critical nodes of the national information infrastructure (NII)
and defense information infrastructure (DII) and are able to, variously, launch nu-
clear weapons, crash the telephone system, cause mayhem on the railways or in the
air, or bring the financial sector to a catastrophic halt (see sidebar, “Will the Real La
Femme Nikita Please Stand Up?”). Warnings also come from more sober sources.
In 1999 the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff concluded that the convergence of vulnerable
information infrastructures with traditional critical infrastructures had created a
tunnel of vulnerability previously unrealized in the history of conflict. In other
words, the one thing that everyone agrees on is that in the digital age, information,
and its dissemination, has achieved the status of a vital strategic asset.
WILL THE REAL LA FEMME NIKITA PLEASE STAND UP?
Section One (in the USA Network’s series La Femme Nikita) was the most covert
antiterrorism organization on the planet. ABC’s Alias and Fox’s 24, don’t hold a can-
dle to La Femme Nikita when it comes to wholesale assassinations and torture. Section
q

One is a skilled team of operatives responsible for protecting human life around the
globe from chaos and destruction.
Sound implausible? Maybe. But the creation of such covert antiterrorism orga-
nizations are currently in the planning stages by the National Security Agency (NSA)
and the CIA. NSA and the CIA realize that conventional information warfare (IW)
tactics will not be enough in the future to thwart the very dangerous and often sui-
cidal covert terrorist organizations. Like the character Nikita, who “transforms into
a highly trained agent dedicated to fighting global terrorism by any means neces-
sary—legal or otherwise,” today’s agents will have to do the same.
In the very near future, agents trained and armed with an arsenal of futuristic
high-tech weapons and trained in the most sophisticated techniques for carrying out
successful assassinations will swoop down upon deadly terrorist operatives. Like
Nikita, they will all have to be the perfect weapon. They will also have to keep their
wits about them, as well as ingenuity to keep themselves alive, where a single mistake
could mean death. This will be their most vital weapon—and the best hope for the
future of all that is good in the world.
If the response of the American defense establishment is any indication, strate-
gic analysts are taking the possibilities of infowar seriously. The first global cyber-
war will be like no other war ever fought before—where the enemy is invisible, the
battles virtual, and the casualties all too real. Special committees in every branch of
the U.S. armed forces are studying the potential of infowar, both as a defensive and
an offensive weapon. The NSA is reportedly studying a rather imaginative arsenal
of “info-weapons.” Among the current possible offensive weapons are:
Computer viruses, which could be fed into an enemy’s computers either re-
motely or by “mercenary” technicians
Logic bombs, another type of virus that can lie dormant for years, until, upon re-
ceiving a particular signal, it would wake up and begin attacking the host system
“Chipping,” a plan (originally proposed by the CIA, according to some
sources) to slip booby-trapped computer chips into critical systems sold by
foreign contractors to potentially hostile third parties (or recalcitrant allies?)
Worms, whose purpose is to self-replicate ad infinitum, thus eating up a sys-
tem’s resources
Trojan horses, malevolent code inserted into legitimate programming to per-
form a disguised function
Back doors and trap doors, a mechanism built into a system by the designer to
give the manufacturer or others the ability to sneak back into the system at a
later date by circumventing the need for access privileges
508
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

A few other goodies in the arsenal of IW are devices for disrupting data flow or
damaging entire systems, hardware and all. Among these, as explained in earlier
chapters, are high energy radio frequency (HERF) guns, which focus a high power
radio signal on target equipment, putting it out of action, and electromagnetic
pulse (EMP) devices, which can be detonated in the vicinity of a target system. Such
devices can destroy electronics and communications equipment over a wide area.
All of the preceding current and future offensive and defensive IW weapons ar-
senal will be discussed in specific detail next.
WEAPONS OF THE FUTURE
Body count: 796. Cause: midair collision. The air traffic control system was “cybo-
taged.” News reports indicate that FAA personnel complained that their radar screens
were freezing and were switching data tags (such as aircraft altitude data) between
close-flying planes, causing a series of near-misses in skies throughout the country—
and one head-on collision between passenger jets in a thunderstorm over New York,
resulting in the deaths of all aboard. It’s suspected that the automated route and alti-
tude management program’s collision-avoidance algorithm was damaged.
Body count: 1,807. Cause: midair collision with a structure. The navigation sys-
tem of another passenger jet was taken over by hackers, leaving the pilots helpless
as the jet nose-dived into the Sears Tower in Chicago. No reports yet on how the
hackers got in. A couple of hit sites have posted theories, some of them pretty good.
A message posted to 90,000 newsgroups from a group known as “The Vulture
of Jihad” claimed credit for the attack. As they’re an obscure Sunni sect known for
abjuring the use of any technology, their claim, made during prayers in a mosque
in Aleppo, was disregarded. Other Islamic splinter groups also claimed credit, along
with a white supremacist faction and an anarchist syndicate. These claims were
swiftly dismissed, too: all were missing the digital signature that the Islamic Liber-
ation Army (ILA) had in both previous site hacks. The most outrageous theory as
to the identity of the people responsible for the attack came on a hit site called the
Hit Theorist. It says the whole thing is a CIA, NSA, and Department of Defense
(DoD) plot to generate support in Congress for increased spending of military and
Black Ops operations.
Do these scenarios sound like spin-offs from Fox’s X-Files’ “The Lone Gun-
men”? Perhaps. But could it happen? You bet.
The Electromagnetic Bomb: A Weapon of Electrical Mass Destruction
Perhaps the most dangerous of all of defensive and offensive weapons in the IW arse-
nal of the future is the electromagnetic bomb. High-power EMP generation tech-
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
509

niques and high-power microwave (HPM) technology have matured to the point
where practical E-bombs (electromagnetic bombs) are becoming technically feasible,
with new applications in both strategic and tactical information warfare. The devel-
opment of conventional E-bomb devices allows their use in nonnuclear confronta-
tions. This section discusses aspects of the technology base and weapon delivery
techniques and proposes a foundation for the use of such devices in warhead and
bomb applications.
The efficient execution of an IW campaign against a modern industrial or
postindustrial opponent will require the use of specialized tools designed to destroy
information systems. Electromagnetic bombs (also popularized by the USA net-
work’s sci-fi show Dark Angel) can provide, where delivered by suitable means, an
effective tool for this purpose.
The EMP Effect
The EMP effect was first observed during the early testing of high-altitude airburst
nuclear weapons. The effect is characterized by the production of a very short (hun-
dreds of nanoseconds) but intense EMP, which propagates away from its source
with ever-diminishing intensity, governed by the theory of electromagnetism. The
EMP is, in effect, an electromagnetic shock wave.
EMP stands for electromagnetic pulse. The source can be a nuclear or a nonnuclear
detonation. It can be used by special forces teams who infiltrate the enemy’s terri-
tory and detonate a device near their electronic devices. It destroys the electronics
of all computer and communication systems in a quite large area. The EMP bomb
can be smaller than a HERF gun to cause a similar amount of damage and is typ-
ically used to damage not a single target (not aiming in one direction) but to dam-
age all equipment near the bomb.
This pulse of energy produces a powerful electromagnetic field, particularly within
the vicinity of the weapon burst. The field can be sufficiently strong to produce short-
lived transient voltages of thousands of volts (kiloVolts) on exposed electrical con-
ductors, such as wires, or conductive tracks on printed circuit boards, where exposed.
It is this aspect of the EMP effect that is of military significance, as it can re-
sult in irreversible damage to a wide range of electrical and electronic equipment,
particularly computers and radio or radar receivers. Subject to the electromagnetic
hardness of the electronics, a measure of the equipment’s resilience to this effect,
and the intensity of the field produced by the weapon, the equipment can be irre-
versibly damaged or, in effect, electrically destroyed. The damage inflicted is not
unlike that experienced through exposure to close proximity lightning strikes and
may require complete replacement of the equipment, or at least substantial por-
tions thereof.
510
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Commercial computer equipment is particularly vulnerable to EMP effects, as
it is largely built up of high-density metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) devices,
which are very sensitive to exposure to high-voltage transients. What is significant
about MOS devices is that very little energy is required to permanently wound or
destroy them; any voltage typically in excess of ten volts can produce an effect
termed “gate breakdown,” which effectively destroys the device. Even if the pulse is
not powerful enough to produce thermal damage, the power supply in the equip-
ment will readily supply enough energy to complete the destructive process.
Wounded devices may still function, but their reliability will be seriously impaired.
Shielding electronics with equipment chassis provides only limited protection, as
any cables running in and out of the equipment will behave very much like anten-
nae, in effect, guiding the high-voltage transients into the equipment.
Computers used in data processing systems; communications systems; displays;
industrial control applications, including road and rail signaling; and those embed-
ded in military equipment, such as signal processors, electronic flight controls, and
digital engine control systems, are all potentially vulnerable to the EMP effect.
Other electronic devices and electrical equipment may also be destroyed by the
EMP effect. Telecommunications equipment can be highly vulnerable, because of
the presence of lengthy copper cables between devices [1]. Receivers of all varieties
are particularly sensitive to EMP, as the highly sensitive miniature high-frequency
transistors and diodes in such equipment are easily destroyed by exposure to high-
voltage electrical transients. Therefore, radar and electronic warfare equipment,
satellite, microwave, UHF, VHF, HF, and low-band communications equipment
and television equipment are all potentially vulnerable to the EMP effect. Modern
military platforms are densely packed with electronic equipment, and unless these
platforms are well hardened, an EMP device can substantially reduce their function
or render them unusable.
The Technology Base for Conventional Electromagnetic Bombs
The technology base that may be applied to the design of electromagnetic bombs is
both diverse and in many areas quite mature. Key technologies that are extant in
the area are explosively pumped flux compression generators (FCGs), explosive or
propellant driven magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) generators, and a range of HPM
devices, the foremost of which is the virtual cathode oscillator or vircator. A wide
range of experimental designs have been tested in these technology areas, and a
considerable volume of work has been published in unclassified literature.
This section will review the basic principles and attributes of these technologies
in relation to bomb and warhead applications. This treatment is not exhaustive and
is only intended to illustrate how the technology base can be adapted to an opera-
tionally deployable capability.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
511

The Lethality of Electromagnetic Warheads
The issue of electromagnetic weapon lethality is complex. Unlike the technology
base for weapon construction, which has been widely published in the open litera-
ture, lethality-related issues have been published much less frequently.
Although the calculation of electromagnetic field strengths achievable at a
given radius for a given device design is a straightforward task, determining a kill
probability for a given class of target under such conditions is not. This is for good
reasons. The first is that target types are very diverse in their electromagnetic hard-
ness, or ability to resist damage. Equipment that has been intentionally shielded
and hardened against electromagnetic attack will withstand greater orders of mag-
nitude and field strengths than standard commercially rated equipment. More-
over, various manufacturer’s implementations of like types of equipment may vary
significantly in hardness because of idiosyncrasies of specific electrical designs, ca-
bling schemes, and chassis/shielding designs used.
The second major problem area in determining lethality is that of coupling ef-
ficiency, which is a measure of how much power is transferred from the field pro-
duced by the weapon into the target. Only power coupled into the target can cause
useful damage.
Targeting Electromagnetic Bombs
The task of identifying targets for attack with electromagnetic bombs can be complex.
Certain categories of target will be very easy to identify and engage. Buildings hous-
ing government offices and thus computer equipment, production facilities, military
bases, and known radar sites and communications nodes are all targets that can be
readily identified through conventional photographic, satellite, imaging radar, elec-
tronic reconnaissance, and human operations. These targets are typically geographi-
cally fixed and thus may be attacked, providing that the aircraft can penetrate to
weapon release range. With the accuracy inherent in global positioning system
(GPS)/inertially guided weapons, the electromagnetic bomb can be programmed to
detonate at the optimal position to inflict a maximum of electrical damage.
Mobile and camouflaged targets that radiate overtly can also be readily en-
gaged. Mobile and relocatable air defense equipment, mobile communications
nodes [2], and naval vessels are all good examples of this category of target. While
radiating, their positions can be precisely tracked with suitable electronic support
measures (ESMs) and emitter locating systems (ELSs) carried either by the launch
platform or a remote surveillance platform. In the latter instance, target coordinates
can be continuously datalinked to the launch platform. As most such targets move
relatively slowly, they are unlikely to escape the footprint of the electromagnetic
bomb during the weapon’s flight time.
512
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Mobile or hidden targets that do not overtly radiate may present a problem,
particularly should conventional means of targeting be employed. A technical so-
lution to this problem does, however, exist for many types of target. This solution
is the detection and tracking of unintentional emission (UE). UE has attracted the
most attention in the context of TEMPEST surveillance, where transient emana-
tions leaking out from equipment because of poor shielding can be detected and, in
many instances, demodulated to recover useful intelligence. Termed “Van Eck 
radiation,” such emissions can only be suppressed by rigorous shielding and 
emission-control techniques, such as are employed in TEMPEST rated equipment.
Although the demodulation of UE can be a technically difficult task to perform
well, in the context of targeting electromagnetic bombs this problem does not arise.
To target such an emitter for attack requires only the ability to identify the type of
emission and thus target type and to isolate its position with sufficient accuracy to
deliver the bomb. Because the emissions from computer monitors, peripherals,
processor equipment, switchmode power supplies, electrical motors, internal com-
bustion engine ignition systems, variable duty cycle electrical power controllers
(thyristor or triac-based), superheterodyne receiver local oscillators, and computer
networking cables are all distinct in their frequencies and modulations, a suitable
ELS can be designed to detect, identify, and track such sources of emission.
A good precedent for this targeting paradigm exists. During the SEA (Vietnam)
conflict, the U.S. Air Force operated a number of night interdiction gunships that
used direction-finding receivers to track the emissions from vehicle ignition sys-
tems. Once a truck was identified and tracked, the gunship would engage it.
Because UE occurs at relatively low power levels, the use of this detection
method prior to the outbreak of hostilities can be difficult, as it may be necessary to
overfly hostile territory to find signals of usable intensity. The use of stealthy re-
connaissance aircraft or long-range, stealthy unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) may
be required. The latter also raises the possibility of autonomous electromagnetic-
warhead-armed expendable UAVs, fitted with appropriate homing receivers. These
would be programmed to loiter in a target area until a suitable emitter is detected,
upon which the UAV would home in and expend itself against the target.
The Delivery of Conventional Electromagnetic Bombs
As with explosive warheads, electromagnetic warheads will occupy a volume of
physical space and will also have some given mass (weight) determined by the den-
sity of the internal hardware. Like explosive warheads, electromagnetic warheads
may be fitted to a range of delivery vehicles.
Known existing applications involve fitting an electromagnetic warhead to a
cruise missile airframe. The choice of a cruise missile airframe will restrict the
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
513

weight of the weapon to about 340 kg (750 lb), although some sacrifice in airframe
fuel capacity could see this size increased. A limitation in all such applications is
the need to carry an electrical energy storage device (a battery), to provide the cur-
rent used to charge the capacitors used to prime the FCG prior to its discharge.
Therefore, the available payload capacity will be split between the electrical stor-
age and the weapon itself.
In wholly autonomous weapons such as cruise missiles, the size of the priming
current source and its battery may well impose important limitations on weapon
capability. Air-delivered bombs, which have a flight time between tens of seconds
to minutes, could be built to exploit the launch aircraft’s power systems. In such a
bomb design, the bomb’s capacitor bank can be charged by the launch aircraft en
route to the target, and after release a much smaller onboard power supply could be
used to maintain the charge in the priming source prior to weapon initiation.
An electromagnetic bomb delivered by a conventional aircraft can offer a much
better ratio of electromagnetic device mass to total bomb mass, as most of the
bomb mass can be dedicated to the electromagnetic-device installation itself. It fol-
lows, therefore, that for a given technology an electromagnetic bomb of identical
mass to an electromagnetic-warhead-equipped missile can have a much greater
lethality, assuming equal accuracy of delivery and technologically similar electro-
magnetic device design.
A missile-borne electromagnetic warhead installation will be composed of the
electromagnetic device, an electrical energy converter, and an onboard storage de-
vice such as a battery. As the weapon is pumped, the battery is drained. The elec-
tromagnetic device will be detonated by the missile’s onboard fusing system. In a
cruise missile, this will be tied to the navigation system; in an antishipping missile,
the radar seeker; and in an air-to-air missile, the proximity fusing system. The war-
head fraction (ratio of total payload [warhead] mass to launch mass of the weapon)
will be between 15% and 30%.
An electromagnetic bomb warhead will be composed of an electromagnetic de-
vice, an electrical energy converter, and an energy storage device to pump and sus-
tain the electromagnetic device charge after separation from the delivery platform.
Fusing could be provided by a radar altimeter fuse to airburst the bomb, a baro-
metric fuse, or in GPS/inertially guided bombs, the navigation system. The warhead
fraction could be as high as 85%, with most of the usable mass occupied by the elec-
tromagnetic device and its supporting hardware.
Because of the potentially large lethal radius of an electromagnetic device com-
pared to an explosive device of similar mass, standoff delivery would be prudent.
Although this is an inherent characteristic of weapons such as cruise missiles, po-
tential applications of these devices to glidebombs, antishipping missiles, and air-
to-air missiles would dictate fire and forget guidance of the appropriate variety to
514
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

allow the launching aircraft to gain adequate separation of several miles before
warhead detonation.
The recent advent of GPS satellite [3] navigation guidance kits for conven-
tional bombs and glidebombs has provided the optimal means for cheaply deliver-
ing such weapons. Although GPS-guided weapons without differential GPS
enhancements may lack the pinpoint accuracy of laser- or television-guided muni-
tions, they are still quite accurate (circular error probable [CEP]\(~40 ft), cheap,
and autonomous all-weather weapons.
The U.S. Air Force has deployed the Northrop GPS-aided munition (GAM) on
the B-2 bomber as well as the GPS/inertially guided GBU-29/30 joint direct attack
munition (JDAM) and the AGM-154 joint stand-off weapon (JSOW) glidebomb.
Other countries are also developing this technology. For example, the Australian
BAeA agile glide weapon (AGW) glidebomb is achieving a glide range of about 140
km (75 nautical miles [nmi]) when launched from that altitude.
The importance of glidebombs as delivery means for HPM warheads is threefold.
First, the glidebomb can be released from outside the effective radius of target air de-
fenses, therefore minimizing the risk to the launch aircraft. Second, the large stand-
off range means that the aircraft can remain well clear of the bomb’s effects. Finally
the bomb’s autopilot may be programmed to shape the terminal trajectory of the
weapon, such that a target may be engaged from the most suitable altitude and aspect.
A major advantage of using electromagnetic bombs is that they may be deliv-
ered by any tactical aircraft with a nav-attack system capable of delivering GPS-
guided munitions. As you can expect GPS-guided munitions to become the
standard weapon in use by Western air forces in the 21st century, every aircraft ca-
pable of delivering a standard guided munition also becomes a potential delivery
vehicle for an electromagnetic bomb. Should weapon ballistic properties be identi-
cal to the standard weapon, no software changes to the aircraft would be required.
Because of the simplicity of electromagnetic bombs in comparison with
weapons such as anti-radiation missiles (ARMs), it is not unreasonable to expect
that these should be both cheaper to manufacture and easier to support in the field,
thus allowing for more substantial weapon stocks. In turn, this makes saturation at-
tacks a much more viable proposition.
Defense Against Electromagnetic Bombs
The most effective defense against electromagnetic bombs is to prevent their deliv-
ery by destroying the launch platform or delivery vehicle, as is the case with nuclear
weapons. This, however, may not always be possible, and therefore systems that can
be expected to suffer from exposure to the electromagnetic weapons’ effects must
be electromagnetically hardened.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
515

The most effective method is to wholly contain the equipment in an electrically
conductive enclosure, termed a “Faraday cage,” which prevents the electromagnetic
field from gaining access to the protected equipment. However, most such equip-
ment must communicate with and be fed with power from the outside world, and
this can provide entry points via which electrical transients may enter the enclosure
and cause damage. Although optical fibers address this requirement for transferring
data in and out, electrical power feeds remain an ongoing vulnerability.
Where an electrically conductive channel must enter the enclosure, electro-
magnetic-arresting devices must be fitted. A range of devices exist, but care must be
taken in determining their parameters to ensure that they can deal with the rise
time and strength of electrical transients produced by electromagnetic devices. Re-
ports from the United States indicate that hardening measures attuned to the be-
havior of nuclear EMP bombs do not perform well when dealing with some
conventional microwave electromagnetic device designs.
Hardening of systems must be carried out at a system level, as electromagnetic
damage to any single element of a complex system could inhibit the function of the
whole system. Hardening new building equipment and systems will add a substan-
tial cost burden. Older equipment and systems may be impossible to harden prop-
erly or may require complete replacement. In simple terms, hardening by design is
significantly easier than attempting to harden existing equipment.
An interesting aspect of electrical damage to targets is the possibility of wound-
ing semiconductor devices, thereby causing equipment to suffer repetitive inter-
mittent faults rather than complete failures. Such faults would tie down
considerable maintenance resources while also diminishing the confidence of the
operators in the equipment’s reliability. Intermittent faults may not be economi-
cally possible to repair, thereby causing equipment in this state to be removed from
service permanently, with considerable loss in maintenance hours during damage
diagnosis. This factor must also be considered when assessing the hardness of
equipment against electromagnetic attack, as partial or incomplete hardening may,
in this fashion, cause more difficulties than it would solve. Indeed, shielding that is
incomplete may resonate when excited by radiation and thus contribute to damage
inflicted on the equipment contained within it.
Other than hardening against attack, facilities that are concealed should not
radiate readily detectable emissions. Where radio frequency communications 
must be used, low probability of intercept (spread spectrum) techniques should be
employed exclusively to preclude the use of site emissions for electromagnetic-
targeting purposes. Appropriate suppression of UE is also mandatory.
Communications networks for voice, data, and services should employ topolo-
gies with sufficient redundancy and failover mechanisms to allow operation with
multiple nodes and links inoperative. This will deny a user of electromagnetic
516
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

bombs the option of disabling large portions if not the whole of the network by tak-
ing down one or more key nodes or links with a single or small number of attacks.
Limitations of Electromagnetic Bombs
The limitations of electromagnetic weapons are determined by weapon implemen-
tation and means of delivery. Weapon implementation will determine the electro-
magnetic field strength achievable at a given radius and its spectral distribution.
Means of delivery will constrain the accuracy with which the weapon can be posi-
tioned in relation to the intended target. Both constrain lethality.
In the context of targeting military equipment, it must be noted that
thermionic technology (vacuum tube equipment) is substantially more resilient to
the electromagnetic weapons effects than solid-state (transistor) technology. There-
fore, a weapon optimized to destroy solid-state computers and receivers may cause
little or no damage to a thermionic technology device, for instance early-1960s So-
viet military equipment. Therefore, a hard electrical kill may not be achieved
against such targets unless a suitable weapon is used.
This underscores another limitation of electromagnetic weapons, which is the
difficulty in kill assessment. Radiating targets such as radars or communications
equipment may continue to radiate after an attack even though their receivers and
data processing systems have been damaged or destroyed. This means equipment that
has been successfully attacked may still appear to operate. Conversely, an opponent
may shut down an emitter if attack is imminent, and the absence of emissions means
that the success or failure of the attack may not be immediately apparent.
Assessing whether an attack on a nonradiating emitter has been successful is
more problematic. A good case can be made for developing tools specifically for the
purpose of analyzing unintended emissions, not only for targeting purposes but
also for kill assessment.
An important factor in assessing the lethal coverage of an electromagnetic
weapon is atmospheric propagation. Although the relationship between electro-
magnetic field strength and distance from the weapon is one of an inverse square
law in free space, the decay in lethal effect with increasing distance within the at-
mosphere will be greater because of quantum physical absorption effects. This is
particularly so at higher frequencies, and significant absorption peaks caused by
water vapor and oxygen exist at frequencies above 20 GHz. These will therefore
contain the effect of HPM weapons to shorter radii than are ideally achievable in
the K and L frequency bands.
Means of delivery will limit the lethality of an electromagnetic bomb by intro-
ducing limits to the weapon’s size and the accuracy of its delivery. Should the de-
livery error be of the order of the weapon’s lethal radius for a given detonation
altitude, lethality will be significantly diminished. This is of particular importance
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
517

when assessing the lethality of unguided electromagnetic bombs, as delivery errors
will be more substantial than those experienced with guided weapons such as GPS-
guided bombs.
Therefore, accuracy of delivery and achievable lethal radius must be considered
against the allowable collateral damage for the chosen target. Where collateral elec-
trical damage is a consideration, accuracy of delivery and lethal radius are key pa-
rameters. An inaccurately delivered weapon of large lethal radius may be unusable
against a target should the likely collateral electrical damage be beyond acceptable
limits. This can be a major issue for users constrained by treaty provisions on col-
lateral damage.
The Proliferation of Electromagnetic Bombs
At the time of this writing, the United States is one of several nations with the es-
tablished technology base and the depth of specific experience to design weapons
based upon this technology. However, the relative simplicity of the FCG and the
vircator suggests that any nation with even a 1940s technology base, once in pos-
session of engineering drawings and specifications for such weapons, could manu-
facture them.
As an example, the fabrication of an effective FCG can be accomplished with
basic electrical materials, common plastic explosives such as C-4 or Semtex, and read-
ily available machine tools such as lathes and suitable mandrels for forming coils. Dis-
regarding the overheads of design, which do not apply in this context, a two-stage
FCG could be fabricated for a cost as low as $14,000–15,000 at Western labor rates.
This cost could be even lower in a third world or newly industrialized economy.
Although the relative simplicity and thus low cost of such weapons can be con-
sidered of benefit to first world nations intending to build viable war stocks or
maintain production in wartime, the possibility of less developed nations mass
producing such weapons is alarming. The dependence of modern economies upon
first world nations’ information technology infrastructures, makes them highly
vulnerable to attack with such weapons, providing that such weapons can be deliv-
ered to their targets.
Of major concern is the vulnerability resulting from the increasing use of
communications and data communications schemes based on copper cable
media. If the copper media were to be replaced en masse with optical fiber to
achieve higher bandwidths, the communications infrastructure would become
significantly more robust against electromagnetic attack. However, the current
trend is to exploit existing distribution media such as cable TV and telephone
wiring to provide multiple megabit/s data distribution (cable modems,
ADSL/HDSL/VDSL) to premises. Moreover, the gradual replacement of coaxial
518
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Ethernet networking with 10-Base-T twisted pair equipment has further increased
the vulnerability of wiring systems inside buildings. It is not unreasonable to as-
sume that the data and services communications infrastructure in the West will re-
main a “soft” electromagnetic target in the foreseeable future.
At this time, no counter-proliferation regimes exist. Should treaties be agreed
upon to limit the proliferation of electromagnetic weapons, they would be virtually
impossible to enforce, given the common availability of suitable materials and tools.
With the former Soviet Union suffering significant economic difficulties, the
possibility of microwave and pulse power technology designs leaking out to third
world nations or terrorist organizations should not be discounted. The threat of
electromagnetic bomb proliferation is very real.
A Doctrine for the Use of Conventional Electromagnetic Bombs
A fundamental tenet of IW is that complex organizational systems such as govern-
ments, industries, and military forces cannot function without the flow of infor-
mation through their structures. Information flows within these structures in
several directions under typical conditions of function. A trivial model for this func-
tion would see commands and directives flowing outward from a central decision-
making element, with information about the state of the system flowing in the
opposite direction. Real systems are substantially more complex.
This is of military significance because stopping this flow of information will
severely debilitate the function of any such system. Stopping the outward flow of
information produces paralysis, as commands cannot reach the elements that are 
to execute them. Stopping the inward flow of information isolates the decision-
making element from reality and thus severely inhibits its capacity to make rational
decisions that are sensitive to the currency of information at hand.
The recent evolution of strategic (air) warfare indicates a growing trend toward
targeting strategies that exploit this most fundamental vulnerability of any large
and organized system. The Desert Storm air war of 1991 is a good example, with a
substantial effort expended against such targets. Indeed, the model used for mod-
ern strategic air attack places leadership and its supporting communications in 
the position of highest targeting priority. No less important, modern electronic
combat concentrates on the disruption and destruction of communications and
information-gathering sensors used to support military operations. Again, the
Desert Storm air war provides a good illustration of the application of this method.
A strategy that stresses attack on the information-processing and communica-
tions elements of the targeted systems offers a very high payoff, as it will introduce
an increasing level of paralysis and disorientation within its target. Electromag-
netic bombs are a powerful tool in the implementation of such a strategy.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
519

Computer Viruses
A virus is a code fragment that copies itself into a larger program, modifying that
program. A virus executes only when its host program begins to run. The virus then
replicates itself, infecting other programs as it reproduces.
Viruses are well known in every computer-based environment, so it is not as-
tonishing that this type of rough program is used in IW. One could imagine that the
CIA (or Army, Air Force, etc.) inserts computer viruses into the switching net-
works of the enemy’s phone system. As today’s telephone systems are switched by
computers, you can shut them down, or at least cause massive failure, with a virus
as easily as you can shut down a computer.
Worms
A worm is an independent program. It reproduces by copying itself in full-blown
fashion from one computer to another, usually over a network. Unlike a virus, it
usually doesn’t modify other programs.
If worms don’t destroy data, they can cause the loss of communication by
merely eating up resources and spreading through networks. A worm can also eas-
ily be modified so that data deletion or worse occurs. With a “wildlife” like this, you
could imagine breaking down a networked environment such as an ATM and
banking network.
Trojan Horses
A trojan horse is a code fragment that hides inside a program and performs a dis-
guised function. It’s a popular mechanism for disguising a virus or a worm.
A trojan horse could be camouflaged as a security-related tool. If someone edits
this program so that it sends discovered security holes in an email message back to
him (password file could also be included), the cracker acquired much information
about vulnerable hosts and servers. A cleverly written trojan horse does not leave
traces of its presence and, because it does not cause detectable damage, it is hard to
detect.
Logic Bombs
A logic bomb is a type of trojan horse used to release a virus, a worm, or some other
system attack. It’s either an independent program or a piece of code that’s been
planted by a system developer or programmer.
With the overwhelming existence of U.S.-based software (MS Windows or
UNIX systems), the U.S. government, or whomever you would like to imagine,
could decide that no software would be allowed to be exported from that country
520
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

without a trojan horse. This hidden function could become active when a docu-
ment with “war against the USA” exists on the computer. Its activation could also
be triggered from the outside. An effect could be to format the computers hard
disks or to mail the document to the CIA.
Trap Doors
A trap door, or a back door, is a mechanism that’s built into a system by its de-
signer. The function of a trap door is to give the designer a way to sneak back into
the system, circumventing normal system protection.
As previously mentioned, all U.S. software could be equipped with a trap door
that would allow IW agencies to explore systems and the stored data on foreign
countries. This could be most useful in cases of military strategic simulations and
plans and would provide the DoD’s intelligence with vital information.
Chipping
Just as software can contain unexpected functions, it is also possible to implement
similar functions in hardware. Today’s chips contain millions of integrated circuits
that can easily be configured by the manufacturer so that they also contain some un-
expected functions. They could be built so that they fail after a certain time, blow up
after they receive a signal on a specific frequency, or send radio signals that allow
identification of their exact location— the number of possible scenarios exceeds, by
far, the scope of this chapter. The main problem with chipping is that the specific
(adapted) chip be installed in the place that is useful for the information warrior in
making detection possible. The easiest solution is to build the additional features
into all the chips manufactured in the country that is interested in this type of IW.
Nano Machines and Microbes
In the future, nano machines [4] and microbes will provide the possibility to cause
serious harm to a system. Unlike viruses, you can use these to attack not the soft-
ware but the hardware of a computer system. Nano machines are tiny robots
(smaller than ants) that could be spread at an information center of the enemy.
They crawl through the halls and offices until they find a computer. They are so
small that they enter the computer through slots and shut down electronic circuits.
Another way to damage the hardware is a special breed of microbes. This spe-
cial breed of microbes can eat oil, but what if they were bred for eating silizium?
They would destroy all integrated circuits in a computer lab, a site, a building, a
town, and so on. Nano technology and microbes will be discussed in much greater
detail later in the chapter.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
521

Electronic Jamming
In the old days (and even today) electronic jamming was used to block communi-
cations channels at the enemy’s equipment so that they couldn’t receive any infor-
mation. The next step is not to block their traffic, but, instead, overwhelm them
with incorrect information—otherwise known as disinformation.
THE GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM
GPS receivers, one of the newest and probably most important of the IW toys for
Big Brother and the boys, will be everywhere soon—in cars, boats, planes, back-
packs, briefcases, purses, jackets, and pants pockets. The good news is, you’ll always
know exactly where you are. The bad news is, so will everyone else.
Most humans who have ever lived have known roughly where they were, day-
by-day, year-by-year. Not in abstract terms, of course, but in the terms of experi-
ence and familiarity—by neighborhood, not map. For eons, we’ve known things
about ourselves that could be expressed in a statement like “I’m standing on the
threshing floor in the village of my birth” or “I’m walking across the mid-morning
shadow cast by Notre Dame” or even “I’m in a part of town I’ve never seen before.”
Whether one utters it or not, this awareness of “whereness” is part of the meaning
of being human, but for centuries, a dedicated band of mapmakers, navigators, as-
tronomers, inventors, and mathematicians has tried to turn this innate sense of
place into a more precise determination of position that is intelligible to anyone,
not only to locals. On one level, this is like the difference between knowing you’re
coming to the corner where you always turn left on your way to the grocery store
and knowing the names of the streets that cross at that intersection. On another
level, however, the pursuit of pure position is about to lead us into a world that
none of us has ever seen. The agent of change will be GPS—the global positioning
system—which, like so many tools of the modern world, is both familiar and mis-
understood at the same time.
Until recently, not a single human-made object has ever known where it was.
Even a venerable tool of navigation such as a sextant knows nothing more about its
location than does the Mona Lisa or the pigments from which she is painted. Imag-
ine a world in which man-made objects know where they are and can communicate
that information to other self-locating, communicating objects. This sounds as
strange and surprising as the Marauder’s Map in the Harry Potter novels [5]. The
Marauder’s Map shows the position and movement of every animate creature at the
school of wizardry called Hogwarts. A Marauder’s Map of the world would be even
stranger. It would show the position and movement (even a history of movements)
of man-made objects as well. This would be an ever-changing map or a world filled
522
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

with artifacts busily announcing something significant about themselves to each
other and to anyone else who cared to listen.
That world is here. In August 2000, a company called SiRF Technology based
in Santa Clara, California, announced that it had developed an advanced GPS chip
no bigger than a postage stamp. SiRF’s vision is to bring location awareness to vir-
tually everything that moves. This is a subtle but profound change in the history of
GPS technology—a change driven, like everything else these days, by increasing
miniaturization and declining prices for sophisticated circuitry. In the past few
years, consumers have grown used to the sight of hand-held GPS receivers, which
have been marketed as individual positioning devices for anglers, hunters, hikers,
and cyclists. What SiRF and other companies have in mind, is conferring upon ob-
jects a communicable sense of place. One day soon, most GPS devices will not be
stand-alone receivers used by those of us who venture off the beaten path, but in-
tegral components of everyday objects.
Some of these objects, especially the big ones, are easy enough to imagine, be-
cause they exist now. Boats and ships of every kind already incorporate GPS tech-
nology, as do some automobiles made by Toyota, Honda, Lexus, and Cadillac. So
do the newest farm implements, such as combines that allow farmers to map crop
yields in precise detail. Some uses of GPS that are not yet widely available will soon
be common in smaller devices. For instance, the Federal Communications Com-
mission requires cellular-phone service providers to be able to identify the location
of a cell-phone caller who dials 911. This means that most cell phones now include
a tiny GPS chip. So do beepers and watches and handheld digital assistants and
other digital devices like Game Boy Colors, Tamagotchis (virtual game animals),
dog collars, and, probably, handguns as well.
The spread of a technology such as GPS is easy enough to predict, but it’s much
harder to foresee what the effect of that spread may be. There’s always a limit to
how far one can see into the future of the tools being used, especially into a future
where those tools become interlinked. There was a time (only as long ago as Bill
Gates’ first book) when the value of computers was believed to lie mainly in their
stand-alone power, not in the networks they might form when linked together.
Now there’s the Internet and the World Wide Web, whose far-reaching implica-
tions are only dimly visible, but which have already transformed the way countries
all over the world do business.
The development of GPS technologies may follow a similar pattern. It’s already
obvious how useful GPS is in discrete applications: for surveying and mapmaking,
the tracking of commercial vehicles, maritime and aeronautic navigation, and for
use by emergency rescue crews and archaeologists. There is simply no telling what
it will mean when, on a planet full of location-aware objects, a way is found to 
coordinate all the data they send out. Awareness may be a metaphor when applied
to inanimate objects, but the potential of that metaphor is entirely literal. In the
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
523

meantime, for most of us, there is still a more basic question to be answered: Where
did GPS technology come from and how does it work?
GPS depends on an array of 50 satellites (47 in regular use, plus spares) flying
some 11,000 miles above Earth. They were put there by the DoD, which began the
NAVSTAR global positioning system program in 1973. A version of GPS was first
tested in 1964, when the Navy deployed a five-satellite prototype, called Transit, for
submarines. It could take an hour and a half for a Transit satellite to saunter above
the horizon and then another 10 or 15 minutes to fix the submarine’s position. The
current generation of satellites was built by the Boeing Company and Lockheed
Martin, and each one orbits the planet in about 12 hours, cutting across the equa-
torial plane at an angle of roughly 55 degrees. The U.S. Air Force tracks the satel-
lites from Colorado Springs, Colorado, Hawaii, and three other islands: Ascension
in the South Atlantic, Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean, and Kwajalein in the South
Pacific. These ground stations provide the satellites with navigational information,
which the next generation of satellites will be able to supply to each other. Ordinary
users can track this constellation of satellites with one of several Web sites or with
an appealing public-domain software program called Home Planet, which can map
any satellite you choose, GPS or not, against a projection of the Earth’s surface. You
can also track the satellites with a GPS receiver.
In the world of GPS, knowing where you are, give or take a few meters, depends
on knowing precisely when you are. Just as longitude couldn’t be effectively calcu-
lated until 1764, when John Harrison’s chronometer was tested on a voyage to Bar-
bados, so GPS couldn’t be created until there was a way to mount highly accurate
clocks in stable orbits. The problem with finding longitude in Harrison’s era was
making a chronometer that could keep accurate time at one location (Greenwich,
England) even while the ship carrying that chronometer was halfway around the
globe. The chronometer provides a constant frame of reference for the celestial
events that shift as a ship moves eastward or westward.
GPS satellites effortlessly provide a constant frame of reference. Each carries
three or four ultra-precise clocks synchronized to GPS time—which is, essentially,
coordinated universal time (UTC) without the leap seconds. The satellite clocks are
accurate to within one-millionth of a second of UTC as kept by the U.S. Naval Ob-
servatory. The GPS receiver translates the time that the satellites transmit into local
time. As far as most civilian users are concerned, GPS is more accurate for time
than it is for position, and, in most cases, GPS is far more accurate for position than
it is for altitude. In 1764, Greenwich time was available only in Greenwich (on the
meridian running through England) and in the presence of a properly maintained
chronometer, of which there were two. Now, GPS time is available globally to any-
one with a receiver.
When you turn on a GPS receiver, it tunes itself to a radio signal called L1,
which comes from any GPS satellite—usually one of four to eight—coasting above
524
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

the horizon. The U.S. military and other authorized users also receive two en-
crypted signals—one from L1, another from a frequency called L2. Those extra sig-
nals are one of the reasons military users can fix their location more precisely than
civilian users can. By measuring the time it takes a signal to reach it, a GPS receiver
calculates what is called the pseudo-range to the transmitting satellite. With at least
four satellites in view, and hence four pseudo-ranges (the minimum for determin-
ing accurate location plus time), a GPS receiver can compute its position using
basic trigonometry. It can also calculate velocity by comparing location readings
taken at different points in time.
The real value of GPS begins to emerge when you consider a GPS receiver’s abil-
ity to compare where it is now with where it was moments or hours or days ago.
When you begin to move, a GPS springs to life. It announces your directional bear-
ing, average speed, approximate altitude, the estimated time to get to a named des-
tination, the degree to which you’re adhering to a planned path, and the distance to
your destination—in short, it calibrates the dimensions of your dynamism or the dy-
namism of anything you attach it to, from a delivery truck to an outcropping of the
Earth’s crust. A navigator’s task has always been to plot his current position, com-
pare it with his previous day’s position, and deduce from those two points some idea
of tomorrow’s position. These are the functions inherent, and almost instantly ac-
cessible, in a dynamic tracking system such as GPS. It’s no wonder GPS has rapidly
made its way into the navigation stations of recreational boats and commercial ships
alike, replacing older electronic navigation systems as well as celestial navigation.
For civilian GPS users, there is a catch. The system is purposely compromised,
its accuracy intentionally degraded. GPS was designed, as the responsible federal
agencies are careful to remind us, to serve as a dual-use system with the primary
purpose of enhancing the effectiveness of U.S. and allied military forces. One way
to do that is to de-enhance everyone else’s effectiveness—to deny nonmilitary users
and foreign adversaries the kind of accuracy that military users enjoy, which in all
kinds of targeting weapons is a difference of dozens of feet. This has been done by
selectively and intermittently introducing error into the information GPS satellites
dispense to receivers lacking access to the military’s encrypted signals—in other
words, to the receivers nonmilitary users and foreign adversaries can buy. One of
the many ironies of GPS, however, is that a system designed mainly for military use
and developed through the DoD at a cost of more than $10 billion has been en-
gulfed by the commercial market. The result is that “selective availability,” as GPS’s
intentional error is called, will most likely be phased out within the next decade.
The more positional signals a GPS receives, the more accurate it is. That’s one
reason why in 1999, then Vice President Gore, announced a $600 million initiative
that would help fund additional civilian signals on GPS satellites scheduled for
launch in the next decade—a clear acknowledgment of the scientific, commercial,
and economic importance of nonmilitary GPS. Even at present, there are ways
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
525

around selective availability. Some GPS receivers have been manufactured that can
also tune in to the Russian equivalent of GPS, called GLONASS, which operates
without signal compromise but lacks the reliability of GPS. The most common so-
lution is differential GPS, or DGPS, in which “differential corrections” (indications
of the degree of error at one station) are transmitted to GPS receivers via a radio
link, greatly enhancing their accuracy regardless of selective availability. Even DGPS
chips have shrunk to the size of postage stamps.
The U.S. Coast Guard operates a maritime DGPS service available to civilians,
and the Federal Aeronautics Administration is implementing a similar system,
called the Wide Area Augmentation System, which uses satellites as well as ground
stations. Once a complementary system called Local Area Augmentation Service is
in place at selected airports, the FAA will eventually be able to turn over the task of
flight navigation, from takeoff to precision landings, entirely to GPS. The result of
this is a bizarre irony, in which some branches of the federal government are work-
ing hard to offset error purposely created by another federal agency, the DoD.
GPS, especially DGPS, has come as a particular godsend to geophysicists, the
men and women who study the physical and dynamic parameters of planet Earth.
Most of us think of the Earth as an inherently stable platform: bedrock. To geo-
physicists, Earth experiences a wide range of volatility—some of it very slow, some
of it occurring at the rate of days or weeks. Tectonic plates grind at each other’s
edges, cresting upward. Portions of the crust are still rebounding from the weight of
long-vanished ice sheets. It adjusts locally to the shock of earthquakes and volcanoes.
As a geophysicist might write: The torques from the sun, moon, and planets move
the rotation axis of Earth in space. Torques from the atmosphere, ocean, and fluid
core move the rotation axis relative to the crust of Earth. Both sources of torques
change the rotation rate of Earth. GPS offers an extraordinary leap in the rate of data
collection, with a corresponding leap in the understanding of Earth’s motion.
As technology becomes more sophisticated, it seems as though freedom gets
defined in more basic terms. GPS offers one version of freedom—knowing where
you are—but it may ultimately threaten a more basic kind of freedom—being
where you are without anyone else knowing it. Everyone would like to have a Ma-
rauder’s Map, but no one wants to appear on the Marauder’s Map without ap-
proving it. The value of cell- phones embedded with GPS chips is obvious when it
comes to emergency services, but the cell-phone service providers’ ability to track
the location of a 911 call means that GPS could track the location of every other
kind of call as well. Already, GPS is being used to monitor the movement of com-
mercial trucks of every description. This is both a form of insight to the vehicle
owners and a form of intrusion to the drivers, who find their movements visible to
management in a way they never were before. GPS is also being used in experi-
mental programs to monitor the movements of parolees. There is only a difference
of emphasis between tracking a parolee with a GPS and tracking a sales representa-
526
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

tive with the same tool. All of us have learned all too well in the past few decades
that even innocuous information can be assembled in ways that make it dangerous.
Location, movement, and time are not innocuous forms of information.
As technology advances, it abstracts us farther and farther from the earth we
live on. All of us inhabit a world of the senses, a world infinitely full of sensory clues
to our location and bearing. Directionality is implicit in our being. The very factors
that influence Earth’s rotation (the sun, moon, planets, atmosphere, oceans) influ-
ence our sense of orientation, if only we can remember how to know them. It is far
easier, after all, to navigate by pushing a single button and reading the numbers on
yet another of the small gray screens that crowd our lives. GPS may mean many
wonderful things, but it may also mean yet another death for the powers of human
observation.
Also, GPS may be an example of technology that reaches the market the mo-
ment it becomes unnecessary—at least where ordinary consumers are concerned.
Now that the nonaqueous and nonarctic globe is mostly paved, and the population
of people is as thick on the Earth as mold on month-old bread, a device has been in-
vented at last that tells you where you are without having to ask strangers.
SNOOP, SNIFF, AND SNUFF TOOLS
There’s a fine line in the difference between “snoop” and “sniff” tools. The mean-
ing of “snuff” tools is obvious. Let’s look at Sniffit first.
Snoop and Sniff Tools
Sniffit is a kind of a network packet sniffer and snooper. Packet sniffers are rather in-
triguingly named pieces of software that monitor network traffic. Under many net-
working protocols, data that you transmit gets split into small segments, or packets,
and the Internet protocol (IP) address of the destination computer is written into the
header of each packet. These packets then get passed around by routers and eventu-
ally make their way to the network segment that contains the destination computer.
As each packet travels around that destination segment, the network card on
each computer on the segment examines the address in the header. If the destina-
tion address on the packet is the same as the IP address of the computer, the net-
work card grabs the packet and passes it on to its host computer.
Promiscuous Network Cards
Packet sniffers work slightly differently. Instead of just picking up the packets that are
addressed to them, they set their network cards to what’s known as “promiscuous
mode” and grab a copy of every packet that goes past. This lets the packet sniffers see
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
527

all data traffic on the network segment to which they’re attached—if they’re fast
enough to be able to process all that mass of data, that is. This network traffic often
contains very interesting information for an attacker, such as user identification num-
bers and passwords, confidential data—anything that isn’t encrypted in some way.
This data is also useful for other purposes. Network engineers use packet snif-
fers to diagnose network faults, for example, and those in security use packet snif-
fers for their intrusion detection software. That last application is a real case of
turning the tables on the attackers: hackers use packet sniffers to check for confi-
dential data; companies use packet sniffers to check for hacker activity. That has a
certain elegant simplicity to it.
The thing that worries most people about Sniffit is how easy it is to install. It
takes about three commands and three minutes to get this thing installed and run-
ning on a Linux machine. It even has a graphical user interface (not exactly pretty,
but it is free). Like Nmap, Sniffit is easy to use and does exactly what it says it does:
It sniffs your network and shows you what sort of data is getting passed around.
It is recommended that you install a packet sniffer and have a look at what sort
of data you can see on your local network. Better still, get one of your network en-
gineers to install it for you. They probably know of better, more professional snif-
fers and will be able to talk you through some of the data that you see going past.
It’s an interesting look into exactly what’s going on within your network.
Sniff
Security experts are still not convinced that Carnivore (the software created by the
FBI to tap into Internet communications) is either ready to be used safely (without
abuse) or can gather information that would be legally admissible in court. Although
Carnivore is the best software available for the job today, it is perhaps not as good as
it could be. Carnivore’s source code should be made available for open review.
Such a review would provide confidence in Carnivore’s ability to gather infor-
mation accurately and fairly—confidence needed to make it a publicly accepted
crime-fighting instrument. Unless it is demonstrated that Carnivore will enable
surveillance personnel to obtain the information they are authorized to see, and not
draw innocent bystanders into its net, it will remain an object of public suspicion.
The FBI publicly admitted the existence of Carnivore in July 2000, after it had
been in use for over a year at numerous Internet service providers (ISPs) and ru-
mors of its existence began to surface. Congress and privacy advocates then called
for full disclosure of the software. Replying that such disclosure would only help
criminals get around the system, the FBI offered to let it be reviewed by an outside
technical group selected by the bureau. Illinois Institute of Technology’s Research
Institute (IITRI) was chosen after accepting the review limits proposed by the FBI,
a stipulation other institutions such as the San Diego (California) Supercomputing
Center would not accept.
528
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The IITRI report does not address significant technical issues. Although it looks
at how Carnivore worked when it was used as intended, the report failed to look at
the larger issue: its system requirements. They did not look at the interaction be-
tween Carnivore and its host operating system or the interaction between Carni-
vore and the ISP’s setup. Thus, the vulnerability of the system to hackers is still not
clearly established.
Carnivore runs on Windows and to control it, the person who is using it must
be logged on at the highest level: administrator. At that level, the operator (meant
to be an FBI agent) has a great deal of freedom. For instance, he or she can access
the content of all communications and change and edit files at will. What is more,
anyone logged in as administrator can hide any evidence of the activity. Thus, it
would be possible for an agent or someone who hacked into the system to tamper
with evidence, plant false leads, or extract confidential information for bribery, ex-
tortion, fraud, and so on.
Failure to examine the interaction between Carnivore and an ISP’s systems
may be a gap in the report. The limited nature of IITRI’s review cannot support a
conclusion that Carnivore is accurate, safe, or always consistent with legal require-
ments. The scope of IITRI’s review was dictated by the FBI, and any additional ef-
fort would have invalidated the contract under which the work was performed.
EMAIL WIRETAPS LIKE CARNIVORE CAN 
STEAL SENSITIVE CORRESPONDENCE
As part of its ongoing research, the Privacy Foundation (see sidebar, “The Privacy
Foundation”) found that a simple, hidden JavaScript code segment in HTML-
formatted email messages can effectively allow someone to monitor all succeeding
messages that are forwarded with the original message included. Clearly, this can
cause confidential internal communications to be compromised. Here’s a look at
how to identify wiretaps and protect yourself from them.
THE PRIVACY FOUNDATION
The Privacy Foundation at the University of Denver conducts research into com-
munications technologies and provides the public with tools to maintain privacy in
the Information Age. You can read the Foundation’s report and commentary on
email wiretaps. The report cites the following possible uses for this security breach:
The wiretaps can provide the ability to monitor the path of a confidential email
message and the written comments attached.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
529
q

In a business negotiation conducted via email, one side can learn inside infor-
mation from the other side as the proposal is discussed through the recipient
company’s internal email system.
A bugged email message can capture thousands of email addresses as the for-
warded message is sent around the world.
Commercial entities, particularly those based offshore, may seek to offer email
wiretapping as a service.
This security problem is a particularly dangerous one for organizations that
conduct conversations containing sensitive internal information via email. The
usual scenario for such communication is that a message from an outside source is
forwarded from executive to executive within a company and it includes each per-
son’s comments. If there’s an email wiretap on the original external document,
each time someone forwards the message to someone else, a copy of their message
is automatically and invisibly emailed to the original sender of the external message
(or someone designated by him).
This problem affects only HTML-enabled email readers that have JavaScript
turned on by default, such as Microsoft Outlook, Outlook Express, and Netscape
Communicator. Eudora and AOL are not affected, nor are Web mail services such
as Yahoo and Hotmail.
Snuff
As hackers obtain ever more dangerous and easy-to-use tools, they are being countered
by novel defense strategies. The Pentagon envisions a war in the heavens, but can it de-
fend the ultimate high ground? You bet! Witness the experimental idea of setting up a
decoy network separate from your real one to fool intruders as they try to fool you.
Deception Network
This so-called deception network is envisioned as more than just a single server set
up to be a “honeypot,” where hackers may break in, find a dead-end, and have their
activities recorded with an eye toward prosecution. Rather, the decoy net is an en-
tire fake network, complete with host computers on a LAN with simulated traffic,
to convince hackers for as long as possible that it’s real.
Experts debate whether such nets will be worth the effort, but agree they can be
a way to slow hackers long enough to sort the curious from the truly destructive
“snuff.” A group calling itself the Honeynet Project has quietly begun testing decoy
networks on the Internet.
530
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The Honeynet Project is not intended to prosecute intruders who haplessly
wander into their elaborate decoys, but to study hacker responses in depth to devise
the best decoy defenses. Other decoy networks slow intruders with an eye toward
collecting evidence to prosecute them. To collect evidence, you need to divert the
hacker to a deception network. The idea is to feed back information about what
hackers do to a kind of “deception central” for network administrators. The time
the hackers are dealing with a deception environment is time they’re not in your
network.
It is possible to create a deception network that has the same IP network ad-
dress as your real network. Deception nets carry obvious administrative burdens,
such as the need to generate realistic traffic to fool a hacker and maintain a network
no one really uses.
There is a risk that administrators will lose track of what’s real and what’s not.
These deception techniques have doubters. It’s not clear yet if you can fool a lot
of people with this deterrent. Meanwhile, hackers continue to learn new tricks. It’s
pretty nasty stuff. For very sensitive networks, you may want to activate port-level
security on your switches.
Many tools that let hackers carry out surveillance are now Web-based. Why
Web-based? It’s easy. No complicated downloads or zip files. They can hack from
anywhere, and it’s anonymous. Although a talented few among hackers actually
make attack tools, many of these tools today are freeware and they’re posted on
dozens of techie sites, not the secret underground. The tool, which involves launch-
ing an attack to determine operating system weakness, was given solely to vendors,
but somehow ended up posted on the Packetstorm site in its depository for tools.
In the wrong hands this tool is dangerous, but that version isn’t as dangerous as
other versions that will be released.
The New IW Space Race
The war was not going well. Serbian forces were sowing terror across Kosovo.
NATO pilots squinting through clouds could do little to stop them. Errant NATO
bombs had killed dozens of civilians and shaken support for the alliance. Then the
Pentagon saw it had another problem. A Colorado outfit, called Space Imaging, was
about to launch a picture-taking satellite with clarity nearly as good as that of U.S.
spy satellites. The company could have sold photos of NATO air bases or troop en-
campments to, for instance, Serbian operatives. That had to be stopped. But how?
The brass canvassed its experts for recommendations. The U.S.-licensed firm
could simply be ordered not to take pictures over a broad swath of Europe. A sim-
ilar ban could be issued for a few other key areas, such as northern Albania. In the
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
531

end, however, no order was issued. A malfunction sent Space Imaging’s satellite
plunging into the Pacific Ocean 30 minutes after it lifted off.
Fortune may not be so kind next time. Space Imaging launched another satel-
lite and started selling pictures from it. Several other companies are right behind it.
Before too long, an international bazaar for high-quality satellite imagery will be
open for business, and potential foes are making headway with their own satellite
capabilities. There’s a new proliferation of space-based capabilities. Plus, the United
States’ Cold War–era capabilities have atrophied.
That’s pushing the Pentagon into a whole new kind of warfare. In the future,
the U.S. military will be responsible for countering space systems and services used
for hostile purposes. That’s a nice way of saying the Pentagon needs to be prepared
to defend the ultimate high ground by attacking hostile satellites. The new policy
also directs the Space Command to start developing tactics and doctrine for con-
ducting warfare in the heavens. It must also come up with plans for deploying
space-based lasers or other weapons that could be used against targets anywhere on
Earth or above it. If the United States ultimately deploys such weaponry, not only
would it break one of the great taboos of the past 53 years, but it could also trans-
form the way America structures its military and fights wars.
Aggressive “space control,” as the military calls its quest for dominance in the
sky, could backfire. The military view is that it would be the neatest thing in the
world to have a death ray in space, but will deploying it lead to a war with somebody?
Very possibly, some critics say. Developing space weapons would be a mistake
of historic proportions that would trigger an arms race in space. Imagine scenarios
in which other nations follow the U.S. example and scramble to launch their own
space weapons while frantic generals, unable to tell exactly who has put what into
orbit, plead for extravagant countermeasures. In Pentagon war games, just trying to
defend U.S. satellites causes problems. If you defend the satellite, you often widen
the war. The activity ends up being the problem and not the solution.
IW WEAPONS OF THE FUTURE
Now let’s look at some really “far out” IW arsenals of the future: spy dust and tiny
mechanical robots. Let’s look first at spies the size of a mote of dust. This will be fol-
lowed by tiny robotic insects that may soon serve as military scouts.
Spy Dust Balls
“If only these walls could talk” may not be an idle plea much longer. Kris Pister,
expectant father of an invention he calls “smart dust,” thinks that in a few years
almost anything, from a wall to a mote floating in the air, may have a story to tell
532
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

(see sidebar, “A Dusty Future”). Thousands of these gossipy particles, each a tiny
bundle of electronic brains, laser communications system, power supply, sensors,
and even a propulsion system, could lurk all around, almost undetectable. One or
more of the remote sensors would fit inside the letter “O.”
A DUSTY FUTURE
Scientists recently set up a network of small, wireless sensors called motes that detect
birds as well as measure temperature, humidity, and barometric pressure. The
battery-powered devices transmit their data by radio link to a solar-powered base
station and then to the Internet. You can literally be anywhere in the world and
know what’s going on.
Thanks to this new technology, many scientists are getting the chance to observe
what was previously unobservable. Just as MRI technology revolutionized the abil-
ity to peer inside the body, the new networks are expected to shed much-needed
light on planetary problems like climate change and how pollutants move through
the environment. Other researchers are testing the devices for modeling earthquake
damage and monitoring everything from vehicle movements in war zones to water
use in agricultural fields.
However, while smart dust is generating excitement, some people already are
concerned about the dark side of what will undoubtedly be its expanded presence on
the landscape. It’s a very intrusive technology and could be abused.
Sensors and computer chips have long been embedded in consumer products,
whether cars or refrigerators. What’s new is that because motes are wireless and 
battery-powered, they can be used in previously hard-to-access places and moved
around at will. Before the technology takes off, motes may have to get smaller—cur-
rently, prototypes are the size of matchboxes. The devices also will have to become
cheaper, more reliable, and more energy efficient, but there’s little doubt that they
could serve as ubiquitous information collectors. These networks of tiny communi-
cating computers could even function as a new kind of Internet that, by merging
with the physical world, would allow us to query almost anything—buildings, roads,
rivers—for information.
The technology was jump-started in 1998, when Kris Pister, then an engineer at
the University of California-Berkeley and now CEO of Dust Inc., got funding from
the DoD’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to develop tiny,
intelligent sensing devices. He had no idea what the applications would be and never
in his wildest dreams expected it would lead where it has. The initial challenge was
to miniaturize the components, including the sensors, radio transmitters, batteries,
and computer hardware. Programming the devices also was tricky because they
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
533
q

needed to be both smart and energy efficient. Recently, scientists solved this prob-
lem by designing software that enabled the motes to sleep most of the time, yet wake
up regularly to take readings and communicate. The scientists didn’t want lots of
people to have to baby-sit the motes.
Indeed, an early test in March 2001 showed just how independent the devices
could be. At a military base in Twentynine Palms, California, Pister and his team
dropped six motes from an airplane along a road. As soon as they hit the ground, they
organized themselves into a network and began sensing the magnetic field around
them. When that changed as a vehicle drove by, the motes cooperated to calculate its
speed and direction, later transmitting the data to a laptop at a nearby base camp.
Now, several companies make prototypes with customized sensors that are
showing great promise in field tests. For instance, in 2003, scientists deployed motes
made by Intel to measure sunlight, temperature, and humidity in a half-dozen red-
wood trees in a botanical garden. In addition to eliminating miles of airing (moving
out) and reducing the cost of the experiments 10-fold, the motes will give scientists
the first 3-D view of the redwood forest microclimate. Recently, scientists packed up
the motes and moved them to a remote natural grove. Their goal is to better under-
stand how the loss and fragmentation of redwood forests affect local climate and
water resources. In an even more ambitious study of ecosystems, UCLA’s Center for
Embedded Network Sensing (CENS) is setting up a network with a couple hundred
devices in a forested 40-acre reserve near Palm Springs.
Motes are poised to become practical tools for protecting and managing all sorts
of resources. For instance, CENS will test motes to monitor an alfalfa field to see how
well the plants dissipate high-nitrate wastewater. In 2003, a vineyard in British
Columbia deployed a network of 65 motes to closely track temperature fluctuations
on its slopes. One aim is to determine when temperatures are perfect for picking
grapes to make a late-harvest wine known as ice wine.
While the applications of wireless sensor networks seem endless, the first field
tests have revealed shortcomings, which companies are working hard to address.
Generally, the motes have needed more-robust packaging to survive rough treat-
ment, curious animals, and frigid weather. At times the radios have been as fickle as
cell phones in their signaling and reception.
Still, the biggest challenge may be dealing with the crushing load of information
in smart dust. For instance, the Embedded Collaborative Computing Area at the
Palo Alto Research Center in California, is trying to reduce the volume of incoming
data by training the motes to pay attention only to what’s important in the sur-
rounding environment. Others are trying to ensure that the data is accurate and
secure—a crucial step if motes are ever to be used for, for example, monitoring a city
for signs of bioterrorism.
534
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

As motes are deployed more and more widely, the potential for the misuse of the
information they collect can only grow. Scientists at Berkeley’s Center for Informa-
tion Technology Research in the Interest of Society are already looking at how laws
might be updated to protect the privacy of individuals whose comings and goings,
for instance, may one day be tracked by motes. Scientists don’t think it will be diffi-
cult to draw the lines, but they do need to ask, How far do we let this go? It’s a ques-
tion far removed from observing seabirds on a wind-swept island.
Pister exemplifies the surging confidence of the leaders in a new field called
MEMS (microelectrical and mechanical systems). The idea is to build complex
gadgets so small one needs a microscope to see the parts, using fabrication methods
invented by the electronics industry for making silicon chips. He talks big and
earnestly, even though the best his prototypes (an undustlike inch or so across) 
can do is exchange laser signals with a counterpart on a tennis court visible 900
yards away through his fifth-floor office window at the University of California-
Berkeley—but that’s enough to show that the components work. Miniaturizing
them is well within current technology.
Tracking Tots
Cheap, dispersed sensors may tell farmers the exact condition of their acreage; man-
ufacturers, the precise humidity and temperature history of their raw materials; par-
ents, the locations and conditions of their small children all the time. Climate-control
systems in buildings would know exactly where it is too cold, humid, hot, or drafty.
In five years, smart dust could be linked by satellite. Eventually, you could log on to
readings from smart dust almost anywhere. One dream of Pister is to explore outer
space with smart dust. NASA could scatter smart dust sensors into the Martian at-
mosphere and they’d settle all over the planet (like in the recent movie Red Planet).
They could also be used as tiny spies. In 1992, as a new associate professor at the
University of California-Los Angeles, Pister attended a Rand Corp. workshop in
Santa Monica sponsored by the DARPA. The topic was miniaturization of novel
battlefield surveillance methods. The question was whether tiny electronic sensors
could be scattered in contested territory to relay vital information back to com-
manders. You could find out, for example, if a tank had gone by or whether there
was anthrax in the air. The concept sent his imagination racing.
Poppy Seeds
Pister coined the label smart dust in 1996 and produced the first complete smart-
dust particle in mid-2002, about 1 millimeter on a side, or roughly between a poppy
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
535

seed and a grape seed in size. None of the unit’s components seems to present
major fabrication obstacles. Before building the first fully small versions, however,
the team wants to be sure it can get oversize prototypes to work. One of the stu-
dents is working on a variant that will sport a thin, winglike extension, like that of
a maple seed, so that a modest breeze will keep it aloft. Another student is design-
ing a solid rocket micromotor, visible with a good magnifying glass, carved out of
silicon. If a smart dust particle detects a tank going by, it could hop up and hitch a
ride like a little spy. Some smart dust may be equipped with solar cells for power.
Others might alight on vibrating machinery to soak up energy from the motion or
charge batteries off electromagnetic pulsations leaking from power lines. Sensors, at
first, would be simple (such as for temperature, humidity, a few targeted chemicals,
etc.), but eventually microphones and camera systems should be possible.
Pister tells the grad students and postdocs in the engineering school’s smart
dust group that above all, they must have a passion for new ideas and teamwork. He
warns them against giving in to the “dark side” (Big Brother), against becoming
stealth researchers whose distrust of others makes them, in his words, roach motels
for information. Love of freely flowing communication is appropriate from a man
who expects a tomorrow suffused with tiny snoops. He knows his ideas may occa-
sionally serve nefarious ends, invading privacy or monitoring citizens of authori-
tarian governments. His reply to nervous objections is simple. “Information is
good, and information flow reinforces democracy and not tyranny.” Well, maybe.
Mechanical Dragonflies
The military calls it “situational awareness”: the ability to detect how many hostile
tanks await in the next valley or if bombed-out buildings are filled with snipers. It
is an advantage that has proved difficult to attain: spies, satellites, and U-2s have all
failed to keep commanders from blundering into ambushes and mismatches. The
worst thing is just not knowing where the enemy is. It’s having the sense that some-
body’s out there trying to get you but having no idea of where the enemy might be.
Military researchers are working to free future American troops from the ter-
ror of the unknown. The researchers envision tomorrow’s soldiers coming to a hill,
halting, and reaching into their packs for cigar-shaped tubes. From every tube
emerges a robotic spider, or a robotic dragonfly, each no longer than 3 inches.
Equipped with cameras or acoustic sensors, the mechanical insects range forward
and provide data on the hazards that lie in wait on the other side: the number of
machine gun nests and the position of artillery.
Backed by $7.7 million from DARPA, military researchers are designing such
insect-inspired spies. Recently, the researchers built their first crawling bug proto-
types, and they aim to perfect the design within two years. Insect-shaped “micro
aerial vehicles” are next on the slate. Along with providing the military with state-
536
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

of-the-art scouts, the researchers hope their project alters the way engineers ap-
proach the long-vexing problem of robotic locomotion.
In most robotic systems today, people think that if you want to move one joint,
then you need to attach a motor at that joint. That makes for large, bulky, energy-
hog robots. It also reduces robots to the ranks of expensive toys. Motors are only
about 80% efficient in turning electrical power into movement, so, although robots
may impress with their futuristic looks, most motor-driven devices have ranges
limited to only a few dozen yards, rendering them useless for practical applications.
In the initial design, piezoelectric ceramics—thin, ceramic-coated metal wafers
that bend when an electrical current is applied to their surfaces—were proposed.
Such materials already are used commercially to make silent pagers vibrate or to
make zoom lenses move strips (built from lead, zirconium, and titanium) that are
sandwiched together, a structure known as a bimorph actuator. When charged, one
half of the actuator expands while the other contracts, causing it to curve. When the
brief energy pulse ends, the structure snaps back to its original form and then can
begin the cycle anew. The researchers attached titanium legs to these vibrating
strips. Vibration is translated into motion, as the crawler takes 2-millimeter-long
forward strides in response to each oscillation.
Because piezoelectrics require only occasional energy boosts to keep up the vi-
bration, the bugs promise to be up to 70% more energy efficient than traditional ro-
bots. If you’re in a weight room and you lift 100 pounds up and down 10 times, that
takes a lot of energy from a person (illustrating the principle behind the design). The
same work could more easily be accomplished by hooking that weight to a spring on
the ceiling, then displacing it a bit and letting it bounce up and down by itself. An-
other common analogy is a child on a swing; once in motion, very little pumping ac-
tion is required to keep moving. The bugs’ energy efficiency should give them ranges
of almost 600 yards and allow them enough juice to carry such intelligence-oriented
payloads as chip-size infrared detectors and quarter-size video cameras.
Natural Efficiency
The engineers’ decision to model their robots after bugs was a natural choice: bio-
logical systems are far more energy efficient than anything cooked up in the labo-
ratory. Most things biological sort of oscillate as they walk. If you look at humans
walking and the way our legs act as pendulums off our hips and swing back and
forth, that’s a cyclic motion. They were also impressed by the shape of daddy 
longlegs, whose low-slung bodies and inverted-V legs create a stable configura-
tion—important for robots that will have to scamper across uneven, sometimes
treacherous terrain. Additional hardiness comes from the solid-state legs, which are
free of bearings, rods, or shafts that could get jammed by pebbles or dust. They
probably won’t survive being stomped on, but short of that they’re pretty tough.
They could actually survive four-story falls.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
537

Before the bugs can be unleashed on the battlefield, however, a few major hurdles
remain. Chief among them is a power problem; though the robots will require around
60 volts to start vibrating, the watch-size batteries being considered can provide only
3 to 6 volts. To get the bugs moving without the aid of chargers, circuitry must be de-
veloped to amplify the current, and it must be small enough to fit the 2-by-3/4-inch
bugs. Still, the design’s voltage requirement is impressively low; rival efforts to create
locomotive robots of comparable size have needed well over 1,000 volts.
Another lingering question is how a robotic swarm can be controlled. With
thousands of bugs roving at once, commanding each individual unit would be close
to impossible, so a battalion leader, outfitted with a remote control, would only
have to control a “mother ship,” an insect at the fore that would then relay in-
structions to other members of the swarm. In the event of the mother ship’s de-
struction, the leadership role could be shifted to a surviving robot. The exact details
of this control, however, have yet to be worked out.
DARPA officials and the researchers are optimistic that the kinks can be worked
out and that assembly-line production of the bugs is nearing. Along with the crawl-
ing prototype, the researchers have already managed to construct a piezoelectrically
actuated thorax for the flier. Once all design issues are resolved, the researchers be-
lieve, the insects could cost as little as $7 per unit. The required metals are readily
available, and the bimorph strips and legs can be cheaply pressed from large sheets.
The low price makes the insects potential candidates for a variety of uses, in-
cluding delivering lethal toxins on the battlefield or aiding police SWAT teams. Per-
haps 40,000 of the mechanical creatures could be dropped on the Martian surface
to probe the nooks and crannies Pathfinder missed. Those missions are far distant,
though; the bugs’ first and foremost duty will be to give American troops an upper
hand and to save them from stumbling into situations too perilous to survive.
Finally, let’s look at how machines the size of molecules are creating the next
industrial revolution in IW.
NANOTECHNOLOGY
In 2000, a group of scientists from the University of Michigan’s Center for Biologic
Nanotechnology traveled to the U.S. Army’s Dugway Proving Ground in Utah. The
purpose of their visit was to demonstrate the power of “nano-bombs.” These muni-
tions don’t exactly go “Kaboom!” They’re molecular-size droplets, roughly 1/5,000
the head of a pin, designed to blow up various microscopic enemies of mankind, in-
cluding the spores containing the deadly biological warfare agent anthrax.
The military’s interest in nano-bombs is obvious. In the test, the devices
achieved a remarkable 100% success rate, proving their unrivaled effectiveness as
a potential defense against anthrax attacks. Their civilian applications are also
538
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

staggering. For example, just by adjusting the bombs’ ratio of soybean oil, solvents,
detergents, and water, researchers can program them to kill the bugs that cause in-
fluenza and herpes. Indeed, the Michigan team is now making new, smarter nano-
bombs so selective that they can attack E. coli, salmonella, or listeria before they
can reach the intestine.
If you’re a fan of science fiction, you’ve no doubt encountered the term nano-
technology. Over the past 23 years, scores of novels and movies have explored the im-
plications of mankind’s learning to build devices the size of molecules. In a 1999
episode of The X-Files titled “S. R. 819,” nanotechnology even entered the banal
world of Washington trade politics, with various nefarious forces conspiring to pass
a Senate resolution that would permit the export of lethal “nanites” to rogue nations.
Since 1999, a series of breakthroughs have transformed nanotech from sci-fi
fantasy into a real-world applied science and, in the process, inspired huge invest-
ments by business, academia, and government. In industries as diverse as health
care, computers, chemicals, and aerospace, nanotech is overhauling production
techniques, resulting in new and improved products—some of which may already
be in your home or workplace.
Silicon Fingers
Meanwhile, nearly every week, corporate and academic labs report advances in
nanotech with broad commercial and medical implications. In 2000, for example,
IBM announced it had figured out a way to use DNA to power a primitive robot
with working silicon fingers 1/50 as thick as human hair. Within a decade or so,
such devices may be able to track down and destroy cancer cells. At Cornell Uni-
versity, researchers have developed a molecule-sized motor, built out of a combi-
nation of organic and inorganic components, which some dub nanotech’s “Model
T.” In tests announced in 2003, the machine’s rotor spun for 120 minutes at 6 to 7
revolutions per second. When further developed, such motors will be able to pump
fluids, open and close valves, and power a wide range of nanoscale devices.
These inventions and products are just the beginning of what many observers
predict will be a new industrial revolution fostered by man’s growing prowess at
manipulating matter one atom, or molecule, at a time. Because of nanotech, all of
us will see more change in our civilization in the next 30 years than we did during
all of the 20th century.
Nanotech takes its name from the nanometer, a unit of measurement just one bil-
lionth of a meter long.
Imagine the possibilities. Materials with 10 times the strength of steel and only
a small fraction of the weight. Shrinking all the information housed at the Library
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
539

of Congress into a device the size of a sugar cube. Or detecting cancerous tumors
when they are only a few cells in size.
To build such objects, engineers employ a wide range of techniques, borrowed
from bioengineering, chemistry, and molecular engineering. Such feats include im-
itating the workings of the body, where DNA not only programs cells to replicate
themselves but also instructs them how to assemble individual molecules into new
materials such as hair or milk. In other words, many nanotech structures build
themselves.
Atom by Atom
The inspiration for nanotech goes back to a 1959 speech by the late physicist Richard
Feynman, titled “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom.” Feynman, then a profes-
sor at the California Institute of Technology, proposed a novel concept to his col-
leagues. Starting in the Stone Age, all human technology, from sharpening
arrowheads to etching silicon chips, has involved whittling or fusing billions of
atoms at a time into useful forms. What if we were to take another approach, Feyn-
man asked, by starting with individual molecules, or even atoms, and assembling
them one by one to meet our needs? The principles of physics, as far as Feynman
could see, did not speak against the possibility of maneuvering things atom by atom.
Four decades later, Chad Mirkin, a chemistry professor at Northwestern Uni-
versity’s $45-million nanotech center, used a nanoscale device to etch most of Feyn-
man’s speech onto a surface the size of about 10 tobacco smoke particles—a feat
that Feynman would no doubt have taken as vindication. The course science took
to achieve such levels of finesse has not always been straightforward. Nor has it been
lacking in controversy.
Indeed, some scientists are alarmed by nanotechnology’s rapid progress. In
2000, the chief scientist at Sun Microsystems created a stir when he warned that in
the wrong hands, nanotech could be more destructive than nuclear weapons. Influ-
enced by the work of Eric Drexler, an early and controversial nanotechnology theo-
retician, the scientist predicted that trillions of self-replicating nanorobots could
one day spin out of control, literally reducing the earth’s entire biomass to gray goo.
Most researchers in the field don’t share that type of concern. They are com-
pelled to keep going. Researchers are knocking on the door of creating new living
things, new hybrids of robotics and biology. Some may be pretty scary, but they
have to keep going.
The early payoffs have already arrived. Computer makers, for example, use
nanotechnology to build “read heads,” a key component in the $45-billion-a-year
hard disk drive market, which vastly improve the speed at which computers can scan
data. Another familiar product, Dr. Scholl’s brand antifungal spray, contains nano-
scale zinc oxide particles—produced by a company called Nanophase Technolo-
540
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

gies—that make aerosol cans less likely to clog. Nanoparticles also help make car and
floor waxes that are harder and more durable and eyeglasses that are less likely to
scratch. As these examples show, one huge advantage of nanotech is its ability to cre-
ate materials with novel properties not found in nature or obtainable through con-
ventional chemistry.
What accounts for the sudden acceleration of nanotechnology? A key break-
through came in 1990, when researchers at IBM’s Almaden Research Center succeeded
in rearranging individual atoms at will. Using a device known as a scanning probe mi-
croscope, the team slowly moved 35 atoms to spell the three-letter IBM logo, thus
proving Feynman right. The entire logo measured less than three nanometers.
Soon, scientists were not only manipulating individual atoms but also “spray
painting” with them. Using a tool known as a molecular beam epitaxy, scientists
have learned to create ultrafine films of specialized crystals, built up one molecular
layer at a time. This is the technology used today to build read-head components
for computer hard drives.
One quality of such films, which are known as giant magnetoresistant materi-
als, or GMRs, is that their electrical resistance changes drastically in the presence of
a magnetic field. Because of this sensitivity, hard disk drives that use GMRs can read
very tightly packed data and do so with extreme speed. In a few years, scientists are
expected to produce memory chips built out of GMR material that can preserve 100
megabits of data without using electricity. Eventually, such chips may become so
powerful that they will simply replace hard drives, thereby vastly increasing the
speed at which computers can retrieve data.
Natural Motion
The next stage in the development of nanotechnology borrows a page from nature.
Building a supercomputer no bigger than a speck of dust might seem an impossi-
ble task, until one realizes that evolution solved such problems more than a billion
years ago. Living cells contain all sorts of nanoscale motors made of proteins that
perform myriad mechanical and chemical functions, from muscle contraction to
photosynthesis. In some instances, such motors may be re-engineered, or imitated,
to produce products and processes useful to humans.
Animals such as the abalone, for example, have cellular motors that combine
the crumbly substance found in schoolroom chalk with a “mortar” of proteins and
carbohydrates to create elaborate, nano-structured shells so strong they can’t be
shattered by a hammer. Using a combination of biotechnology and molecular en-
gineering, humans are now on the verge of being able to replicate or adapt such
motors to suit their own purposes.
How are these biologically inspired machines constructed? Often, they con-
struct themselves, manifesting a phenomenon of nature known as self-assembly.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
541

The macromolecules of such biological machines have exactly the right shape and
chemical-binding preferences to ensure that, when they combine, they will snap
together in predesigned ways. For example, the two strands that make up DNA’s
double helix match each other exactly, which means that if they are separated in a
complex chemical mixture, they are still able to find each other easily.
This phenomenon is potentially very useful for fabricating nanoscale products.
For instance, in 1999, a team of German scientists attached building materials such
as gold spheres to individual strands of DNA and then watched as the strands found
each other and bound together the components they carried, creating a wholly new
material.
Similarly, the 1996 Nobel Prize in chemistry went to a team of scientists for
their work with “nanotubes”—a formation of self-assembling carbon atoms about
1/50,000 the width of a human hair. Scientists expect that when they succeed in
weaving nanotubes into larger strands, the resulting material will be 100 times
stronger than steel, conduct electricity better than copper, and conduct heat better
than diamond. Membranes of such fibers should lead to rechargeable batteries
many times stronger, and smaller, than today’s.
In 2000, a team of IBM scientists announced that they had used self-assembly
principles to create a new class of magnetic materials that could one day allow com-
puter hard disks and other data-storage systems to store more than 100 times more
data than today’s products. Specifically, the researchers discovered certain chemi-
cal reactions that cause tiny magnetic particles, each uniformly containing only a
few thousand atoms, to self-assemble into well-ordered arrays, with each particle
separated from its neighbors by the same preset distance.
Other scientists have discovered important new self-assembling entities by ac-
cident. In 1996, Samuel Stupp, a professor at Northwestern University, was in his
lab trying to develop new forms of polymer when he inadvertently came upon
“nanomushrooms.” He saw the potential right away. The molecules he had been
experimenting with had spontaneously grouped themselves into supramolecular
clusters shaped like mushrooms. Soon afterward, Stupp discovered, again acciden-
tally, that he could easily program these supramolecules to form film that behaves
like Scotch tape.
Meanwhile, researchers at UCLA and Hewlett-Packard have laid the ground-
work for the world’s first molecular computer. Eventually, the researchers hope to
build memory chips smaller than a bacterium. Such an achievement is essential if
computing power is to continue doubling every 18 to 24 months, as it has for the
past four decades. This is because the more densely packed the transistors on a chip
become, the faster it can process, and we are approaching the natural limit to how
small transistors can be fabricated out of silicon.
542
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Future Phenomena
Where will it all end? Many futurists have speculated that nanotech will fundamen-
tally change the human condition over the next generation. Swarms of programma-
ble particles, sometimes referred to as “utility fog,” will assemble themselves on
command. The result could be a bottle of young wine molecularly engineered to taste
as if it had aged for decades or a faithful biomechanical dog with an on/off switch.
Meanwhile, new, superstrong, lightweight nanomaterials could make space
travel cheap and easy and maybe even worth the bother, if, as some scientists pre-
dict, nanotech can be used to create an Earth-like atmosphere on Mars. Space col-
onization could well be necessary if the new science of “nanomedicine” extends life
indefinitely, manufacturing new cells, molecule by molecule, whenever old cells
wear out. It all seems hard to imagine, yet nanotech has already produced enough
small wonders to make such big ideas seem plausible, if not alarming—at least to
the high priests of science and the IW military strategists.
SUMMARY
Information technology is being developed by strategic planners both as an offen-
sive battlefield weapon and as a weapon for “logistics attack,” as a means to disrupt
the civilian infrastructure on which an enemy’s military apparatus depends. Tech-
nology has already been used effectively by U.S. forces in the Gulf War, in Iraq and
in the conflict in Haiti.
However, IW is a double-edged sword. Those countries most capable of wag-
ing it are also the ones most vulnerable to it. The increasing dependence on so-
phisticated information systems brings with it an increased vulnerability to hostile
elements and terrorists.
Conclusions
Even though the anticipated national security threats of the coming decades in-
volve less-developed countries, the Collaborative Virtual Workspace (CVW)
threat and other methods of intrusion and disruption are not necessarily be-
yond their reach. CVW is a collaboration software environment that provides
a virtual building where teams can communicate, collaborate, and share infor-
mation, regardless of their geographic location.
Opportunities to deceive and confuse through an elaborate misinformation
scheme along a myriad of information paths are available to anyone.
The IW arsenal of the future provides a new avenue to employ deception tech-
niques through the use of multiple paths that create the perception and valida-
tion of truth.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
543

There exists the prospect of an intelligence analyst manipulating an adversary’s
command-and-control system so that reality is distorted.
Tomorrow’s soldier will depend more than ever on the very well-known and
trusted factors of mobility.
Imagine a scenario depicting a “left hook” in the Iranian desert that fails be-
cause the systems in use were successfully attacked by CVW, or some other in-
trusion method, with the resulting disruption putting U.S. troops in a flailing
posture—facing the unknown and losing confidence in their operation.
One thing is sure. An Iranian “left hook” will be difficult to repeat.
One can assume that Iran, and others, will exploit the GPS to their own advan-
tage. The IW arsenal is coming of age.
World War II set the stage, but only with today’s technology can we expect ac-
tion in this sphere of warfare on a grand scale.
The necessity to prevent irresponsible groups and individuals from getting ac-
cess to nanotechnological manufacturing capability will be a prime concern in
the near future.
The chapter has shown how this quest for containment has shaped many aspects
of society, most notably via the institution of a global surveillance network.
An Agenda for Action
In the United States, where the threat is most immediately recognized, debate is
currently going on to decide what part government can and should play in pro-
tecting civilian networks. On the one hand, the civilian networks are controlled by
private interest groups, some of them internationally owned. Government regula-
tion would seem to be interference or even repression. On the other hand, the vul-
nerability and ease of manipulation of some networks are weak links in modern
society, and their exploitation by hostile elements threatens all elements of society,
not just the direct controllers of the networks. One solution is to require organiza-
tions with a dependence on sensitive information technology to fulfill certain se-
curity criteria before being issued a government license. Something like this has
been done in Israel already, with the legislation of the “computer laws” of 1994.
The U.S. government needs to set an agenda for action that goes beyond the
work already done in preparation for defending against the IW arsenal of the fu-
ture. Action steps should include, but not be limited to the 12 areas shown in Table
F17.1 in Appendix F.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
544
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Even though the anticipated national security threats of the com-
ing decades involve less-developed countries, the CVW threat and other meth-
ods of intrusion and disruption are necessarily beyond their reach.
2.
True or False? Opportunities to deceive and confuse through an elaborate mis-
information scheme along a myriad of information paths are not available to
anyone.
3.
True or False? The IW arsenal of the future provides an old avenue to employ
deception techniques through the use of multiple paths that create the percep-
tion and validation of truth.
4.
True or False? Tomorrow’s soldier will depend more than ever on the very
well-known and trusted factors of mobility.
5.
True or False? One can assume that Iran, and others, will exploit the GPS to
their own advantage.
Multiple Choice
1.
Among the current possible offensive weapons are the following, except:
A. Computer viruses, which could be fed into an enemy’s computers either
remotely or by “mercenary” technicians
B.
Nuclear bombs, another type of virus which can lie dormant for years,
until, upon receiving a particular signal, would wake up and begin attack-
ing the host system
C. “Chipping,” a plan (originally proposed by the CIA, according to some
sources) to slip booby-trapped computer chips into critical systems sold by
foreign contractors to potentially hostile third parties (or recalcitrant allies?)
D. Worms, whose purpose is to self-replicate ad infinitum, thus eating up a
system’s resources
E.
Trojan horses, malevolent code inserted into legitimate programming to
perform a disguised function
2.
The Privacy Foundation at the University of Denver conducts research into
communications technologies and provides the public with tools to maintain
privacy in the Information Age. You can read the Foundation’s report and
commentary on email wiretaps. The report cites the following possible uses for
this security breach, except:
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
545

A. The wiretaps can provide the ability to monitor the path of a confidential
email message and the written comments attached.
B.
In a business negotiation conducted via email, one side can learn inside in-
formation from the other side as the proposal is discussed through the re-
cipient company’s external email system.
C. A bugged email message can capture thousands of email addresses as the
forwarded message is sent around the world.
D. Commercial entities, particularly those based offshore, may seek to offer
email wiretapping as a service.
3.
Computers used in data processing systems are all potentially vulnerable to the
EMP effect, such as the following, except:
A. Open source intelligence
B.
Communications systems
C. Displays
D. Industrial control applications
4.
The electromagnetic device will be detonated by the missile’s onboard fusing
system. In a cruise missile, this will be tied to the following, except:
A. Navigation system
B.
Antishipping missile
C. Internet protocol
D. Radar seeker
E.
Air-to-air missile, the proximity fusing system
5.
The necessity to prevent irresponsible groups and individuals from getting
access to nanotechnological manufacturing capability is a prime concern in:
A. The near future
B.
The past
C. Traditional psychological operations or deception operations
D. Covert media manipulation
E.
Clandestine human intelligence operations or overt research operations
Exercise
In a breach of contract case it was decided on a Friday to use a computer forensics
specialist (CFS) to recover company emails. The attorney needed all the plaintiff
company’s emails and attachments over a seven month time frame, meeting key-
word and time/date criteria immediately. Over 1,090,000 total emails met the cri-
teria. The emails and system were password protected and the passwords were not
available. How was the CFS able to go about recovering the email?
546
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

HANDS-ON PROJECTS
An examiner at a major financial institution in Chicago successfully previewed two
drives in Asia connected to the company-wide area network. The drives were pre-
viewed in less than an hour after management determined that the investigation
was necessary and that time was of the essence. The preview process revealed that
one of the drives contained highly relevant information and the drive was promptly
acquired for further forensic analysis in Chicago. How did the CFS team (CFST) go
about conducting their investigation?
Case Project
A large government agency used a CFS and a high-speed network connection to
image a drive on its wide area network (WAN) located approximately 11,000 miles
(17,600 km) away. How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation?
Optional Team Case Project
Law enforcement investigators arrived at a company site to collect computer evi-
dence from a server. The company was not the perpetrator of the investigated
crime, but apparently did possess important evidence that resided on a mission-
critical server that could not be taken off-line. How was the CFS able to go about
conducting the investigation?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., The Cabling Handbook, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, New York,
2001.
[2] Vacca, John R., i-mode Crash Course, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002.
[3] Vacca, John R., Satellite Encryption, Academic Press, New York, 1999.
[4] Vacca, John R., The World’s 20 Greatest Unsolved Problems, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2004.
[5] Rowling, J. K., Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, Scholastic Trade,
New York, 1999.
The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
547

This page intentionally left blank 

549
Surveillance Tools for
Information Warfare 
of the Future
18
W
ireless systems [1] capable of monitoring vehicles and people all over the
planet (basically everything) are leaving businesses and the military
aglow with new possibilities—and some privacy advocates deeply con-
cerned. Companies seeking to tap the commercial potential of these technologies
are installing wireless location systems in vehicles, hand-held computers, cell-
phones—even watchbands. Scientists have developed a chip that can be inserted
beneath the skin, so that a person’s location can be pinpointed anywhere.
For example, the owner of a small company in Dallas that installs automobile
alarms uses a wireless tracking service to monitor his fleet of six Dodge Dakota
pickup trucks, and the equipment alerted him recently when one of his trucks
turned up in the parking lot of the Million Dollar Saloon, a strip club. When he
signed up for this service, he told his guys, “Big Brother’s keeping an eye on you,
and I’m Big Brother.” After he fired that one fellow, you bet they all believed him.
These technologies have become one of the fastest-growing areas of the wireless
communications industry. The market for location-based services is already esti-
mated at nearly $1 billion and is forecast to approach $9 billion by 2007.
MONITORING EVERYTHING
A federal effort to make it easier to pinpoint the location of people making emer-
gency 911 calls from mobile phones means that cell phones sold in the United
States are now equipped with advanced wireless tracking technology. Various plans
already under way include alerting cell-phone users when they approach a nearby
McDonald’s, telling them which items are on sale, and sending updates to travelers

about hotel vacancies or nearby restaurants with available tables. One Florida com-
pany wants to provide parents with wireless watchbands that they can use to keep
track of their children.
Although the commercial prospects for wireless location technology may be
intriguing, and the social benefits of better mobile 911 service are undisputed,
privacy-rights advocates are worried. By allowing location-based services to prolif-
erate, you’re opening the door to a new realm of privacy abuses. What if your in-
surer finds out you’re into rock climbing or late-night carousing in the red-light
district? What if your employer knows you’re being treated for AIDS at a local
clinic? The potential is there for inferences to be drawn about you based on knowl-
edge of your whereabouts.
Until recently, location-based services belonged more in the realm of science
fiction than commerce. Although satellite-based global positioning system (GPS)
technology has been commercially available for some time for airplanes, boats,
cars, and hikers, companies have only recently begun manufacturing GPS chips
that can be embedded in wireless communications devices [1]. GPS uses satellite
signals to determine geographic coordinates that indicate where the person with the
receiving device is situated. GPS monitoring technology will be discussed in much
greater detail later in the chapter.
Real-life improvements in the technology have come largely from research ini-
tiatives by start-up companies in the United States, Canada, and Europe as well as
from large companies like IBM, which recently formed a “pervasive computing” di-
vision to focus on wireless technologies such as location-based services.
Location technology is a natural extension of e-business. It’s no surprise that a
whole new ecology of small companies has formed to focus on making it all more
precise. For instance, Peter Zhou, the chief scientist for Applied Digital Solutions,
a company in Palm Beach, Florida, helped create a chip called Digital Angel that
could be implanted beneath human skin, enabling his company to track the loca-
tion of a person almost anywhere using a combination of satellites and radio tech-
nology. After all, he reasoned, wouldn’t the whereabouts of an Alzheimer’s patient
be important to relatives? Wouldn’t the government want to keep track of paroled
convicts? Wouldn’t parents want to know where their children are at 10 P.M., 11
P.M., or any hour of the day?
A review of Digital Angel’s commercial potential, though, revealed concern
over the possibility of privacy abuses [3]. Professor Zhou altered his plans for Dig-
ital Angel, which is about the size of a dime, so that instead of being implanted it
could be affixed to a watchband or a belt. Embedding technology in people is too
controversial, but that doesn’t mean a system capable of tracking people wherever
they go won’t have great value. Digital Angel is now commercially available.
That Professor Zhou found himself in the middle of the privacy debate is no
surprise, given the growing interest in location-based services. Through the use of
550
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

existing cellular communications technology or the GPS, researchers’ ability to
track wireless devices more precisely is growing [4].
Some of the world’s largest wireless carriers, such as Verizon Wireless, Vodafone
of Britain, and NTT DoCoMo of Japan, are promoting the technology, in addition
to dozens of small companies in the United States and Europe. The SignalSoft Cor-
poration, based in Boulder, Colorado, develops software that allows tourists and
business travelers to use their mobile phones to obtain information on the closest
restaurants or hotels in a given city [5]. Meanwhile Cell-Loc Inc., a Canadian com-
pany, has already installed a wireless service in Austin, Texas, and in Calgary, Al-
berta, that, after determining a caller’s location, delivers detailed driving directions.
Some companies are even more ambitious. Webraska, a French company that
secured $90 million in financing from investors in the United States and Europe,
has mapped every urban area in the world and allows these maps to be retrieved in
real time on wireless devices.
While businesses around the world seek to improve the quality of location-based
services, the biggest impetus behind the advancement of the technology has come
from the federal government, through its effort to improve the precision of locating
wireless 911 emergency calls. Nearly a third of the 593 million 911 calls made in 2003
came from cell phones, according to the National Emergency Number Association.
With the number of wireless users growing, carriers are now equipping either
cell phones or their communications networks with technology that would allow
authorities to determine the location of most callers to within 600 feet, compared
with current systems that can locate them within about 900 feet. For example, Ver-
izon Wireless and Western Wireless have developed a network-based system that
pinpoints the signal on a handset using the existing cellular network to determine
the location, whereas other carriers including Sprint PCS, Alltel, and Nextel favor
handsets equipped with GPS chips. Supporters of the initiative, called “E-911” for
“enhanced 911,” expect the technology’s precision to be even better than the feder-
ally mandated 600-foot radius.
If your cell phone is on while you’re driving, you can tell which intersection
you’re at. Although the E-911 initiative has driven wireless carriers in the United
States to improve their location technology, industry groups have started to grap-
ple with privacy issues. The Wireless Advertising Association, a group of carriers,
advertising agencies and device manufacturers, encourages companies to allow
consumers to choose whether they want location-based services. The association
will endorse companies that adhere to the policy.
People are justifiably concerned with the rapidity with which this technology is
being deployed. They need to be assured that there is no conspiracy to use this in-
formation in an underhanded way.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
551

CYBER SURVEILLANCE
Nicodemo S. Scarfo, the son of Philadelphia’s former mob boss, was almost para-
noid enough. Scarfo, who has been charged with masterminding a mob-linked loan
sharking operation in New Jersey, reportedly used the popular PGP encryption
software to shield his computer’s secrets from prying eyes and cyber surveillance,
but when the feds learned of Scarfo’s security measures, they decided to do some-
thing that would bypass even the best encryption software. FBI agents sneaked into
Scarfo’s office in Belleville, New Jersey, on May 10, 1999, and installed a keyboard-
sniffing device to record his password when he typed it in.
A seven-page court order authorized the FBI and cooperating local police to
break into Scarfo’s first-floor Merchant Services of Essex County office as many
times as necessary to deploy, maintain, and then remove recovery methods that will
capture the necessary key-related information and encrypted files. The case, which
is still awaiting trial, appears to be the first in which the U.S. government used such
aggressive surveillance techniques during an investigation; some legal observers say
the FBI’s breaking-and-entering procedures go too far. This case has the potential
to establish some very important precedents on this issue.
Scarfo’s prosecution comes at a time when the FBI’s Carnivore surveillance sys-
tem (discussed in Chapter 17) is under increasingly heavy fire from privacy groups,
and the use of data-scrambling encryption products appears to be growing. Re-
cently, for instance, news leaked out about Yahoo’s encrypted Web-based email
service it introduced through a deal with Zixit, a Dallas firm.
Scarfo has been charged with supervising an illegal gambling business in violation
of state and federal law and using extortionate loan shark tactics, according to a three-
count indictment filed in federal court in June 2000. He has pleaded not guilty.
The elder Scarfo, who once ran the Philadelphia mob that also dominated the
Atlantic City gambling racket, was imprisoned in 1991 on racketeering charges. The
spring 1999 investigation of the younger Scarfo, who is now 38 years old, may be
what prompted the previous Clinton administration to recommend changing fed-
eral law to allow police to conduct electronic “black bag” jobs.
The idea first publicly surfaced in mid-1999, when the Justice Department pro-
posed legislation that would let police obtain surreptitious warrants and “post-
pone” notifying the person whose property they entered for 30 days. After vocal
objections from civil liberties groups, the administration backed away from the
controversial bill. In the final draft of the Cyberspace Electronic Security Act sub-
mitted to Congress, the secret-search portions had disappeared.
In January 2000, the previous Clinton administration seemed to change its
mind. When criminals such as drug dealers and terrorists use encryption to conceal
their communications, law enforcement must be able to respond in a manner that
will not thwart an investigation or tip off a suspect.
552
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The feds didn’t need a new law—and would instead rely on “general authori-
ties” when asking judges to authorize black bag jobs. A related “secret search” pro-
posal resurfaced in May 2000 in a Senate bankruptcy bill.
In the Scarfo case, the FBI in May 1999 asked for authority to search for and
seize encryption-key-related passphrases from his computer as well as install and
leave behind software, firmware, or hardware equipment to monitor the inputted
data entered on Nicodemo S. Scarfo’s computer by recording the key-related in-
formation as it is entered. Although the government has refused to release details,
this appears to indicate that the FBI was using either a hardware device (inserted
into the keyboard or attached to the keyboard cable) or a software program that
would quietly run in the background and record keystrokes. With the PGP private
key and Scarfo’s secret password, the government could then view whatever docu-
ments or files he had encrypted and stored on his computer.
Ruling that normal investigative procedures to decrypt the codes and keys neces-
sary to decipher the “factors” encrypted computer file have been tried and have failed,
U.S. Magistrate Judge G. Donald Haneke granted the FBI’s request. Haneke did not,
under federal law, have the authority to grant such an order. The interesting issue is
that in those (court) documents the FBI specifically disclaim any reliance on the wire-
tap statute. If they’re on record saying this isn’t communications (and it isn’t), then
that extraordinary authority they have under the wiretap laws does not apply.
If the government is now talking about expanding black bag jobs to every case
in which it has an interest and where the subject is using a computer and encryp-
tion, the number of break-ins is going to skyrocket. Break-ins are going to become
commonplace.
However, the government could successfully argue that break-ins are constitu-
tional. There’s nothing in the Constitution that prohibits this kind of anticipatory
search. In many respects, it’s no different from a wiretap.
A lawyer for Scarfo told the Philadelphia Inquirer that he would file a motion
challenging the legality of the FBI’s black bag job. The FBI’s got everything that
Scarfo typed on that keyboard (a letter to his lawyer, personal and medical records,
legitimate business records, etc.).
Finding a mentally impaired relative, a lost child, or a criminal in a sprawling
metropolitan area would be simple if the person were equipped with a personal lo-
cator device. The next part of the chapter will take a close look at these information
warfare (IW) tracking devices.
THE CYBER FOOTPRINT AND CRIMINAL TRACKING
At 10:00 A.M. one morning in 1999, an elderly woman in Osaka, Japan, became
alarmed. Her 74-year-old husband, who suffers from dementia, had left four hours
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
553

earlier and had not yet returned. She did not panic, but contacted the provider of
her personal locator service, Life Service Center. Within a minute, the provider
found him on the second floor of a department store, simply by paging a miniature
locator device secured to the man’s clothes. Forty minutes later, when the man’s
son arrived at the department store, his father had already left. Fortunately, the ser-
vice provider continued tracking the elderly man and was able to direct the son to
the fourth floor of an Osaka hotel. At 1:10 P.M., the two were reunited. Locus
Corp. provided the system that made this possible.
The belief that it should be easy to find anyone, anywhere, at any time with a
few pushes of a button has caught on with the advent of the GPS. People imagine a
miniature device, attached to one’s person, that reports one’s whereabouts almost
instantaneously. Add the highly practical need to find missing persons promptly,
and the personal locator system (PLS) industry is born.
Systems of this nature, whether based on the GPS or some other technology,
are being tested throughout the world. Some are already being deployed in Japan.
The service alone can be sold by cellular companies, which base it on their wireless
infrastructure. Several companies looking into the technology options plan to offer
a broad array of services to the public and to businesses.
In Japan, location services are now commercially available to 74% of the na-
tion’s population, including Tokyo, Osaka, Kyoto, Yokohama, Nagasaki, and Hi-
roshima. Initially designed to support the mentally handicapped, personal locator
services have expanded to serve children, the elderly, tourist groups, and security
patrols, as well. They may also be used to track valuables and recover stolen vehi-
cles. Not surprisingly, service areas coincide with wireless infrastructure deploy-
ments, which personal locators have exploited since their beginning in 1998.
In the United States, two further factors encourage the adoption of these 
geolocation systems. One is the need to effectively monitor offenders on parole and
probation. Tagging offenders with locator devices would tighten their supervision
and enhance public safety and could even reduce the prison population. The other
is the wish to provide wireless callers with enhanced 911 (E-911) emergency ser-
vices. For land-line telephony, the location of a phone from which a 911 call is
made appears automatically on the 911 operator’s computer screen. Callers using
cellular phones could be anywhere and unlocatable, unless location technology
were applied to the wireless telephone system.
Of course, wireless services for locating vehicles have been thwarting car theft
and managing fleets of cars since the mid-1980s. Unlike vehicular locators, which
are less constrained by size and power, locators borne on the person have to be the
size of a pager, and their power output has to be less than 1 W, because they can
only carry a small battery that cannot be continuously recharged. Most challenging
of all, personal locators have to be able to operate in radio frequency (RF)-shielded
areas such as buildings, because people spend a lot of their time indoors.
554
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

One PLS Architecture
A PLS is likely to involve a service provider, a location center, and a wireless net-
work. In this setting, three scenarios, each involving a different operating mode, are
possible. The person bearing a locator device is either being sought by a subscriber
to the service, is seeking help from the subscriber, or, as in the case of a parolee, is
having his or her whereabouts monitored continuously.
Consider again the introductory example, but from a system architecture per-
spective. It is representative of the first scenario, based on the paging mode, wherein
the person with the locator device is sought. In this instance, the subscriber calls the
service provider, giving the operator there a password and the “wanted” person’s
identification (user) number (ID). The operator enters the ID into a computer,
which transmits it to another computer at the location center. That machine calls
the locator device, in effect paging it to establish communication through the PHPS
(personal handy phone systems) wireless telephone switching office. Immediately
the office forwards the call to the wireless base station nearest the locator.
Once communication is established between the center and the device, the cen-
ter asks the device for the signal strength data and IDs of any base stations in its
vicinity. The locator replies, and from those inputs, plus RF database information
on the base stations, the center computes the locator’s coordinates. Details of the
geolocation technology behind this architecture follow in subsection “Enhanced
Signal Strength.”
These coordinates are transmitted to the service provider’s computer, which
displays the missing person’s position on a street map for the service operator to re-
port to the subscriber. The user’s location is continuously updated on the service
provider’s map as long as the location center maintains its call connection to the lo-
cator device.
In a second scenario, involving the emergency mode, the user of the locator is
lost or in dire straits of one sort or another and presses the device’s panic button.
The locator calls the location center, which computes the user’s position and alerts
the service provider, which in turn alerts the subscriber to the user’s situation.
The system can employ either packet data or voice channel communications. If
a data channel is used, the service takes about 8 seconds to obtain a geolocation fix.
If a voice channel is used, the wait could last up to 33 seconds because of process-
ing differences between the two channel types.
Several minutes may be added by communication between the service’s oper-
ator and the subscriber. Such a human interface may be necessary given the com-
plexity of Japanese (as explained in the Japanese example earlier) city-addressing
schemes. Otherwise, subscribers using personal computers may obtain the infor-
mation directly from the computer of either the service provider or location center.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
555

Both the emergency and paging operating modes of PLSs are characterized as
intermittent. In addition, a continuous automatic mode, in which the system polls
the locator nonstop, is possible. Strictly speaking, the polling is periodic rather than
continuous, but the latter term is more common. Of the three locator modes, this
last requires the most RF bandwidth and battery power. If it were implemented
with a continuous voice call between the system and the locator, the expense would
be beyond the reach of most applications. Assuming a minimal cost of 3 cents per
minute for airtime, such a connection would cost US $46.59 a day—and also drain
the locator battery within a few hours.
Packet data calls between the locator and the rest of the system are far more
economical. In the packet version, the locator is likely to be polled every few min-
utes, exchanging 100 bytes or so with the system in a fraction of a second. Given a
3-minute polling interval and a 1-cent-per-poll cost, the daily cost per locator
would be only $4.80.
Most of the time, the locator would be in standby mode, conserving valuable bat-
tery charge. Another plus: upcoming third-generation mobile wireless telephony
will increase the availability of packet data communications.
Six Technologies
A PLS could use any of several technologies. Among the most common methods
are angle and time difference of the signal’s arrival, GPS and the more recent as-
sisted GPS, enhanced signal strength, and location fingerprinting.
Signal Direction
The simplest technologyy is based on measuring the direction of a signal received
from an RF transmitter at a single point. This can be done by pointing a directional
antenna along the line of maximum signal strength. Alternatively, signal direction
can be determined from the difference in time of arrival of the incoming signals at
different elements of the antenna. A two-element antenna is typically used to cover
angles of ±60 degrees. To achieve 360-degree coverage, a six-element antenna can
be used.
A single mobile directional antenna can give only the bearing, not the position,
of a transmitting object. The single bearing can be combined with other informa-
tion, such as terrain data, to provide location. Such an antenna is generally used to
approach and locate objects up to several kilometers away. A common use of this
technique is tracking RF-tagged wildlife. The same basic technique is used by Lo-
Jack Corp., of Dedham, Massachusetts, in its system for finding stolen vehicles.
556
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

With two directional antennas spaced well apart, however, the position of a
transmitting device in a plane can be computed. In this method, also known as the
angle of arrival (AOA) method, transmitter position is determined from the known
(fixed) position of the receivers’ antennas and the angle of arrival of the signals with
respect to the antennas.
Angle measurement precision affects the accuracy of positioning calculations,
as does the geometry of the transmitting device and receiving antennas. For exam-
ple, if a transmitter is too near a line drawn between two receiving antennas, its
measured position could be off by more than the distance between the antennas.
Fortunately, multiple receiver antennas distributed throughout the area of coverage
enable the cellular system to select those antennas that introduce the smallest error.
Signal Times of Arrival
Similarly, the time difference of arrival (TDOA) between signals received at the
geographically disparate antennas can be used to determine position. Given the
speed of light and known transmit and receive times, the distance between the mo-
bile locator and receiver antenna can be calculated.
Accurate clocks are of the essence here, because an error of 1 μs in time corre-
sponds to an error of 300 meters in space. Also, all clocks used must be synchro-
nized, but as synchronizing the mobile locator clock is usually impractical, at least
three receiving antennas are required for the calculation. Sometimes the calcula-
tions produce ambiguous results, which can be resolved by considering signals re-
ceived at a fourth antenna. As with the angle of arrival method, the relative
positions of receivers and transmitter affect computational errors.
In an alternative time difference scheme, the locator and the antennas reverse
roles: the antennas are transmitters and the mobile locator is a receiver. This tech-
nique is known as forward link trilateration (FLT). This is relatively simple to im-
plement in some code-division multiple access (CDMA) wireless systems, where
the TDOA can be determined from the phase difference between pseudorandom
noise code sequences of 0s and 1s transmitted from two antennas.
Global Positioning System
As previously explained, a GPS relies on a constellation of 24 satellites. It, too, em-
ploys signal timing to determine position, but the mobile locator is a receiver and
the orbiting satellites are transmitters. The satellites transmit spread-spectrum sig-
nals on two frequency bands denoted L1 (1575.42 MHz) and L2 (1223.6 MHz). The
signals are modulated by two pseudorandom noise codes, the precision (P) code,
and coarse/acquisition (C/A) code. The GPS signal is further modulated with a
data message known as the GPS navigation message.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
557

Only the C/A code in the L1 band is used in civilian applications and hence is of
interest here.
To acquire the satellites’ signals, the GPS receiver generates a replica of the
satellites’ pseudorandom noise codes. The GPS navigation message can be demod-
ulated only if the replica can be matched and synchronized with the pseudo-
random noise codes received. If the receiver cannot match and synchronize its
replica, the GPS signal appears to the receiver as noise. Matching the pseudo-
random noise codes and using the satellites’ navigation message also enables the re-
ceiver to calculate the signal transmit time as well as the coordinates of the satellites.
The accuracy of GPS position calculations depends partly on measurement ac-
curacy and partly on satellite configuration. Measurement errors depend on phys-
ical parameters, such as ionospheric delays and orbital uncertainties and on the
selective availability factor, introduced by the U.S. Department of Defense to de-
grade satellite data for nonmilitary users. Total measurement errors are estimated
at 35 meters; without selective availability, they are reduced to 8 meters.
The configuration of the GPS satellites at the time of the measurements adds
further distortion. If those in sight are scattered throughout the sky, the measure-
ment error is multiplied by about 1.5. If they are clustered together, the multiplier is
5 or more.
To estimate actual position accuracy, it is necessary to combine the measure-
ment errors with the errors introduced by the spatial disposition of the satellites. To
determine its position, a GPS receiver calculates its x, y, and z coordinates as well as
the time the satellite signals arrive. Data must be acquired from at least four (and
preferably more) observable GPS satellites. When fewer than four satellites are in
view, in areas such as city canyons, one remedy is a hybrid approach, augmenting
GPS with the land-based measurements called “forward link trilateration.” To il-
lustrate, the use of two GPS satellites and two cellular base stations would suffice to
determine a locator’s position.
The unobstructed line of sight to the orbiting transmitters is important. The
satellite signals are weak (below 1015 W) when they arrive at a receiver’s antenna
and are further weakened upon entering a building. Moreover, a conventional GPS
receiver could take several minutes to acquire the satellite signals and, therefore,
tends to operate continuously rather than be turned on and off for each acquisition.
The drain on the receiver’s battery is significant.
Server-Assisted GPS
To combat the shortcomings of GPS, an innovative technique known as “server-
assisted GPS” was introduced in 1998. The idea is to place stationary servers
throughout the area of coverage to assist mobile receivers to acquire the GPS sig-
nals. In effect, the servers are stationary GPS receivers that enhance the mobile GPS
558
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

receiver’s capabilities by helping to carry their weak signals from satellites to loca-
tor. The server includes a radio interface for communicating with the mobile GPS
receiver and its own stationary GPS receiver, whose antenna has full view of the sky
and monitors signals continuously from all the satellites within view.
To ask a mobile GPS receiver for its position, the server feeds it satellite infor-
mation through the radio interface. Included in this information is a list of observ-
able GPS satellites and other data that enable the mobile receiver to synchronize
and match its pseudo-random noise code replicas with those of the satellites.
Within about a second, the GPS receiver collects sufficient information for geolo-
cation computation and sends the data back to the server. The server can then
combine this information with data from the satellites’ navigation message to de-
termine the position of the mobile device.
With the assisted GPS approach, the mobile receivers conserve power by not con-
tinuously tracking the satellites’ signals. Moreover, they have only to track the pseudo-
random noise code and not extract the satellites’ navigation message from the signal,
in effect becoming sensitive enough to acquire GPS signals inside most buildings.
In addition, the assisted version of the technology attains greater accuracy. Be-
cause the actual position of the stationary GPS receiver is known, the difference be-
tween that and its measured position can be used to calculate a correction to the
mobile receiver’s position. In other words, assisted GPS is inherently differential
GPS (DGPS), which counters some of the inaccuracy in civilian GPS service.
The most accurate GPS service is reserved for military use.
In June of 2000, Lucent Technologies Inc., of Murray Hill, New Jersey, an-
nounced that its wireless assisted GPS had attained an accuracy of better than 5 me-
ters outdoors—an achievement attributable to the DGPS capability of assisted GPS.
More good news in this field was announced by SiRF Technology Inc., of Santa
Clara, California, in the form of a postage-stamp-sized chipset (Star II) with built-
in DGPS. In addition to providing improved GPS capability, it also offers reduced
power consumption and greater accuracy, as well as performing well at handling
weak signals.
Enhanced Signal Strength
If no obstructions are present, computing the position of a mobile locator is
straightforward for both the signal timing and signal strength methods. When tim-
ing is used, the speed of light multiplied by the time a signal takes to propagate be-
tween the two points gives the distance between them.
For the signal strength method, the distance between two points can be deter-
mined from the signal attenuation between the points. However, direct line contact
seldom exists inside buildings, where signal attenuation is usually unknown and many
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
559

indirect paths between transmitter and receiver are likely. Although techniques exist
for reducing this multipath effect, the effect cannot be eliminated, and the errors it pro-
duces are difficult to predict. Multipath effects impede signal timing methods some-
what, but affect signal strength methods even more.
In addition, signal strength is very sensitive to antenna orientation, attenuation
by obstructions, and other operating conditions. In contrast, signal timing is unaf-
fected by antenna orientation and is less sensitive to attenuation.
Nonetheless, an enhanced signal strength (ESS) method that overcomes such
impediments as multipath effects, attenuation, and antenna orientation has allowed
the deployment of personal locator systems in PHPS service areas in Japan. Such a
system takes in three-dimensional information on the lay of the land, buildings,
elevated highways, railroads, and other obstructions and uses it to simulate the RF
signal propagation characteristics of every PHPS wireless transmitting antenna in
the area of interest. The location system center stores the results in an RF database.
The position of a mobile locator is determined by getting it to measure the sig-
nal strength of preferably three to five base stations. From this input plus informa-
tion from the base stations’ databases, the system can calculate the position of the
locator. The mean accuracy of the ESS is 40–50 meters. Inside large public build-
ings, with a PHPS base station on every floor, the system can indicate a specific
floor level. In subway and railroad stations, the availability of base stations makes
it possible to find an individual on a specific track.
The stand-alone locator used by Locus Corp.’s ESS method weighs only 58
grams and can operate for 16 days on a single battery charge. The ESS geolocation
capabilities are also available in a standard PHPS phone handset, in which the
firmware has been modified. Presently, researchers in Japan are investigating how
to apply ESS technology to other wireless phone systems.
Location Fingerprinting
Instead of exploiting signal timing or signal strength, a new technique from U.S.
Wireless Corp., of San Ramon, California, relies on signal structure characteristics.
Called “location fingerprinting,” it turns the multipath phenomenon to surpris-
ingly good use: by combining the multipath pattern with other signal characteris-
tics, it creates a signature unique to a given location.
U.S. Wireless’s proprietary RadioCamera system includes a signal signature
database of a location grid for a specific service area. To generate this database, a ve-
hicle drives through the coverage area transmitting signals to a monitoring site. The
system analyzes the incoming signals, compiles a unique signature for each square
in the location grid, and stores it in the database. Neighboring grid points are
spaced about 30 meters apart.
To determine the position of a mobile transmitter, the RadioCamera system
matches the transmitter’s signal signature to an entry in the database. Multipoint
560
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

signal reception is not required, although it is highly desirable. The system can use
data from only a single point to determine location. Moving traffic, including ve-
hicles, animals, and people and changes in foliage or weather do not affect the sys-
tem’s capabilities.
What’s PLS Good For?
In the United States, the need to provide wireless phone users with emergency 911
services has been one of the spurs to the development of location technologies.
Today, an E-911 emergency call made over a land line is routed to a public safety
answering point (PSAP), which matches the caller’s number to an entry in an au-
tomatic location information database. When the match is made, this database
provides the PSAP with the street address plus a location in a building—maybe the
floor or office of the caller handset. So quickly is the caller located that the emer-
gency crew can respond within 5 to 7 minutes on average.
The very mobility of wireless handsets rules out a simple database relationship
between phone number and location. In fact, the response to a wireless call can be
10 times longer than for a land-line call—far from ideal in an emergency.
Accordingly, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) directed
operators of wireless phone services to enable their E-911 services to locate callers.
The directive specified two phases. The first required an accuracy of several kilo-
meters by April 1998 and the second required an accuracy of 125 meters with 0.67
probability by 2002. Whereas the first phase needed only software changes to the
system, the second required the adoption of new location technologies.
The original FCC directive for Phase II also required support for existing hand-
sets, which implied that only network upgrades would be acceptable. However, a
network-only solution would preclude the use of emerging technologies, such as as-
sisted GPS, because that would require handset modification in addition to any net-
work infrastructure and software changes. All users might not bring in their handsets
for modification, severely complicating support for handsets already in service.
To ease the introduction of new technologies, in September 1999, the FCC
modified its original Phase II directive to permit handset-enabled solutions and
also to tighten the accuracy required. In addition to the many technical roadblocks
to implementing the E-911 directive, an even greater obstacle is cost. Upgrading all
the wireless networks will cost billions of dollars. Cost recovery is the central issue
for cellular service providers. Although wireless subscribers are the most likely
source of recouping the cost, the government has made no formal decisions yet.
Presently, only the U.S. government requires its wireless companies to add caller
geolocation to their E-911 services, but as the United States is a major telecommu-
nications market, many manufacturers of wireless telecommunications equipment
elsewhere are developing approaches to meet the commission’s directive.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
561

In an international development, a working group of the European Telecommu-
nications Standards Institute (ETSI), based in Sophia Antipolis, France, is currently
drafting a standard for supporting location services for the Global System for Mobile
Communications (GSM). Currently, GSM is the most common mobile wireless sys-
tem in the world and is available in more countries than any other wireless system.
Monitoring Tops Services List
Wireless E-911 just helps the individual, but monitoring the mentally impaired
and criminals could have even greater impacts on society at large. With the chang-
ing demographics of the developed world, the percentage of individuals over age 65
will soar over the next several decades. So will the number of elderly afflicted with
age-related mental impairments. Most of the eight million or so U.S. patients diag-
nosed with Alzheimer’s disease are over age 65.
Recall how personal locator technology helped a family find a mentally im-
paired elderly man, fortunately within 50 minutes or so. What if many hours passed
before anyone noticed that the man was missing? What if he had run into some kind
of difficulty during that time? Being mentally impaired, he would be unlikely to
press the panic button. An automatic polling system could solve this problem by
checking whether the man was within a defined polygonal area or not—the location
service and the family would be alerted whenever the man went out of this area.
As the population ages, the need for and cost of long-term care are likely to in-
crease, too. Today it costs over $70,000 per year in the United States to care for a pa-
tient in a nursing home. Systems that monitor the whereabouts of the mentally
impaired elderly could help them live longer in their communities and spend less
time in institutions.
Criminal justice is another area of social concern where personal locators could
intervene. The United States leads industrial nations in the percentage of its popu-
lation incarcerated. In 2003, according to U.S. Department of Justice statistics, al-
most 8.5 million people were serving time in U.S. jails and prisons, and a further 11
million were in parole and probation programs. In comparison, in Japan in 2003,
only 468,000 were serving prison terms while 423,000 were on parole or probation.
The high human and monetary cost of corrections could be reduced by new
technologies, such as PLSs, that would reduce prison populations and improve the
monitoring of parolees and persons on probation. First-generation monitoring sys-
tems, introduced in the mid-1980s, track the location of the offender in a very con-
fined area, such as the home. They enable the corrections system to verify that a
parolee stays there during specified periods, 6 P.M. to 6 A.M., for example, but by
day, when the offender is presumably at work, these systems can do nothing.
Second-generation monitoring systems do better. A tamperproof personal lo-
cator is fastened on the offender and tracked continuously and automatically over
562
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

a wide area. The newer system compares the actual with the supposed positions of
the offender, as stored in a database. If any violation or tampering with the locator
occurs, the system alerts the appropriate corrections or law enforcement agencies.
The goal is to verify that parolees and probationers comply with the directives
imposed by the corrections system as to where and when they should and should not
be by day and night. For example, a child molester is excluded from school areas,
and a stalker is excluded from areas near the home and workplace of the victim.
Storage of the offender’s ongoing whereabouts in an electronic file benefits law
enforcement agencies in other ways [6]. The record can be used to exclude or in-
clude a monitored offender as a suspect in a crime by comparing events at the
crime scene with the file entries.
Privacy, Security Still Issues
Confidentiality of information about a person’s whereabouts is a serious concern
for location technology. Databases already store large amounts of personal infor-
mation, including medical data, marketing preferences, and credit information.
Lax security could lead to serious abuse of this data. Access to a database of location
information could aggravate this situation by further exposing a person’s move-
ments. Moreover, it can have real-time implications. For example, someone could
find and harm a victim.
The location information stored in databases needs to be secured, as does the
tracking and locating process itself. Because RF communications are used, eaves-
dropping is a possibility. To reduce this risk, location information can be encrypted
or transmitted using coded signals employing such spread-spectrum technology as
CDMA.
Privacy protection can also depend on the technology used. For example, in
GPS or the ESS method, the location system uses information captured and trans-
mitted by the locator. Some devices are equipped with an option to block such
transmissions, preventing the system from locating the device. In network-based
locator systems that measure the locator’s signal characteristics without requiring
its cooperation, the only safe way for users to keep their locations secret is to turn
off the device.
More Work to Be Done
Despite the strides made in recent years in personal locator technologies, much
work remains to be done on their accuracy, locator miniaturization, battery life,
multipath effects, ability to penetrate buildings, and the economical use of RF
bandwidth. In addition, hybrid systems may be required to provide improved cov-
erage and open the door to new applications.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
563

Reducing the cost of deploying location technology is essential in removing
barriers to the use of location services. The concern over how to pay for E-911 ser-
vices demonstrates the need for cost reduction. However, if a rich set of location
services could share the expense of the additional infrastructure needed to support
these services, the cost per subscriber would be reduced. The new location tech-
nologies, as well as wireless data packet services that are now emerging around the
globe, offer opportunities for entrepreneurs to expand personal locator services.
In June 2002, Loc8.net (http://www.loc8.net), based in Seattle, Washington,
began to provide location-based services employing the ReFLEX two-way paging
wireless infrastructure. The services use wireless assisted GPS and include personal
locator services for Alzheimer patients and children, as well as commercial services
such as fleet management. The two-way paging systems using ReFLEX, developed
by Motorola Inc. of Schaumberg, Illinois, cover 98% of the U.S. population. The
Loc8.net system operates in emergency and paging modes.
Recent advances such as assisted GPS are likely to enhance GPS-based offender-
monitoring systems, reducing device size and power consumption, adding to ac-
curacy, and offering new capabilities such as in-building tracking. In the future,
personal locators could bring many other blessings. Equipping young children with
personal locators may offer parents greater peace of mind. Small enough locators
could even track pets.
Personal locators could also be helpful to medical patients where the locator
would be combined with a detector that monitors the patient’s vital signs. If the de-
tector picked up abnormalities in the signals, it would alert the nurse or physician
with both medical and location information. Such a service could offer a patient
greater freedom and a shorter stay in hospital or nursing home. Its greatest contri-
bution, however, may be peace of mind for patients, their families, and doctors.
Obviously, technical and commercial considerations will determine the success
of the technology. Issues of users’ privacy and confidentiality will, however, have to
be addressed first.
THE IMPLICATIONS OF COOKIES AND INTEGRATED PLATFORMS
Cookies have benefits and drawbacks. Used properly, they can enhance a visitor’s
experience of a Web site. Used carelessly, they can poison a user’s impression of a
site and even prompt some users to stay away forever.
All Web site integrated platform designers will eventually face the question of
whether and how to use cookies. Often, designers find themselves ill-equipped to
make this decision and so they employ cookies haphazardly or without regard for
user acceptance or data privacy.
564
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

This section is for anyone involved in Web site integrated platform design, not
just engineers, so it avoids addressing every low-level technical nuance of cookies.
Instead, it explores technical considerations, interface design challenges, and (per-
haps most importantly) ethical issues.
A Cookie in a Nutshell
When a visitor views a Web page, the server can assign that visitor a unique cus-
tomer ID, known as a cookie. The server asks the visitor’s browser program to “ac-
cept” the cookie—to save the ID number on the visitor’s computer. Then the
browser sends the cookie back to the Web server each time the visitor returns to
that page, or in some cases, to any page on the Web site.
The ID number tells the server that the visitor has visited the site in the past.
The server can use the ID number as a key to store any information the visitor has
provided in past visits, or any details it has observed about the visitor’s preferences
or browsing behavior. The ID number can save a visitor from having to repeatedly
log-in to a members-only site on each visit.
Why Cookies Provoke Controversy
Cookies (like any powerful data-gathering tool) can be abused. Many users fear,
sometimes justifiably, that a cookie they accept may allow unscrupulous Web site
operators to gather information about them and then use that data in an unautho-
rized manner. These users set their browser software to warn them of each incom-
ing cookie—and many users reject every cookie, without exception.
Web site integrated platform designers should note this sometimes justified mis-
trust in cookies and design accordingly.
Poor Support of Cookies in Browsers
Part of the climate of mistrust surrounding cookies stems from the poor cookie in-
terface provided by current Web browser software. Both Netscape and Microsoft
browsers can consult users before accepting a cookie, and many users choose to
browse with this preference turned on.
Currently, a visitor who rejects a cookie on a Web site integrated platform but
continues to browse experiences a relentless barrage of cookie requests. Often, even
visitors who accept a cookie are still bombarded by offers of more cookies from the
same site. On many sites, this badgering can include multiple cookies per page,
cookies that change gratuitously even once accepted, and cookies on pages that
don’t even require cookies for any apparent reason. As feedback from users reaches
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
565

the designers of browser software, look for browsers to add the following features
to help users cope with this overuse of cookies:
Reject all cookies option
Better choices when asked
Cookie management tools
Reject All Cookies Option
Today, browsers present only the annoying false choice between “Accept all cook-
ies without asking” and “Ask about each cookie.” Users should expect to see these
choices expanded to include a third “Reject all cookies without asking” option.
Better Choices When Asked
For users who choose notification, browsers should offer a more flexible set of
choices regarding what happens after a cookie has been accepted or rejected. Specif-
ically, the user should be able to say “I want to accept/reject this cookie, and then
don’t ask me again...”
About this particular cookie on this Web site integrated platform
About any cookie on this Web site integrated platform
About any cookie on this page
Cookie Management Tools
Finally, expect to see browsers offer a mechanism that lets users view and manage
the set of cookies they’ve collected. Certain browsers, such as the most recent re-
lease of Microsoft Internet Explorer, have begun to add these or similar cookie
management features. Until a majority of common browsers have incorporated
these options, integrated platform designers should plan to minimize the number
and type of cookies a visitor encounters on a site.
WINTEL INSIDE, OR HOW YOUR COMPUTER IS WATCHING YOU
Privacy Foundation has discovered that it is possible to add “Web bugs” to Mi-
crosoft Word documents. A Web bug could allow an author to track where a doc-
ument is being read and how often. In addition, the author can watch how a bugged
document is passed from one person to another or from one organization to an-
other. Some possible uses of Web bugs in Word documents include
Detecting and tracking leaks of confidential documents from a company
Tracking possible copyright infringement of newsletters and reports
566
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Monitoring the distribution of a press release
Tracking the quoting of text when it is copied from one Word document to a
new document
Web bugs are made possible by the ability in Microsoft Word of a document to
link to an image file that is located on a remote Web server. Because only the URL
of the Web bug is stored in a document and not the actual image, Microsoft Word
must fetch the image from a Web server each and every time the document is
opened. This image-linking feature puts a remote server in the position to monitor
when and where a document file is being opened. The server knows the IP address
and host name of the computer that is opening the document. A host name will typ-
ically include a company name if a computer is located at a business. The host name
of a home computer usually has the name of a user’s Internet service provider (ISP).
An additional issue, and one that could magnify the potential surveillance, is
that Web bugs in Word documents can also read and write browser cookies be-
longing to Internet Explorer. Cookies could allow an author to match up the com-
puter viewer of a Word document to their visits to the author’s Web site.
Web bugs are used extensively for tracking by Internet advertising companies
on Web pages and in HTML-based email messages. They are typically 1-by-1 pixel
in size to make them invisible on the screen to disguise the fact that they are used
for tracking.
Although the Privacy Foundation has found no evidence that Web bugs are
being used in Word documents today, there is little to prevent their use. Short of re-
moving the feature that allows linking to Web images in Microsoft Word, there
does not appear to be a good preventative solution. However, the Privacy Founda-
tion has recommended to Microsoft that cookies be disabled in Microsoft Word
through a software patch. In addition to Word documents, Web bugs can also be
used in Excel and PowerPoint documents.
Detailed Description
Microsoft Word has, from the beginning, supported the ability to include picture
files in Word documents. Originally, the picture files would reside on the local
hard drive and then be copied into a document as part of the Word.doc file. How-
ever, beginning with Word 97, Microsoft provided the ability to copy images from
the Internet. All that is required to use this feature is to know the URL (Web ad-
dress) of the image. Besides copying the Web image into the document, Word also
allows the Web image to be linked to the document via its URL. Linking to the
image results in smaller Word document files because only a URL needs to be
stored in the file instead of the entire image. When a document contains a linked
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
567

Web image, Word will automatically fetch the image each time the document is
opened. This is necessary to display the image on the screen or to print it out as part
of the document.
Because a linked Web image must be fetched from a remote Web server, the
server is in a position to track when a Word document is opened and possibly by
whom. Furthermore, it is possible to include an image in a Word document solely
for the purpose of tracking. Such an image is called a Web bug. Web bugs today are
already used extensively by Internet marketing companies on Web pages and em-
bedded in HTML email messages.
When a Web bug is embedded in a Word document, the following information
is sent to the remote Web server when the document containing the bug is opened:
The full URL of the Web bug image
The IP address and the host name of the computer requesting the Web bug
A Web browser cookie (optional)
This information is typically saved in an ordinary log file by Web server software.
Because the author of the document has control of the URL of the document,
they can put whatever information they choose in this URL. For example, a URL
might contain a unique document ID number or the name of the person to whom
the document was originally sent.
These tracking abilities might be used in any number of ways. In most cases, the
reader of a particular document will not know that the document is bugged or that the
Web bug is surreptitiously sending identifying information back through the Internet.
One example of this tracking ability is to monitor the path of a confidential
document, either within or beyond a company’s computer network. The confi-
dential document could be bugged to “phone home” each time it is opened. If the
company’s Web server ever received a “server hit” from an IP address for the bug
outside the organization, then it could learn immediately about the leak. Because
the server log would include the host name of the computer where the document
was opened, a company could know that the organization that received the leaked
document was a competitor or media outlet, for example.
All original copies of a confidential document could also be numbered so that
a company could track the source of a leak. A unique serial number could be en-
coded in the query string of the Web bug URL. If the document is leaked, the server
hit for the Web bug will indicate which copy was leaked.
A serial number could be added to a Web bug in a document either manually
(right before a copy of a document is saved) or automatically through a simple util-
ity program. The utility program would scan a document for the Web bug URL and
add a serial number in the query string. A Perl script of less than 20 lines of code
could easily be written to do this sort of serialization.
568
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Another use of Web bugs in Word documents is to detect copyright infringe-
ment. For example, a publishing company could bug all outgoing copies of its
newsletter. The Web bugs in a newsletter could contain unique customer ID num-
bers to detect how widely an individual newsletter is copied and distributed.
A third possible use of Web bugs is for market research purposes. For example,
a company could place Web bugs in a press release distributed as a Word docu-
ment. The server log hits for the Web bugs would then tell the company what or-
ganizations have actually viewed the press release. The company could also observe
how a press release is passed along within an organization or to other organizations.
In an academic setting, Web bugs might be used to detect plagiarism. A docu-
ment could be bugged before it is distributed. An invisible Web bug could be placed
within each paragraph in the document. If text were to be cut and pasted from the
document, it is likely that a Web bug would be picked up also and copied into the
new document
To place a Web bug in a Word document is relatively simple. These are the
steps in Word:
1.
Select the Insert | Picture | From File menu command.
2.
Type in the URL of the Web bug in the File Name field of the Insert Picture
dialog box.
3.
Select the Link to File option of the Insert button.
The use of Web bugs in Word does point to a more general problem. Any file
format that supports automatic linking to Web pages or images could lead to the
same problem. Software engineers should take this privacy issue into consideration
when designing new file formats.
This issue is potentially critical for music file formats such as MP3 files where
piracy concerns are high. For example, it is easy to imagine an extended MP3 file
format that supports embedded HTML for showing song credits, cover artwork,
lyrics, and so on. The embedded HTML with embedded Web bugs could also be
used to track how many times a song is played and by which computer, identified
by its IP address.
DATA MINING FOR WHAT?
The use of data mining for IW is growing rapidly. The number of data-mining con-
sultants, as well as the number of commercial tools available to the “nonexpert” user,
are also quickly increasing. It is becoming easier than ever to collect datasets and
apply data-mining tools to them. As more and more nonexperts seek to exploit this
technology to help with their business, it becomes increasingly important that they
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
569

understand the underlying assumptions and biases of these tools. There are a num-
ber of factors to consider before applying IW data mining to a database. In particu-
lar, there are important issues regarding the data that should be examined before
proceeding with the data-mining process. Although these issues may be well-known
to the data-mining expert, the nonexpert is often unaware of their importance.
Now let’s focus on three specific issues. Each issue is illustrated through the use
of brief examples. Also, insight is provided for each issue on how it might be prob-
lematic, and suggestions are made on which techniques can be used for approach-
ing such situations.
The purpose here is to help the nonexpert in IW data mining better understand
some of the important issues of the field. Particular concern is also established here
with characteristics of the data that may affect the overall usefulness of the IW
data-mining results. Some recent experiences, and the lessons learned from them,
are described. These lessons, together with the accompanying discussion, will help
to both guide the IW data-collection process and better understand what kinds of
results to expect.
One cannot blindly “plug-and-play” in IW data mining. There are a number of
factors to consider before applying data mining to any particular database. This
general warning is not new. Many of these issues are well known by both the data
mining experts and a growing body of nonexpert, data owners. For instance, the
data should be “clean,” with consistent values across records and containing as few
errors as possible. There should not be a large number of missing or incomplete
records or fields. It should be possible to represent the data in the appropriate syn-
tax for the required data-mining tool (attribute/value pairs).
This section will discuss three specific, but less well-known, issues. Each will be
illustrated through real-world experiences. The first is the impact of data distribu-
tion. Many IW data-mining techniques perform class or group discrimination and
rely on the data-containing representative samples of all relevant classes. Some-
times, however, obtaining samples of all classes is surprisingly difficult. The second
issue is one of applicability and data relevance. High-quality data, combined with
good data-mining tools, does not ensure that the results can be applied to the de-
sired goal. Finally, this section will discuss some of the issues associated with using
text (narrative fields in reports) in data mining. The current technology cannot fully
exploit arbitrary text, but there are certain ways text can be used.
These three issues are not new to the field. Indeed, for many IW data-mining ex-
perts, these are important issues that are often well understood. For the nonexpert,
however, these issues can be subtle or appear deceivingly simple or unimportant. It is
tempting to collect a large amount of clean data, massage the representation into the
proper format, hand the data tape to the consultant, and expect answers to the most
pressing business questions. Although this section does not describe all of the poten-
570
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

tial problems one might face, it does describe some important issues, illustrate why
they might be problematic, and suggest ways to effectively deal with these situations.
Two Examples
The discussion of data distribution, information relevance, and use of text will be
illustrated with examples from two current projects. The first involves a joint
project with the Center for Advanced Aviation Systems Development (CAASD) in
the domain of aviation safety. In this project, one of the primary goals is to help
identify and characterize precursors to potentially dangerous situations in the avi-
ation world. One particular way to do this is to mine accident and incident reports
involving aircraft for patterns that identify common precursors to dangerous situ-
ations. For any type of flight—commercial, cargo, military, or pleasure—accidents
(and often less serious incidents) are investigated. A report is filed containing a
variety of information such as time of day, type of aircraft, weather, pilot age, and
pilot experience. These reports often include the inspector’s written summary. One
task involves using collections of these reports to try to identify and characterize
those situations in which accidents occur. A source of such reports is the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).
Another project we are currently working on involves targeting vehicles for law
enforcement. In this particular instance, vehicles (mostly passenger vehicles and
small trucks) arrive at an inspection stop. At this primary stop, a brief inspection is
conducted to decide if further examination is necessary. There is typically a con-
stant flow of cars to be processed, so excessive time cannot be taken. This first in-
spection typically takes 20 to 30 seconds. If the primary inspector feels it is
warranted (and there are any number of reasons that justify this), any vehicle can
be pulled out for secondary inspection. This secondary inspection and background
check is more thorough. If the driver or vehicle is found to be in violation of the
particular laws under consideration, then information concerning both driver and
vehicle is collected and entered into the “violators” database. The goal of this
project is to find a way to better profile these violating drivers and vehicles, so that
the primary inspectors can more accurately identify likely suspects and send them
for secondary inspection.
Data Distribution
Let’s first discuss the issue of data distribution. Of particular concern is the situa-
tion in which the data lacks certain types of examples. Consider the aviation safety
domain. One goal of the project in this domain is to characterize situations that re-
sult in accident flights. An obvious source of information is the NTSB’s database of
accident reports.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
571

This database does not contain records about uneventful flights (the NTSB is an
accident investigation agency). That is, the data are unevenly distributed between
records of accident flights and records of uneventful flights.
This lack of reports about uneventful flights has important consequences for a
significant class of data-mining techniques. When given the data containing only
accident flights, each of the approaches in this class concludes that all flights con-
tain accidents. Such a hypothesis is clearly incorrect. The majority of the flights are
uneventful. Also, such a hypothesis is not useful because it does not offer any new
insight on how to differentiate the accident flights from the uneventful ones. Fur-
thermore, some of the most popular IW data-mining tools, including decision tree
inducers, neural networks, and nearest neighbor algorithms, fall into this class of
techniques. (They assume that the absence of uneventful flights in the data implies
that they do not exist in the world.)
To continue this discussion, it is necessary to first define some terms used in
data mining. The “target concept” is the concept you are trying to learn. In the avi-
ation domain, the target concept is accident flights. Consequently, each example of
an accident flight (each accident report in the database) is called a member of the
target concept, and each uneventful flight is a nonmember of the target concept.
The NTSB data do not contain records of uneventful flights. That is, there are no
descriptions of nonmembers of the target concept. The problem of learning to dif-
ferentiate members from nonmembers is called a “supervised concept learning
problem.”
It is called supervised because each example in the data contains a label indicating
its membership status for the target concept.
For example, a supervised concept learner uses a training sample as input. A
training sample is a list of examples, labeled as members or nonmembers, which is
assumed to be representative of the whole universe. The supervised concept learner
produces hypotheses that discriminate the members and nonmembers in the sam-
ple. Many IW data-mining tools use supervised concept learners to find patterns.
Let’s say that a supervised concept learner makes the closed-world assumption
that the absence of nonmembers in the data implies that they do not exist in the
universe. Why do some of the popular learners make the closed-world assumption?
The case of decision tree learners provides a good illustration. These learners par-
tition the training sample into pure subsamples, containing either all member or all
nonmembers. The partitioning of the training sample drives the rule generation.
That is, the learners introduce conditions that define partitions of the training sam-
ple; each outcome of a condition represents a different subsample. Ultimately, the
conditions will become part of the discrimination rules. Unfortunately, if the input
572
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

sample contains only data that are members of the target class, the training sample
is already pure and the decision tree learner has no need to break up the sample fur-
ther. As a consequence, the rules commit to classifying all new data as members of
the target class before conducting any tests. Thus, in the aviation project, all flights
would be classified as accident flights, because the learner never saw any unevent-
ful flights. This is not to say that learners employing the closed-world assumption
are inappropriate in all, or even most situations. For many problems, when repre-
sentative data from all the concepts involved is available, these learners are both ef-
fective and efficient.
Applicability and Relevance of Data
Even when collected data is of high quality (clean, few missing values, proper form,
etc.) and the IW data-mining algorithms can be successfully run, there still may be
a problem of relevance. It must be possible to apply the new information to the sit-
uation at hand. For instance, if the data mining produces typical “if...then...” rules,
then it must be possible to measure the values of the attributes in the condition
(“if” part) of those rules. The information about those conditions must be available
at the time the rules will be used. Consider a simple example where the goal is to
predict if a dog is likely to bite. Assume data are collected on the internal anatomy
of various dogs, and each dog is labeled by its owner as either “likely” or “unlikely”
to bite. Assume further that the data-mining tools work splendidly, and it is dis-
covered that the following (admittedly contrived) rules apply: Rule 1: If the rear
molars of the dog are worn, the dog is unlikely to bite. Rule 2: If the mandibular
muscles are over-developed, the dog is likely to bite.
These may seem like excellent rules. However, if faced with a strange, angry dog
late at night, these rules would be of little help in deciding whether you are in dan-
ger. There are two reasons for this: First, there is a time constraint in applying the
rules. There are only a few seconds to check if these rules apply. Second, even with-
out such a constraint, the average person probably can’t make judgments about
molar wear and muscle development. The lesson here is that just because data are
collected about biting (and nonbiting) dogs, it does not mean one can predict
whether a dog will bite in every situation.
In the vehicle-targeting task described earlier, a similar situation occurred. The
initial goal was very specific: develop a set of rules, a profile, that the primary in-
spectors could use to determine which vehicles to pull out for secondary inspection.
As mentioned, much more information is collected concerning actual violators
than for those who are just passed through the checkpoint. Thus, the initial goal
was to profile likely violation suspects based on the wealth of information about
that group. The problem, noticed before any analysis was done, was that the infor-
mation that would make up the profiles would not be applicable to the desired task.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
573

As mentioned, the primary inspectors have only a short amount of time to decide
whether a particular vehicle should be pulled out for secondary inspection. During
that time, they have access to only superficial information. That is, the primary in-
spectors don’t have quick access to much of the background knowledge concerning
the driver and vehicle, yet this is precisely the knowledge collected during seizures
initially chosen to build profiles. Thus, they have no way to apply classification rules
that measure features such as “number of other cars owned,” “bad credit history,”
or “known to associate with felons” (types of data collected on violation vehicles
and drivers).
The problem here is not that the data is “bad,” or even that the data is all from
the target concept. The problem is that the data cannot be applied to the initially
specified task. How does this situation come about in general? The answer involves
a fairly common situation. Often, IW data mining begins with data that has been
previously collected, usually for some other purpose. The assumption is made that
since the collected data is in the same general domain as the current problem, it
must be usable to solve this problem. As the examples show, this is often not the
case. In the vehicle-targeting task, the nature of the law enforcement system is such
that a great deal of information is collected and recorded on violators. No one ever
intended to use this information as a screening tool at stop points. Thus, it is im-
portant to understand the purpose for which a set of data was collected. Does it ad-
dress the current situation directly? Similarly, when data is collected for the specific
task at hand, careful thought must go into collecting the relevant data.
There are two primary ways to address this problem of data irrelevancy. The
most obvious is to use additional data from another source. It may be that differ-
ent data already exists to address the primary question. For instance, returning to
the example of the dogs, general aggressiveness characteristics for different breeds
of dogs have been determined. Using this data, rather than the original data, de-
ciding how likely a dog is to bite is reduced to the problem of determining its breed
(often done by quick visual inspection). When the necessary data does not already
exist, it may be necessary to collect it. Some of this data collection will likely take
place in the vehicle-targeting project. In this case, data must be collected that relates
directly to the information available to the inspectors at the initial inspection. For
example, the demeanor of the driver may be an important feature. Of course, col-
lecting new data may be a very expensive process. First, the proper attributes to col-
lect must be determined. This often involves discussions and interviews with
experts in the field. Then the actual data-collection process may be quite costly. It
may be that an inordinate amount of manpower is required, or that certain features
are difficult to measure.
If additional data cannot be obtained, there is another, often less desirable way to
address this issue. It may be possible to alter the initial goals or questions. This will
clearly require problem-specific domain expertise to address a few simple questions:
574
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Is there another way to address the same issue? Is there another relevant issue that can
be addressed directly with this data? In the vehicle-targeting domain, only those at-
tributes that were directly accessible to the inspector were used. A good example
would be looking at simple statistical patterns for time of day, weather, season, and
holidays. This is not a deep analysis and doesn’t quite “profile” likely violators, but it
makes progress toward the initial goal. Another alternative is to use the violator data-
base to profile suspects for other situations. It may be that profiles of certain types of
violators bear similarities to other criminal types. Perhaps this information can be
used elsewhere in law enforcement. Admittedly, this latter solution does not address
the initial issue: helping the primary inspectors decide who to pull out for secondary
inspection. However, it may not be possible to achieve that goal with this data and the
given time constraints. It is important to understand this potential limitation early in
the process, before a great deal of time, effort, and money has been invested.
Combining Text and Structured Data
IW data mining is most often performed on data that is highly structured. Highly
structured data has a finite, well-defined set of possible values, as is most often seen
in databases. An example of structured data is a database containing records de-
scribing aircraft accidents that includes fields such as the make of an airplane and
the number of hours flown by the pilot. Another source of valuable yet often un-
used information is unstructured text. Although more difficult to immediately use
than structured data, data mining should make use of these available text resources.
Text is often not used during IW data mining because it requires a preprocess-
ing step before it can be used by available tools such as decision trees, association
rule methods, or clustering. These techniques require structured fields with clearly
defined sets of possible values that can be quickly counted and matched. Such tech-
niques sometimes also assume that values are ordered and have well-defined dis-
tances between values. Text is not so well behaved. Words may have multiple
meanings depending on context (polysemy); multiple words may mean the same
thing (synonymy) or may be closely related (hypernymy). These are difficult issues
that are not yet totally solved, but useful progress has been made and techniques
have been developed so that text can be considered a resource for data mining.
One way to exploit text, borrowed from information retrieval, is to use a
vector-space approach. Information retrieval is concerned with methods for effi-
ciently retrieving documents relevant to a given request or query. The standard
method for doing this is to build weight vectors describing each document and
then compare the document vector to the query vector. More specifically, this
method first identifies all the unique words in the document collection. Then this
list of words is used to build vectors of words and associated weights for the query
and each of the documents. Using the simplest weighting method, this vector has
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
575

a value of 1 at position x when the xth vocabulary word is present in the docu-
ment; otherwise it has a value of 0. Every document and query is now described by
a vector of length equal to the size of the vocabulary. Now each document vector
can be compared to every other document by comparing their word vectors. A
cosine-similarity measure (which projects one vector along another in each
dimension) will then provide a measure of similarity between the two corre-
sponding documents. Surprisingly, although this approach discards the structure
in the text and ignores the problems of polysemy and synonymy altogether, it has
been found to be a simple, fast baseline for identifying relevant documents.
A variant of this vector-space approach was used on the airline safety data to
identify similar accidents based on a textual description of the flight history. The
narrative description of each accident was represented as a vector and compared to
all other narratives using the approach described earlier. One group of accidents
identified by this technique can be described as planes that were “veering to the left
during takeoff.” The following accident reports were found to be similar in this
respect:
MIA01LA055: During takeoff roll he or she applied normal right rudder to
compensate for engine torque. The airplane did not respond to the pilot input
and drifted to the left.
ANC00LA099: Veered to the left during the first attempt to take off.
ANC00LA041: Pilot added full power and the airplane veered to the left.
Identifying this kind of a group would be difficult using fixed fields alone. This
technique can also be used to find all previous reports similar to a given accident or
to find records with a certain combination of words. This can be a useful tool for
identifying patterns in the flight history of the accident so that the events leading up
to different accidents can be more clearly identified.
The information stored in text can be extracted in other ways as well. A collec-
tion of documents and a taxonomy of terms are combined so that maximal word
or category associations can be calculated. It could also be used in the airline safety
domain to calculate, for example, which class of mechanical malfunctions occurred
most often in winter weather.
Another approach relevant to IW data mining from text is information extrac-
tion (IE). IE concerns techniques for extracting specific pieces of information from
text and is the focus of the DARPA Message Understanding Conference (MUC). The
biggest problem with IE systems is that they are time-consuming to build and do-
main specific. To address this problem a number of tools have (and continue to be)
developed for learning templates from examples such as CRYSTAL, RAPIER, and
AutoSlog. IE tools could be used in the airline safety data to pull out information
that is often more complete in the text than in the fixed fields. This work is geared
576
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

toward filling templates from text alone, but often the text and structured fields
overlap in content.
An example of just such an overlap can be found in the NTSB accident and in-
cident records. The data in the NTSB accident and incident records contains struc-
tured fields that together allow the investigator to identify human factors that may
be important to the accident scene. However, it was found that these fields are
rarely filled out completely enough to make a classification: 95% of the records that
were identified as involving people could only be classified as “unknown.” IE meth-
ods could be used to reduce this large unknown rate by pulling information out of
the narrative, which described if a person in the cockpit made a mistake. Such an
approach could make use of a dictionary of synonyms for “mistake” and a parser
for confirming if the mistake was an action made by the pilot or copilot and not in
a sentence describing, for example, the maintenance methods.
Although IW data mining has primarily been concerned with structured data,
text is a valuable source of information that should not be ignored. Although auto-
matic systems that completely understand the text are a still a long way off, one of
the surprising recent results is that simple techniques, which sometimes completely
ignore or only partially address the problems of polysemy, synonymy, and complex
structure of text, still provide a useful first cut for mining information from text.
Useful techniques, such as the vector-space approach and learned templates from
information extraction, can allow IW data miners to make use of the increasing
amount of text available online.
THE INTERNET IS BIG BROTHER
How prepared is your business for the future? As the Internet expands its reach to
the farthest corners of the globe, companies will find themselves dealing with in-
creasingly complex challenges such as Big Brother.
In the Internet of tomorrow you can be sure of at least three things. First, the
experience will not be anything like what we’re familiar with. Second, despite this,
little will change in the next 10 years. Third, the business environment of the future
will be much less forgiving, so companies that do not take the new technologies se-
riously are putting themselves at risk.
Fiber Optics
During the 1990s, everyone heard about fiber-optic technology’s potential for in-
creasing bandwidth and enhancing performance. Recently, better installation tech-
niques and a wider range of fiber-compatible equipment have made fiber both
easily available and less expensive than it used to be.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
577

Although fiber will remain a good choice for backbones and carrier-class in-
terconnections, most companies will probably continue to run copper, at least for
the foreseeable future. After all, few businesses want to bear even slightly higher
costs for fiber installation and networking gear. Instead, expect to see more com-
panies upgrading their existing copper technology. Expect them to get away with it,
too, because for most practical purposes, copper can handle the load.
Broadband
High-speed Internet connections, especially the cable modem [7] and DSL tech-
nologies lumped together under the “broadband” heading, are increasing in num-
ber at an astonishing rate, at least in first world countries like the United States and
within the European Union. The biggest problem the providers face seems to be
keeping up with demand. The current waiting list of DSL and cable access orders
probably won’t be caught up until 2006. Even then, North America will be home to
wide swaths of rural territory without high-speed access.
This scenario isn’t likely to change in the next decade, either. Unless govern-
ments (Big Brother) insist that Internet carriers supply rural service at a loss (as
American telephone companies were ordered to do with voice service), broadband
providers will have little incentive to deploy their technologies on a wide scale.
The increasing availability of broadband wireless connections is another revo-
lution that’s already under way, although it won’t make a serious difference anytime
soon either. In its infant state, broadband wireless, with its ability to support certain
e-business applications, is best suited to a LAN-like role. It will be a while before we
see a device that combines the size of the cell phone with the power of the laptop.
A Truly Global Internet
The days of Americans (Big Brother) ruling the Internet are not over by a long shot.
Even so, the next decade will bring an explosion of Internet usage in places such as
Asia and Africa. As the Internet becomes more pervasive, businesses will face an
even greater shortage of skilled employees. American businesses that have tradi-
tionally relied on a foreign labor market may be caught short when those workers
can find jobs at home.
As always, the spoils will go to those businesses that think ahead. We are going
to see big changes, so start preparing yourself for a world ruled by broadband, cul-
turally neutral, easily maintained wireless access. That means considering technical
issues and different standards of civil rights, conduct, and privacy. The companies
that do will have a head start on the competition for the next decade and maybe the
next century.
578
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

THE WIRELESS INTERNET: FRIEND OR FOE?
The wireless networking engineer was working her way through the IW test range
when she stopped and looked at her computer screen. Another unsecured access
point, she noted. She was testing the roaming capabilities of 802.11b network de-
vices, but as she moved their portable computers through the areas covered by the
devices, other access points popped up.
This isn’t surprising, because one of the nice things about wireless Internet is
the ability to install the products quickly and easily, with a minimum amount of
configuration. Clearly, some people around her test site (which is being kept name-
less to protect the guilty) took advantage of the ease of installation but never got
around to protecting their internetworks.
If Internetwork managers don’t pay attention to the fact that the default con-
dition of wireless access points is to let anyone into the network, then they may be
doing just that. Those people who constitute “anyone” can include people across
the street, your competitors parked outside, and malcontents who want to use your
network to shield their activities. It’s like installing a network port on the lamppost
outside your building and asking anyone who walks by to plug in. 
Fortunately, if you plan accordingly, securing your wireless Internet isn’t very
difficult. It just requires network administrators to take a few simple steps. First,
turn off the broadcasting of your access point’s extended service set identification,
which lets anyone with a wireless Internet card know the address of your wireless
Internet access point. Having that ID makes logging-in even easier than it already
is. Second, turn on encryption. All 802.11b access points support the wireless en-
cryption protocol (WEP), which can handle 40- and 128-bit encryption. Third,
turn on your ability to use access control lists, available in some access points. This
allows you to keep a list of acceptable users according to the medium access control
(MAC) address of their network card.
These steps will keep most wireless networks reasonably secure. It’s convenient
that these capabilities are built into most wireless Internet access points—the only
exception being some early Apple AirPorts, which can be upgraded.
You must also deal with the fact that wireless access points are inexpensive and
that getting them running is a no-brainer. This means that pretty much anyone on
your network can pick up a wireless access point at Best Buy, plug it into the cor-
porate network, and use it. You’d then have an entry point into your network that’s
open to anyone with a wireless Internet card. Fortunately, if you already have a
wireless Internet, you probably also have the management software that lets you lo-
cate all access points, including those that aren’t authorized, and you can either take
them off the network or secure them.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
579

Another problem is that, without limits on what users are allowed to do and
where they’re allowed to go, you lose control. So even more security is needed. One
solution is to move to a third-party provider of wireless security products, such as
WRQ, whose NetMotion product requires a login that’s authenticated through
Windows NT. It uses much better encryption than is available under wired equiv-
alent privacy (WEP) and it offers some security management features, such as the
ability to remotely disable a wireless Internet card’s connection to the network.
Such capabilities require a bit more attention from managers, but the result can be
a wireless Internet that’s more secure than the wired one it’s attached to.
Stories abound of employees who bought their own wireless access points, in-
stalled them, and claimed they were “just testing” when they were discovered.
Meanwhile, these employees opened their companies’ networks to anyone (friend,
foe, hacker, or spy) who cared to enter.
How do you find these people who would expose your network? Oddly
enough, the easiest way is for your company to start using wireless Internetwork-
ing—in an organized fashion. That eliminates the need for employees to buy their
own access points, and it gives the IT department the tools it needs to detect and
eliminate them.
SUMMARY
Attacks on information technology are unsettling and easy to carry out. The means
are relatively inexpensive, easy to smuggle, virtually untraceable, and completely
deniable. This, coupled with the fact that the civilian networks, which are most at-
tractive to terrorists, are also the most vulnerable, makes infowar the perfect
weapon in the terrorist arsenal of the future.
Currently, the security solutions lag far behind the potential threat. This situa-
tion is likely to continue until the threat becomes reality, forcing a reassessment of
preventive measures. The basic concepts and principles that must be understood
and can help realistically guide the process of moving forward in dealing with the
surveillance tools for the IW of the future are as follows.
Conclusions
Fortunately, the U.S. military senior leadership is becoming involved in IW,
and, in many cases, taking the lead on this perplexing issue. With this empha-
sis, they must carefully assess the vulnerabilities of the systems they employ.
Systems proposals must be thoroughly evaluated and prioritized by highest
value payoff. This needs to be accomplished through a more balanced invest-
ment strategy by the U.S. military that conquers our institutional prejudices
that favor killer systems weapons.
580
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Offensive systems will be at risk if the U.S. military does not apply sufficient de-
fensive considerations in this process.
The electromagnetic spectrum will be their Achilles’ heel if the U.S. military
does not pay sufficient attention to protecting their use of the spectrum and, at
the same time, recognize that they must take away the enemy’s ability to see the
U.S. forces and to control their own forces.
Interdict opportunities exist for adversaries to intrude on U.S. military systems.
Other nations have realized the value of offensive applications of the IW arse-
nal of the future; therefore, the U.S. military must attack the issue from two di-
rections, offensively and defensively, with almost equal accentuation.
The IW arsenal of the future adds a fourth dimension of warfare to those of air,
land, and sea. When the Soviets developed a nuclear program after World War
II, the United States was caught by surprise. In this new dimension, the U.S.
military must stay ahead.
As with so many other design issues, taking the user’s experience into account
suggests how to proceed with implementing cookies.
If the data contains examples of only a single class, extra work may be involved,
as some popular types of data-mining methods may not be appropriate.
Although automated understanding of natural language is not available, an in-
creasing number of techniques can be used for exploiting text data.
An important feature of bandwidth/packet management technology is its
stealthy wireless internet security features that render complete invisibility and
protection for end users from network hackers and other wireless users sharing
the same access points.
An Agenda for Action
It must be pointed out that although such IW preparation measures can provide a
minimum level of protection against tampering, there is no such thing as 100% se-
curity. What is more, the solutions are sure to lag behind the potential threat until
the threat becomes reality. At present the cost of protection is higher than the cost
of attack, and until an attack on a major system actually happens, organizations are
unlikely to take security measures as seriously as they could or should. The U.S.
government needs to set an agenda for action that goes beyond the work already
done in preparation for defending against the surveillance tools for IW of the fu-
ture. Action steps should include, but not be limited to the 11 areas shown in Table
F18.1 in Appendix F.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
581

CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Fortunately, the U.S. military senior leadership is becoming
involved in IW and, in many cases, taking the lead on this perplexing issue.
With this emphasis, they must carefully assess the vulnerabilities of the systems
they employ.
2.
True or False? Interdict opportunities exist for adversaries to intrude on U.S.
military systems.
3.
True or False? Offensive systems will be at risk if the U.S. military does not
apply sufficient defensive considerations in this process.
4.
True or False? The IW arsenal of the future adds a fourth dimension of warfare
to those of air, land, and sea. When the Soviets developed a nuclear program
after World War II, the United States was caught by surprise. In this new
dimension, the U.S. military must stay ahead.
5.
True or False? An important feature of bandwidth/packet management tech-
nology is its stealthy wireless Internet security features that render complete
invisibility and protection for end users from network hackers and other wire-
less users sharing the same access points.
Multiple Choice
1.
As feedback from users reaches the designers of browser software, look for
browsers to add the following features to help users cope with this overuse of
cookies, except:
A. Reject all cookies option
B.
Better choices when asked
C. Accept all cookies option
D. Cookie management tools
2.
Specifically, the user should be able to say “I want to accept/reject this cookie,
and then don’t ask me again...,” except:
A. About this particular cookie on this Web site integrated platform
B.
About all cookies
C. About any cookie on this Web site integrated platform
D. About any cookie on this page
582
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

3.
Some possible uses of Web bugs in Word documents include the following,
except:
A. Managing documents
B.
Detecting and tracking leaks of confidential documents from a company
C. Tracking possible copyright infringement of newsletters and reports
D. Monitoring the distribution of a press release
E.
Tracking the quoting of text when it is copied from one Word document
to a new document
4.
When a Web bug is embedded in a Word document, the following information
is sent to the remote Web server when the document containing the bug is
opened, except:
A. The full URL of the Web bug image
B.
The IP address and the host name of the computer requesting the Web bug
C. A Web browser cookie (optional)
D. The near future 
5.
To place a Web bug in a Word document is relatively simple. These are the
steps in Word, except one:
A. Select the Delete | Picture | From File... menu command.
B.
Select the Insert | Picture | From File... menu command.
C. Type in the URL of the Web bug in the File Name field of the Insert Picture
dialog box.
D. Select the Link to File option of the Insert button.
Exercise
The CTO of a large beverage company suspected something was amiss when he no-
ticed a significant amount of traffic traveling through the company network. He de-
duced that his trusted staff of system administrators might have been misusing
their access privileges and the network servers for some unknown purpose. A com-
puter forensics specialist team (CFST) was contracted to perform a confidential
after-hours investigation of the network and the system administrators. How was
the CFST able to go about conducting their investigation?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A large multinational corporation was accused of questionable financial reporting
by the SEC, resulting in an investigation by a major independent consulting com-
pany. The goal of the investigation was to determine if the Chief Financial Officer
Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
583

had ordered his staff to alter or destroy transactions to help the company’s finan-
cial position appear more favorable. How did the CFS go about conducting the in-
vestigation?
Case Project
A CFST conducted the analysis of multiple seized computer systems taken in con-
nection with major cases of central excise duty evasion in the Indian government.
How did the CFST go about conducting the investigation?
Optional Team Case Project
The Austin Police Department (APD) covers an area of 270 square miles and over
650,000 residents of greater Austin, Texas. Austin is the state capitol, and the gov-
ernment offices employ approximately 20% of the population. The APD knew they
had a Windows 2000/20003 file server and at least 12 workstations that needed to
be analyzed from a particular business under investigation. The APD also had a sys-
tem administrator who was located out of state, and they weren’t sure he was trust-
worthy. If the APD had pulled the server from this particular business, by shutting
them down, the business could have sued the city and possibly won for the loss of
productivity. How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Wireless Data Demystified, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2003.
[2] Vacca, John R., Satellite Encryption, Academic Press, New York, 1999.
[3] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
[4] Vacca, John R., Wireless Broadband Networks Handbook, New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[5] Vacca, John R., i-mode Crash Course, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002.
[6] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, New York,
Prentice Hall, 2002.
[7] Vacca, John R., The Cabling Handbook, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, New York,
2001.
584
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

585
Civilian Casualties: The
Victims and Refugees of
Information Warfare
19
N
ational information infrastructures are becoming an important vehicle for
the generation of national wealth throughout the developed world. Na-
tional information systems are, among other things, already used to con-
duct commerce and regulate and control national production. Nations are
becoming increasingly dependent on their information infrastructure as the Infor-
mation Age evolves. Accordingly, this infrastructure may now be considered to
represent an extension of national sovereignty, and any attacks on national infor-
mation systems may be perceived as attacks on the nation itself. This has resulted
in civilian causalities (the victims and refugees of information warfare [IW]).
A further argument may be that the national security implications of infor-
mation attacks make the defense against such attacks a military task. If this is the
case, the vast majority of the world’s military forces require a significant review of
their current doctrine and capabilities. Most are presently not capable of operat-
ing in a hostile information environment. An alternative argument may be that at-
tacks against national information systems are criminal in nature and are,
therefore, the responsibility of national police forces. Again, most police forces are
incapable of defending against such attacks. Indeed, there is probably no organi-
zation in the world that can adequately defend national information infrastruc-
tures as of yet. Regardless of the capabilities of the various organizations, the
jurisdiction boundaries that separate civilian and military security responsibilities
are blurring as the Information Age evolves.
Separating military and civilian information operations, particularly as they
pertain to defending national information systems, is also complicated by military
dependence on the civilian information infrastructure. Significant elements of
many of the information systems used by the world’s modern military forces are

designed, developed, and managed by civilians, primarily for civilian purposes, and
make extensive use of the civilian information infrastructure. This is particularly
the case with communication systems. The use of unique systems by military forces
for all of their information tasks is not economically viable. Therefore, an attack that
targets a military capability via a multiuser information system may inadvertently dis-
rupt civilian users. Likewise, an attack that is directed at a civilian user of an infor-
mation system may inadvertently affect military users. Is a military or civilian
response more appropriate in each of these cases? To many this may appear to be a
trivial issue, but distinguishing between civilian and military information operations
is important if an appropriate (and legal) national response is to be determined.
Identifying the source of an information attack can be difficult, at times im-
possible, and can contribute to the problem of determining an appropriate re-
sponse. Following a skilled information attack, identifying whether the act was
calculated and hostile or simply an accident or a system error may well be impos-
sible. Determining whether a nation, an individual, or a non-nation-state organi-
zation committed the IW attack may also be impossible, as may be ascertaining the
extent of any damage caused to civilians or refugees. Given the embryonic state of
international law pertaining to the information domain, pursuing a response
through the courts may also be impossible or pointless. Therefore, although dis-
tinguishing between a military information operation (MIO) and a civilian infor-
mation operation (CIO) is highly desirable, and, from a legal viewpoint may be
essential, such distinction is often impossible.
Attempting to resolve tomorrow’s information security challenges with today’s
security infrastructure and culture is unlikely to prove successful. Securing a na-
tional information infrastructure presents unique challenges to national security
agencies and demands unique and innovative solutions.
The need for macro-level information security in the information domain is
becoming more obvious. There is a strong argument for the development of a na-
tional information authority responsible for assuring the integrity of all national in-
formation systems, advising on the development of new information systems,
sponsoring research and development into information-assurance technologies,
and ultimately prosecuting information operations in support of diplomatic,
counter-criminal, and conflict-resolution objectives.
A national information authority would offer many strategic opportunities and
benefits (including significant efficiencies) and could comfortably address informa-
tion issues across portfolios, including national security and defense considerations.
Such an organization would not deny the individual elements of a nation’s armed
forces the right to develop their own information strategies; indeed, all the armed  ser-
vices have both a single-service and joint responsibility to develop robust information
strategies now. The further a nation travels down the Information Age path, however,
the more necessary the development of a professional, specialist national information
586
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

body appears. It is an option that should be considered by any government with a
genuine commitment to national security and the protection of its civilians.
WHAT THE CYBER MASSES HAVE TO LOSE
As explained in the preceding chapters, IW is the latest development in a long
list of revolutions in military affairs based on new technology (other examples
include the introduction of airplanes, the atom bomb, and long-range missiles).
IW is defined as an attack on information systems for military advantage using
tactics of destruction, denial, exploitation, or deception. The information cycle
is vulnerable to these tactics at each step from information gathering to data
entry to data transmission to information processing to information dissemina-
tion. Current research is searching for robust solutions at each step in the infor-
mation cycle, but the problem is systemic in that for every new solution, a new
threat is developed.
The rise of IW is linked to widespread diffusion of information technology. The
most important enabling feature of the diffusion of information technology is de-
clining cost. Since the 1950s, costs have declined 94% every five years, and most ex-
perts expect this trend to continue.
The IW threat will continue to grow at the expense of the cyber masses because
entry costs are low and decreasing, leading a large number of foreign governments
to organize strategic IW organizations within their military. A second feature of IW
is that as the technology becomes less expensive, it becomes more efficient to
decentralize away from a hierarchical command structure such as is traditional to
military tradition.
Information systems are so critical to military operations that it is often more
effective to attack an opponent’s information systems than to concentrate on de-
stroying its military forces directly. There is a perception within military circles that
control of information may become more important than air superiority was in
previous wars. This has lead to a reevaluation of military doctrine referred to as a
revolution in military affairs (RMA).
An RMA is a major change in the nature of warfare brought about by the in-
novative new application of new technologies that, when combined with dramatic
changes in military doctrine and operational and organizational concepts, funda-
mentally alters the character and conduct of military operations.
The United States is potentially vulnerable to IW attack because it is more de-
pendent on information systems than any other country in the world. For example,
in the United States, 99% of all military communications is carried over civilian in-
frastructure, thus intermingling military and civilian targets. In a civilian context,
the quality of life of our most basic needs is dependent on automated information-
management systems.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
587

The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) has budgeted billions of dollars to IW,
and all the military services have formed distinct IW organizations, which are draft-
ing IW military strategies. In January 1997, the Defense Science Board within the
Pentagon released a task force report warning of U.S. vulnerability to an “elec-
tronic Pearl Harbor,” which puts the cyber masses at great risk with a lot to lose.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is funding millions
of dollars worth of research to develop an “electronic immune system” that will
provide some level of protection to the cyber masses against IW attacks. The Pen-
tagon already spends $8 billion a year to protect its information military systems.
A presidential commission was formed by Executive Order 13010 to issue rec-
ommendations on how to best protect the cyber masses from IW. Eight critical na-
tional infrastructures were considered so vital that their incapacity or destruction
would have a debilitating effect on the defense and economic security of the United
States. These eight critical national infrastructures as listed by the executive order are:
1.
Electric power system (see sidebar, “Electric Power System Vulnerabilities”)
2.
Gas and oil storage and transportation
3.
Telecommunications
4.
Banking and finance
5.
Transportation
6.
Water-supply systems
7.
Emergency services (including medical, police, fire, and rescue)
8.
Continuity of government services (including federal, state, and local gov-
ernment services)
ELECTRIC POWER SYSTEM VULNERABILITIES
Nationwide rolling blackouts could have a devastating impact on the economy, but
experts also fear that the stress being placed on the nation’s power grid could make
it more susceptible to disruptions from hackers. In California’s Silicon Valley, large
Internet data centers have been blamed for stressing the region’s power grid beyond
what its Korean War–era design can handle. Now, other states, including Oregon,
Utah, and Washington, are preparing for possible rolling blackouts.
From a cybersecurity perspective, the electric power grids in the West are now
more fragile, and margins for error are significantly less. With diminishing margins
and power reserves, the probability for cascading catastrophic effects is higher.
The recent power shortages come as the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office
(CIAO) of the U.S. Department of Commerce delivered to Congress the first status
report on private-sector efforts to bolster cyberdefenses for systems that run critical
588
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

sectors of the economy. Although progress has been made in improving information
sharing, officials acknowledge that they still know very little about how failures in
one sector could affect other sectors.
In the context of broader infrastructure assurance, the scale and complexities of
the energy infrastructure and their impact on infrastructure security and reliability
are not fully understood. The energy industry continues to be the target of Internet-
based probes and hacker attacks that seek to exploit known vulnerabilities in off-the-
shelf software and systems that are increasingly being used to control and manage
the power grid.
Likewise, the sector continues to fall victim to poor personnel security practices,
ports, and services that are open to the Internet; outdated software without current
security patches; and improperly configured systems. With the system teetering on
the brink of collapse, it becomes easier for a small incident to have a wide impact.
For instance, if someone were to find a way to force the shutdown of a single power
plant or a section of the power grid, the results would be much more devastating,
because there is not enough reserve capacity to take up the slack.
In addition to the technical risks, the publicity generated by the recent crisis in
California, and the possibility that hackers may try to exploit known vulnerabilities,
there exists the possibility of making a bad situation worse. One risk with a situation
like this is that it exposes the flaws of the system to public scrutiny. It shows every-
one how vulnerable the cyber masses’ economy is to a power disruption. Like it or
not, there are people in the world who pay attention to such revelations.
Anytime the visibility of a system is raised, it acts as an attack magnet. It is rec-
ommended that companies, particularly utility companies, treat the power crisis as
a signal to begin stepping up network monitoring and security operations. The link
between the stress level on the power grid and its vulnerabilities act like blood in
water to a shark. Hackers smell weakness and a chance for their 15 minutes of fame.
Electric companies have made significant progress in stepping up their security
preparedness and have also set up information sharing and analysis centers to enable
system administrators to share information with the FBI’s National Infrastructure
Protection Center. When a transmission system is stressed, the system operators and
security coordinators operate at a heightened level of alert so they can quickly
address and return the transmission system to normal from any situation that may
occur. The electric system can withstand sudden disturbances such as electric short
circuits or unanticipated loss of system elements. This was the case decades ago, and
it is still true today.
The U.S. government should face the ethical consequences of the new global
battleground now before a crisis arises by having a declarative policy concerning IW
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
589

attacks. During the Cold War, the United States used a policy of strategic nuclear
deterrence, warning that any nation that attacked the United States could expect
total destruction in return. It is commonly believed that this policy of deterrence
was successful, but is impossible to prove. By analogy, analysts have wondered if a
similar strategy might deter IW attacks on the U.S. national information infra-
structure (NII). For a strategy of deterrence to work the following must hold:
The incident must be well defined.
The identity of the perpetrator must be unambiguous.
The will and ability to carry out a deterrence strike must be believed.
The perpetrator must have something of value at stake.
The deterrence strike must be controllable.
This strategy of deterrence must be measured in the context of the inherent
vulnerability of large technologically based systems. In what has been called the
“complex-system issue,” the axioms are
Complex systems fail in unpredictable ways from causes that seem to be minor
and, often, obvious flaws in retrospect.
The failure of a complex system may be exceptionally difficult to discover and
repair.
Complex systems fail at inopportune moments—usually during demanding
system use when the consequences of failure are highest.
It must be possible to determine if an event involving one of the United States’
vital infrastructures is the result of an accident, criminal attack, isolated terrorist in-
cident, or an act of war. The damage to the cyber masses from an event may be the
same regardless of the cause, but the cause of the event will determine the jurisdic-
tion and nature of the response from the U.S. government. Possible jurisdictions
include private industry, the FBI/Department of Justice, CIA/National Security
Agency (NSA), or DoD; possible responses range from doing nothing to a nuclear
retaliatory strike.
Ethical Challenges of IW to Prevent Cyber Masses’ Losses
This section analyzes the most significant ethical questions of IW as a new form of
warfare. Many of the questions have been raised before in previous contexts, but the
unique characteristics of IW bring urgency to the search for new relevant answers.
This analysis is also pertinent to other military situations generally referred to
as operations other than war (OOTW), such as peacekeeping missions, preludes to
conflict, alternatives to conflict, sanctions, and blockades. For example, in an IW
590
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

analogy to the U.S. blockade of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis, there are IW
techniques (jamming and denial-of-service attacks) that could be used to block
and, thus, isolate rogue nations from international communications without cir-
cumventing physical sovereignty—much in the same way the British decided to
sever all transatlantic telegraph cables that linked Germany to international com-
munications at the outset of World War I.
What Constitutes an Act of War in the Information Age?
The nation-state combines the intangible idea of a people (nation) with the tangible
construct of a political and economic entity (state). A state under international law
possesses sovereignty, which means that the state is the final arbiter of order within
its physical geographical borders. Implicit to this construct is that a state is able to
define and defend its physical geography. Internally, a state uses dominant force to
compel obedience to laws, and externally, a state interacts with other states, interac-
tion in either friendly cooperation, competition, or to deter and defeat threats.
At the core view of any nation-state’s view of war should be a national infor-
mation policy that clearly delineates national security thresholds over which an-
other nation-state must not cross. This national information policy must also
include options that consider individuals or other non-state actors who might try
to provoke international conflicts.
Increasingly, the traditional attributes of the nation-state are blurring as a re-
sult of information technology. With IW, the state does not have a monopoly on
dominant force, nor can even the most powerful state reliably deter and defeat IW
attacks. Non-state actors attack across geographic boundaries, eroding the concept
of sovereignty based on physical geography. With the advent of the Information
Age, the United States has lost the sanctuary that it has enjoyed for over 200 years.
In the past, U.S. citizens and businesses were protected by government control of
our air, land, and sea geographical borders, but now, an IW attack may be launched
directly through (or around) these traditional geographical physical defenses.
War is armed conflict between nation-states. Historically, war has been a legal
status that could be specified by declaration or occur by way of an attack accompa-
nied by an intention to make war. The modern view of war provides a new look at
the tradition of a just war, jus ad bellum, (when it is right to resort to armed force)
and jus in bello, (what is right to do when using force). The six requirements of jus
ad bellum were developed by Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century:
1. The resort to force must have a just cause.
2. It must be authorized by a competent authority.
3. It is expected to produce a preponderance of good over evil.
4. It must have a reasonable chance of success.
5. It must be a last resort.
6. The expected outcome must be peace.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
591

There are two requirements for jus in bello: the use of force must be discrimi-
nate (it must distinguish the guilty from the innocent), and the use of force must be
proportional (it must distinguish necessary force from gratuitous force). The ap-
plication of just war reasoning to future IW conflicts is problematic, but there is a
growing voice saying there is a place for the use of force under national authority
in response to broader national security threats to the values and structures that de-
fine the international order.
Applying one aspect of just war reasoning to IW is the problem of proportion-
ality. It is impossible to respond to every IW action, because there are too many. At
what threshold in the lives of the cyber masses and their money, should the United
States consider an IW attack an act of war? 
Article 51 in the United Nations Charter encourages settlement of interna-
tional disputes by peaceful means. However, nothing in the charter impairs the in-
herent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs.
Infringement of sovereign geographical boundaries by itself is not considered an
armed attack. Experts do not equate “use of force” with an “armed attack.” Thus,
certain kinds of data manipulation as a result of IW that are consistent with use of
force would not constitute an armed attack under Article 51.
On the other hand, Article 41 of the United Nations specifically states measures
that are not considered to be an armed attack: complete or partial interruption of
economic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means
of communications. IW might still be considered an act of war, however, if fatali-
ties are involved.
If data manipulation is such that the primary effects are indistinguishable from
conventional kinetic weapons, then IW may be considered an armed attack. The
paradigm shift is that weapons are devices designed to kill, injure, or disable peo-
ple or to damage and destroy property and have not traditionally included elec-
tronic warfare devices.
What are the ethical implications of the blurring distinction between acts of
war from acts of espionage from acts of terrorism? Let’s take a look.
Ethical Implications
It is important to be precise in what the cyber masses identify as a crime and what
they identify as an act of war. An armed attack as stated in Article 51 contemplates
a traditional military attack using conventional weapons and does not include pro-
paganda, information gathering, or economic sanctions. Espionage is a violation of
domestic, not international, law.
592
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The threat analysis section of the 1997 Defense Science Board Report indicates
that a significant threat includes activities engaged on behalf of competitor states.
This introduces the new concept of low-intensity conflict in the form of economic
espionage between corporations. In the age of multinational corporations that view
geographical boundaries and political nation-states as historical inconveniences,
should economic warfare between multinational corporations involve the military?
The new IW technologies make it difficult to distinguish between espionage
and war. If espionage is conducted by computer to probe a nation’s databanks and
military control systems, when is it an act of war versus an act of espionage? Does
it depend on whether the intelligence was passively read versus information actively
destroyed in battle or manipulated? Does it depend on whether the intelligence was
used for military advantage or for political or criminal advantage? Does the answer
depend on whether a state of war exists?
A different scenario is modifying internal computer software (via viruses, tro-
jan horses, or logic bombs) or hardware (chipping) before shipment to cause an
enemy’s computer to behave in a manner other than they would expect. During
peacetime, gaining entry to a computer’s internal operating system could be con-
sidered a criminal offense or act of espionage, despite the fact that the action in
question took place before the enemy had acquired ownership of the computer. Is
this prudent preparation for IW or is this a hostile action that could precipitate a
war? If the computer hardware chip is commercially manufactured and altered,
what are the legal and ethical implications for a company inserting internal hard-
ware hooks in cooperation with national security at the request of the govern-
ment—especially if the company has international sales? Finally, is IW a potential
step that might lead to an escalated conventional military conflict that could have
been avoided by other means?
Can IW Be Considered Nonlethal?
Nonlethal weapons are defined as weapons whose intent is to nonlethally over-
whelm an enemy’s lethal force by destroying the aggressive capability of their
weapons and temporarily neutralizing their soldiers. Nonlethal most often refers to
immediate casualty counts, not downstream collateral effects.
In response to the power of cyber masses’ opinion and instant global media
coverage, the U.S. military has begun to develop a new kind of weaponry designed
to minimize bloodshed by accomplishing objectives with the minimum use of
lethality. This weaponry includes sticky foam cannons, sonic cannons, and electro-
magnetic weapons— which effectively temporarily paralyze the enemy without
killing them.
Is it more ethical to use a sophisticated smart bomb precisely targeted to kill 30–40
soldiers immediately or is it more ethical to choose a nonlethal weapon that has the
same tactical effect with no immediate casualty count but an indirect collateral effect
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
593

of 600–700 cyber mass deaths? Ethically, the function of the target against which the
weapon is used and the existence or lack of a state of war determines one ethical frame-
work for analysis. For instance, disabling the electronics of a fighter plane or air defense
radar during wartime is the goal of a large investment in electronic warfare equipment
by the United States and is considered fair and ethical. However, disabling the elec-
tronics of a civilian airliner or air traffic control, during either peacetime or wartime,
violates the principles of discrimination of combatants and proportionality of response
and is considered unethical and a act against the cyber masses.
Is It Ethical to Set Expectations for a “Bloodless War” Based on IW?
As nonlethal weaponry of all types (especially IW weapons) advance from novelty
to norm many potential pitfalls will need to be faced. The most important of these
is the expectation that such weapons will ultimately allow wars to be fought with-
out casualties.
Nonlethal military capabilities are not new, although IW weapons are the newest
weapons in the nonlethal arsenal. Military forces have used riot-control chemical
agents, defoliants, rubber bullets, and electric stun weapons for decades. As U.S. mil-
itary forces are involved in missions that require extended direct contact with civil-
ians (Somalia, Bosnia), force can no longer be viewed as either on or off, but rather
as a continuum with nonlethal weapons on one end and nuclear devices on the
other end. In more traditional conventional warfare, IW attacks to disrupt, deny,
and destroy C4I capabilities (command, control, communication, and computer in-
telligence) are a core part of military tactics and strategy. If IW weapons can be used
to remotely blind an opponent to incoming aircraft, disrupt logistics support, and
destroy or exploit an adversary’s communications, then many of the problems asso-
ciated with the use of ground forces for these missions can be avoided.
It is important to point out that although nonlethal weapons are not meant to
be fatal, they can still kill if used improperly or against people particularly suscep-
tible to their effects. Because these technologies are potentially lethal in these cir-
cumstances, the term nonlethal has not been universally accepted within the U.S.
military. For example, the U.S. Marines Corps uses the term less lethal to imply that
there is no guarantee of nonlethality.
Asserting that IW will ultimately allow future wars to be fought without casual-
ties is a widespread misconception likely to prove counterproductive and even po-
tentially dangerous to the cyber masses. First, all nonlethal weapons are not equally
applicable to all military missions. Second, overselling of nonlethal capabilities with-
out providing a context can lead to operational failures, deaths, and policy failure.
Third, unrealistic expectations about nonlethal weapon capabilities inhibit their
adoption by military forces who need to build confidence in these weapons.
There is a large asymmetry in global military power when comparing the
United States to other nation-states. In 1994, the U.S. DoD budget exceeded that of
594
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Russia, China, Japan, France, and Great Britain combined. This asymmetry makes
it unlikely another nation-state would challenge the United States in a direct high-
technology conventional war, except in circumstances that cyber masses should not
depend on (incredible miscalculations or ignorant dictators, which were both pres-
ent in the Gulf War.
Despite the luxury of a bumbling opponent, the success of the Gulf War has led
the U.S. citizenry to expectations of low casualties in all future conflicts. These ex-
pectations go against two cardinal rules of military strategy: (1) you do not plan to
refight the previous war and (2) the future battlefields cannot be dictated by the
United States. The next battlefield for which the U.S. DoD is preparing is a global
battlefield with weapons of IW targeting the civilian infrastructure. Even in this sce-
nario, military and civilian casualties will be likely from either primary or secondary
effects of IW attacks.
Is It Ethically Correct to Respond to IW Tactics with IW Tactics?
If the United States is attacked by IW weapons, how should the U.S. government
respond? By changing perspectives from defense to offense, what is in the U.S. ar-
senal to wage IW against an adversary:
Offensive software (viruses, worms, trojan horses)
Sniffing or “wiretapping” software (enabling the capture of an adversary’s
communications)
Chipping (malicious software embedded in systems by manufacturer)
Directed energy weapons (designed to destroy electronics but not humans and
buildings)
Psychological operations (sophisticated and covert propaganda techniques)
A strategy that uses these weapons in various combinations has the potential to
replace conventional military forces. The questions remain: is it ethically correct for
the United States to defend its security interests by resorting to the same IW tactics
that are used against it? Should information attacks be punished by information
counterattacks? The options include maintaining the United States’ superpower
status at all costs, covertly listening to their adversaries but not actively disrupting
operations, or contracting mercenaries, who are not officially affiliated with the
U.S. government, to do their dirty work.
Cracking computers to deter and punish computer cracking erodes any moral
basis the United States has for declaring the evils of IW warfare. It is also harder to
predict secondary effects because of the globalization of systems. Retaliation may
produce effects ranging from nothing to being counterproductive through de-
struction of U.S. interests. A nation-state or non-state actor that sponsors an attack
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
595

on the U.S. NII might lack an NII of their own for the United States to attack in
punishment and, thus, not be intimidated by a U.S. IW deterrence strategy.
Short of an official declaration of war, nation-states may seek UN Security Coun-
cil action authorizing “all necessary means” even in the absence of an armed attack in
cases of any threat to peace, breach of peace, or act of aggression. Every breach of
international law creates a duty to pay for loss or damages; nation-states may seek
recompense under “state responsibility doctrine.” In addition to recompense, retri-
bution in the form of proportional countermeasures are authorized when an IW at-
tack that does not involve the use of force violates international law. IW may violate
multiple international laws depending on the scenario, including the following:
UN Convention on Law of the Sea (prohibits unauthorized broadcasts from
the high seas)
International Telecommunications Convention of 1982 (requires nations to
avoid “harmful interference”)
INTELSAT Convention (satellite communications for nonmilitary purposes) [1]
INMARSAT (maritime satellite communications for “only peaceful purposes”)
Chicago Convention (refrain from endangering safety of flight)
According to DoD Policy Directive 5100.77, U.S. military forces are bound by law
to follow the rules of engagement of the specific conflict as follows: “The Armed
Forces of the United States shall comply with the law of war in the conduct of mili-
tary operations and related activities, however such conflicts are characterized.” The
problem is that there are no characterized rules of engagement for IW conflicts, which
can take the form of isolated operations, acts of retribution, or undeclared wars.
The most serious problem for using IW retaliation to counter IW attacks is that
adversaries could counter or copy IW capabilities. Every breakthrough in offensive
technology eventually inspires a matching advance in defensive technology, thus es-
calating an IW weapons race.
A last issue related to retaliation is the ethical dilemma faced by the intermin-
gling of the military and civilian sides of society. Given the uncertainty of deter-
rence and identifying the enemy, is the most ethical strategy for retaliation one that
attempts to separate the military from civilians and, in so doing, diminishes their
impact, which potentially prolongs the duration of the conflict, or a strategy that at-
tempts to minimize lethality and duration but deliberately targets civilian systems?
Can Protection from IW Take Place in the 
United States Given Our Democratic Rights?
How much government control of the U.S. NII is permissible in a free society? Most
of the IW technology is software, which is easy to replicate, hard to restrict, and dual-
use by nature (having civilian and military uses). The 1997 Defense Science Board re-
596
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

port states that the DoD is “confused” about when a court order is required to mon-
itor domestic communications. This raises basic questions about the constitutional
and ethical balance between privacy [2] and national security in a new IW context.
A “Big Brother” approach that places all of a nation’s telecommunications
under a single government jurisdiction is improbable given the diffusion and com-
plexity of technology and the shrinking size of government. Most systems were
built to serve commercial users who will vehemently object to unfunded mandates
(taxes) and new requirements not driven by business demand (CLIPPER chip en-
cryption and key escrow accounts). Regardless, it is critical to the future security of
the United States that the cyber masses find a way to protect their infrastructure
from IW attack and have contingency plans for potential IW crises. If an IW attack
is detected and the enemy identified, but the United States is unable to react
promptly because of bureaucratic inefficiency or indifference from private indus-
try, it may be too late to react at all.
Current political discussion has floated tax incentives and direct subsidies to
promote industry cooperation. In a related matter that may provide a precedent,
the government has pledged to provide telephone companies with at least $1.2 bil-
lion to ensure that FBI officials can access telephone conversations over digital cir-
cuits (as opposed to accessing telephone conversations over analog circuits, which
is technically much easier).
THE DESTRUCTION OF PERSONAL ASSETS IN IWS
The Mounties always get their man—or, when it comes to hackers, their boy. In
2000, Canadian cops announced the arrest of a Montreal-area 15-year-old for dis-
abling CNN’s Web site. His father was also nabbed, on unrelated charges of plot-
ting to assault a business associate. The teen suspect, who was identified only by the
hacker handle Mafiaboy, allegedly bragged about his exploits in online chats. He
was not what one would call a genius. Mafiaboy was charged with two counts of
mischief to data and faces two years’ detention plus a $786 fine. While awaiting
trial, he could not enter any public space that hosts networked computers.
The CNN.com incident was part of a rash of denial-of-service attacks that crippled
Yahoo!, eBay, and other Internet titans, leading to a manhunt that stretched through-
out the United States, Canada, and Germany. The international dragnet was spurred by
damage and destruction of personal and corporate assets estimated at up to $2.3 billion.
Critics charge that companies and prosecutors regularly inflate such numbers
and that the Mafiaboy case is no exception. If you’re a law enforcement organization,
it makes the crime look more serious. If you’re a company, it allows you to get more
money from insurance (see sidebar, “Hacker Insurance”). If you’re the press, it makes
the story more sensational.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
597

HACKER INSURANCE
In the increasingly competitive hacker insurance market, American International
Group (AIG) is making an offer it hopes prospective clients won’t refuse: a free,
comprehensive security assessment. AIG, the largest commercial insurance under-
writer in the United States, hopes the free on-site security check—which ordinarily
can cost tens of thousands of dollars—will encourage more companies to buy insur-
ance coverage from it. AIG is one of the biggest players in a swarm of underwriters
and brokers who are rushing into the hacker insurance market, a sector that the
Insurance Information Institute estimates could generate $6.9 billion in annual pre-
miums by 2009.
The insurers’ sales efforts are being aided by highly publicized events such as the
“Anna Kournikova” worm that tied up mail servers around the world. Insurance
industry officials indicate their business is doubling every 7 to 13 months, as worries
about hacking increase and more information technology professionals realize their
companies’ standard insurance policies don’t cover risks incurred by their Internet-
based businesses.
Cyber masses aren’t used to spending money on this. The cost of the insurance
application in the past included (for almost everyone) an on-site security assessment
that would cost upward of $60,000, regardless of whether you bought the insurance.
To help convince qualified prospects (applicants must be seeking $6 million or
more in coverage) to buy insurance, AIG pays independent security firms Global
Integrity and Unisys to do the on-site assessments. The firms do external probes and
“ethical hacking” of a prospect’s Web site, as well as a three-day, on-site analysis to
determine what types of security problems the company faces.
At the end of the assessment, if a prospect decides not to buy AIG’s coverage, the
company can keep the security report and assessments as AIG’s gift. Although AIG’s
assessment is free, some competitors expressed skepticism. AIG’s offer may create a
false sense of security among insurance buyers. Security is not a product; it’s a process.
WHAT’S COVERED
Companies interested in hacker insurance can buy coverage either as a package or a
la carte. Some policies only pay for risks associated with loss or misuse of intellectual
property. Others cover liability for misuse of a company’s site by a third party, or
damage caused by an outside hacker.
Premiums are generally based on a company’s revenue, as well as the type and
amount of coverage being sought. Rates vary. A package policy that covers a range of
risks, including liability, loss of revenue, errors and omissions, and virus protection,
598
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

can cost from $10,000 to $54,000 per year (or more) for each million dollars of cover-
age in the policy.
Given the range of costs and coverage, industry officials warn potential buyers
to be wary. Some policies cover only the amount of net income lost due to hacking.
A better choice for some companies may be coverage for lost revenue.
Numerous variables can affect premiums. Just as a buyer of auto insurance can
choose a high deductible to lower the premium, hacker insurance buyers can choose
different waiting periods before coverage begins. For instance, a policy that begins
paying for business losses just four hours after a hacker shuts down a site may cost
more than a policy that begins paying after 24 hours of downtime. These waiting
periods, called “time element deductibles,” are variable and depend on the kind of
business being covered and the amount of risk a business may face.
Companies can also get substantial discounts on their policies if they have man-
aged service contracts with an insurer-certified security firm. Security assessments
are critically important for both insurers and insurance buyers. Hacker insurance is
such a new product that there are no reliable actuarial tables to determine rates.
Therefore, insurance companies rely heavily on the assessments to help them deter-
mine the amount of risk they are taking on with a given company. For the compa-
nies seeking insurance, assessments should help them find (and immediately fix)
holes in their defense systems.
STIFF COMPETITION
Underwriters competing with AIG (the Chubb Group, Fidelity and Deposit Com-
panies, St. Paul Companies, Lloyd’s of London, and Wurzler) are rolling out a fleet
of new products and alliances to help them gain market share. Chubb recently
announced new coverage designed for online banks, brokerages, and insurance
companies. Wurzler has joined with Hewlett-Packard to market its products to a
select group of HP’s clients.
Insurance brokers and security firms are teaming up to sell branded products
and services. Marsh & McClennan Companies, the world’s largest insurance bro-
kerage, is selling insurance provided by AIG, Chubb, and Lloyd’s. The brokerage
relies on internet security systems to do its security assessments. Counterpane Inter-
net Security has allied with brokers Safeonline and Frank Crystal & Co. to provide
its clients with special policies underwritten by Lloyd’s.
It’s a wildly growing market, and its primary underwriters are AIG, Fidelity and
Deposit, and Wurzler. Hacker insurance has been a small market because people
were waiting for e-commerce to hit. Well, now e-commerce has hit.
Insurers are finding a ready market for their products, because companies with
Internet operations are increasingly under attack. A survey conducted in 2004 by the
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
599
q

FBI and the Computer Security Institute, an association of computer security per-
sonnel from the private and public sectors, found that from March 2002 to March
2003, 32% of the 1,085 governmental agencies and businesses that responded indi-
cated that they experienced denial-of-service attacks. Viruses are also wreaking havoc.
Losses from 2000’s “Love Bug” virus were estimated to be as high as $20 billion.
AIG’s move to lower the cost of obtaining hacker insurance shows that the mar-
ket is beginning to mature, according to industry experts. Security analysts hope it
will encourage more Net companies to get insurance coverage.
Companies need to understand that getting hacked is not only an inconve-
nience. Anything Internet-facing is a point of vulnerability. Companies can be
attacked directly or they can be used to attack someone else. There’s real exposure
and liability. They need to reduce their risk, and the only way to do that is through
proper insurance.
Pricing cyberintrusions is pretty much a guessing game. If a burglar steals your
television set, you know what its replacement value might be, but what’s the value
of the time of all the people who had to drop their work and deal with this hacker
nonsense? More tangential costs are also often tabulated; the $5.6 billion figure as-
sociated with recent attacks, calculated by the Yankee Group, includes the expense
of security upgrades, consulting fees, and losses in market capitalization from tum-
bling stock prices.
The implication is that companies wouldn’t have had to spend the money if
they never had a problem. That’s like saying you don’t need to get a lock for your
front door unless somebody breaks in.
Fair Punishment
Inflated estimates can skew jail terms. A formula should be devised to calculate the
severity of hacks. The question is, how serious a societal harm has been done in the
hands of these companies, without any real checks or balances? If the FBI is going
to punish people by sending them to prison, they probably don’t want to send
them to prison for something that’s just a nuisance.
In one famous case, an editor at the computer-security webzine Phrack was
charged with publishing a document stolen from BellSouth’s network. Prosecutors
valued the 13-page paper at $80,550, which included the $42,000 cost of the com-
puter it was typed on, $7,000 for the printer, and $7,300 for a “project manager.” It
was revealed at trial, however, that BellSouth sold a nearly identical document to
the public for just $14 per copy.
600
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

SHORT- AND LONG-TERM PERSONAL 
ECONOMIC IMPACT ON CYBER CITIZENS
Cyberattacks cost U.S. organizations and their cyber citizens $600 million in
2003—more than double the average annual losses for the previous three years. The
study, released by the San Francisco–based Computer Security Institute (CSI) and
the San Francisco FBI Computer Intrusion Squad, found that 95% of survey re-
spondents detected some form of security breach in 2003.
Based on information from 617 of CSI’s member organizations, 75% reported
serious security attacks, including theft of proprietary information, financial fraud,
system penetration from outsiders, denial-of-service attacks, and sabotage of data
or networks. This figure, up from 67% in 2001, didn’t include data from common
security problems caused by computer viruses, laptop theft, and abuse of Internet
access by employees.
According to the report, 79% of respondents confirmed that they sustained fi-
nancial losses from security attacks, but only 47% said they were willing and able to
quantify these costs. The figures are based on responses from 1,087 computer se-
curity practitioners in 617 U.S. corporations, government agencies, financial insti-
tutions, medical institutions, and universities.
The $600 million in verifiable losses claimed by respondents was more than
twice the average annual total of $473 million reported from 2001 to 2004. Eighty
respondents reported $100.1 million in losses from theft of proprietary informa-
tion, and 97 organizations listed $90 million in losses from financial fraud.
CSI indicates a continuing trend in the study—that computer security threats
to large corporations and government agencies come from both inside and outside
the organization. Whereas media reports often focus on outside computer crackers,
85% of respondents were worried about disgruntled employees. Sixty-five respon-
dents indicated that they suffered $51 million in damages from sabotage of data or
networks, compared to a combined total of $65 million for previous years.
For the sixth consecutive year, 63% of respondents identified their Internet
connection as a frequent point of attack, compared with 36% who cited internal
systems as the target. The short- and long-term personal economic impact on cyber
citizens continues to be staggering.
Unauthorized access and security attacks are widespread. The private sector
and government organizations must increase their focus on sound security prac-
tices, deployment of sophisticated defensive technology, and adequate training and
staffing of security managers.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
601

THE VIOLATION OF PRIVACY DURING INFORMATION WARS
Privacy—who could possibly be against it? Not IBM, which has vowed to yank all
its ads from Web sites that fail to post a clear privacy policy. Not America Online,
which promises never to disclose information about members to “outside compa-
nies.” Certainly not Microsoft, which in 1999 threw its weight behind a plan that
could one day let people skip automatically past sites that don’t meet their privacy
standards. The biggest collectors of information, it seems, are suddenly in the fore-
front of the campaign for our right to be left alone.
Privacy protection is good for business, but it may not be not quite that simple.
True, millions of Americans are wary of the Internet, and surveys suggest that many
are hanging back because of confidentiality concerns.
However, the recent frenzy of corporate initiatives is only partly about building
public trust. It’s also about fending off legislation. Corporate America is mobilizing
against the threat of a broad federal privacy-protection law. In particular, busi-
nesses are disturbed by one likely element of such a law: a subject access provision
that would allow citizens to find out what companies know about them and how
the information is being used.
To comply with such a measure, corporate information systems would have to
be retrofitted to serve a purpose for which they weren’t designed—a vastly expen-
sive undertaking that worried executives liken to the year 2000 problem. The tech-
nological costs, however, could be exceeded by the psychological costs.
Junkbusters
If subject access becomes law, Americans will be stunned to discover how much
data large corporations have on them. People are going to be horrified. So far, the
United States has addressed the subject on a case-by-case basis. The confidentiality
of video rentals is protected, for example, because a reporter got hold of Robert
Bork’s rental records during the fight over his failed nomination to the Supreme
Court. Otherwise, corporate lobbyists have sold republican and democratic leaders
alike on their view of the Internet economy as a tender, if vital, young thing need-
ing protection from the regulatory mechanisms of the past.
The market can do the job. In addition, companies are banding together to de-
velop privacy guidelines, hoping to show that they can regulate themselves. That
premise, however, is under mounting attack on two fronts, domestic and foreign.
The immediate pressure is coming from Europe. A European Union (EU)
privacy directive that took effect in October 2004 not only includes subject access
but also requires that, when soliciting information from people, companies clearly
spell out what they intend to do with it. This concept is anathema to many large
602
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

U.S. companies. Accustomed to collecting data for hazy purposes (a “personalized
experience”), businesses reserve the right to discover more specific uses or sell the
information later on.
The most annoying element of the EU directive, as far as U.S. corporations 
are concerned, is a ban on transborder shipment of data to countries that don’t
offer “adequate” privacy guarantees. The Sabre Group, a Texas-based airline-
reservation network, is fighting in Swedish court for the right to maintain in its
global data bank such facts as a passenger’s wheelchair use or preference for kosher
meals. Prodded by Sabre and other large information-oriented companies, the
U.S. government is trying to convince European officials that the argument isn’t
really over the degree of privacy protection, but over two different “cultural per-
spectives.” The Europeans have gone to ridiculous extremes, creating privacy
commissions and “privacy czars” to deal with such trivialities as L. L. Bean’s deci-
sion to send out a catalog of their home products as opposed to their clothing
products. Literally interpreted, the EU directive would bar a traveling American
business executive from flying home with the names and phone numbers of 
European clients in his laptop.
Double Standard
Such fears are overwrought, but European officials point to deep historical reasons
(including Nazism) for their view of privacy as a basic human right. The White
House is not in any position to cut deals on that, any more than the British are in a
position to cut deals on the U.S.’s First Amendment. But if Washington has to
make concessions, U.S. multinationals could find themselves in the ticklish posi-
tion of explaining why they have granted rights to Europeans that they are trying to
withhold from Americans. The self-regulation concept has already suffered a series
of embarrassments at home. In 1999, Microsoft was discovered to be collecting data
on users who had expressly requested anonymity.
Privacy advocates agree that there are informal and technological fixes for
many of the problems. Online privacy protection has the potential to become a sig-
nificant industry in itself, but it will grow much faster with legal incentives. In the
absence of sanctions, the privacy commissioner of Hong Kong claims that self-
regulation amounts to putting Count Dracula in charge of the blood bank.
Oddly enough, the concept of subject access originated in the United States,
with the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1971. Credit companies have been living
quite profitably with the rule for over 33 years.
Many of the same companies that have been battling against a federal privacy
law have pressed Congress to enact more stringent copyright and patent laws.
They’re only against regulation when it’s something they don’t like.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
603

THE INDIVIDUAL EXPOSED
On the Internet, goes the saying, nobody knows you’re a dog. If that ode to online
anonymity was once true, the notion seems laughable today. The Internet is now
more like an unlocked diary, with millions of consumers divulging marketable de-
tails of their personal lives, from where they live to what they eat for dinner. Oper-
ators of sites on the World Wide Web collect and sell the information or use it to
lure advertisers. Software tracks the sites you visit and the pages that catch your eye.
If you were a dog, online snoops would soon learn that you’re a collie who plays a
mean game of Frisbee catch and likes your kibble moist.
No one is immune. Online databases bulge with facts on millions of Americans.
“Spammers” cram your emailbox with ads. Continuous loopholes in Netscape
Navigator and Microsoft Explorer give Web administrators direct access to the
hard disk of any browser user visiting their site.
Businesses recognize the Web’s potential as a shopping mall, but because of
concern over consumer privacy, many stores in that shopping mall have been
forced out of business. It doesn’t help matters that many Web sites don’t reveal how
they intend to use the information collected or whether it might be shared. In a re-
cent survey by the Boston Consulting Group, more than 77% of online users wor-
ried more about offering up private facts online than they did via phone or
mail—so they often refused or gave false information. Mounting user fears
prompted the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to hold a four-day public work-
shop recently to determine whether the government should step in. Congress is ex-
amining the issue, too; several measures to govern the use and sale of personal
data, such as Social Security numbers, are pending.
Facing possible regulation, online companies vowed during the workshop to
help individuals preserve their anonymity and decide whether to reveal personal
details. After all, a pro-consumer stance is good for business. It is estimated that on-
line consumer commerce will grow from 2001’s $68 million to as much as $101 bil-
lion by 2005—if privacy is addressed, that is.
Of course, you can avoid keying in anything you consider private, but that
would bar you from using quite a few sites, and abstinence is not always foolproof.
Using a technology called “cookies,” some sites, unbeknownst to you, can pick up
the address of the site you most recently visited and the Internet service provider
(ISP) or online service used and can log your movements within the site. Even
companies that advertise there can drop cookies on your hard drive without your
knowledge; some expire only after 2005.
Web users do have a few ways to deal with the cookie problem. Surfing through
the Anonymizer hides your identity but slows you down to some degree. You can
also program most popular Web browsers to accept or reject cookies before they are
604
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

downloaded to your hard disk. Many shareware programs, which can be tried out
before being purchased, can help you manage cookies (you might want to permit
cookies from a personalized news product, for example) or cut them out entirely.
Our Private Information Is Everywhere!
None of these tools, however, will wipe out details about you that are stored in on-
line databases ranging from telephone directories such as Switchboard and World-
Pages to commercial reference services such as Lexis-Nexis, CDB Infotek, and
Information America. Résumé banks, professional directories, alumni registries,
and news archives can all be harvested, as well.
Resourceful thieves can exploit these online caches. The Delaware State Police
nabbed a couple recently who had obtained birth certificates and drivers’ licenses in
others’ names (thus enabling them to open bank accounts and get credit cards)
using information gleaned from sources that included the Internet. Going online
made it much easier for them to get at some of the more personal information.
Eight major reference services announced an agreement at the FTC workshop
to prevent the misuse of nonpublic data, such as the name, address, and Social Se-
curity number found at the top of a credit report. A law enforcement agency, for ex-
ample, might see all of the data, but a commercial enterprise might not see the
Social Security number.
The Fair Credit Reporting Act restricts dissemination of data in the body of a
credit report (such as credit card accounts, car loans, or mortgages), but does not
cover the material at the top.
Much of the material in online databases is culled from public files such as
property tax records and drivers’ license rolls. That raises questions about the qual-
ity of the data. Databases are notoriously inaccurate, yet major institutions use
such services to judge, for example, fitness for employment and insurance. Privacy
advocates say consumers should be told if any personal facts are being sold and
should have the right to dispute errors in the databases. In their proposed privacy
guidelines, however, reference services agreed merely to tell people the “nature” of
the data held on them.
Privacy advocates also argue that consumers should be able to opt out of junk
email, or spam. America Online, the largest online service in the U.S. says that up to
34% of the 19 million email messages its members receive each day are junk and that
spamming is members’ number 1 complaint. Although all major online services
and ISPs prohibit spamming and use filtering programs to weed it out (several have
won injunctions barring spammers from their networks), the filters don’t always
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
605

work. Sleazy marketers often use fake return addresses that are nearly impossible to
track down. The FTC recently vowed to prosecute perpetrators of fraud and decep-
tion, soliciting the assistance of the Internet E-Mail Marketing Council.
The FTC recently gave online businesses and organizations six months to a year
to make good on their promises to protect the privacy of online consumers. If that
does not happen, the FTC will consider taking stronger steps to enable people to
browse and buy confidently as if they were shopping at the local mall.
IDENTITY THEFT
Stolen identity [3]? It can ruin your credit. And that’s just the beginning. When Dee
Helus (named changed to protect her privacy) and her husband went to the bank
in December to refinance their home, they thought it would be routine. After all,
the couple, who live in Kansas City, Kansas, were refinancing with their existing
mortgage lender and they prided themselves on their credit history. So it was quite
a shock when the bank officer turned them down, pointing to their credit report,
which listed numerous accounts in arrears.
It turns out that a woman in Illinois had applied for credit 55 times using
Helus’s name and Social Security number. In all, she had made purchases totaling
$120,000, leaving a trail of unpaid debt that Helus is desperately trying to prove is
not hers: a $61,000 loan for a mobile home, three car loans, credit card bills, and
charges for a cellular phone and other services. The perpetrator torched her credit
to the point where even the perpetrator herself was denied.
Helus is a victim of a crime of the 21st century: identity theft. It happens when
one individual uses another’s personal identification (name, address, Social Secu-
rity number, date of birth, mother’s maiden name) to take over or open new credit
cards and bank accounts, apply for car and house loans, lease cars and apartments,
and even take out insurance. The perpetrators don’t make the payments, and the
victim is left to deal with the damage: calls from collection agencies and creditors,
the endless paperwork that results from trying to expunge fraudulent accounts
from a credit record, and the agony of waiting to see if more phony accounts pop
up. Meanwhile, the proliferation of black marks on a credit report can be devastat-
ing. Victims of identity theft are often unable to get loans. Some run into trouble
applying for a job. A few have even been arrested after the thief committed a crime
in the victim’s name.
Many identity thieves use stolen personal information to obtain driver’s li-
censes, birth certificates, and professional licenses, making it easier to get credit.
Most victims don’t even know how the criminals pulled it off. Data have been
stolen from desk drawers in the workplace, mailboxes, job application forms, and
the Internet. False identification cloaks a thief in anonymity, and the impostor can
606
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

often use the alias for a prolonged period of time. Thieves typically have the bills
sent to an address that is not the victim’s, concealing the scheme for months, even
years. Most victims aren’t aware that their credit has taken a nose-dive until, like
Helus, they apply for credit themselves or receive a call from a bill collector.
In the 1980s, criminals who wanted free plastic simply made up counterfeit
credit cards with the correct number of digits. To thwart them, the industry insti-
tuted sophisticated security measures involving holograms and algorithms. Now
criminals are taking advantage of what some see as the weakest link in the credit
system: personal identity. There is nothing in the system that demands proof that
you are the person you say you are. Personal identifiers are now, more than ever, a
valuable commodity to criminals.
Although no single agency tracks identity fraud, statistics collected by the Gov-
ernment Accounting Office point to a growing problem. Trans Union, for example,
one of the three major credit bureaus, indicates three-fourths of all consumer inquiries
relate to identity fraud. Those inquiries numbered 855,255 in 2000; in 2004 there were
1,299,699. The costs of identity fraud can be very high: the Secret Service indicates
losses to victims and institutions in its identity-fraud investigations were $5.2 billion in
2004, up from $1.8 billion in 2000. It’s a problem that Congress finally addressed by
making it a federal offense for anyone caught perpetuating identity fraud.
Most victims call the police, but in states with no statute, some police depart-
ments refuse to take a report because the law sees the victim in a case of identity
fraud as the party that granted the credit (the bank or the merchant, for example),
not the person impersonated. That’s frustrating to the victims because they often
need a report to prove they are not the bad guys.
Victims need proof because the attitude they often encounter when dealing
with creditors is guilty, guilty, guilty. Every person Doyle Comfort (name changed
to protect privacy) talks to has been skeptical, condescending, and hostile, and he
is still trying to clean his credit report of 26 bounced checks written to stores in Ari-
zona in 1997 on a bank account opened fraudulently in his name. That really ag-
gravates Comfort, who has already been turned down for a mortgage. Victims often
have to play detective, coming up with clues, leads, and even the basic evidence that
a fraud has been committed. They have to do all the footwork themselves.
Typically, creditors ask an identity-theft victim to fill out an affidavit certifying
he or she did not incur the debt. Some require much more: one collection agency
told Helus it needed a copy of her driver’s license, her Social Security card, her birth
certificate, and any lease or mortgage contract from the past five years—all for an
$87 cable bill. In the end, Helus neither paid the bill nor sent the copies to prove her
innocence, opting to explain the $87 item on her credit report to future creditors.
As with many victims of identity theft, sensitive documents were the last thing she
wanted to send to a stranger.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
607

The belligerence that victims encounter from some creditors is particularly irk-
some to those who suspect a creditor’s negligence in the first place. Many creditors
do not take the proper steps to verify the identity of the credit applicant. Dorothy
Haskins (name changed to protect privacy) of Reston, Virginia, points to a credit-
card application that started an impostor on a crime spree in her name. The appli-
cation was preprinted with the impostor’s name and address, but the impostor
crossed off her own name (leaving her address) and wrote in Haskins name, Social
Security number, and occupation. The bank gave the impostor a credit card with a
$50,000 credit line, leading Haskins to ask, “Wouldn’t a reasonable person say
something is fishy here?” Bankers, meanwhile, insist they are on the ball. All the
banks have systems that detect fraud. They have to modify them for every new
scheme that comes up.
To make matters worse, two weeks after Haskins notified the bank that the ac-
count was fraudulent, the bank sold it to a collection agency, and she and her children
started receiving threatening phone calls and letters. It didn’t stop there. The card
triggered an avalanche of preapproved credit offers to the phony Haskins mailbox:
One different address on a credit account was all it had taken for one of the credit bu-
reaus to switch Haskins credit-file address to the impostor’s. They came to Haskins
like candy. Some credit bureaus won’t change a file address until three creditors re-
port a new address, but a criminal on a spree can quickly cross that threshold.
It’s not easy getting a credit report back on track. The credit bureau says con-
tact the creditor, the creditor says contact the credit bureau, and the consumer just
gets ping-ponged back and forth. The bureaucracy can be maddening: Helus re-
cently received a letter from the credit bureau Experian saying it was reinserting a
disputed item. The letter did not say which of the 25 accounts it referred to.
One of the few weapons victims have to protect them is a “fraud alert,” which
credit bureaus will put in consumer credit files. This notifies anyone who pulls the
report that the subject is a victim of fraud and that he or she should be called to ver-
ify any credit application. The alert isn’t foolproof.
Credit bureaus might want to step up their efforts at finding a solution before
more aggrieved consumers turn to the courts. Recently, in Clarksdale, Mississippi,
a man won a lawsuit against Trans Union for failing to clean up his credit report.
The award: $7.8 million.
Meanwhile, the credit-reporting industry has formed a taskforce to tackle iden-
tity theft. Among solutions being considered are taking files of theft victims offline
and sharing fraud alerts among credit bureaus more quickly. Individual creditors
are also taking steps to stem their losses and prevent future ones. In San Francisco,
Cellular One routinely flags suspect applications and compares details with credit
reports. That’s how Irene Cole (named changed to protect privacy) of San Fran-
cisco found out her identity had been compromised. Moreover, Cellular One
alerted competitors in the area that they might be the next targets.
608
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Identity theft is a crime that comes back to haunt its victims, and many are tak-
ing determined measures to prevent its recurrence. Helus and her husband have
taken an unusual vow: when they have children, they will not get them Social Se-
curity numbers—even though that means no tax deduction. To her way of think-
ing, safeguarding her children’s identity is far more valuable.
MONITORING PRIVATE AFFAIRS IN CYBERSPACE
Not being Prince Charles or Newt Gingrich, most of us give little thought to cell-
phone eavesdropping. After all, who cares if someone overhears you telling your
husband or wife you’re stuck in traffic. Of course, if the conversation is of a sensi-
tive nature, then one of your concerns is (or should be) the security of your phone.
Cellular service providers have a different security problem. Their great con-
cern is service theft, through which criminals succeed in using a cell phone without
paying for it. In the early days of cellular telephony, service theft mostly meant
cloning. People with radio scanners would simply “sniff” the cellular frequency
bands, pick up cell-phone identification numbers, and program them into other
phones. That problem has been reduced by almost two orders of magnitude
through the application of some thoughtful technology, but it has been replaced by
other problems: subscription fraud (the same problem that bedevils issuers of
credit cards) and the misapplication of service provider subsidies on handsets.
Subscription fraud has several forms: pretending to be another, real person;
pretending to be a nonexistent person; and even just being yourself and pretending
you intend to pay your bill. Subsidy fraud involves taking a phone whose cost has
been heavily subsidized by a cellular carrier and activating it on a different carrier’s
network.
Solutions to these problems exist. However, the newest and best of them can-
not be implemented on old handsets, so the technical situation is not without in-
terest. Some of the solutions, particularly those used to fight subscription fraud,
tend by their very nature to inhibit sales (after all, the idea is to eliminate dead-
beats), which presents the executives of cellular companies with a dilemma. On the
one hand, many of them need the revenue stream from a large number of sub-
scribers to help them pay off the huge investments they made when they bid wildly
for spectrum space back in 1995. On the other, they have no desire to be cheated.
As the practice of conducting serious business over the Internet continues to
grow, other security issues will arise. In particular, someone conducting business on
a cell phone needs to be confident of the identity of the other instrument’s user. The
technical solutions to be discussed here, such as radio frequency (RF) fingerprint-
ing and authentication, do a good job of guaranteeing that the handset is what it
claims to be, but they guarantee nothing about the person using it.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
609

Several approaches are being pursued for user identification. The problem, in
fact, is not finding solutions, but getting everyone to agree on which to use. To do
banking over a cell phone, your bank, your cellular service provider, and your phone
must agree on the same end-to-end solution. The phone companies, as an industry,
must standardize that solution to drive mass-market end-user accessibility.
Analog Yes, Digital No
When it comes to eavesdropping, the situation is pretty simple. Analog phones are
easy to bug; digital are hard. Although it is illegal to sell scanners in the United
States today that are capable of receiving the frequency bands used for cellular tele-
phony (824–849 MHz, 869–894 MHz, 1.85–1.91 GHz, and 1.93–1.99 GHz), older
units that can receive them are readily available. Moreover, it is hardly rocket sci-
ence to modify a new, compliant receiver to add the extra bands.
The scanners are capable of receiving at least the lower bands; they have just been
rigged to block them.
Lest anyone think that analog cellular telephony is an old, dead technology, as
of June 2002, over 40% of the subscribers in the United States still used analog
handsets, according to Boston’s Yankee Group. Many who have dual-mode phones
(capable of analog and digital operation) turn to the analog mode when roaming,
especially in rural areas.
The latest figures from the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association
(CTIA), indicate merely that digital penetration today exceeds 80% but the CTIA
counts dual-mode handsets as digital, so its number may not be so different from
the Yankee Group’s. Whatever the precise numbers, the message is clear: eaves-
dropping is not of only historical interest.
Digital phones, be they of the time- or code-division multiple-access (TDMA
or CDMA) variety, are, unlike analog units, foolproof against eavesdropping by or-
dinary mortals. Would-be listeners-in, for one thing, have to know what system
they are trying to tap into, because TDMA and CDMA are utterly different. For
TDMA, what can be snatched out of the ether is a digital data stream representing
one side of each of three multiplexed conversations. Eavesdroppers need to lock
onto the correct time slot to get the conversation they want.
In the case of CDMA, what they wind up with is an even thornier problem—a
mishmash of half a dozen conversations, each modulated by a different pseudo-
random code, all occupying the same band. The signal has to be decoded with the
same code, which has been obtained in some mysterious fashion. Plus, in digital
systems, voice is vocoded. The sound is not only digitized, but also compressed. As
before, someone interested in decompressing it needs to know the compression al-
gorithm used.
610
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

In short, eavesdroppers need to build what amounts to the receiving part of a
cellular phone base station to have a chance of overhearing a call. Small wonder that
none of the system operators or phone manufacturers regard eavesdropping on
digital cell phones as a problem.
Ethereal Signatures
The fight against cloning analog handsets has gone a lot better than efforts to com-
bat eavesdropping. Conceived in innocence, early analog phones were almost com-
ically vulnerable to security attacks. For one thing, the signaling between handset
and base station takes place in the clear, so anyone with a suitable RF scanner can
simply listen-in and learn the phone numbers (called “mobile identity numbers,”
or MINs) of handsets in the vicinity and the electronic serial numbers (ESNs) that
go with them. To program those numbers into another handset is the work of a
minute, and behold, another cloned phone is ready for use.
Once the problem manifested itself, service providers began taking steps to
protect themselves. Working with the U.S. Secret Service, they persuaded Congress
in 1998 to amend the law pertaining to “fraud and related activity in connection
with access devices” (Title 18, Section 1029, of the U.S. Code), so as to make it a
federal crime to own a scanning receiver or a cell-phone programmer with intent
to defraud. That same law also makes it a crime to knowingly, and with intent to
defraud, use a counterfeit phone, to traffic in such phones, or to possess 15 or more
of them. The law is serious, specifying maximum prison terms of 10 or 15 years (for
first-time offenders), depending on the exact nature of the crime.
The service providers also instituted the use of personal identification numbers
(PINs) that a user had to key in before a call could be completed. PINs certainly
made it tougher for thieves to use stolen phones, but because the PINs were trans-
mitted in the clear, they were not very effective against cloning.
What did help was a technology pioneered by the military for keeping track of
enemy troop movements, namely, RF fingerprinting. The technology involves mea-
suring several (unspecified) parameters associated with RF signals and characteriz-
ing them (again, in a proprietary manner) to produce a signature unique to the
transmitter being studied. Even nominally identical transmitters, manufactured on
the same assembly line to the same specifications, have slight differences, which are
sufficient (as Corsair named its product) to tell them apart.
Authentication Secrets
With the advent of digital and more advanced analog phones, an even more effec-
tive fraud-fighting technology came into use: authentication. A sort of handshak-
ing process, authentication makes use of secret numbers that are stored in the
phone and known to the network, but never passed over the air. Every time a call is
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
611

made, the network sends the handset a random number, which the handset then
combines with its secret number using an algorithm designed for the task. The re-
sult is another random number that the handset sends back to the network, which
has meanwhile performed the same calculations. If the numbers match, the call is
completed; if not, it is not.
The algorithm is designed to avalanche very quickly. If the input numbers are
off by even a single bit, the resulting number will not even be close to the right an-
swer. Because a different random number is used for each challenge, an eaves-
dropper would have a hard time figuring out a phone’s secret number. This is not
to suggest that sophisticated code crackers could not do it (the experts at the NSA
would probably consider it a warm-up exercise), but even high-level criminals
rarely have access to the required expertise or equipment.
Criminals, by the way, generally clone cell phones not for economic reasons,
but rather in the pursuit of anonymity. Eighty-three percent of narcotics dealers ar-
rested in 2001 were found to be in possession of cloned phones, according to testi-
mony from the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Call counting is another technique that can be used instead of (more often, in
addition to) authentication. Like authentication, it requires a phone capable of per-
forming its part of the process. With call counting, both the handset and the net-
work track the number of calls made by the handset. Those numbers are compared
whenever a call is made. If they do not match or if they disagree by more than a
specified amount (generally one call), then the call is not allowed. Obviously, if
someone has cloned a phone, then both he or she and the legitimate users will be
making calls, so the network will have their combined number, whereas each hand-
set will have only its own.
RF fingerprinting and authentication together have proven extremely effec-
tive. Cloning fraud has dropped about 99% over the past four to five years. It has
been replaced, however, by another kind of fraud called “identity theft” (as previ-
ously discussed), also known as subscription fraud.
Subscriber Fraud
Criminals, like electrons, tend to take the path of least resistance. Make it really hard
to steal what they want one way, and they find a different way to get it. In the case of
cell phones (or, more accurately, cell-phone service), the defenses in place against
cloning have motivated criminals to adopt the various techniques used by credit
card thieves, which are all lumped together under the rubric of subscriber fraud.
As with cloning, the industry’s first defensive move was to persuade Congress
to strengthen the relevant statute (in this case Title 18, Section 1028 of the U.S.
Code, “fraud and related activity in connection with identification documents and
information”). As the law now stands, it is a federal crime merely to steal someone’s
612
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

identity information with intent to defraud. Previously, the government had to
wait until fraud was committed before it could act.
The industry became particularly susceptible to subscriber fraud when it started
pursuing new customers through such nontraditional channels as telemarketing and
the Internet. Previously, cell-phone service was mostly purchased in face-to-face
transactions in company-owned stores, and clerks could do things like check photo
IDs to verify a customer’s identity. Now companies are finding they will have to get
back to the basics if they are to keep subscriber fraud losses at a tolerable level. They
are going to have to verify addresses against credit-card databases, for example, but
there are legitimate reasons for discrepancies, because people may have just moved
or they may maintain multiple residences. Therefore, methods must be developed
for screening out bad risks without turning off legitimate customers.
Technology as such is of limited value in this area. One thing computers are
being used to do is keep track of subscriber calling patterns—the numbers they
tend to call or receive calls from. If a subscriber is terminated for nonpayment of
bills and if a “new” subscriber shows up with pretty much the same calling pattern,
then an alarm can be raised calling attention to the possibility that this may be the
same person, and the company can look more closely at him.
Subsidy Loss
A major problem, especially in Latin America, is cell phones moving sideways
through the distribution channels. Cellular handsets are often heavily subsidized by
service providers, who supply them to subscribers on condition that the subscribers
remain with the company for a specific period, typically a year. What sometimes
happens is that the phones wind up being activated on some other carrier’s network.
A distributor, for example, who has purchased a batch of subsidized handsets
at a low price from one carrier may find that he or she can sell them at a handsome
profit to a dealer who is not affiliated with that carrier. In Latin America, that dealer
may not even be in the same country as the distributor. As a result, the carrier loses
the money it invested in subsidizing the phones.
As with subscriber fraud, the remedy is mostly a matter of running a tighter
ship, but some sort of technological fix will also be developed, which can be de-
scribed as an authentication kind of approach for the activation process. This tech-
nology is foreseen as showing up in some second-generation phones and it will be
part of any third-generation deployment.
THE NEW ORDER AND STATE MEDICAL ID CARDS
The recent hacking of 9,000 administrative patient files from one of the country’s
top hospitals underscores the lack of firm, clear, universal standards to ensure the
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
613

security of online medical records. Although officials are crafting regulations gov-
erning electronic patient records for the health care industry, some analysts and in-
dustry players are skeptical about how effective these specifications will be.
In an attempt to remedy the situation, the U.S. government is finalizing and re-
leasing the security and privacy portions of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), which will define interface and security standards
and policies. Unless it is derailed by the new administration, both the regulatory
commissions that accredit hospitals and the federal agencies that receive com-
plaints will enforce the HIPAA privacy regulations.
Bumpy Road Ahead
The industry still has a long way to go. The privacy provisions are a quagmire. A lot
of it is onerous and expensive, and a lot of it hard to interpret (see sidebar, “New
Medical Privacy Rules”).
NEW MEDICAL PRIVACY RULES
Before President Clinton left office, he announced a sweeping set of federal rules
aimed at protecting the privacy of medical records and other personal health infor-
mation, establishing the potential for penalties to be imposed on executives at health
care businesses that breach the new standards.
The regulations, which were prepared by the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), are the final version of proposed rules that were issued in
1999 after Congress failed to pass comprehensive medical privacy legislation as
required by HIPAA.
Oral, paper-based, and electronic communications are all covered by the mea-
sures. That casts a wider net than the original proposal, which applied to electronic
records and to paper ones that at some point had existed in electronic form.
Under the regulations, health care providers are prohibited from releasing most
information about individual patients without getting their consent in advance. In
another change from the proposed rules, HHS indicates doctors and hospitals will be
given full discretion in determining what personal health information to include
when sending patients’ medical records to other providers for treatment purposes.
However, the final rules also tighten the consent requirement, mandating that
approval be secured from patients for even routine use and disclosure of health records
for purposes such as bill payments. Patients also must be given detailed written infor-
mation about their privacy rights and any planned use of their personal information.
In addition, HHS is calling on hospitals, health insurers, and health care clear-
inghouses to establish procedures for protecting the privacy of patients, including
614
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

the appointment of executives to oversee their internal privacy procedures. Compa-
nies are prohibited from accessing health records for employment purposes.
Under HIPAA, civil fines of $100 per violation can be imposed, up to a total
of $25,000 per year. Criminal penalties of up to $250,000 and 10 years in prison
could also be targeted at individuals who try to profit from the sale of health
information. Most health care companies will be given two years to comply with
the regulations.
Nothing is more private than medical or psychiatric records,  so if the govern-
ment is to make freedom fully meaningful in the Information Age, when most of the
information is on some computer somewhere, then the government has to protect
the privacy of individual health records. The regulations were made necessary by the
great tides of technological and economic change that have swept through the med-
ical profession over the past few years.
HHS estimates that complying with the HIPAA rules will cost the health care
industry $40.9 billion. In the long run, government officials claim, the regulations
will help achieve savings of almost $60 billion over the next 10 years, as a result of
related rules that eliminate paperwork by issuing standards for electronic commu-
nication of health insurance claims.
The government is expected to receive a lot of backlash regarding the inclusion
of paper and oral communications in the new rules. Originally, HIPAA was intended
to apply solely to electronic communications. It could be impossible to monitor
written and oral messages.
One of the problems is that HIPAA is supposed to offer specifications to cover
all privacy implementations, from one-doctor offices to giant health care organiza-
tions. It’s too strict in many respects and too loose in others to offer adequate reg-
ulations across the board.
Lessons to Learn
However, there is a whole range of institutions that must be educated on any
guidelines to be implemented, including third-party companies that offer elec-
tronic patient-record hosting or storage [4]. With start-ups, patients face the risk
that companies that store their records online will go out of business. A bankrupt
company could sell its data to a company with a different privacy policy.
Despite the obstacles, online medical records will eventually gain more general
acceptance [5]. The biggest resistance is fear. Once fear is behind the patients and
the companies that store their records, online medical records can really take off.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
615

BIG BROTHER IS HERE AND IS STAYING
Workplace surveillance was the leading privacy concern in 2004, according to an
analysis recently released by the Privacy Foundation, a Denver-based nonprofit
group that performs research and educates the public on privacy issues. In 2004,
millions of Americans were watched at work, as employers became increasingly
concerned about employee productivity and their use of the Internet. Three-
fourths of major U.S. companies now perform some type of in-house electronic
surveillance according to the American Management Association, and 32% of all
companies surveyed now monitor email.
The Big Brother tactic has led to some people losing their jobs. Dow Chemical
fired 68 employees and disciplined 679 others in 2004 for allegedly storing and
sending sexual or violent images on the company’s computers. Xerox, the New
York Times Co., and the CIA were others that fired or disciplined employees be-
cause of alleged bad behavior.
Employers may be rightly concerned about security and productivity issues, or
legal liability arising from emailed sexual banter. But pervasive or spot-check sur-
veillance conducted through keystroke monitoring software, reviewing voice-mail
messages, and using mini video cameras will undoubtedly affect morale and labor
law, as well as employee recruitment and retention practices.
In the future, the Privacy Foundation predicts that employers, especially so-
called new economy companies, may offer “spy-free” workplaces as a fringe bene-
fit—but only as a fringe benefit. Big Brother is here and staying, and, it’s only going
to get worse.
Big Brother Is Watching and Listening
“How the United States Spies on You,” read the afternoon headline in Le Monde
[6], enough, certainly, to jolt Parisians on their commute home. Across Europe re-
cently, politicians and the press were in full cry over a vast Anglo-American elec-
tronic surveillance system named Echelon. The system scans billions of private
emails, faxes, and telephone conversations each hour, according to a report debated
by the European Union Parliament. Echelon, said Parliament President Nicole
Fontaine, is “a violation of the fundamental rights” of European Union citizens.
The most incendiary charge is that Echelon represents economic espionage
nonpareil, helping the United States and its English-speaking allies steal trade (and
jobs) from non-Anglos. Charges cited are mostly old, well-known cases: In 1994,
U.S. intelligence discovered that French companies were offering bribes to Saudi
Arabia and Brazil for multibillion-dollar contracts. Washington complained, and
U.S. firms got the deals.
616
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

U.S. officials insisted last week that American intelligence does not steal trade
secrets for U.S. firms. Even if it tried, the NSA, which oversees Echelon, is drown-
ing in data thanks to the global communications revolution. In some ways, people’s
communications have never been safer from becoming intelligence, and France is
certainly not a slouch in the industrial espionage arena.
Although it has the added spice of Internet-age privacy concerns, the Echelon
flap revealed anew how Europe and the United States are increasingly at odds over
matters from defense cooperation to genetically engineered “frankenfoods.” Just a
few days earlier, a French intelligence report suggested the NSA helped create Mi-
crosoft to eavesdrop around the world. The loser this time may be the United King-
dom, whose special intelligence-sharing accord with Washington looks to some
like disloyalty to the EU.
BioFusion
Buck Rogers, meet John Norseen. Like the comic-strip hero, a 20th-century man
stuck in the 25th century, Norseen feels he’s not quite in the right time: his brain-
research ideas are simply too futuristic, and he admits his current obsession seems
to have been lifted from a Rogers saga. The Lockheed Martin neuroengineer hopes
to turn the “electrohypnomentalophone,” a mind-reading machine invented by
one of Buck’s buddies, from science fiction into science fact.
Norseen’s interest in the brain stems from a Soviet book he read in the mid-
1980s, claiming that research on the mind would revolutionize the military and so-
ciety at large. The former Navy pilot coined the term bioFusion to cover his plans to
map and manipulate gray matter, leading (he hopes) to advances in medicine, na-
tional security, and entertainment. He does not do the research but sees himself as
the integrator of discoveries that will make bioFusion a reality and the ultimate IW
weapon for Big Brother.
BioFusion would be able to convert thoughts into computer commands, pre-
dicts Norseen, by deciphering the brain’s electrical activity. Electromagnetic pulses
would trigger the release of the brain’s own neurotransmitters to fight off disease,
enhance learning, or alter the mind’s visual images, creating what Norseen has
dubbed “synthetic reality.”
The key is finding “brain prints.” Think of your hand touching a mirror. It
leaves a fingerprint. BioFusion would reveal the fingerprints of the brain by using
mathematical models. Just like you can find one person in a million through fin-
gerprints, you can find one thought in a million.
It sounds crazy, but Uncle Sam is listening and watching. NASA, DARPA, and
the Army’s National Ground Intelligence Center have all awarded small basic re-
search contracts to Norseen, who works for Lockheed Martin’s intelligent systems
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
617

division. Norseen is waiting to hear if the second stage of these contracts (portions
of them classified) comes through.
Norseen’s theories are grounded in current science. Mapping human brain
functions is now routine. By viewing a brain scan recorded by a magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) machine, scientists can tell what the person was doing at the time
of the recording, for example, reading or writing. Emotions from love to hate can
be recognized from the brain’s electrical activity.
Applying Neuroscience Research to Antiterrorism
Norseen has submitted a research and development plan to the Pentagon, at its re-
quest, to identify a terrorist’s mental profile. A miniaturized brain-mapping device
inside an airport metal detector would screen passengers’ brain patterns against a
dictionary of brain prints. Norseen predicts profiling by brain print will be in place
by 2009.
A pilot could fly a plane by merely thinking, indicates Norseen. Scientists have
already linked mind and machine by implanting electrodes into a paralyzed man’s
brain; he can control a computer’s cursor with his mind. Norseen would like to
draw on Russian brain-mimicking software and American brain-mapping break-
throughs to allow that communication to take place in a less invasive way. A mod-
ified helmet could record a pilot’s brain waves. When you say “right 090 degrees,”
the computer would see that electrical pattern in the brain and turn the plane 090
degrees. If the pilot misheard instructions to turn 090 degrees and was thinking
“080 degrees,” the helmet would detect the error, then inject the right number via
electromagnetic waves.
Finally, if this research pans out, you can begin to manipulate what someone is
thinking even before they know it. Norseen feels he is “agnostic” on the moral ram-
ifications, that he’s not a mad scientist—just a dedicated one. The ethics don’t con-
cern him, but they should concern someone.
SUMMARY
This chapter has considered the application of civilian information operations
(CIOs) to the conventional warfare environment. Although the array of CIO tools
and techniques has been presented as discrete elements in a schematic diagram, the
CIO environment is complex, multidimensional, interactive, and still developing.
Accordingly, the introduction of a CIO capability into an existing military force re-
quires careful consideration and adherence to a series of principles espoused within
this chapter. These principles are defined within a framework of concepts includ-
ing information assurance, information superiority, and information dominance.
618
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

This framework can be applied to both the introduction of a CIO capability and the
application of CIO’s in information warfare.
CIOs will change the nature of future wars and will eventually evolve into a sep-
arate paradigm of warfare—IW. However, CIOs can be applied to today’s conven-
tional environment, and it is within this context that more urgent attention from
military planners is required. CIOs offer both a support capability to existing arms
of the military and an additional dimension to conventional warfare. They may be
used to strike enemy systems, control the overall information environment, deter
enemy aggression, or support either themselves or other military strategies. Re-
gardless of which tasks they are employed for, CIOs offer a significant addition to
the conventional inventory and should be developed as a matter of priority as an es-
sential joint force operational capability in dealing with the civilian casualties of IW
as follows.
Conclusions
Information warfare (IW) is the latest development in a long list of revolutions
in military affairs based on new technology (other examples include the intro-
duction of airplanes, the atom bomb, and long-range missiles).
IW is defined as an attack on information systems for military advantage using
tactics of destruction, denial, exploitation, or deception.
Information systems are so critical to military operations that it is often more
effective to attack an opponent’s information systems than to concentrate on
destroying its military forces directly.
In the civilian context, the U.S. economic, social, and political structures are
increasingly dependent on complex and extensive systems for financial trans-
actions, telecommunications, electric power, energy distribution, and trans-
portation. Because these systems rely on each other, a serious disruption in any
one system will cascade quickly through the other systems, potentially causing
a national security crisis. Under these circumstances, the ability of the govern-
ment to respond will be interrupted and severely constrained.
In addition to outages caused by natural disasters and accidents, these systems
present a tempting target for IW attack to those contemplating an action
against U.S. interests.
IW provides a new context for the application of ethical theories.
The ethical questions about IW are not meant to be a complete set of ethical
questions, but rather a subjective assessment of what are the ethical questions
derived from the most important issues exposed by IW.
New unforeseen ethical questions will inevitably arise from IW in the near future.
It is hoped that this research will begin a dialog on the issues and lay a frame-
work for more substantive work by ethicists.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
619

IW and its complement (protection from IW) require important new research
efforts from both the technology and ethics research communities.
The threat of IW raises the following ethical challenges: (1) What constitutes an
act of war in the Information Age? (2) What are the ethical implications of the
blurring distinction between acts of war, acts of espionage, and acts of terror-
ism? (3) Can IW be considered nonlethal? (4) Is it ethical to set expectations for
a “bloodless war” based on IW? (5) Is it ethically correct to respond to IW tac-
tics with IW tactics? (6) Can protection from IW take place in the United
States, given our democratic freedoms?
An Agenda for Action
Three policy questions dominate the issue of critical infrastructure protection for
civilian casualties of IW: how limited should the government’s role be, what is ad-
equate infrastructure security and how will appropriate standards be determined,
and what data does the government need from business and why? None seems fun-
damentally settled, if only because policy continues to develop. There are more
questions than answers. Nonetheless, a few basic principles are emerging that
should guide infrastructure protection efforts.
The U.S. government needs to set an agenda for action that goes beyond the
work already done in preparation for civilian casualties of IW. Action steps should
include, but not be limited to the 10 areas as shown in Table F19.1 of Appendix F.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review
questions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case
project. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Information warfare (IW) is the latest development in a short list
of revolutions in military affairs based on new technology (other examples
include the introduction of airplanes, the atom bomb, and long-range missiles).
2.
True or False? Information systems are so critical to military operations that it
is often less effective to attack an opponent’s information systems than to con-
centrate on destroying its military forces directly.
3.
True or False? IW is defined as an attack on information systems for military
disadvantage using tactics of destruction, denial, exploitation, or deception.
620
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

4.
True or False? Old unforeseen ethical questions will inevitably arise from IW in
the near future.
5.
True or False? IW provides an old context for the application of ethical theories.
Multiple Choice
1.
The following are critical national infrastructures as listed by the executive
order, except:
A. Electric power system
B.
Gas and oil storage and transportation
C. Web site
D. Banking and finance
E.
Transportation
2.
For a strategy of deterrence to work the following must hold, except:
A. The incident must not be well defined.
B.
The identity of the perpetrator must be unambiguous.
C. The will and ability to carry out a deterrence strike must be believed.
D. The perpetrator must have something of value at stake.
E.
The deterrence strike must be controllable.
3.
In what has been called the “complex-system issue,” the following are axioms,
except:
A. Complex systems fail in unpredictable ways from causes that seem to be
minor and, often, obvious flaws in retrospect.
B.
Complex systems pass in unpredictable ways from causes that seem to be
minor and, often, obvious flaws in retrospect.
C. The failure of a complex system may be exceptionally difficult to discover
and repair.
D. Complex systems fail at inopportune moments—usually during demand-
ing system use when the consequences of failure are highest.
4.
The following requirements of jus ad bellum were developed by Thomas
Aquinas in the 13th century, except:
A. The resort to force must have a just cause.
B.
It must be authorized by a competent authority.
C. It is expected to produce a preponderance of evil over good.
D. It must have a reasonable chance of success.
E.
It must be a last resort.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
621

5.
By changing perspectives from defense to offense, the following are in the U.S.
arsenal to wage IW against an adversary, except:
A. Offensive software (viruses, worms, trojan horses)
B.
Sniffing or “wiretapping” software (enabling the capture of an adversary’s
communications)
C. Chipping (malicious software embedded in systems by manufacturer)
D. Directed non-energy weapons (designed to destroy electronics, not hu-
mans and buildings)
E.
Psychological operations (sophisticated and covert propaganda tech-
niques)
Exercise
A global supplier of integrated circuits for personal and networked computers also
produces microprocessors, flash memory devices, and silicon-based solutions for
communications and networking applications, at manufacturing facilities in the
United States, Europe, Japan, and Asia. The company has been conducting internal
investigations since the late 1990s, but they needed to ensure that they had the
proper processes in place to meet federal requirements regarding rules of evidence.
How was the computer forensics specialist team (CFST) able to go about conduct-
ing the company’s investigation?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
With 650 attorneys in 9 U.S. offices and a global reach throughout Europe, Asia,
and Latin America, a large law firm serves many of the world’s largest and best-
known businesses, nonprofit organizations, and individuals. Founded in 1906, the
firm is a leader in innovative legal services—overseeing the functionality and main-
tenance of approximately 1,800 machines on a daily basis. The use of a CFS at the
firm falls into several different categories surrounding internal compliance and
policy enforcement: inappropriate usage, where users might be violating internal
corporate policy and visiting inappropriate outside sites; intentional misuse, where
users have done something they know is inappropriate and there is a need to find
out where the action originated; and, the search for specific information. These
areas may also overlap during an investigation. For intentional misuse, the firm
used a CFS to reach out and find where an action originated to help them build a
case to refer to human resources. How would a CFS go about conducting an inves-
tigation under these circumstances?
622
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Case Project
An incident was discovered by a global pharmaceutical and medical manufacturing
company that caused major concerns. Their email filtering tool had identified dia-
log from a senior manager’s email account that contained inappropriate state-
ments. This manager was a 20-year veteran who had an impeccable employee
record, and prior to this incident the employee’s behavior had never been in ques-
tion. Further investigation was required to confirm or deny the alleged behavior. It
was very important to be able to respond quickly to resolve the potential situation,
and to be discreet, in order to protect the manager’s privacy and good reputation.
How did the CFS go about conducting the investigation?
Optional Team Case Project
A CFS was hired by a client to investigate the theft of trade secrets by a former em-
ployee. A product manufacturer (client) alleged that a former employee removed
files containing corporate secrets from their computer systems and then used these
secrets as the basis for establishing a new company, making a competitive product
line, and marketing to the client’s customer base. Litigation had been ongoing for
two years, allowing the opposition to continue their business operations and begin
to target the suppliers and vendors of the client, resulting in significant lost revenue.
How was the CFS able to go about conducting the investigation?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Satellite Encryption, Academic Press, New York, 1999.
[2] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., Identity Theft, Prentice Hall, New York, 2002.
[4] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[5] Vacca, John R., Public Key Infrastructure: Building Trusted Applications and
Web Services, Auerbach Publications, Boca Raton, FL, 2004.
[6] Cypel, Sylvain, “How the United States Spies on You,” Le Monde, March 5,
2002.
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of Information Warfare
623

This page intentionally left blank 

Advanced Computer
Forensics Systems and
Future Directions
V
T
he fifth part of this book discusses advanced computer forensics, with a sum-
mary, conclusions, and recommendations.
Part

This page intentionally left blank 

T
he rise of the so-called information economy, borne along by proliferating
computers, sprawling telecommunications, and the Internet, has radically
transformed how people do business, govern, entertain themselves, and con-
verse with friends and family. Private documents that in the past would have been
committed to paper and hand-delivered or stowed under lock and key are now rou-
tinely created, sent, and stored electronically.
The very things that allow such speed and ease of communication have also
made it far more difficult to ensure one’s privacy [1]. In an electronic age, an in-
terloper can intercept and alter messages far more easily now than when face-to-
face exchanges were the norm. Mounting concern over the new threats to privacy
and security has led to widespread adoption of cryptography. Once the purview of
professional spies, strong encryption is now available worldwide to any amateur
with a PC and inexpensive, off-the-shelf software.
Over the past two decades, individuals and businesses alike have embraced the
technology, using it for everything from sending email and storing medical records
and legal contracts to conducting online transactions. Cryptographic algorithms
are written into all the most popular World Wide Web browsers and can be read-
ily incorporated into most email programs.
If ordinary individuals can now encrypt a message in all but unbreakable form,
then so can criminals, terrorists, and other troublemakers. That prospect has gov-
ernments on edge. In the past, armed (or not) with a court warrant, police could
readily get at hidden documents by, for example, forcing a safe, but physical force
is of no use in decoding computer-encrypted data.
This turn of events has led many governments worldwide to view the technol-
ogy as a grave threat to social order and to seek to control its spread. Repressive
regimes fear that dissident groups will use encryption to promote their subversive
20
Advanced Computer
Forensics
627

ideas. Democratic governments, too, fret over the possibility that encryption will be
used to further the activities of drug dealers, militant dissenters, and assorted ene-
mies of the state. Indeed, the U.S. government once categorized encryption tech-
nology as a controlled munition, on a par with nuclear weapons, and until very
recently it banned the export of the most advanced encryption products.
State controls have met with fierce protests, pitting governments against an un-
likely confederacy of privacy rights advocates, cryptography experts, and corpora-
tions with a financial stake in promoting encryption’s use. The ensuing battle over
encryption has taken on several dimensions—technical, legal, ethical, and social. At
times, the arguments have assumed the same rigidity and polarization as certain re-
ligious debates.
With the rise of hard-to-crack encryption, sensitive data is easier to protect—
and criminal activity tougher to monitor. The following section will review the ad-
vanced encryption techniques now available worldwide and discuss the legal
campaigns that governments have mounted in response, including the changes re-
cently proposed to U.S. export laws.
ADVANCED ENCRYPTION: THE NEED TO CONCEAL
On German television several years ago, a stunned audience looked on as an un-
suspecting Web surfer had his computer scanned while he was visiting a site. The
site operators determined that a particular online banking program was installed on
his computer, and they remotely modified a file in it so that the next time the user
connected to his bank online, he also directed his bank (unbeknownst to him) to
send a payment to the owners of that Web site.
The vulnerability of computer data affects everyone. Whenever a computer is
connected to a network, be that a corporate intranet or the Internet, unless proper
precautions are taken, the data residing in the machine can be accessed and other-
wise modified by another knowledgeable user. Even computer data that the user
may believe to be deleted or overwritten can be retrieved. Courts now routinely
subpoena individuals’ and companies’ magnetic media as evidence; forensic experts
can reconstruct data files that have been erased. In these cases, possession is not
nine-tenths of the law. The best way to protect electronic data is to encrypt it.
The purpose of encryption is to render a document unreadable by all except
those authorized to read it. The content of the original document, referred to by
cryptographers as “plaintext,” is scrambled using an algorithm and a variable, or
key. The key is a randomly selected string of numbers; generally speaking, the
longer the string, the stronger the security.
Provably unbreakable encryption has been around since the dawn of recorded
history, and although computers have made encryption more accessible, they are
628
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

certainly not a requirement. One precomputer method is the conceptually simple,
yet very strong, encryption scheme known as the one-time pad, developed in 1926
by Gilbert S. Vernam (see sidebar, “Computer-Free Encryption”).
The term “unbreakable encryption” is somewhat misleading. In many cases, the
plaintext has a limited lifespan, and so the protection afforded by encryption need
not last forever. Tactical data, for example, often requires encryption that takes
only slightly longer to break than the useful life of that data. This is often forgotten
in debates about the relative strengths of encryption methods.
COMPUTER-FREE ENCRYPTION
The durable encrypting scheme known as the one-time pad gets its name from the
use of a key once and once only for just one message. It works like this:
Toni, the sender of a sensitive message wakes up one morning and starts shout-
ing out two-digit numbers at random: 56, 34, 01, 92, 27, 11, and so on. These num-
bers become the key. Toni then assigns a sequential number to each letter of the
alphabet: A = 01, B = 02, C = 03, D = 04, E = 05, and so on.
Next, she encodes the plaintext word “hello,” which, in accordance with the pre-
ceding sequential numbering of the letters, corresponds to the sequence 08, 05, 12,
12, 15. She then does a simple modulo-10 addition with no carry, using the key she
generated in the preceding. In other words,
H  E  L  L  O
08 05 12 12 15
+ 56 34 01 92 27
______________
= 54 39 13 04 32
This last sequence (54, 39, 13, 04, 32) is the ciphertext, which gets sent to Wolf-
gang, the intended recipient. Note that the same plaintext letters do not necessarily get
encrypted into the same ciphertext symbols (the letter L is both 13 and 04 in this case).
Advanced Computer Forensics
629
q

Wolfgang has an exact copy of the key (56, 34, and so on). To decode Toni’s
message, he does the reverse operation, again with no carry:
54 39 13 04 32
_ 56 34 01 92 27
______________
= 08 05 12 12 15
= H  E  L  L  O
Generating long keys by “shouting out” long strings of numbers can be imprac-
tical, so in modern applications of the one-time pad, computers are often assigned
to create the keys. The result is not truly random: computers’ pseudorandom num-
ber generators use only 16 (or, in some cases, 32) bits to store their values. The
entire space of such values can be searched within a week or so. One remedy is to
tweak the pseudorandom number generator by applying an external physical
process to generate noise—maybe a sufficiently amplified semiconductor junction
of 1/f noise—but that further requires removing the influence of predictable exter-
nal influences, such as 50–60-Hz noise.
A self-evident shortcoming of the one-time pad is that the key is at least as long
as the plaintext being encrypted. To escape cryptanalytic attacks involving statistical
analyses, the key must be used only once. A more serious shortcoming is that the
same key is used to both encrypt and decrypt. The sender and the recipient, there-
fore, need a totally secure opportunity to exchange the key, which is hard to come by
when the two are far apart.
An amusing feature of the one-time pad is that a fake key can be created that will
“decode” the encrypted document into something quite innocent—an excerpt from
the Bible, say, or the Bill of Rights. Alternatively, a fake key could be designed to yield
a plausible-looking, but still false, document, thereby fooling people into believing
they have cracked the code [2].
Symmetric Encryption
Vernam’s one-time pad is an example of symmetric encryption, in which the same
key is used to both encode and decode a message. Many of the encryption schemes
630
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

available today are also symmetric, most notably the Data Encryption Standard, or
DES (see sidebar, “A Menu of Symmetric Encryption Algorithms”).
A MENU OF SYMMETRIC ENCRYPTION ALGORITHMS
In symmetric encryption, the same key is used to encrypt and decrypt a message.
Here are the most popular.
THE DATA ENCRYPTION STANDARD
DES was developed in the 1970s and is still used worldwide, although it has been
replaced by the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).
TRIPLE DES
Encrypting the already DES-encrypted output with a different output with a differ-
ent key provides no measurable security, but adding a third round of DES encryp-
tion yields a highly secure, albeit slower, algorithm. Most purportedly triple-DES
implementations, however, use only two keys: key 1 for the first round of encryp-
tion, key 2 for the second round, and key 1 again for the third round.
THE INTERNATIONAL DATA ENCRYPTION ALGORITHM
The international data encryption algorithm (IDEA) uses a 128-bit key developed by
ETH Zurich, in Switzerland. Its U.S. and European patents are held by Ascom Sys-
tec Ltd. of Bern, Switzerland, but noncommercial use is free. IDEA is viewed as a
good algorithm for all except the best-funded attacks. It is used in Pretty Good Pri-
vacy (PGP) and Speak Freely (a program that allows an encrypted digitized voice to
be sent over the Internet).
BLOWFISH
Blowfish is a 64-bit block code with key lengths of 32 to 448 bits. Developed in 1993
by Bruce Schneier of Counterpane Internet Security Inc., San Jose, California, it is
used in over 100 products and is viewed as one of the best available algorithms.
TWOFISH
Twofish, also developed by Schneier, is reputedly very strong, and, as one of five can-
didates for AES, is now being extensively reviewed by cryptanalysts.
Advanced Computer Forensics
631
q

RC4
RC4 is a stream cipher of unknown security, designed by Ronald Rivest for RSA
Security Inc., Bedford, Massachusetts. It adds the output of a pseudorandom num-
ber generator bit by bit to the sequential bits of the digitized plaintext [2].
Developed in the 1970s, DES is still popular, especially in the banking industry.
It is a block cipher, meaning that it encodes text in fixed-bit blocks using a key
whose length is also fixed in length. The alternative, known as stream ciphers, en-
code the stream of data sequentially without segmenting it into blocks.
After nearly three decades of use, DES is headed for the garbage can. Currently,
AES has already replaced DES in many organizations worldwide. In all likelihood,
AES will become nearly as ubiquitous as its predecessor. Unlike DES, however, it
will be competing with other algorithms—algorithms that will not suffer from any
suspicion that the U.S. government has a back door into the code.
For some encryption algorithms, a plaintext that is repetitive will result in a repet-
itive ciphertext. This is clearly undesirable because the encrypted output betrays im-
portant information about the plaintext. One solution is to encrypt the ciphertext
block and add it bit by bit to the sequential bits of the previously encrypted plaintext.
Another problem with symmetric key encryption is that it requires that the
sender and recipient of a message have a secure means for exchanging the encryp-
tion key. This is clearly difficult when the two parties are far apart, and the problem
is compounded every time the keys are updated. Repeated use of the same key cre-
ates its own security weakness.
Public Key Encryption
An ingenious scheme that avoids many of the problems of symmetric encryption
was proposed in 1976 by Stanford professor Martin Hellman and his graduate stu-
dent Whitfield Diffie. Their public key encryption scheme, first described in IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, allows the recipient to verify that the sender is
who he or she appears to be and that the message has not been tampered with.
The method works like this: Bob and Alice have a copy of openly available soft-
ware that implements the public-key algorithm. Each directs his or her copy of the
software to create a key, or rather, a pair of keys. A file encrypted with one key of a
pair can only be decrypted with the other key of that same pair, one key cannot be
mathematically inferred from the other key in the pair.
Bob makes known (by email, by posting to a Web site, or however else he
chooses) one of the keys of his pair; this becomes his public key. Alice does the
632
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

same. Each retains under tight control the other key in the pair, which is now his or
her private key.
If Bob wants to encrypt a message that only Alice can read, he uses Alice’s pub-
lic key (which is available to anyone); that message can only be decoded by Alice’s
private key (Figure 20.1) [2]. The reciprocal process (sending an encrypted message
from Alice to Bob) is clear. In effect, Bob and Alice can now exchange encrypted
Advanced Computer Forensics
633
Private
Key
Public
Key
Plaintext     Decrypt      Ciphertext         Encrypt      Plaintext
    _______
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
1
2
Alice
Plaintex     Decrypt      Ciphertext
_______
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
1
2
Alice
Bob
Bob
Bob
Imposter
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
FIGURE 20.1 In public-key encryption [top], Alice encrypts a message using Bob’s public
key, and Bob decrypts it using his private key. This scheme allows encrypted files to be
sent in the absence of a secure means to exchange keys, a major improvement over
symmetric encryption. It’s still possible, though, for Alice to receive a public key (or a
conventional symmetric key) that ostensibly came from Bob, but that, in fact, belongs to a
third party claiming to be Bob—the so-called man-in-the-middle attack (bottom).

files in the absence of a secure means to exchange keys, a major advantage over
symmetric encryption.
Sender authentication verifies that the sender is who he or she appears to be.
Suppose Bob sends a message to the world after encrypting it with his private key.
The world uses Bob’s public key to decrypt that message, thereby validating that it
could only have come from Bob.
Message authentication, the validation that the message received is an unal-
tered copy of the message sent, is also easy: Before encrypting an outgoing message,
Bob performs a cryptographic hash function on it, which amounts to an elaborate
version of a checksum. The hash function compresses the bits of the plaintext mes-
sage into a fixed-size digest, or hash value, of 128 or more bits. It is extremely dif-
ficult to alter the plaintext message without altering the hash value (Figure 20.2).
The widely used hash function MD5, developed by Rivest in 1991, hashes a file
of arbitrary length into a 128-bit value. Another common hash function is SHA
(Secure Hash Algorithm), published by the U.S. government in 1995, which hashes
a file into a longer, 160-bit value.
Public-key encryption has been a part of every Web browser for the past few
years. It is used, for example, when sending credit-card information to an online
vendor or when sending email using the standard S/MIME protocol and a security
certificate, which can either be obtained from online commercial vendors or cre-
ated locally using special software.
One drawback of public key encryption is that it is more computationally in-
tensive than symmetric encryption. To cut back on the computing, almost all
634
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
Cybertext
_______
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
________
________
________
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
Bob
Private
Key
Public
Key
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
Plaintex
Decrypted
plaintext 
Hash
Alice
Private
Key
Public
Key
Encrypt
Decrypt
Sender
authentication
_______
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
________
  ________
Encrypted
hash value
Compare
hash value
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
    _______
   ________
   ________
   ________
   ________
  ________
  ________
  ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
 ________
Message
authentication
Decrypted
hash value
FIGURE 20.2
Public key encryption allows Alice to verify that a message from Bob
actually came from him and that it is unaltered from the original. Here’s how: Bob
encrypts the hash value with his private key, encrypts the plaintext with Alice’s (green)
public key, and sends both to her. Alice then decodes the received ciphertext using her
own (orange) private key, decodes the hash value using Bob’s public key, thereby
confirming the sender’s authenticity, and compares the decrypted hash value with one
that she calculates locally on the just decrypted plaintext, thereby confirming the
message’s integrity.

implementations call on the symmetric approach to encrypt the plaintext and
then use public key encryption to encode the local key. The differently encrypted
plaintext and key are then both sent to the recipient.
In terms of resistance to brute force cryptanalysis (the exhaustive search of all
possible decryption keys) a good 128-bit symmetric encryption algorithm is about
as strong as a 2,304-bit public key algorithm. Realistically, though, the public key
should be even longer than that, because the same public and private key pair is
used to protect all messages to the same recipient. In other words, although a bro-
ken symmetric key typically compromises only a single message, a broken public
key pair compromises all messages to a given recipient. To be sure, cracking an en-
cryption key is just one way to get at sensitive data (see sidebar, “Human and Hard-
ware Frailties”).
HUMAN AND HARDWARE FRAILTIES
The encryption of material to withstand a brute force attack still leaves many
avenues open to invasion. Often, the real weaknesses in security lie in the human
tendency to cut corners. It is all too tempting to use easy-to-remember passwords or
keep unencrypted copies of sensitive documents on one’s computer, intentionally or
otherwise. Windows-based computers and many software products, in their quest to
be user-friendly, often leave extensive electronic trails across the hard drive. These
trails include not only copies of unencrypted files that the user deleted but also pass-
words and keys typed.
Furthermore, unless each file is encrypted using a different key or a different
encryption method, an attacker who can somehow read one encrypted file from or to a
given person can probably also read many other encrypted files from or to that person.
Cryptanalysts have also been known to exploit the hardware on which the
encryption algorithm is used. In 1995, the so-called timing attack became popular.
It allowed someone with access to the hardware to draw useful inferences from the
precise time it took to encrypt a document using a particular type of algorithm.
Public key encryption algorithms such as RSA and Diffie-Hellman are open to such
attacks. Other exploitable hardware phenomena include power consumption and
RF radiation. It is also possible to assess the electronic paper trail left behind when
the hardware is made to fail in the course of an encryption or decryption.
Most of today’s commercial email programs, Web browsers, and other Internet
applications include some encryption functions. Unfortunately, these schemes are
often implemented as an afterthought by engineers who may be very competent in
their respective fields but have minimal experience in cryptography.
Advanced Computer Forensics
635
q

Just like a decent forgery, bad encryption can look like good encryption on the
surface. In general, however, “proprietary,” “secret,” or “revolutionary” schemes
that have not withstood the scrutiny of cryptanalysts over time are to be avoided.
One easy test is to attempt to decrypt a file with a different key from the one used
for encryption. If the software proudly informs the user that this is the wrong key,
that encryption method should be discarded. It means that the encryption key has
been stored in some form along with the encrypted file. The cryptanalyst would
merely have to keep trying different keys until the software identified the correct
one. This is only one of many weaknesses. Given the preceding, the odds favor the
person attacking an encrypted file, unless the person being attacked is very knowl-
edgeable in the ways of information security [2].
Public key encryption is also a victim of the uncertainty besetting any crypto-
graphic scheme when the two communicating parties lack a secure channel by
which to confirm the other’s identity (Figure 20.1). There is, as yet, no technical fix
to this problem.
One of the most commonly used public key algorithms is the 24-year-old RSA,
named for its creators, Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge. Its security derives from the
difficulty of factoring large prime integers. At present, a key length of at least 1,024
bits is generally held secure enough. However, RSA may be somewhat vulnerable to
“chosen plaintext attacks,” attacks in which the cryptanalyst already possesses a
plaintext file and the corresponding RSA-encrypted ciphertext.
The Diffie-Hellman public key algorithm is used mostly for exchanging
keys. Its security rests on the difficulty of computing discrete logarithms in a fi-
nite field generated by a large prime number, which is regarded as even harder
than factoring large numbers into their prime-number components. The algo-
rithm is generally viewed as secure if long enough keys and proper key genera-
tors are used.
By far the most popular public key encryption scheme is PGP (pretty good pri-
vacy). PGP was created in 1991 by a programmer and activist named Philip Zim-
mermann as a means of protecting email. After one of his colleagues posted PGP on
the Internet, the Department of Justice launched an investigation of Zimmermann
for possible violation of U.S. laws governing export of encryption products. The
case against him was eventually dropped in 1996, after which Zimmermann started
a company to market PGP. It has since become a mainstream commercial product,
sold by Network Associates Inc., of Santa Clara, California, although freeware ver-
sions continue to be available from the Internet.
636
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Crackdown on Cryptography
What happened to Zimmermann is just one small skirmish in the much wider
campaign waged by governments worldwide against cryptography. At issue is
whether, and to what extent, persons and organizations should have the ability to
encrypt information that the state cannot decipher.
Private citizens have legitimate reasons to preserve confidentiality: to protect
trade secrets, to prevent legal or medical records from falling into strangers’ hands,
and to voice dissenting political or religious opinions without retribution. The in-
ternational group Human Rights Watch, for example, regularly encrypts eye-witness
reports of serious abuse, gathered in parts of the globe where the victims may be
subject to further reprisals.
From a government’s perspective, however, encryption is a double-edged
sword: it has honorable purposes, true, but it can also be used to conceal out-and-
out criminality. In an effort to keep encryption from gaining ground, many coun-
tries have passed laws criminalizing its import, export, and use.
To be sure, exactly what constitutes a crime is not always clear; governments have
been known to capitalize on the use of the term “criminal” and apply it to conduct
they dislike or consider threatening.
The proliferation of encryption has coincided with the explosive growth of the
Internet. Nowadays, the man in the street can reach an instant global audience of mil-
lions, bypassing the chain of command that rules almost any institution, be that the
military, a religious group, or a corporation. In essence, the simultaneous spread of
encryption and the Internet has amounted to a transfer of power to the individual.
This turn of events has been viewed differently by different states. An interest-
ing case is the People’s Republic of China. There, the outlawed religious sect Falun
Dafa has used the Web to great effect to spread its ideology and recruit new mem-
bers. Repeated attempts by the authorities to shut down the group have largely
failed. Recently, the government began requiring any company doing business in
China to disclose the types of Internet encryption software it uses, as well as the
names of employees who use it. It further banned the sale of foreign-designed en-
cryption products. Overseeing the regulations is a newly established body, the State
Encryption Management Commission, which is believed to be staffed by China’s
secret police.
China’s unwavering opposition to encryption suggests a more fundamental
reason why a government (any government) would want to control the technology:
to preserve the ability to exercise censorship. Even enlightened and democratic
regimes have topics that are taboo, and when any and all information being ex-
changed by private citizens can be monitored, it has a chilling effect on dissenting
Advanced Computer Forensics
637

opinions. Conversely, when citizens can communicate freely and privately using
encryption, censorship becomes unenforceable. Few sovereign states can accept
this loss of control. It’s like having two rude guests at one’s dinner table who keep
whispering in each other’s ears.
Encryption, though, is good for business, and that factor is largely responsible
for the gradual relaxing in the U.S. government’s stance on encryption. Until 1996,
strong encryption technology was listed as a munition, and until just recently, it fell
under the same export restrictions as advanced weaponry. Under concerted pres-
sure from the U.S. business community, which claimed that such controls were re-
ducing sales and choking the growth of electronic commerce, the government came
out with a revised policy recently that lifts many of the bureaucratic burdens from
companies wanting to export encryption. Even so, every encryption product must
still undergo a one-time review by the U.S. Commerce Department’s Bureau of Ex-
port Administration before it can be exported; sales to the so-called terrorist five
(Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan, and Syria) are still excluded. The new stipulation
has some cynics wondering if only products with an identifiable weakness will re-
ceive an export license.
What’s more (although encryption proponents have largely welcomed the re-
laxation of export rules), another concern has been raised: the same legislation
would grant law enforcement new powers, such as the right to present a plaintext
in court without disclosing how it was obtained from a suspect’s encrypted files.
Here the potential for abuse is obvious.
Other Legal Responses
The United States is not alone in backing away from strict encryption bans. What
started as a global campaign to limit encryption has splintered into various ap-
proaches, with some governments now even encouraging encryption among their
citizens as a precaution against snooping by other governments.
Generally speaking, laws pertaining to encryption are quite convoluted and rife
with exceptions and qualifications. In Sweden, for instance, encryption importation
and use are allowed, and so is its export, except to certain countries; authorities may
search someone’s premises for a decryption key but may not compel the person to
assist in the investigation by, for example, handing over the key to the authorities.
The first international attempt to control encryption was made by the 17-coun-
try Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Strategic Export Controls (COCOM),
which came together in 1991 to restrict the export of items and data deemed “dan-
gerous” if acquired by particular countries. COCOM members, with the notable
exception of the United States, permitted the export of mass-market and public do-
main cryptography and restricted export of strong encryption to select countries
only. One such item was Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) cellular
638
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

telephony [3], which has two grades of encryption. Under COCOM, only the
lower-grade version could be sent to the restricted countries.
Both grades of encryption have since been broken.
In March 1994, COCOM was dissolved, to be replaced the following year by the
multilateral Wassenaar Arrangement, which has now been joined by (at last count)
66 countries. Under the nonbinding agreement, countries agreed to restrict the ex-
port of mass-market software with keys longer than 64 bits.
The arrangement, administered through a small office in Vienna, Austria, is not a
treaty, and thus not subject to mandatory review by any country’s legislature.
Do such encryption bans work? In a word, no. For one thing, the penalty for
using encryption is likely to be far less than the damage caused by disclosing what-
ever was deemed sensitive enough to warrant encryption. What’s more, sophisti-
cated techniques for hiding data, unencrypted or not, are now readily available and
extremely hard to detect, so that prosecution of cryptography-ban violations is all
but impossible. Who can prove that an innocuous-sounding email message re-
porting “The temperature in the garage was 86 degrees” really means “Meet me be-
hind Joe’s garage on August 6”? out of tens of millions of digitized images posted
to a Usenet electronic bulletin board, who can detect the one image in particular,
perhaps of an antique car, that contains a secret message intended for a specific per-
son, who along with millions of unsuspecting others will download that image to
his or her computer?
The very existence of the Internet has made it easy to circumvent bans. In most,
though not all, countries, a sender can log onto any public computer connected to the
Internet, such as those in public libraries or Internet cafés and send encryption soft-
ware anonymously to a recipient, who can also retrieve it anonymously. A would-be
user of encryption software can anonymously download it from any of the thousands
of Internet servers that openly provide a large collection of programs of this kind.
It may make sense for a country to ban the exportation of something that it
alone possesses and that could be used against it, but it makes no sense for a coun-
try to ban the export of what other nations already produce locally. A 2004 survey
by the Cyberspace Policy Institute of George Washington University, in Washing-
ton, DC, identified 4,723 encryption products (hardware and software) developed
in 82 countries.
The study, published before the latest relaxing of U.S. export laws, explains that
on average, the quality of foreign and U.S. products is comparable and that in the
face of continuing U.S. export controls on encryption products, technology and
services, some U.S. companies have financed the creation and growth of foreign
Advanced Computer Forensics
639

cryptographic firms. With the expertise offshore, the relatively stringent U.S. export
controls for cryptographic products can be avoided since products can be shipped
from countries with less stringent controls. 
Nevertheless, in recent years, the war over encryption has moved beyond the
mere control of the technology itself. Although encryption proponents may have
won the first round, law enforcement and intelligence agencies have responded
with a slew of powerful tools for getting at computerized data (encrypted or not).
These efforts are in turn being met by ingenious new schemes for hiding and pro-
tecting information, including one’s identity.
ADVANCED HACKING
Today, as enterprise-wide networks reach the plant floor and zip data to the far side
of the world in a twinkling, and, as the number of computers, personal digital as-
sistants, telephones, and pagers communicating with the network increases, there
is a corresponding increase in the opportunities for a critical blunder that would
allow an attacker to enter your system. The consequences could be ruinous. Ac-
cording to a recent survey by the Computer Security Institute, the cumulative loss
of 520 companies that quantified their losses in 2004 reached $712 million, or
about $1.4 million each. Roughly $595 million of that loss was theft of proprietary
information—information your competitors want.
One of the best places for plant engineers to learn about network security (see
sidebar, “Hack Yourself Before Somebody Else Does”) with a peer in information
technology (IT) is at the Computer Security Resource Center, a Web site
(http://csrc.nist.gov/) established by the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST). There you’ll find primers that explain security issues and technolo-
gies, news about current problems and security initiatives, and downloadable
copies of the standards that govern electronic communication with Uncle Sam.
More than ever, it’s vital that plant engineers work effectively with IT to identify
potential breaches, shore them up, and train everybody to be security conscious.
HACK YOURSELF BEFORE SOMEBODY ELSE DOES
How do you test your system to make sure it’s as safe as possible? Can you recom-
mend software, hardware, or services that can identify security issues before they
become problems? What kind of procedures do you have in place to make sure that
the latest patches are applied to Web servers?
640
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

The best way to retain your network security is to do frequent security audits,
including trying to gain access using easily available hacking tools. In addition, you
should ensure that you only run the services you need and only open the ports
needed by your network.
Your gateway to the Internet should be a system without any important com-
pany data or a hardware solution backed up by a firewall. You should also set up
Windows Update notification for the server and have a backup server ready when
you need to run the update.
Also, you should always check security bulletins and consider joining hacking
mailing groups to find out what’s happening on the other side of computer security.
The main thing is to regularly test the security yourself; then you know what to find
solutions for.
Nor is it only NIST that’s getting into the act. The National Infrastructure Pro-
tection Center (http://www.nipc.gov/) was created by Congress to defend the nation’s
computer networks by serving as the national focal point for gathering information
on threats to critical infrastructures. It is the principal means of facilitating and coor-
dinating the federal government’s response to an incident, mitigating attacks, inves-
tigating threats, and monitoring reconstitution efforts. The center issues updates
about new viruses, Internet frauds, and disruption attempts almost daily. It is located
in the FBI’s Washington headquarters and maintains its own investigative staff.
Cybersecurity isn’t an exclusively local matter, however. A complaint filed by the
U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York provides an instructive exam-
ple of the reach of today’s e-thieves. The complaint alleged that Oleg Zezov and Igor
Yarimaka, residents of Kazakhstan, penetrated the computers of Bloomberg.com, in
New York and demanded $200,000 from the company to tell how they had done it.
Bloomberg agreed to pay, but only following a face-to-face meeting in London.
There, accompanied by undercover London police officers, Bloomberg met with
Zezov and Yarimaka. They repeated their demands, and police arrested them the
next day. The United States is now seeking their extradition.
In view of the preceding incident, computer intrusions have more than tripled
in the past two years. Who are the people trying to get their hands in your data, and
why? Can you fight back by hacking yourself before somebody else does? This part
of the chapter continues the theme of advanced computer forensics by providing
answers to these questions.
Are We a Hacker Nation?
Shadowy, computer-wise predators slip in undetected to steal data, deface Web sites,
crash systems, or just look around. Why? Because hacking has become nothing in recent
Advanced Computer Forensics
641

years if not a good career move. Yesterday’s hackers are today’s security gurus, with
more corporations counting on them for protection.
One reason there are so many types of hackers these days is that hacking—at
least as manifested in its simpler forms such as Web page defacement and denial-
of-service (DoS) attacks (which overwhelm a site with data to prevent users from
accessing it)—has never been easier.
Tools of the Trade
The Internet is filled with Web sites that offer tips and tools for the neophyte
hacker. Kids, criminals, and terrorists are some of the people who avail themselves
of this information—so more and more intruders are knocking at port doors. The
barrier to entering the hacker world has become very low. If you have a political
motivation against wheat farmers and you want to deface their Web page, you
could just go online and learn how to do it.
Despite tighter Web security and stricter penalties for breaking into systems,
hacking attacks have more than tripled in the past two years. The government’s
Computer Emergency Response Team reported about 39,000 cases of corporate
hacking in the United States in 2002, more than 40,000 cases in 2003 and over
62,000 in 2004, and those are just recorded cases. To avoid negative publicity, most
companies don’t report attacks. The statistics cover network break-ins (which can
give a hacker access to data files), Web site vandalism, DoS attacks, and data theft.
The FBI estimates that businesses worldwide lost $5.9 trillion in 2004 from security
breaches perpetrated from within the business.
The risks are personal and professional: hackers can steal passwords and bank
account numbers from your home PC or grab trade secrets from your company
network. Recently, criminal hackers broke into Microsoft’s corporate network and
accessed source code for its software (see sidebar, “Future Threat: Advanced Mali-
cious Code in Software”).
FUTURE THREAT: ADVANCED MALICIOUS CODE IN SOFTWARE
Malicious code embedded in software is not new; users have always run the risk of
downloading a virus or a trojan horse with shareware and games from the Net. The
occasional intruder has even been found in shrink-wrapped products, but the hack
into Microsoft’s source code recently, raises worries that popular software may be
the next target.
Although Microsoft indicates its code was not altered (the code was compared
with previous backups) it’s possible that a criminal hacker could get into a software
manufacturer’s code and insert a trojan horse. Unless software companies improve
their security, you may find yourself the recipient of a gift horse in your next
accounting package.
642
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Hacking also poses risks for national security—sophisticated terrorists or hos-
tile governments could conceivably crash satellite systems, wage economic warfare
by interfering with financial transfers, or even disrupt air traffic control.
Good and Bad Hackers
Not all hackers have malicious intentions. Some hackers work for companies to se-
cure their systems, and some contribute to security by notifying software vendors
when they spot a vulnerability. Breaking things is easy. Building a solution is difficult,
but arguably more fulfilling, but for every hacker who swaps his black hat for a white
one, dozens of others continue to keep governments and companies on their toes.
Hacking will get worse. Bad software is being written faster than vulnerabilities
are exposed. The trend is toward more features in applications, and the more fea-
tures you have, the less security you get. Face it: hackers are not going to go away,
so it’s worthwhile to know who they are and why they do what they do.
Idle Hands
People see movies like WarGames and think hackers are going to start World War
III. The truth is that computer hackers for the most part are smart, bored kids.
Hackers usually start in their teens and stop by the time they’re 30, but anyone can
be a hacker—from the 16-year-old who defaces Web sites to the 36-year-old who
sabotages a former employer’s server. People in the underground indicate that not
all hackers are true hackers.
By Any Other Name
It used to be that hacking had nothing to do with breaking the law or damaging sys-
tems. The first hackers, who emerged at MIT in the 1960s, were driven by a desire
to master the intricacies of computing systems and to push technology beyond its
known capabilities.
The hacker’s ethic, an unwritten dictum governing the hacker world, indicates
that a hacker should do no harm. A hacker should pass through a network without
a trace. Somehow that message has gotten lost in the noise of Web defacements and
data thefts.
Hacker purists get riled when anyone confuses them with crackers—intruders
who damage or steal data, but although some hackers are quick to claim the moral
high ground, the line between hacker and cracker is often blurred. Most hackers,
for instance, don’t believe it’s criminal to break into systems and rifle around. The
law, of course, thinks otherwise. Just because something is illegal doesn’t mean it’s
wrong, but once you go in and destroy data or damage the system, that’s where you
stop being a hacker and you become a criminal.
Advanced Computer Forensics
643

T12, a 20-year-old who admits to some questionable hacking conduct, indicates
he wouldn’t normally damage a site, but if a phone company were to illegally switch
his long-distance carrier and start billing his calls at $10 a minute, he wouldn’t hesi-
tate to take action. This is the kind of situation where one would feel free to just de-
face their site and make it as public as possible.
Diablo, a teenager with the Romanian hacking group Pentaguard, indicates
that a hacker should never abuse his or her powers, but if you penetrate a server and
change the main page, nobody is hurt. The administrator gets embarrassed, and
that’s all.
Pentaguard has defaced more than 100 Web sites (most of them government-
and military-related) and Diablo indicates that he’s careful: he never deletes or
steals data and never crashes the system. This may be true, but the manager of one
site Pentaguard defaced (owned by the Hawaii state legislature) indicated that his
office had to pay $5000 for several new large-capacity hard drives (because the po-
lice confiscated the hacked hard drives as evidence), and the site was down for a
week until the drives arrived.
Signs of the Times
Hacking has definitely changed in the past 43 years. Talk to any hacker over 25, and
he’s likely to lament the passing of the good old days, when coding was an art form
and learning how systems worked was an exercise in persistence. They say new
hackers today are often younger and less skilled than their predecessors and more
likely to focus on showy exploits than the noble pursuit of knowledge.
Many old hackers call the Internet generation of hackers hollow bunnies—such
as gigantic chocolate Easter bunnies filled with nothing but air. Ten years ago, hack-
ers respected information and machines and had to possess knowledge and skills to
hack. Now novices use hacking programs without understanding them and are
more likely to leave havoc in their wake.
Script kiddies receive the bulk of hacker disdain. These are the graffiti kids who
download canned scripts (prewritten hacking programs) for DoS attacks or paint-
by-number Web defacements. The risk here is that an unskilled hacker could re-
lease wanton mayhem in your systems. The hacker might download a buggy
hacking tool to your network that goes awry or execute a wrong command and in-
advertently damage your machines. But script kiddies tend to disappear after a
year. This is the generation of instant gratification, and if they can’t get the hang of
Back Orifice (a more advanced hacking program), they get bored and move on.
Bigger Threats
Script kiddies may get attention, but experts agree that the most dangerous hack-
ers are the ones who don’t make any noise: criminal hackers and cyberterrorists.
644
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

The truly dangerous people are hacking away in the background, drowned out by
the noise and pomp that the script kiddies and DoS packet monkeys have been
making.
Hacking has evolved into professional crime. Amateur hackers are falling into
the minority, and now the fear is the criminal and the terrorist. These are people
like the Russian cracker group that siphoned $20 million from Citibank in 1994 and
the mafia boss in Amsterdam who had hackers access police files so he could keep
ahead of the law.
In 1997, crime syndicates approached hackers to work for them. Now, with so
many easy-to-use hacking tools on the Internet, criminals hardly need hackers to
do their dirty work.
The cyber element that everyone fears most is one you’ve yet to see: foreign
governments, terrorists, and domestic militia groups hacking for a political cause.
The Department of Defense indicates its systems are probed about 583,000 times a
year. It’s difficult to tell if probes are coming from enemies seeking military data or
from “ankle biters”—harmless hackers on a joyride. Regardless, authorities have to
investigate every probe as a potential threat.
The likelihood of obtaining top secret information in this way is small, because
classified data is generally stored on machines not connected to the Net. A more
problematic assault would focus on utilities or satellite and phone systems. Ninety-
two percent of U.S. military communications run through civilian phone networks.
An attack on these systems could impede military communications.
For example, Navy officials recently reported that hackers broke into a Navy re-
search facility in Washington, DC and stole two-thirds of its source code for satel-
lite and missile guidance systems. The Navy indicates that the source code was an
unclassified older version.
Thus, a large-scale cyberattack is imminent. Members of terrorist groups such
as Hezbollah have been educated in Western universities and are capable of devel-
oping such attacks in the future—such as a digital 9-11 attack.
Why Hackers Hack
Aside from criminal and political motives, the reasons that hackers hack range
from malice and revenge to simple boredom. Despite the image of hackers as dys-
functional loners, many are drawn to hacking by the sense of community it gives.
Of course, a big part of hacking’s attraction is the sense of power that comes from
uncovering information you shouldn’t possess. A hacker called Dead Addict once
described the high that comes from discovering valuable information, followed by
the low that comes from realizing you can’t do anything with it.
For example, one hacker knows a little of that rush. He says that he once broke
into a hazardous waste firm and found pretty evil insider information that no one
Advanced Computer Forensics
645

was meant to see. Though he didn’t act on the information, he did log it for possi-
ble use later—just in case he felt like being socially active.
Many hackers who begin as system voyeurs graduate to more serious activities.
It’s easy to be lured to the dark side when you get easy gratification messing around
with individuals such as for example—AOL users. Most hackers are not old enough
to drive a car or vote, but they can exert power over a network.
White Hats
There are a lot of the reasons why hackers’ ability to hack into computers fade with
age. Life fills their time and their ethics begin to change. The majority eventually
find their interest waning. You only have three directions to go with hacking: you
can keep doing the same old tricks, you can become a real criminal cracker, or you
can use those skills wisely to build new software and create a more secure Internet.
Securing the Net is an interest many hackers develop (especially now that em-
ployers are hiring them for their skills). They lament that the public never hears
about their positive acts, such as patching a hole on their way out of a site and let-
ting the administrator know they fixed it. Most companies just focus on the fact
that you hacked them and want to come after you with a lawsuit. It’s made hackers
reluctant to help them.
An even sorer point between hackers and vendors is the issue of releasing vul-
nerability exploits. These are findings about a security problem that hackers (and
researchers) post on the Net. Vendors indicate hackers expose the holes for anyone
to exploit and should instead report them to vendors first so they can fix them. The
hacking community frowns on people who don’t notify vendors, but when they do,
vendors often ignore them. Most software companies won’t do anything about a
problem until you make it public. Then they have to fix it.
Vendors have a duty to develop secure software. Hackers, on the other hand,
force vendors to admit their errors after they’ve hacked into their software. Manu-
facturers are grossly negligent in selling software that doesn’t stand up. What if they
were producing cars that were this unsafe? The software they give us is not safe to
drive in cyberspace.
Anything that’s attached to the Internet is potentially hackable, and if you’re
using a Windows 2000, XP, or 2003 machine, nothing that is on that computer is
secure. Better security is in everyone’s best interest, and hackers should play a cru-
cial role in this. The hacker kids who are going to Def Con today are the software
architects of tomorrow. The same thing that makes them hackers makes them valu-
able to employers in the future.
All of this points to the fact that although hackers may be the Internet’s great-
est annoyance, their warnings are ignored about security at everyone’s peril. The
646
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

network that can’t guard against a bored 18-year-old hacking in his or her spare
time, can’t hope to protect itself from a hostile government or tech-savvy terrorist.
ADVANCED TRACKER HACKERS
As the number of computer crimes spirals, the computer forensics experts’ (a rare
breed of security pros) skills are getting ever more precious. These are the data de-
tectives who search for digital clues remaining on computers after malicious (or
black-hat) hackers have done their dirty deeds. Cyber sleuths analyze email, Web site
records, and hard drive data, looking for clues to the identity of criminals and crack-
ers, much like gumshoes examine crime scenes for fingerprints and stray hairs.
It’s not only the number of crimes that’s fueling the need for these skills but
also the increasing sophistication of criminals. The black-hat community is moving
forward at a pace that outstrips the ability of the average system administrator or
law enforcement agency. That means that both e-businesses and law enforcement
agencies are paying plenty to find experts to sift through evidence left behind at dig-
ital crime scenes.
In other words, security consultants and auditors are well-compensated for
their knowledge—especially since the 9-11 attacks. In a recent survey of more than
11,000 IT managers, security consultants, on average, make $20,000 more per year
than network administrators. Overall, salaries for all positions grew 33.9% to an av-
erage of $109,176 in 2004 (see Table 20.1).
TABLE 20.1 The Salary Protection Racket
Position
Average salary
Increase from 2003
Security consultants
$121,783
+23.7%
Security auditors
$110,722
+26.7%
Security administrators
$101,368
+29.9%
System administrators
$108,313
+44.3%
Network administrators
$104,047
+45.1%
The need for computer forensics is growing exponentially. The need is partic-
ularly acute at local, state, federal, and military law enforcement agencies that host
computer forensics divisions, which are looking for individuals adept at solving
hacking and intellectual property cases. An increasing number of corporations are
using computer forensics to resolve internal matters such as fraud, violations of
trade secrets, and inappropriate use of company computers.
Advanced Computer Forensics
647

The job is intense and tedious and requires nerves of steel. Most specialists
have years of programming or computer-related experience, strong analytical skills,
and the patience to invest days taking apart a computer in search of evidence. If
things keep going the way they are, it probably won’t hurt if these experts don’t
mind overtime.
Other professional attributes needed to catch a thief are strong computer sci-
ence fundamentals, a broad understanding of security vulnerabilities, and strong
system administration skills. Cyber sleuths use these skills to seek information to
reconstruct how a system was hacked. The number and complexity of intrusions
has increased at an alarming rate. Cyber sleuths have been forced to find ways to try
to keep up with intruder tools as they have progressed in sophistication.
Experts gather this data and create an audit trail for criminal prosecutions.
They search for information that may be encrypted or hidden, along with unallo-
cated disk space. Most cunningly of all, they set traps using vulnerable computers
to lure malicious hackers into giving away themselves and their techniques.
Computer forensics specialists must have strong analytic skills and excellent
verbal and written communication skills. That’s because they’re required to docu-
ment their findings in detail, and they often testify at criminal trials.
The demand is being answered by several educational facilities, including the
University of Central Florida, in Orlando, which offers a graduate certificate degree in
computer forensics. The International Association of Computer Investigative Spe-
cialists, based in Donahue, Iowa, offers certification for computer forensics examin-
ers. Demand for such courses is so high that the association’s fall classes are already
full. Such courses are helpful for IT managers or individuals who lack computer pro-
gramming experience but who want to make the leap into computer forensics.
Computer forensics specialists caution that IT managers interested in pursuing
computer forensics as a career shouldn’t expect that just by taking a few courses in
the subject, they’ll be able to track some of the world’s slyest hackers (see sidebar,
“The Costs of Tracking a Hacker”). The specialty is a tough discipline in a fast-
moving industry that requires highly trained professionals dedicated to continued
learning. That’s because there’s no way to stay ahead of the crooks. White-hat hack-
ers at this point can only try to narrow the gap between themselves and the bad
guys—and hope that the black-hat hackers don’t get too fastidious when it comes
to leaving behind digital footprints.
THE COSTS OF TRACKING A HACKER
It took the intruder less than a minute to break into the university’s computer via the
Internet, and he stayed less than a half an hour, yet finding out what he did in that
time took researchers, on average, more than 34 hours each.
648
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
q

That inequity—highlighted during the Forensic Challenge, a contest of digital-
sleuthing skills whose results were announced recently—underscores the costs of
cleaning up after an intruder compromises a network. That damage done in a half
an hour would take a company an estimated 34 hours of investigative time and cost
about $3,000 if the investigation was handled internally and more than $33,000 if a
consultant was called in—and those are conservative estimates.
Eventually, the members of a loose group of security experts known as the Hon-
eynet Project, announced the winner of the Forensic Challenge. The contest pitted
the reports of 13 amateur and professional cyber sleuths against one another. 
Each digital detective used decompilers, data recovery programs, and other
forensic tools to uncover as much information as possible. The entries consisted of
a memo to fictional upper management, a security advisory, and an in-depth analy-
sis of the evidence uncovered by the contestant’s digital detective work. The winner
of the contest, Thomas Roessler, a student in mathematics at the University of Bonn
in Germany, has dabbled in, but not done digital forensics work in the past. Roessler
indicated that it’s always amazing how much information you can get out of a sys-
tem by using rather basic tools. You always miss something.
The contest was made more interesting by the fact that the attack was a real
one, captured by one of the several “honeypots” (vulnerable computers con-
nected to the Net and surreptitiously watched) run by the Honeynet Project. In
fact, the detectives produced several leads to the identity of the culprit. However,
the person responsible would not be prosecuted. Such on-line vandals are
extremely common.
The perpetrator represents a very large and common percentage of the black-hat
community. It’s a threat that everyone faces. Nevertheless, only about 70 to 80% of
the so-called black-hat hackers (those who break into computers illegally) have com-
parable skills to the attacker who breached the computer.
The contest also helped illuminate why securing a computer is more cost-effec-
tive than hiring consultants to come in and do the detective work afterward. It is a
fairly extensive process to take what amounts to a bunch of garbage and build a com-
prehensive picture of what happened. The costs of such investigations can easily
amount to $63,000 per computer.
Companies need to understand the difficulty, and costs, involved. Companies
also tend to balk at agreeing to that kind of expense when there is no guaranteed pay-
off. Maybe the contest opened the eyes of corporate executives, who all too often
want a quick fix.
If you just reinstall the system, do you know if you have plugged the hole that
allowed the attacker to get in? Most of the time, such quick fixes just mean the attacker
gets another shot at the system. Some computers at the University of Washington have
been compromised five times. Multiple intrusions are occurring all over the place.
Advanced Computer Forensics
649
q

The Honeynet Project plans to do another contest soon, but it’s a question of
time. The next project would also focus on either a Solaris or Windows NT/2000,
XP, or 2003 computer. 
Anonymity in Retrieving System Logs
The 9-11 terrorist attacks have had numerous effects on national security. One of
these is legislation that increases the ability of federal agencies to intercept Internet
traffic. Another side effect was the loss of the well-known Web anonymity service
hosted by ZeroKnowledge, which turned out not to be related to any of the national
security activities during 9-11.
Web anonymizers allow people to visit Web sites without disclosing their iden-
tities to the owner of the Web site, or even a local administrator who can log the
URLs that a user visits. These tools work just as well for a terrorist who wishes to use
the Web with anonymity, although using Internet access in a Web café, which one
of the plane hijackers did, works well, too.
Anonymity has its place in a free society, and personal rights and freedoms
shouldn’t be collateral victims of terrorist attacks. Interestingly, government agen-
cies may also be important users of anonymizers. This section explains how
anonymization works on the Internet and why this is important in the face of in-
creasing privacy concerns.
Source Addresses
A source address is an IP address embedded in the header of an IP packet. When the
packet is received, the source address becomes the destination address in the reply
packet. If you spoof your source address, reply packets wind up going to the address
that you’ve spoofed, and you don’t see the results. Worse, spoofing your source ad-
dress is a lousy technique for anonymity, as most application protocols require a
completed transmission control protocol (TCP) connection before exchanging any
information.
Something similar to source address spoofing occurs whenever a firewall is be-
tween you and the destination network. Most firewalls translate internal addresses
into external addresses, most commonly through network address translation
(NAT). Another way to rewrite the source address is to connect to a proxy and ask
it to connect to the server you want to visit. This capability is built into Web
browsers, which permits you to specify the IP address and the proxy you wish to
use. If you’ve configured your Web browser to use a proxy, the Web server sees the
address as the source. The proxy relays for you transparently.
650
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Of course, whoever maintains the proxy or firewall has logs of your activity. And
the owner of the Web server still has information about you—for example, the type
of Web browser you’re using, the source IP address, the URL requested, any refer-
ring page, as well as the source operating system, and sometimes the type of PC.
The Web site’s operator can go farther still: a Web designer can include
Javascript to collect more information about your browser and operating system,
attaching that to any form data that you return. This information may include
your system’s real source IP address, which is accessible to Javascript programs.
Routing to the Rescue
Surprisingly, the U.S. Navy has researched network anonymity. This research
formed the basis for the Freedom Network and may show up in other systems for
anonymity as well. 
Suppose that you proxy your Web requests through a third party who promises
to keep its logs a secret. You connect to this server via secure sockets layer (SSL) so
that anyone sniffing the connection can only see that you’re visiting an anonymizer,
and not your final destination site, which is encrypted. Sounds like a reasonable so-
lution, but it hasn’t worked in the past.
In the early 1990s, a site in Finland, anon.penet.fi, provided an anonymous re-
mailer. Anonymous emailers strip away revealing information from email headers
before resending it to your intended destination. That works well as long as the
software manages to remove all the headers and you don’t include revealing infor-
mation in the email you send (for example, including an automatic signature file at
the end of your email that, consequently, identifies you).
Penet also supported using aliases, so that the person receiving your email
could reply to you without learning your identity. Therefore, Penet had to keep
track of the mapping between your anonymous email address and your real one.
Penet worked well until authorities stepped in and demanded that Johann
Helsingius, Penet’s operator, disclose the mapping of a particular email address be-
cause it involved information copyrighted by the Church of Scientology.
If the proxy doesn’t even know your real source address, how can it successfully
relay for you? There have been several approaches to this problem, and one of the
most recent (as previously discussed) is Onion Routing.
In Onion Routing, instead of having a single proxy for relaying, there’s a net-
work of proxies. Each of these proxies runs the same software, which not only re-
lays your packets but also encrypts them. The first Onion Router chooses a route
for your connection, then encrypts your data several times, each time using the
public key for one of the routers in its network of routers.
This is where the “onion” comes in. Each layer of encryption resembles the skin
of an onion: the Onion Router you’ve connected to first encrypts your data using
the key of the last router in its list of routers—this makes up the innermost layer of
Advanced Computer Forensics
651

the onion. Once this layer of encryption is removed, the packet is sent to its real
destination. Then, the first Onion Router adds another layer of encryption. This
layer includes the address of the last router in the list, and gets encrypted with the
second to last router’s key. The next layer gets added, with the address of the sec-
ond to last router’s address, but using the third to last router’s key, and so on.
There should be at least six routers to ensure confidentiality.
Onion Routing is even more effective if you run one of the routers. Your Onion
Router must also be a full participant in the network, so that other Onion Routers
can use it. Otherwise, packets coming from your Onion Router will only contain
packets from your network, and can reveal your approximate source, even with the
content still encrypted.
Onion Routers present another potential problem. An aggressive attacker
could monitor the network traffic of every participating Onion Router. This at-
tacker (or snoop) can then track traffic patterns. For example, you send off a re-
quest to http://www.fbi.gov via your Onion Router. The snoop sees traffic leaving
your Onion Router, bound for another Onion Router, with a certain packet size.
The next router sends off a slightly smaller packet and so on, until the final router
sends the plaintext packet directly to the real destination. Then the snoop can de-
duce that this packet came from your network, based on the sizes and the timing of
the packets between routers.
Onion Routing defeats this by delaying packets slightly, as well as batching data
from several packets. Thus, a snoop cannot make simple deductions about the size
and timing of packets. The end user does experience greater latency (delay), but this
is the price for greater security.
Onion Routing is only one approach to the problem of network anonymity.
AT&T Research (http://www.research.att.com) tried a different approach called
Crowds. The concept behind Crowds is that “anonymity loves company,” so the
more participants the better. Each Crowd proxy is called a “jondo” (think “John
Doe”). Unlike Onion Routing, which relies on layers of encryption, jondos employ
secret key encryption with one key per route. This speeds up processing by reduc-
ing the amount of time required to handle encryption. As with Onion Routing,
state information is required so that the entry and exit points of a route know
where to send packets. This information is discarded at the end of each connection
but could be used to track users.
The Freedom Network used an approach similar to Onion Routing. You could
either add a plug-in to Internet Explorer or patch your Linux kernel so that your sys-
tem actually becomes an entry point in the network, with sites other than the one
run by ZeroKnowledge participating as routers. The Freedom Network claims that
it decided in spring 2001 to discontinue its service because it wasn’t paying for itself.
652
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

As of this writing, the Anonymizer (http://www.anonymizer.com) is still up and
running but functions as a proxy; it also strips identifying information from your
requests. Although you can use this service for free, your request will be delayed so
that you can read ads encouraging you to pay for the service.
You can also acquire software that acts as a local proxy for Web requests. This
software removes the USER-AGENT line and strips away cookies, which can also be
used to track your use of a Web site.
Who Needs It?
The Onion Routing project closed down in January 2000, after processing over 30
million requests. Its home page contains an interesting disclaimer, essentially saying
that anyone using the Navy’s network should expect their traffic to be monitored—
a very chilling statement when one considers the alleged intent of Onion Routing.
Still, government agencies form one of the largest groups of anonymizer users.
Anonymizers allow law enforcement to visit Web sites without giving away their
identity, or military analysts to collect data without revealing their areas of interest.
Such uses of anonymizers are legitimate and actually of value to national security.
If only the military and law enforcement used a particular anonymizer, then any
visits from that anonymizer would immediately be of interest to someone worried
about being investigated.
Anonymizers also have a place for nongovernmental users. While an
anonymizer has the potential for misuse—for example, by hiding the identity of
visitors to a pornographic site with illegal content—anonymizers have historically
had more important and legitimate uses. For example, someone with AIDS could
feel free to search the Web without revealing his or her identity. A person on the
verge of committing suicide could ask for help, while remaining anonymous, which
was one of the actual uses of the original Penet remailer. One can only hope that the
rush to embrace national security in the United States doesn’t have additional ca-
sualties—especially ones that actually enhance national security.
Denial of Service
Pity the poor intrusion detection system (IDS)—it has the reputation of an irritat-
ing snitch and the track record to prove it. Perhaps no other security device has
done its job so well and then been reviled so roundly for doing it. Designed to sniff
out and warn system administrators when hackers are trying to exploit network
vulnerabilities or launch denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, the original IDSs did their
job all too well. That was both bad and good news.
True to vendor promises, first-generation IDSs generated information-traffic
patterns on network segments, aberrations in host log files, and so forth, which
could indicate whether their systems had been hit with any of the attacks hackers use
Advanced Computer Forensics
653

to break into critical network resources. This required placing IDSs at key locations
on the network, such as at firewalls, switches, routers, Web servers, databases, and
other back-end devices further into the enterprise—a straightforward process.
Those IDSs were also overly chatty boxes, renowned for generating mountains
of data on traffic passing through networks and on host systems. They cried “wolf”
too often, reporting false alarms by the droves. Consequently, many systems ad-
ministrators, overwhelmed by tons of information they couldn’t digest or didn’t
understand, simply dumbed them down or shut them off entirely.
The IDS products on the market are now bigger, better, and faster and offer much
more to those charged with protecting network resources. Vendors have, for instance,
developed new intrusion detection methods that go beyond the pattern, or signature-
matching, technology that plagued the earlier products with all those false alarms.
They have also increased the performance of their devices, which can now keep up
with 100 Mbit/sec networks. Vendors are also shipping appliance-like IDSs, which
simplify their deployment and management, and they’ve begun delivering products
that combine the best of the two principal types of IDSs into a single offering.
Just as importantly, the number of attacks on networking systems is growing.
It’s a jungle out there, and network managers need to keep the predators at bay with
a variety of security devices, including the IDS. For example, the nonprofit CERT
Coordination Center received reports on 44,304 security incidents in 2004 (the
most recent year for which its incident totals are available). That’s comparable to
the 33,879 it received in 2003, and the 22,768 incidents logged for 2002.
The most virulent threat to emerge from the hacker jungle, though, is clearly
DoS and distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks, the number and variety of which have in-
creased dramatically according to security organizations. Hackers target DoS at-
tacks at devices and networks with Internet exposure, especially e-commerce sites
[4], according to the National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC). The goal of
such attacks is to incapacitate a device or network with bandwidth (devouring traf-
fic so that external users can’t access those resources)—this without hacking pass-
word files or stealing sensitive data.
In March 2004, NIPC continued investigating a series of organized hacker ac-
tivities that specifically targeted e-commerce and online banking sites. NIPC iden-
tified 500 victims in 33 U.S. states who were attacked by organized groups in
Eastern Europe (particularly Russia and the Ukraine), which took advantage of
vulnerabilities in servers running an unpatched version of Microsoft’s Windows
NT operating system. Once the Eastern European hackers gained access, they
downloaded a variety of proprietary data—mostly customer databases and credit-
card information. In this case, the intruders didn’t use the information maliciously,
per se, because they didn’t attempt to make purchases with the stolen cards. They
did, however, make veiled extortion threats by offering to furnish paid services that
would “fix” the unpatched systems.
654
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

A Second Look
It’s thus time for network professionals who gave up on the IDS a few years ago to
go looking again. Indeed, market research numbers indicate that more and more of
them plan to deploy IDSs in the coming years. Frost & Sullivan, for example, pre-
dicts that the market for intrusion detection software will increase from $665.6
million in 2004 to $887.8 million in 2006 and $998.9 million in 2007. Another re-
search house, IDC (http://www.idc. com), paints a slightly rosier picture, saying that
the IDS market stands at $1 billion in 2005 and will grow to $5.6 billion by 2006.
Several developments have moved the IDS back into prominence. These in-
clude IDSs’ new ability to keep up with the high-speed transport technologies
found in today’s networks, the emergence of IDS “appliances,” new intrusion-
detection methods, better management tools, and a hybrid approach that com-
bines the monitoring of the network- and host-based systems, the two basic types
of IDSs, with a single console. The charge is led by many of the usual vendor sus-
pects—Cisco Systems [5], Internet Security Systems (ISS), Intrusion.com, NFR 
Security, and Symantec—as well as numerous newcomers. The latter list includes
CyberSafe, Entercept Security Technologies, and Enterasys Networks.
The market has also spawned a growing number of managed security services
providers (MSSPs) with outsourced offerings that include intrusion detection ca-
pabilities. In this area are Activis, Exodus Communications, OneSecure, NetSolve,
RedSiren Technologies, Riptech, and Ubizen.
Moving to Anomoly Tracking
As noted, the developments driving the IDS marketplace are improving organiza-
tions’ ability to monitor and secure against unwanted attacks, whether intrusions or
DoS/DDoS strikes. Arguably, the most critical is the growing use of anomaly-based
intrusion detection by vendors of network-based IDSs.
The traditional network-based IDS discovers malicious traffic by detecting the
presence of known patterns, a process usually called “signature matching.” These
systems work much like an anti-virus software package (detecting a known “bad”
pattern generates an alarm) and effectively discover known patterns.
On the downside, signature-based network IDSs can suffer on two principal ac-
counts. First, they can’t see inside encrypted packets—the encryption essentially
hides the packet’s contents from the IDS, leaving it blind to assaults. Second, hack-
ers often mutate the nature of their attacks, rendering pattern-matching useless.
Just as an anti-virus package can’t protect against a new virus until vendors patch
their software, an IDS vendor must update its signature files—and it’s not clear
how many vendors have figured that out.
The anomaly-based network IDS uses packet sniffing to characterize and track
network activities to differentiate between abnormal and normal network behavior.
Advanced Computer Forensics
655

These devices analyze the data transfer among IP devices, permitting them to dis-
cern normal traffic from suspicious activity without pattern or signature matching.
These devices don’t care about the content of data in a session (as with signa-
ture matching). They only care about how a session took place, where the connec-
tion was made, at what time, and how rapidly (is a suspicious connection to one
host followed by a suspicious connection to another host?).
With anomaly-based systems, it’s important to get a baseline of what “normal”
network traffic looks like. The chief difficulty of this approach is how to baseline—
to know what’s normal traffic as opposed to deviated. Signature-matching should
be coupled with anomaly tracking. An anomaly can be compared against a signa-
ture, and if the anomaly doesn’t show up on multiple probes, you ignore it. Cisco
Systems, Enterasys Networks, Lancope, Intrusion.com, ISS, and Recourse Tech-
nologies are among the vendors that offer anomaly-based network IDS products.
Faster Systems
Most IDSs on the market now can keep up with a 400 Mbit/sec Ethernet. Beyond
that, they begin to drop packets and become less efficient. When vendors push
their IDS offerings beyond 400 Mbits/sec, they’re only looking at a subset of pack-
ets. You can find products that will die in 400 Mbit/sec networks. Other players that
boast IDSs capable of operating in 400 Mbit/sec network environments are Cisco
and Enterasys.
Moving to Appliances
Another trend among IDS products is the network-based IDS appliance. Unlike
first-generation IDS products, which required installing and configuring the ven-
dor’s intrusion-monitoring software on a PC, these appliances merge hardware
and software into a preconfigured unit.
Cisco’s Secure IDS, formerly known as the NetRanger, was among the first
such appliances, and IDC believes this makes Cisco the current leader in this area.
ISS (working with Nokia), Intrusion.com, and NFR Security (formerly Network
Flight Recorder), are also moving their IDS products into the appliance category.
The appliance approach makes sense for several reasons. First, it eliminates many
of the performance issues involved in installing IDS software on a general-purpose
PC. The IDS software vendor can’t optimize its product for every processor and revi-
sion of operating system. Second, the appliance is a controlled environment, built to
vendor specifications, so the IDS software can be configured specifically for the ap-
plication. Appliance-based IDS boxes also eliminate operating system–related con-
cerns, especially in all-Wintel or all-Unix organizations. Finally, appliance-based IDSs
give plug-and-play capabilities to IT departments in multilocation companies and to
service providers. These are especially valuable for deployment in remote offices,
656
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

where novice end users can handle the physical connections while leaving setup and
configuration to centralized IT staff.
IDS vendors have developed recent products that merge the capabilities of
host- and network-based systems into a single management platform. In these en-
vironments, a management console works in conjunction with traffic- and log-
analysis tools on the network and host IDS systems to provide a correlated view of
network activity.
Correlating data from multiple network sources lowers the incidence of false pos-
itives and enables network security personnel to view traffic from a higher level. For in-
stance, a single scan of Port 80 on a Web server via a single router probably would not
reveal the presence of an attack, but multiple scans across several routers would.
Outsourcing Intrusion Detection
Advances in IDS technology notwithstanding, organizations worried about unau-
thorized intrusions and DoS attacks should also consider outsourcing their intru-
sion detection needs. Outsourcing intrusion detection to an MSSP, which monitors
customers’ IDSs via the Internet, can make sense for several reasons. Not the least
of these is cost. Companies with small, limited staff with limited experience in se-
curity can benefit greatly from an MSSP. It would typically require five employees,
working three eight-hour shifts (with extra staffing for vacations, sickness, and the
like), to handle the 24-by-7 needs of an IDS-monitoring program. Forget about the
$50,000 for the IDS—an employee costs at least $90,000 a year, and with five em-
ployees, you could spend a fortune on training and maintaining security personnel.
Thus, it’s important to sit down and perform a return on investment (ROI)
study. During this process, IT organizations should ask themselves whether they have
the expertise to operate critical systems that can cost a business revenue or customer
confidence if they’re compromised as the result of hacking or DoS or DDoS attacks.
The MSSPs tout the level of security expertise among their employees, claim-
ing that this expertise enables them to better handle the task of deciphering often
arcane IDS logs and alarms that befuddle typical IT employees. In addition, MSSPs
have often deployed tools specifically designed to acquire and correlate information
from a wide range of intrusion detection devices and systems. MSSPs Riptech and
OneSecure, for example, both indicate that the technology they’ve developed in this
area differentiates them from others in the market.
Riptech, for instance, spent two years developing proprietary data-mining and
correlation software for its Caltarian security service. Caltarian’s software permits
the company to warn clients of attacks while they’re under attack, with recom-
mendations to protect their networks in real time.
So, perhaps one shouldn’t pity the IDS after all. No longer an overly chatty box
crying “wolf” too often, it now offers network managers an improved set of tools that
can finally help them fend off unwanted attacks from insiders and outsiders alike.
Advanced Computer Forensics
657

Signs of Attempted and Successful Break-Ins
Hackers are succeeding more and more in gaining root-privilege control of gov-
ernment computer systems containing sensitive information. Computers at many
agencies are riddled with security weaknesses. When an attacker gets root privileges
to a server, he or she essentially has the power to do anything that a systems ad-
ministrator could do, from copying files to installing software or sniffer programs
that can monitor the activities of end users.
The increase in the number of root compromises, DoS attacks, network recon-
naissance activities, destructive viruses, and malicious code, coupled with the ad-
vances in attack sophistication, pose a measurable threat to government systems.
In 2004, 599 systems at 43 federal agencies suffered root compromises in which
intruders took full administrative control of the machines, according to the General
Services Administration (GSA). That’s up from 186 root compromises in 2002 and
332 in 2003. The government has only a vague idea of what kind of data may have
fallen into the wrong hands.
For at least five of the root compromises, officials were able to verify that access
had been obtained to sensitive information. For the remaining 594 incidents, com-
promise of any or all information must be assumed. The compromised data in-
volves scientific and environmental studies.
Meanwhile, the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO), in a report recently re-
leased, summarized security audits that have been completed at 35 federal agencies
and indicated it had identified significant security weaknesses at each one. The
shortcomings have placed an enormous amount of highly sensitive data at risk of
inappropriate disclosure.
The government is going to find itself in “deep, deep trouble” if its IT security
procedures aren’t improved. If sensitive personal data about U.S. citizens is com-
promised, Americans are going to wake up angrier then you can possibly imagine.
Many of the thousands of attempts to illegally access federal systems come from
abroad. Also, many nations are developing information warfare capabilities as well as
adapting cyber crime tools. Hackers exchange vulnerability information with one
another. There is a whole new currency on the Internet that’s called the back door. At-
tackers trade information about back doors that provide access to different systems.
One step the government could take to increase the security of its systems is to
focus more resources on improving education and training. Computer security ex-
perts are scarce. They are in short supply, and they are expensive. The average salary
is $120,000. 
A 1998 directive by President Clinton, ordered all federal agencies to complete
a virtual bulletproofing of their IT systems from attack by May 2005, but officials
indicate that most agencies are behind in that work, and only a few are doing pen-
etration testing.
658
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Even more alarming, is that many attacks aren’t detected. No one knows what
was done, and no one has a way of knowing what was done.
Forensics
Threats to an enterprise’s information infrastructure can come in a number of un-
suspecting forms. Beyond fending off network intrusions and DoS attacks, compa-
nies must stave off threats of industrial espionage.
Layoffs occur more frequently these days, and when the disgruntled, newly dis-
enfranchised leave, today’s technology makes it easy for them to sneak off with
trade secrets, research materials, client lists, and proprietary software. Increasingly,
cyberthieves are raiding corporate servers, electronically stealing intellectual prop-
erty, and using email to harass fellow employees, putting companies at risk for lia-
bility. The impact on the bottom line alone is cause for concern; the American
Society of Industrial Security reports that theft of intellectual property in the United
States costs businesses almost $6.9 billion annually.
Constant developments in information technology have posed challenges for
those policing cyber crime. For many organizations, identifying, tracking, and
prosecuting these threats has become a full-time job.
Specialists in computer forensics must use sophisticated software tools and
spend enormous amounts of time to isolate anomalies and detect clues for evidence
of a cyber crime or security breach. As previously explained, computer forensics is
the equivalent of surveying a crime scene or performing an autopsy on a victim.
Clues inadvertently left behind after a cyber crime can often be pieced back together
to reveal details of wrongdoing and eventually pinpoint the perpetrator.
Although software tools can identify and document evidence, computer foren-
sics is more than just technology and analysis. Safeguards and forensics method-
ologies ensure that digital evidence is preserved to withstand judicial scrutiny and
to support civil or criminal litigation should the matter be brought to trial.
Divining Good Forensics
Obtaining a good digital fingerprint of a perpetrator requires that steps be taken to
preserve the electronic crime scene. The systematic search for evidence must adhere
to basic guidelines to prevent the inadvertent corruption of original data during the
course of investigation. Even booting up or shutting down a system runs the risk of
losing or overwriting data in memory and temporary files.
The examination will usually begin with a look at the disk drive. Minimal han-
dling preserves its integrity, so any disk investigation should begin by making a
copy of the original, using the least intrusive manner available.
Today’s forensic software tools can sniff out storage areas for data that may
otherwise go unnoticed. Ambient system data, such as swap files and unallocated
disk space, and file “slack” (data padded to the end of files), often hold interesting
Advanced Computer Forensics
659

clues, including email histories, document fragments, Web browsing details, and
computer usage time lines.
Be careful to document any inadvertent changes that may occur to the original
drive data during data extraction. Complying with the rules of evidence preserva-
tion and upholding the integrity of the process will help prevent any future chal-
lenges of admissibility.
Although somewhat trickier than hard drive examination, data communi-
cation analysis is another useful forensic tool. Data communication analysis typ-
ically includes network intrusion detection, data preservation, and event
reconstruction. Isolating suspicious network behavior also requires the use of
specialized monitoring software. Doing so can reveal activities such as unautho-
rized network access, malicious data-packet monitoring, and any remote system
modifications.
Leave It to the Pros
Although today’s sophisticated data-recovery tools have become fairly efficient, the
process of recovery remains a tedious, labor-intensive task. And no matter how
good the tools, the science of computer forensic discovery draws on multiple disci-
plines. Forensics demands a skill set often composed of software engineering and a
solid familiarity with binary systems and memory usage, disk geometries, boot
records, network systems, and data communications. Principals of cryptography
are also important for identifying data encryption and password-protection
schemes. Only experience can teach a forensic examiner how to avoid booby traps
or an extortionist’s logic bomb—items often left to wreak havoc along the path to
discovery if not properly dismantled.
For these reasons, it’s often wise to leave the process to the professionals. An
expert in forensics will be able to quickly isolate the telltale signs of where to look
for clues and will better understand data-discovery technologies as they apply to
the legal process.
When selecting a forensic examiner, you should have several goals in mind:
Your candidate should be familiar with the intricacies of your particular operating
systems, know how to protect against data corruption and booby traps, and have a
history of court appearances and controls established to deal with evidentiary pro-
cedures, such as chain-of-custody.
If you’re looking for more information on computer forensics or getting your
staff trained on good procedure and practice, there are a number of good resources
at your disposal. As storage capacities and network sizes continue to increase, so do
the means by which cyberthieves can circumvent security as well as the effort re-
quired to bring them to justice. So start training to detect the signs of suspicious ac-
tivity today and learn how forensic computer investigation can protect your
corporate assets in these dangerous times.
660
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

How a Hacker Works
Obviously, knowing how the hacker’s mind works is only half of the battle. You
must also know your network inside and out, identify its vulnerable points, and
take the necessary steps to protect it. This section will look at some tips and tools
administrators can use to prevent those vulnerabilities.
Diagram Your Network
You should begin by diagramming the topology of your network. You can do this
with a sophisticated tool such as Visio, or you can use a less complex tool such as
Word. Simpler yet, you can draw it by hand. Once you’ve diagrammed your net-
work, identify all the machines that are connected to the Internet, including routers,
switches, servers, and workstations. Then, evaluate the security precautions in place
on those machines. You want to pay close attention to machines that have a public
IP address on the Internet, because they’re the ones that will be scanned by hackers.
Always-On Means Always-Vulnerable
Currently, the greatest security vulnerability is always-on Internet access using sta-
tic IP addresses. With always-on access and a static IP, you are a like a big bull’s-eye
sitting on the Internet waiting to get hit. The question is, once hackers get in your
network can they do any damage, or will they be frustrated and move on to the next
target? If you have an always-on Internet connection, you should already have a
basic security policy and firewall in place on your network. If you have a Web server,
mail server, or other servers constantly connected to the Internet, your security re-
sponsibilities are even greater. Because the Internet is built upon the TCP/IP proto-
col, many hacker attacks will seek to exploit the TCP ports of these servers with
public IP addresses. A number of common ports are scanned and attacked:
FTP (21) 
Telnet (23)
SMTP (25)
DNS (53)
HTTP (80)
POP3 (110)
NNTP (119)
IMAP (143)
SNMP (161)
You need to identify whether your servers are utilizing any of these ports (the num-
bers above in parentheses) because these represent known vulnerabilities.
Advanced Computer Forensics
661

Ways to Protect the Network
There are a number of ways to compensate for these vulnerabilities. First, you can
implement firewall filtering. One of the best protections against port attacks is to
implement a firewall with dynamic packet filtering, also called “stateful inspection
firewalls.” These firewalls open and close ports on an as-needed basis, rather than
permanently leaving a port open where it can be identified by one of the hackers’
port scans and then exploited. You can also analyze your system log files to track
hacker activity. A third option is to install an intrusion-detection program that will
do much of the log file examination for you.
Seeing What the Hacker Sees
In addition to protecting against the well-known vulnerabilities, you need to see what
the hacker sees when he looks at your network. The best way to do this is to use nmap,
a program that gives you a look at your network from a hacker-like perspective. A
company called eEye has released a new version of this program for Windows NT
(you can download it at http://www.eeye.com/html/Research/Tools/nmapNT.html).
The company also offers an industrial-strength network security scanner called
Retina, which helps discover and fix known and unknown vulnerabilities. This is an
expensive, yet valuable, product.
You can download the Linux version of nmap at http://www.insecure.org/nmap/.
Software Vulnerabilities
Hackers also often exploit software security problems. They take advantage of these
behind-the-scenes parts of the software to gain access to your system. Thus, you
should take stock of all the software running on your Internet-exposed systems. Go
to the Web sites of the vendors that make each of the software packages and book-
mark the page that has updates and patches for that software. You’ll want to check
these sites regularly and always keep your software up-to-date with the latest
patches. Some companies even have services that will email you whenever there’s a
new update or patch.
Security Expert Web Sites
In addition to staying on top of your vendors’ security updates and patches, you
should also stay current on the security risks and problems that are identified by se-
curity experts in the industry. Often, vulnerabilities may become known long before
a vendor issues a patch. Therefore, your systems could be vulnerable for a period
during which the hackers may know about it, but you don’t. Two Web sites that will
keep you informed are http://www.atstake.com/ and http://www.403-security.org.
662
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

THE PROBLEMS OF THE PRESENT
An IT worker faced federal criminal charges recently in U.S. District Court in
Miami for allegedly downloading a virus into his employer’s computer system,
crashing the network for nearly two full days. This case, which comes a little more
than a year after the first federal criminal prosecution of computer sabotage, is just
one in a growing number of insider-based network attacks, according to federal law
enforcement agents. Another case is getting ready to go to trial in Las Vegas, and yet
another was wrapped up with a guilty verdict in New Hampshire (see sidebar, “In-
sider Accounts”).
INSIDER ACCOUNTS
It’s a scary indicator of a spiraling economy that in 2004, 7.7 million workers were
laid off according to the U.S Department of Labor. Even scarier is the question of
how many of those workers still have active accounts on the networks of their for-
mer employers. So-called ghost accounts, those not closed when workers leave, can
include access to mainframes, databases, file servers, intranets, and email. There are
also remote access holes with virtual private network (VPN) passwords and dial-in
accounts. All open back doors into a network.
A recent series of high-profile network sabotage cases show that vengeful
employees can wreak high-tech havoc. Disgruntled employees are a significant
threat. Security experts recommend a combination of procedures, policies, and
automation to combat the threat.
Automation is key and is being made available in a class of products known as
provisioning software, which can automatically activate and deactivate user
accounts. If you are a chief information officer (CIO) and are currently using a man-
ual process, fundamentally you have no way to know if the process of deprovision-
ing worked. With provisioning software, you know that the process was completed.
However, the process must include social engineering. That means teaching
employees not to share passwords and administrators not to reactivate closed
accounts. For example, there was one case where a former Coast Guard employee
was able to hack into a database using a password given to her by an unsuspecting
coworker. The result: A bill of $80,000 and 5,200 staff hours to repair the damage.
The U.S. Secret Service, which splits its focus between protecting heads of state
and conducting criminal investigations, is handling twice as many cases that in-
volve insider attacks than occurred in 2004. The FBI is currently investigating seven
such cases in New England alone.
Advanced Computer Forensics
663

Eighty-three percent of the cases are from the inside or people who were for-
merly with an organization. When you conduct an investigation, that’s one of the
first areas you need to look at now. It’s not at matter of if you’re going to be
attacked, but when you’re going to be attacked. Of the eighty-three percent of the
insider cases mentioned in the preceding, ninety-five percent of those break-ins are
handled by these agencies. An insider attack really gets the attention of the com-
pany, because an insider has access to all the critical systems. If they want to do
damage, they know how. A company’s decision to protect itself isn’t just a technol-
ogy decision. It’s a business decision.
Grocer Victimized
In the Miami case previously mentioned, Herbert Pierre-Louis, a hardware engi-
neer who worked in the IT department at Purity Wholesale Grocers, is being
charged with computer sabotage for the June 18, 1998, incident at the $2.6 billion
national grocery outlet based in Boca Raton, Florida. The Assistant U.S. Attorney
indicated the damage was well over the $6,000 waterline that is one of the key fac-
tors making this a federal crime.
The FBI warns that this is a time when companies should be particularly cau-
tious. In light of the economy and the downturn and layoffs, companies should pay
attention to this. These are not isolated events. 
That’s a lesson Omega Engineering’s Bridgeport, New Jersey, manufacturing
plant learned the hard way. In the summer of 1997, a software timebomb went off
in the plant’s computer network, systematically eradicating all the programs that
ran the company’s manufacturing operations. Exacerbating the problem, Omega’s
only backup tape was missing. The manufacturing plant was no longer able to man-
ufacture. Company executives, in a 2001 trial in U.S. District Court in Newark,
New Jersey, indicated that the company had yet to fully recover. The incident
caused $23 million in damages and led to Omega losing its footing in the high-tech
instrument and measurement market and the eventual layoff of 90 employees.
Omega’s former network administrator was charged with sabotaging the net-
work he helped build. He was found guilty after a four-week trial. The judge later
set that verdict aside after a juror told the court she was unsure whether a piece of
information she had heard on television news had been factored into her verdict.
The government appealed the judge’s ruling, taking its case in front of the Third
Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia this past April. A ruling is pending.
The employee was charged under a relatively new statute that made computer
sabotage a federal offense if it affected a computer used in interstate commerce and
caused more than $5,000 worth of damage to the company over a 12-month span.
That was the first federal criminal prosecution of computer sabotage.
664
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Similar Cases Prosecuted
Now that same statute is being used in three other cases. One of those cases charges
a network consultant with sabotaging the computer network at one of his clients,
Steinberg Diagnostic Medical Imaging in Las Vegas. The consultant is charged with
three counts of network intrusion for changing passwords in the network, which
locked administrators out of their own system. The Assistant U.S. Attorney notes in
the indictment that the consultant allegedly hacked the system on three different
days between late February and early March of 2001.
The consultant, working with a partner, had been hired as a subcontractor by
the medical imaging company, according to sources close to the investigation. Both
the deal and the partnership fell through, and the consultant’s partner went to work
for Steinberg Diagnostic as a system administrator. The government contends that
the consultant attacked the system to gain revenge. The damage had to have added
up to at least $5,000 for the consultant to be charged with a federal offense.
In the summer of 2001, a former help desk worker at Bricsnet, a Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, application service provider for the construction and design in-
dustry, was found guilty on federal charges of network sabotage for hacking into
Bricsnet’s system after being fired in the fall of 2000. The worker pleaded guilty to
breaking into the system twice using a supervisor’s password (once the night he was
fired and again the next morning) to delete a total of 786 files, change user access
levels, and send emails to Bricsnet clients saying the company’s project center
would be temporarily or permanently shut down. The attack, which was discovered
by another Bricsnet employee the next day, cost the company $24,725 in in-house
repair costs. Some of the destroyed files could not be restored.
The fired worker’s activities were meant to cause as much damage as possible. It
was malicious. Putting a financial number on the loss is misleading. How do you
quantify the impact when customers receive these kind of damaging emails? You can’t
put a dollar amount on that. Would a company pay $24,000 not to have that happen?
Administrators took basic security precautions after firing the worker, who
had broken company rules against moonlighting and other activities. They termi-
nated the worker’s password, logon, and user accounts. They also changed the code
on their building’s keypad and escorted the worker from the building. There was no
sense of foreboding. These steps were routine. Certainly, Bricsnet had an extensive
security system in place, but they were always thinking of outside intrusion.
The incident, which the FBI traced back to the worker in less than a week, has
changed the way the company evaluates its security needs. Since the attack, Bricsnet has
re-evaluated its security system and limited network access. Bricsnet is acutely aware of
the damage a disgruntled employee can cause. People took it personally. For someone
you’ve worked with on a daily basis, it certainly was an act of betrayal for them.
Advanced Computer Forensics
665

Outlook for the Future
Atlanta-based Internet Security Systems Inc. (ISS) has long been concerned about
drive-by hackers. That’s right—drive-by hackers. ISS claims perpetrators can equip
their laptops with wireless technology [6], sit inconspicuously on a park bench or
in a car, and casually monitor traffic, access applications, and hijack data flowing
over someone else’s wireless network, unbeknownst to the victim. To combat this
threat, which sounds like it could be a plot line from an upcoming James Bond film,
ISS recently drew the curtain on wireless local area network (WLAN) security soft-
ware and consulting practices.
Why create safety for the WLAN? ISS believes enterprises are deploying
WLANs with increasing regularity because they are cost-effective and help workers
grab knowledge on the go from laptops or personal digital assistants (PDAs). Very
little exists in the way of security for wireless networks as compared to their wired
counterparts, LANs.
Gartner Group, it would seem, concurs that wireless networks are in the midst
of proliferation. The research firm said 90% of all enterprises in the United States
will have deployed a WLAN by 2006, an increase from 50% in 2003. Accordingly,
ISS indicates that the fact that WLANs can easily be accessed by outsiders (friendly
or not), means that they need stronger protection.
Just as perpetrators such as hackers and crackers have done to wired networks,
they can assault WLANs through the same methods: unauthorized access points,
data interception, DoS attacks, peer-to-peer sabotage, and wireless laptops to at-
tacks when they roam to public access points such as airports and hotels.
What is more frightening, ISS claims, is that nontechnical employees, although
often victims of attacks, are often unaware of these threats. This ignorance can
make the comfort of the firewall a false security blanket.
Most companies have no idea that their networks are wide open to wireless se-
curity risks. Employees today are adding their own wireless access points to the back-
bone of their company’s network without the knowledge of their IT and security
staffs. With a lack of awareness by the company that an access point has been added
and a lack of proper security configuration, these rogue access points can become an
intruder’s dream back door into a company’s network despite the front door firewall.
SUMMARY
This chapter introduced numerous solutions to those of you who are in the process
of conducting advanced computer forensics through the use of encryption for pro-
tection and hacking back with advanced hacker trackers. Hackers and crackers are
everywhere, but you may think your company’s system is too minor for them to
666
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

notice. Not true. Hackers don’t always target specific machines—they scan hun-
dreds with special programs to find any that might be vulnerable to attack. The in-
truder could be a teen hoping to use your system to launch an attack on a Web site,
or a bitter ex-employee looking for payback.
The Internet today is like a walk through a vineyard, with the attackers stopping
here and there to pick a grape at their leisure. The feast is seemingly never-ending.
Even a secure company network can be riddled with holes such as badly configured
routers that expose data in transit to snoops. Think your firewall will protect you?
Not always. Attacks at Microsoft and EBay prove otherwise.
Furthermore, protecting your network against hackers need not be a full-time
job. By including a few best practices as part of your organization’s daily routine,
you can prevent leaks from developing—or at the very least, plug them before the
dams break altogether.
Computer forensics provides the methodology for investigating and docu-
menting cyber crimes so they may be later tried in court. Hiring an expert is costly
but necessary to preserve evidence during the legal process.
Also, tools for sifting digital media and detecting network intrusion have be-
come easier to implement, but they still demand a sizeable time commitment and
cross-discipline knowledge for most situations. Training is required to secure a
crime scene and for procedural litigation.
Conclusions
Hackers often break into computers through well-documented holes (they read
security alerts, too) when users don’t install patches.
Hackers often enter networks through old computers that are no longer in use.
This can happen when administrators forget to disconnect an ex-employee’s
system from the modem or network.
An older system is less likely to have the latest security patches installed.
A shared terminal that’s not attached to any one employee is often overlooked
when security updates are done.
Any workstation that’s left on and connected to both a modem and the net-
work gives hackers one way to dial into the machine, bypass the firewall, and
gain access to the network.
You encrypt important data on your server, but you neglect to encrypt remote
backups.
Hackers can target data on a less-protected off-site machine that stores backups.
Security is an ongoing task. It’s not something you install and forget about; it’s
something you live with.
Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) come in several forms, with the most com-
monly deployed called “host” and “network” systems. Some experts include the
Advanced Computer Forensics
667

“desktop” IDS in this market, whereas others would also list so-called honey-
pots and honeynets.
A host-based IDS is a piece of software that runs on a network-based com-
puter—a Web or application server, for instance. It tracks and analyzes entries
in the host system’s application and operating system event logs.
Host-based systems are particularly valuable in monitoring insider threats be-
cause they can show when unauthorized personnel attempt to access prohib-
ited data or resources.
A network-based IDS, which can be software running on a stand-alone PC or
on a dedicated appliance, tracks and analyzes the packets that make up network
data traffic.
Network-based IDSs are generally “promiscuous” in that they look at every
packet on a network or network segment.
Network-node IDS systems detect packets headed to a single network node.
A desktop IDS offers file-level protection. Rather than monitoring network
traffic, it examines activity on individual systems, looking for potential attacks
on files or registry entries on Windows PCs.
The desktop IDS is also very useful in trojan horse detection.
A honeypot is a system designed to be attacked, with the intent of deception or
alerting of intrusion activity.
Honeypots emulate known vulnerabilities, other systems, or are modified pro-
duction systems that create “caged” environments.
A honeynet is a network of production systems, residing behind a firewall,
which is designed to be compromised. Once breached, the resulting informa-
tion gathered during the attack is analyzed to learn about the tools, tactics, and
motives of the possible intrusion.
An Agenda for Action
Table F20.1 in Appendix F is a provisional list of actions for advanced computer
forensics. The order is not significant; however, these are the activities for which the
researcher would want to provide a detailed description of procedures, review, and
assessment for ease of use and admissibility. A number of these advanced computer
forensics topics have been mentioned in passing already.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review ques-
tions and exercises, hands-on projects, case projects, and optional team case pro-
ject. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
668
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? Hackers often break into computers through well-documented
holes (they read security alerts, too) when users install patches.
2.
True or False? Hackers often enter networks through old computers that are no
longer in use. This can happen when administrators forget to disconnect an ex-
employee’s system from the modem or network.
3.
True or False? Host-based systems are particularly valuable in monitoring out-
sider threats because they can show when unauthorized personnel attempt to
access prohibited data or resources.
4.
True or False? A network-based IDS, which can be software running on multi-
ple PCs or on a dedicated appliance, tracks and analyzes the packets that make
up network data traffic.
5.
True or False? Honeypots emulate unknown vulnerabilities, other systems, or
are modified production systems that create “caged” environments.
Multiple Choice
1.
Because the Internet is built upon the TCP/IP protocol, many hacker attacks
will seek to exploit the TCP ports of these servers with public IP addresses. A
number of common ports are scanned and attacked, except:
A. FTP (21)
B.
Telnet (23)
C. SMTP (25)
D. INS (53)
E.
HTTP (80)
2.
Private citizens have legitimate reasons to do the following, except:
A. Preserve confidentiality
B.
Protect flaws
C. Protect trade secrets
D. Prevent legal or medical records from falling into strangers’ hands
E.
Voice dissenting political or religious opinions without retribution
3.
You only have three directions to go with hacking, except:
A. You can keep doing the same old tricks.
B.
You can become a real criminal cracker.
Advanced Computer Forensics
669

C. You can be hired to hack other hackers.
D. You can use those skills wisely to build new software and create a more se-
cure Internet.
4.
Just as perpetrators such as hackers and crackers have done to wired networks,
they can assault WLANs through the same methods, except:
A. Unauthorized access points
B.
Data interception
C. Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks
D. Authorized access points
E.
Peer-to-peer sabotage
5.
Hackers can do the following, except:
A. Break into computers through well-documented holes (they read security
alerts, too) when users don’t install patches.
B.
Enter networks through old computers that are no longer in use. This can
happen when administrators forget to disconnect an ex-employee’s system
from the modem or network.
C. Target data on a less-protected off-site machine that stores backups.
D. Dial into the machine, bypass the firewall, and gain access to the network.
E.
Physically destroy a network.
Exercise
A large financial institution routinely used a computer forensics specialist team
(CFST) to investigate corporate computer-usage policy violations. The CFST is
used as part of the process to discreetly investigate and verify allegations of computer-
usage policy violations, performance issues, and other policy violations. So, how
was the CFST able to go about conducting their investigations?
HANDS-ON PROJECTS
A large insurance company used a CFST for incident response activities and de-
ployed the CFST on 36,000 machines within their organization. How was the CFST
able to go about conducting their investigations?
Case Project
A large telecommunications company uses a CFS to protect against potential liti-
gation from wrongful termination lawsuits and other employee accusations. Orga-
nizations face many challenges and potential repercussions when terminating
670
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

employees. This organization uses a CFS to proactively acquire forensic hard drive
images of employees’ computers prior to termination. How did the CFS go about
conducting the investigation?
Optional Team Case Project
A large insurance institution uses a CFS to investigate suspicious insurance claims
and to determine if there is employee collaboration in fraudulent claims. How was
the CFS able to go about conducting the investigation?
REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing and Implementing an
Ironclad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001. 
[2] Caloyannides, Michael A., “Encryption Wars: Early Battles” (© 2000
IEEE), IEEE Spectrum, 445 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, New Jersey 08855,
2001.
[3] Vacca, John R., i-mode Crash Course, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002.
[4] Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce, 3rd ed., Charles River Media, Hing-
ham, MA, 2001.
[5] Vacca, John R., High-Speed Cisco Networks: Planning, Design, and Imple-
mentation, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
[6] Vacca, John R., Wireless Broadband Networks Handbook, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 2001.
Advanced Computer Forensics
671

This page intentionally left blank 

673
Summary, Conclusions, 
and Recommendations
21
C
omputer forensics may sound like a media-generated catchphrase, but its
principle is actually quite simple. Forensics, generally speaking, is the inves-
tigation of evidence following scientific methods within the regulations of the
law. Computer forensics applies those same principles to digital evidence recovery.
The scope of such digital-evidence salvage operations is enormous because of
many factors, including the global nature of the Internet. To help create cooperation
between the United States and other nations, the G8 group (http://www.g8online.org/)
of major industrialized nations has proposed six principles for procedures relating
to digital evidence, which it defines as information stored or transmitted in binary
form that may be relied on in court:
1. When dealing with digital evidence, all the standard forensic and procedural
principles must be applied.
2. Upon seizing digital evidence, actions taken should not change that evidence.
3. People who access original digital evidence should be trained for the purpose.
4. All activity relating to the seizure, access, storage [1], or transfer of digital
evidence must be fully documented, preserved, and available for review.
5. Individuals are responsible for all actions taken with respect to digital evi-
dence while such evidence is in their possession.
6. Any agency that is responsible for seizing, accessing, storing, or transferring
digital evidence is responsible for complying with these principles [2].
All computer forensic policy and procedures should be developed from these
principles. Not limited to computers in the traditional sense, the field encompasses

everything from personal digital assistants (PDAs) to routers and covers crimes
ranging from creating, possessing, and disseminating child pornography to net-
work intrusions. Perpetrators range from 13-year-olds to trained experts paid by
rogue nations to infiltrate and steal proprietary information; organization insiders
could also perpetrate similar crimes.
SUMMARY
The United States Department of Justice categorizes computers involved in crimes in
three ways: contraband, instrumentality, and “mere” evidence. If a network manager
discovers contraband (illegal or illegally acquired equipment), he or she should simply
turn the matter over to law enforcement.
Computer instrumentality implies that hardware played a significant role in a
crime. Within network-related crimes, “innocent” computers are often used as in-
strumentalities—they are used to commit further crime, either denial of service at-
tacks or by providing a pass through for the criminal. Law enforcement will often
seize computers used as instrumentalities; they must seize them if the crime falls
under certain federal statutes.
Computers classified as mere evidence are usually not seized. The goal is to ac-
quire the data of evidentiary value from the computer while adhering to computer
forensic principles. Before getting into specifics on how this is done, let us first ex-
amine some policies that should be in place before the need for forensics arises.
Haste Makes Waste
Every business should have a computer security plan, part of which must include
collection and preservation of evidence before, during, and after the incident.
When formulating all policies regarding computer forensics, a balance must be
struck between expediency and following a proper chain of command. It is neither
feasible nor desirable for the chief information officer (CIO) of a large corporation
to be called every time a computer is attacked; at the same time, some oversight is
important. Each organization needs to decide how far to proceed up the hierarchy
when responding to different levels of attacks.
Because laws will affect corporations differently, and because desktop forensics is
extremely important for internal offenses, it is wise to have separate policies for in-
ternal attacks and external attacks. A recent study performed jointly by the Computer
Securities Institute (CSI) and the National Infrastructure Protection Center arm of
the FBI found that a significant number of attacks (84%) came from disgruntled em-
ployees. This is not only the case at university-type settings, where public labs are
plentiful and security is often lax, but remains true for all types of organizations.
674
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

When dealing with internal policies, desktop examination is a crucial element,
whether the matter is simple misuse or corporate espionage. Regardless of the reasons,
following proper forensic procedures will help establish a legal case.
Certain laws exist to provide some privacy to the end user [3].
The one most important privacy law for this chapter and book is the Electronic
Communication Privacy Act (ECPA), which begins in the United States Code at
Title 18, section 2701. The law contains certain provisions that should be incorpo-
rated into every policy. For the purposes of this chapter, assume you are dealing
with an email system that employs user authentication to verify active employee
status. Policy rules regarding an open Internet service provider (wherein anyone
can pay and join) are significantly more stringent.
One provision of the law, Title 18 USC 2703(f), applies equally to all email providers:
“A provider of wire or electronic communication services or a remote computing
service, upon the request of a governmental entity, shall take all necessary steps to
preserve records and other evidence in its possession pending the issuance of a court
order or other process.”
Law enforcement commonly refers to Title 18 USC 2703(f) as sending an “F-
letter” (referencing that the law is section F of the statute) to a provider. Usually
such a request will be communicated via telephone first, followed by a letter. A
company should immediately take the steps mandated via the phone call, without
waiting for the letter’s arrival. Under the second part of this section, the records
must be preserved for 90 days, and the government has an option to extend this an-
other 90 days. There should be appropriate policies in place to handle this possibility,
from the administrative receiving end all the way to placement of the backed-up
records. These policies should be created in a partnership among management,
computer services personnel, and legal counsel.
How does a manager know if the staff possesses the requisite knowledge to
create sound corporate policies on evidence recovery? This is an extremely difficult
question to answer, but one approach might be to determine who, typically, would
not be qualified. The average system administrator usually doesn’t have the required
knowledge; the Microsoft-certified systems engineer (MCSE) test also doesn’t have
such information. A dedicated network security specialist may or may not have the
appropriate knowledge, but this is probably the best place to start looking. That in-
dividual, who might be a certified information systems security professional (CISSP)
or System Administration, Networking, and Security Institute (SANS) certified,
will have a fundamental understanding of security issues that a normal system
administrator probably would not.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
675

Mapping the Labyrinth
Even though the corporate computer forensics specialist is not a law enforcement
officer, he or she will still find merit in following the same forensic procedures. This
includes limiting access, photographing the computer screen if information is vis-
ible, and, most important, documenting every step. From the moment a computer
is recognized as compromised, documenting should begin.
Documentation should hold to a general standard: If someone with compara-
ble knowledge picks up the first examiner’s notes, he or she should be able to reach
the same conclusion after following each step. Documentation should include the
basic “who, what, when, and where” criteria and how long each individual spent di-
agnosing and repairing any problems, which is used to determine damages. The
amount of damage may not only influence the involvement of federal investigators
but also a resulting federal trial; under U.S. Federal Sentencing Guidelines, damages
determine the punishment.
It is essential for companies to keep track of their damages when responding to
an intrusion threat for purposes of criminal prosecution. The costs incurred by a
company to detect, repair, and deter future intrusions, including labor costs, are
used by the courts in determining the sentence for an intruder. Thus, companies
are asked to keep track of their costs so that intruders can be effectively prosecuted.
For laptops or machines with an internal, uninterruptible power supply, disconnect
the internal ups or battery before the power cord is pulled. Afterward, the hard
drive is usually removed and reinstalled on another machine. The system is booted
from a floppy that disallows any attempt to write to the hard drive, and a bit-
stream image is created via one of a variety of products.
What imaging software you choose to use is largely a personal preference, pro-
vided that it satisfies the criterion of providing complete bit-by-bit imaging. The
person performing the imaging procedure must verify the software’s ability and ac-
curacy every time a new update is released. Some popular choices (although this au-
thor and publisher are not endorsing any) are Safeback (http://www.forensics-intl.com
/safeback.html), Fred (http://www.digitalintel.com/), and Encase (http://www.encase
.com/html/index.html).
Some popular commercial imaging software may or may not offer forensic
capabilities. It may be an option. Just remember that before any software is used,
the individual performing the image must verify it. This is done by proper hash
testing, discussed later on.
676
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Sealing Off the Unix Crime Scene
Unix can be more problematic in response to a forced shutdown that occurs be-
cause of power loss. There are several options and opinions within the field re-
garding how best to handle a Unix box. How the shutdown should be handled will
depend on how critical the data on the victimized computer is, among other crite-
ria. Regardless, the first step is, as always, to document the state of the system be-
fore touching it. This may include photographing the monitor and the computer.
The next step is to collect any possible evidence from RAM, accomplished by using
the command line “ps -aux” or “ps -ef,” depending on the Unix version.
The individual should look for and be able to recognize any programs that are
unauthorized. If any are found, the associated RAM contents should be saved. The
method for accomplishing this may vary with the Unix version, but one example is
the “gcore” command. A computer forensics specialist should also be familiar with
programs such as List Open Files, beneficial in isolating trouble spots. It’s impor-
tant to make sure all programs are authentic and updated; intruders may replace
commands with their own “trapped” versions.
After RAM documentation, there are several options: one is to sync, halt, re-
boot, and mount the drives from a CD. One possible danger is that the sync com-
mand may have been altered, thus damaging evidence. This procedure also changes
the state of the hard drive, which is a possible concern. Another option is simply to
pull the power and leave the system in a dirty state. Afterward, the drive can be
mounted dirty, and bit-stream copies can be created from the original.
A third option is to make a bit-stream copy by utilizing the Data Definition
“dd” command. This is not a command that can be covered briefly, as it has many
options and parameters, such as identifying a data-definition element in a defini-
tion list and converting a file while copying it. It is important that any person using
this command is trained to do so.
Truth Serum
No matter what operating system (or program used to create copies) is being uti-
lized, some type of verification software should be part of the forensics equation.
The purpose of these programs is to ensure that the copy of the bit-stream image
of the violated computer is the same as the original. This is accomplished by using
mathematical algorithms, called “hash functions,” which calculate hash values
(also known as checksums, or fingerprints) based on the original file or image. To
be valid, hash functions must meet two primary requirements: The original text
may not be determined from the hash function, and they must be collision free—
meaning that two different messages cannot produce the same hash value.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
677

A file-hashing utility should always be used to verify the copying of all files or
images. The use of the SHA-1 hash is highly recommend. The hash values should
be recorded and kept in order, along with such data as when the program was run,
who ran it, and what program was used—valuable information for the event re-
construction typical of court cases.
Security Officer’s Log: Mission-Critical
Logs create evidence when they capture the actions of an illegal act. What logs an
organization chooses to keep, and how long it will keep them, largely depends on
available space and average number of entries received. It might see frequent
probes—anything from port scans to domain name service (DNS)-version requests
on an open system. Although such probes are annoyances that are not even neces-
sarily illegal, it may be important to keep logs of them. If the organization chooses
to go to court, such logs will provide a complete picture for a jury.
To keep logs from being destroyed by malicious intrusions, system operators
will often output some logs to a printer or a CD-ROM device; this can be an ex-
pensive route, but it frequently offers greater security. If utilized, this option should
be noted in an organization’s policies and procedures, as law enforcement may not
automatically think to ask for logs copied in this fashion.
Different versions of Unix have their logs in different areas. Most of the older ver-
sions keep logs in /usr/adm, whereas most newer versions use /var/adm or /var/log
for storage.
One of the primary logs used in computer forensics is syslog, the main system
log containing a variety of important messages. This is no secret to hackers, and
hence is often one of the first logs to be modified. In addition, routers and firewalls
can be configured to add messages to the syslog.
A high degree of redundancy exists between syslog's contents and other logs, so they
should be checked against each other; log inconsistencies may indicate security breaches.
Some popular logs that may prove useful include acct, aculog, lastlog, login-
log, sulog, utmp(x), wtmp(x), void.log, and xferlog. Remember that when any of
these logs are copied, a hashing program should be used to ensure proper backup 
creation.
Windows NT’s three main log files—appevent.evt, secevent.evt, and sysevent.evt—
are kept in the percentsystemroot percent\system32\config directory and are normally
viewed using Microsoft’s built-in Event Viewer. Various Web and ftp servers will also
have their own logs and should be preserved as well. It is important to have a current list
of programs and services installed and to have a checklist for log preservation.
678
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Ghosts from the Immediate Past
State tables are another potentially important source of evidence, although their
temporary nature makes them difficult to acquire. State tables show actions that
take place either in real time or in the immediate past. One of the most popular and
powerful is the Netstat command, which exists in both Unix and Windows NT en-
vironments, with different options for each. The Netstat command displays net-
work connections, routing tables, interface statistics, masquerade connections,
netlink messages, and multicast memberships.
Another temporary log that can sometimes be useful is a system’s address reso-
lution protocol (ARP) cache, designed to discover media access control (MAC) ad-
dresses on Ethernet-based networks. MAC addresses do not cross routers. This is
important because packets sent over the Internet will not contain the sender’s MAC
address, but instead, will have the MAC address of the last router they traversed. If
the router is keeping the correct logs, and a packet has only traveled over a few
routers, this information may be useful. Both NT and Unix create a temporary cache
list of the IP-to-MAC conversions, viewable by using the Arp-a command.
There are special steps for state table preservation. Not only should they be cut
and pasted to a text file, but printing the screen shot is also advisable. The log
should then be hashed and preserved with other evidence.
Protecting the Evidence
Generally speaking, two separate backups of every relevant file and image should be
made. These files should be hashed along with the original. The media a company
chooses to use will depend on size, speed, and cost issues (tapes versus DVD-RAM
versus identical hard disk drives, and so on). More important still is the method by
which those media are handled. The forensic chain of evidence requires that the
person creating the backups, along with anyone who touches the media prior to
presentation in court, be clearly documented. Obviously, care must also be taken to
protect the media from various environmental elements: preferably, it should be
placed in an appropriate container, taped shut, then initialed and dated. This en-
sures media authenticity after completion of the backup. Some type of standard
tracking method should be used with every piece of evidence.
Costs of Precaution
No summary chapter on computer forensics would be complete without an exam-
ination of costs involved. There are two types of costs: the cost of doing nothing
about data-evidence recovery and the cost of doing something about it. The most
recent CSI/FBI study reported that total losses incurred via data loss, fraud, or
abuse for 506 respondents totaled $598,812,273.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
679

Personnel costs associated with computer forensics are dependent on several
factors, including the number of different operating systems the person is expected
to know. Each additional operating system requires additional training. Costs are
fluid and should be taken only as ballpark figures. Training a staffer with preexist-
ing knowledge to be the rough equivalent of an individual in a forensic laboratory
may cost around $58,000 for one platform. Costs for materials examination may
run from $40 to $700 for one case. The salary level of the examiner will fluctuate
with location and experience. It is possible, of course, to hire an outside forensics
specialist. The cost for this type of service varies greatly.
There is a wide range of options when it comes to the software. The cost of
forensic tools may range from no cost for older, basic tools to over $4,800 for one
software package alone. There are also costs for password cracking, both for soft-
ware and the time necessary on a computer (cost per CPU cycle). It is important to
reiterate that every company should keep track of all costs related to the attack, in-
cluding the amount of time each person spends responding to any damage. Track-
ing all of these costs is extremely helpful if any court proceedings occur.
Homegrown Salvage Team
Computer forensics is an important part of a larger picture. Every organization
should consider forming a computer security incident response team (CSIRT, some-
times referred to as a Computer Emergency Response Team, or CERT), if one hasn’t
already been established.
Incorporating computer forensics into the responsibilities of any CSIRT bol-
sters organizational security and makes court actions more successful. This can
help create a safer environment for an organization’s employees, customers, and
business partners.
Computer Forensics to Play Central Role in Terrorist Fight
Computer forensics begins at home. For the IT manager, that means the server
room, where the Internet has brought not only the promise of a worldwide audi-
ence but also the threat of worms, hackers, and cyberterrorism. As the United States
mobilizes to shore up security at airports and public gathering spaces and in the
country’s infrastructure, the IT industry has a central role to play—a role that not
only makes business sense but also is important in the unfolding war on terror.
In the same week that the terrorist destruction of the World Trade Center took
place, the Nimda worm ran rampant through the Internet. Although there may not
be any overt connection between the two events, the continued marauding of
worms and viruses across the Net only reinforces a general anxiety about living in
an insecure world and a specific feeling that the Net will never be a place where real
business can be conducted.
680
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Much of enterprise IT security has been built around firewalls or monitoring
products meant to keep the bad guys out. Although that is fine for providing a sense
of relief that you avoided the virus that halted the company down the hall, it doesn’t
do much to solve the problem.
The role of computer forensics in the current rush to security cannot be over-
stated. Before the government rushes to mandate face scanners, fingerprint identi-
fication systems, or simply networks to signal when a bad guy might be applying for
a crop duster license, there has to be some consideration of the systems that will be
required to run these programs. Developing systems that have what appears to be
an effective front end, but in reality are porous, is at least partly to blame for the lax
airport security programs that had such a horrific result and still do.
Scanning in lots of data, tapping lots of phones, or opening lots of encrypted
email can drown you in data if you don’t have some way to collect, sort, and ana-
lyze it and alert the security official who needs to know of a breach in process. Too
much data is often more dangerous than too little, as overwhelming data can give
you a false sense of security.
Where does that system expertise reside? It resides in systems that manage
credit-card transactions, in phone connection and billing systems, and in data-
management systems. The war on terror will be marked by huge amounts of data,
gathered electronically and in person, that will be analyzed to focus on a small
group of fanatics. It is telling that President Bush used an attack on financial infor-
mation as the first salvo in the terror war. The IT sector through computer foren-
sics has a crucial role to play in stopping the terrorists before they can strike again.
CONCLUSIONS
The federal government can report in exacting detail the number of bank robberies
committed in any given year, but when it comes to computer crimes against gov-
ernment agencies, it’s close to clueless. Government officials estimate that only
20% of such incidents are reported because individual agencies either don’t have
the technical sophistication to discover the crimes or want to keep bad news quiet.
It’s for those reasons that the 599 root compromises of federal computers reported
in 2004 likely represent a fraction of the actual number.
Computer compromises are a serious issue. Agencies fear the unwelcome at-
tention computer crime reports bring and often lack the money and tools needed
to detect IT security breaches. In addition, there’s an ingrained reluctance on the
part of agencies to work together to combat computer crimes. There is no culture
of collaboration in the federal government.
During the first three months of 2004, the Federal Computer Incident Re-
sponse Center (FedCIRC), the government’s central crime data repository,
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
681

recorded 88 root compromises at civilian nondefense federal agencies, which put it
on pace to exceed the 2003 total. That would result in an increase in the number of
such intrusions for the third straight year.
A root compromise occurs when an intruder gains systems administration priv-
ileges on a network, giving the attacker the ability to do things such as copy docu-
ments, alter data, or plant malicious code. Still, security analysts said it’s impossible
to gauge just what the first-quarter increase recorded by FedCIRC (http://www.us-
cert.gov/federal/) means. FedCIRC doesn’t know whether they’re seeing a change in
the rate of reporting, the rate of detection, or the rate of penetration.
For its part (prior to the 9-11 attacks), the Bush administration had begun to
take steps to improve compliance by federal agencies in reporting and responding
to security breaches, including a recommendation that FedCIRC’s annual funding
be boosted 27%, from $11 million to $14 million. Agencies are already required by
law to report breaches to FedCIRC as a result of the Government Security Reform
Act approved in 2000.
Federal agencies have repeatedly been faulted by the General Accounting Office
(GAO) for poor security practices. The 9-11 attacks and the recent issuance of ed-
ucational visas to the dead terrorists have borne that out. The GAO has conducted
penetration testing against various government systems. For example, it said in a
report recently released that it found significant security weaknesses at all of the 24
agencies where it conducted audits of IT security readiness. Improving security
procedures needs to be a priority within the Bush administration, and from some
of the early indications in the budget, it is going to be.
Cost of Computer Crime Exploding
According to results of the 2004 Computer Crime and Security Survey [3a] re-
cently released, intellectual property theft and security breaches are on the rise and
the costs of those intrusions are skyrocketing. Conducted by the Computer Secu-
rity Institute of San Francisco and the FBI, the survey of 972 security administrators
from industry, government, and academia shows that 89% of respondents reported
security breaches in the 2004 survey and 30% reported intellectual property theft,
up from 24% in 2003.
The survey also shows that the cost of that theft is exploding. Although only 68
respondents could quantify the financial losses associated with intellectual property
theft, that number added up to more than $595 million. The amount is up from al-
most $101 million in 2003 and $64 million in 2000. In total, 520 respondents said
losses from all types of security breaches cost more than $711 million. That means
theft of intellectual property accounts for 44% of all losses tabulated in the survey,
despite the fact that such a small number of companies could quantify it.
682
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Companies are figuring out how to protect their financial data, customers’
credit information, and personnel records. The problem is that many companies
aren’t aware that they should be protecting the information that fuels their busi-
nesses—such as marketing plans, source codes, and research information. You
lock up rooms so people can’t steal laptops, but if your company is based on in-
formation and information systems that can’t be secured, then you’re in line to
lose your cash crop.
Industrial espionage is giving way to information age espionage. It used to be
that if you wanted information on your competition, you would turn to an insider.
You bribed them. You blackmailed them. But why risk someone getting caught
when you can just hack in and take what you need? The survey also points to sev-
eral other aspects of computer security that are on the rise:
Forty-four percent of respondents reported outside system penetration. That
number is up from 24% in 2001.
Forty-two percent detected denial-of-service attacks. That number is up from
28% in 2002 and 31% in 2003.
In 2004, 683 people were able (and willing) to quantify financial losses. That
number totaled $609 million.
Forty percent of respondents reported security breaches to law enforcement
agencies. That’s up from 21% in 2001 and 29% in 2003.
Industry analysts and corporate users agree that more administrators should be
focused on protecting their valuable proprietary information. Companies that col-
lect credit card numbers and personal information about people take on that secu-
rity responsibility. What they’re not doing is protecting their own information,
records, plans, and technologies.
For some IT administrators, getting the message through to upper manage-
ment is another matter. It’s not that upper management doubts the information’s
value, but rather that upper management feels that there isn’t enough threat to war-
rant any significant attention. Once management buys into the importance of pro-
tecting information, it’s another matter to put a strong security plan in place.
Companies developing a new drug or a new widget may understand how sensi-
tive that product information is, but they find it hard to protect. It’s the core of what
they’re doing, so it requires access from a lot of people for a lot of reasons. It’s diffi-
cult to enforce protection of information while still letting people at the information.
The survey trends are unnerving. It’s clearly a dangerous world, and will con-
tinue so for years to come—possibly even get worse—given the widespread de-
ployment of computer forensics and security technologies. It’s costing American
businesses billions.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
683

RECOMMENDATIONS
Details of the arrest of U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent Robert P.
Hanssen for espionage highlight the need for increasingly sophisticated computer
forensic imaging and analysis tools and methodologies for their proper use. The
FBI conducted a search of Mr. Hanssen’s briefcase in 2001 and found a “computer
memory card,” from which they were able to retrieve a digital copy of a note Mr.
Hanssen wrote to his Russian handlers in 2000. The digital copy was made in the
off-limits room Hanssen kept in his basement—the one with two computers that
authorities believe he used to maintain his own spy operation.
Few of us will ever be in as tense a situation as the one the FBI faced recently with
Mr. Hanssen and the “computer memory card” or the off-limits room in the base-
ment. Mess that up from an evidence-handling perspective and a major international
espionage case could evaporate, but no matter where you work in the computer se-
curity field, you may one day find yourself faced with a tough investigative chal-
lenge—looking for the right tools to accomplish an incredibly important job, facing
near impossible deadlines—and always with the thought in the back of your mind
that if you mess something up, life as you know it could change drastically.
The need for technical investigative capabilities has been growing steadily with
the proliferation of computers in the workplace, and the discipline of computer
forensics has emerged to meet that need. Computers being what they are, it takes a
computer and a robust set of applications to analyze another computer in such a
manner that the results of the analysis are thorough, sound, unbiased, and repeat-
able. That’s where the various developers and vendors of computer forensic analy-
sis software come in. Each developer has his or her own unique perspective on the
needs of the investigative community and his or her own approach as to how to
meet those needs, but few have started the software-development process with a
well-stated computer forensic analysis requirements document.
What tasks must computer forensic analysis software be able to accomplish?
How can you measure the performance of various tools against one another with-
out a well-defined requirements definition? The speed of a forensic analysis tool is
of little consequence if it is not also thorough, unbiased, and forensically sound, so
speed alone cannot be the primary consideration. The knowledge, skills, and expe-
rience of the analyst at the keyboard can also play a significant role in the perfor-
mance of a tool when no thorough requirements document exists.
This final recommendations section is concerned with how to conduct a rele-
vant and meaningful review of computer-forensic-analysis software tools. Let’s
start with a requirements definition. With more practitioners involved in stating re-
quirements and designing tests, the tests will be more relevant to the computer
forensics community. With luck, where tools fall short of meeting requirements,
684
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

developers will take the results to their labs and work to improve the tools. It is the
intent of this recommendations section to initiate discussion and solidify the vari-
ous computer forensics requirements.
Requirements Definition
Let’s begin this look at requirements by identifying certain capabilities that a foren-
sic examiner needs, based on tasks the examiner must perform to complete a thor-
ough, unbiased, and forensically sound examination of computer media. The
requirements definition is not intended to mandate specific procedures or to en-
dorse certain products. It is also not intended to mandate that any specific software
tool be used in any specific set of circumstances. Where possible, the requirements
definition is also media independent, operating system independent, file system in-
dependent, and hardware platform independent.
This requirements definition also takes into account that law enforcement of-
ficers have different requirements than corporate security and investigations per-
sonnel. Whereas law enforcement officers typically have legal authority to seize
computer systems as evidence in criminal cases, corporate security and investiga-
tions personnel are typically involved in civil cases and rarely have authority to seize
equipment. Corporate security and investigations personnel do typically have some
authority to preview systems, determine which ones may have relevant evidence,
and preserve evidentiary images of systems deemed to contain relevant evidence.
Likewise, where the law enforcement officer may remove evidence to a lab envi-
ronment for analysis, the corporate security officer will typically remove only evi-
dentiary images of media, leaving the original media on site.
At a fairly fundamental level, the forensic analysis toolbox needs certain capa-
bilities. For instance, you must be able to complete forensically sound searches of
computer media at both the logical and physical levels of the media. That require-
ment exists because certain data in the logical file system may not be readily avail-
able or readable at the physical level. As an example, much of the Windows registry
is written physically to disk in binary form but is readable logically with a tool such
as Regedit.exe. Adobe Acrobat portable document format (.pdf) files are, likewise,
physically written to disk in a manner that obscures the textual content of the doc-
ument. Compressed files, encrypted files, and other “special” files written physically
to disk in a format other than text format likewise will not show their real content
at the physical level.
A search of computer media at the physical level also might miss plain text
words in a document if the document is fragmented physically on disk and the
word of interest is partially contained at the end of one sector and the beginning of
a noncontiguous sector. Only a logical search of the file system can ensure that
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
685

relevant text contained in logical files fragmented physically on disk is found, be-
cause a logical search can account for fragmentation.
This requirements definition also sets forth minimum requirements for func-
tionality, taking into account a wide variety of technical, logistical, and legal cir-
cumstances. The “identify–preserve–analyze–report” model continues to describe
the overall process investigators use to conduct an investigation involving computer-
based evidence. An investigator at a crime scene must be able to identify computer
systems or media possibly containing digital evidence relevant to the case. If a crime
scene contains computers, and investigators leave the scene without them (or with-
out forensically sound evidentiary images of them), then the process ends and no
analysis or reporting can take place. Any evidence on the media is possibly lost.
Once an investigator identifies the systems or media possibly containing data of
an evidentiary nature, he or she must properly preserve their digital contents in a
forensically sound manner. After preserving the evidence, an investigator will con-
duct series of examinations (analyze) of the data on the media to extract relevant
information from it. After identifying relevant media, preserving appropriate evi-
dentiary images of the media, and conducting a thorough, unbiased, and forensi-
cally sound examination of the media, the investigator will report the results of
their efforts in some fashion.
The capabilities an examiner requires for any one step of the process may
sometimes overlap with capabilities required for other steps. Essentially, without
the capability to do each of these functions, an investigator might not have in his or
her toolkit the requisite tools necessary to accomplish a thorough, unbiased exam-
ination of media, finding all relevant and potentially incriminating or exculpatory
evidence on the media under examination. The following capabilities are useful as
a starting point to develop a set of minimum requirements:
An investigator requires a capability to simultaneously preview a large number
of systems on site to determine which ones contain relevant evidence.
An investigator requires the capability to conduct a search at the physical level of
the target media, ignoring operating system and file system logical structures and
searching from sector 0 to the end of the media regardless of the logical content.
The search tool must be able to reliably report the physical location on the
media where responsive data were found.
An investigator requires the capability to conduct a thorough, read-only search
at the logical level of the target media.
An investigator requires an ability to generate a listing of all logical files in a file
system.
An investigator requires an ability to search the contents of the regular files in
a file system without changing either the data in the file or any date/time data
recorded by the operating system about the file.
686
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

An investigator requires an ability to identify and process special files.
Investigators require the capability to recover pertinent deleted files or portions
thereof that have not been overwritten.
Investigators require the capability to make forensically sound images of a wide
variety of media.
Investigators require the capability to restore forensic images to suitable media.
Investigators require the capability to perform a sector-by-sector comparison
of two pieces of media to determine where they differ.
Investigators require the capability to thoroughly document their investigative
activities and succinctly document the data recovered from a piece of media
that is relevant to the allegations under investigation.
Simultaneously Preview a Large Number of Systems on Site
In some situations, identifying which computers or media at a scene may contain
information or data of evidentiary value is fairly straightforward. The hacked Web
server, a compromised file server, a firewall, or other networked devices may be, be-
cause of the nature of the investigation, an obvious system to preserve. In other
cases, particularly where the allegation concerns activities of insiders, it may not be
so easy to determine which systems contain information of evidentiary value. In
cases where an office has multiple computers, and a subset of those computers
might contain relevant evidence, then seizing or imaging all the computers at that
site could be a tremendous waste of vital resources.
In most cases, an initial search at the physical level of the media may be suffi-
cient to determine if a specific computer system or piece of media contains rele-
vant information and should be imaged or preserved for further, more detailed
analysis. However, keep in mind that a fruitless search at the physical level may
have actually missed relevant information for a wide variety of reasons, including
that relevant keywords in logical files may be physically fragmented on disk, rele-
vant files may be compressed or encrypted, or relevant files may be otherwise en-
coded or obscured. The investigator must decide, based on the circumstances of
the case, whether a fruitless search at the physical level of the media is sufficient to
exclude the media from further processing. Previewing computer media has two
subcomponent requirements: a validated read-only methodology and a controlled
boot process.
Validated Read-Only Methodology
For previewing media on scene, an investigator requires a capability to preview
media using tools and methodologies that have been tested under various circum-
stances and validated not to make changes to the original media. Otherwise, the
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
687

preview process itself may taint the evidence by changing pertinent date/time
stamps on files or otherwise modifying data on the target media. Unintentionally
modifying date/time stamps in particular could unnecessarily complicate the 
evidence-analysis process.
Controlled Boot Process
For previewing media on scene, an investigator requires a boot process that can be
precisely controlled. Whether the preview process will be done via a remote con-
nection to a computer system or will be executed locally on the system, the investi-
gator must know exactly what the boot process is, ensure that the boot process used
does not make changes to any of the data on the media to be previewed, and ensure
that the preview tools and methodologies are forensically sound.
The preview process itself can be conducted several ways, including either re-
motely or locally. A local preview of media involves using a controlled boot process
to boot the suspect machine and conduct a review of the system locally. If the en-
tire process can be contained on floppy diskette or bootable CD-ROM, this could
allow as many simultaneous iterations as there are suspect systems to be previewed,
but the local preview process must not make changes to the media being previewed.
Like a local preview, a remote preview must be conducted in such a manner
that it does not make changes to the media being previewed. If the investigator uses
a tool with a remote preview capability, they will actually boot two computers: the
one housing the media to be previewed and the one from which the preview will be
accomplished. Using a remote preview capability may limit the number of simul-
taneous iterations that can be conducted because it requires more hardware, but in
cases where only a few systems need to be previewed, a remote capability could be
very useful. Typically, remote previewing involves connecting two computers via a
parallel port, com port, video port, or other port, running a “server” version of an
application on the machine to be previewed, and running a “client” version of the
software on the machine from which the preview is conducted. No matter the exact
mechanism used, the preview process must be forensically sound and must not
make changes to the media being previewed.
Conduct a Search at the Physical Level of the Target Media
A physical search of the media essentially searches all logical files, file slack, free or
unallocated space, and all space on the media outside any logical data areas. The
search tool must have the ability to use both ASCII and UNICODE character sets.
Some operating systems write documents and other files to disk using printable and
nonprintable ASCII characters. Other operating systems can use the UNICODE
character set as well as the ASCII character set. A search for a word using the ASCII
character set will not find that word if it is written to disk using the UNICODE
688
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

character set, so an investigator requires a search tool that can use both character
sets in its searches. Preferably, a single pass through the media will search using
both character sets simultaneously.
The search tool must be capable of searching all sectors of the physical media.
If the tool cannot see and search all sectors of the media, the resultant search may
not be thorough enough to establish that evidence either does or does not reside on
the media.
The search tool must be capable of using a keyword list. Tools that require sep-
arate passes through the media to search for each keyword would unnecessarily
constrain the investigator in terms of both time and efficiency, especially when
searching one of today’s 80-Gb and larger hard drives. The keyword list must be
able to include regular ASCII text as well as hexadecimal notations. Some file type
headers and all binary files will contain nonprintable ASCII characters. Hexadeci-
mal notation is the best way to search for this type of data.
Report the Physical Location on the Media
This report could use either the cylinder-head-sector (CHS) or logical block ad-
dressing (LBA) address of the responsive data. In the best case, even though a phys-
ical search is conducted, the search tool may be able to determine whether the
keyword resides in a logical file on the media, file slack, free space, or areas of the
media outside the logical data area.
The search tool must be able to show results in context. Rarely is a keyword or
phrase so unique to an investigation that its mere presence on a piece of media in-
dicates the media contains data of evidentiary value. The investigator must be able
to discern the context within which a word or phrase resides on the media to deter-
mine whether the context is relevant to the investigation. Thus, the search tool must
be capable of displaying some amount of data that resides on disk immediately prior
to the keyword and some amount of data that resides on disk immediately after the
keyword. Otherwise, the investigator must use a hex editor to preview each sector
containing the key word to determine whether it actually contains relevant data.
An investigator also requires the ability to calculate a hash of the physical
media. The hash process must take into account every bit of every byte of every sec-
tor on the media, from sector 0 to the last physical sector, regardless of whether any
specific sector is included in any logical volume on the media. In most cases, the
minimum standard is the 32-bit cyclic redundancy check (CRC) algorithm. For
hard drives, the 128-bit message digest 5 (MD5) algorithm is preferred.
Conduct a Thorough Read-Only Search
A search of the logical file space is likely to require less time than a search of the
physical media, but likely will not search every sector of the media. If an investigator
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
689

begins with a logical search to preview media, and that search produces no relevant
results, the investigator may have to follow up with a search of the physical media
to ensure a thorough search. If the search tool used on one logical partition does
not understand the file system formatting of another partition on the media, then
a different search tool must be used on the other partition. For instance, a hard
drive may be partitioned and formatted to boot multiple operating systems, each
using a different file system. That may require several logical level search tools if no
one tool understands all the file systems on the media.
As with the physical level search, the search tool must have the ability to use
both ASCII and UNICODE character sets. This is for exactly the same reasons as
previously stated for searching at the physical level.
The search tool must be capable of searching all sectors within the logical
boundaries of the file system. If the tool cannot see and search all sectors of the file
system, the resultant search may not be thorough enough to establish that the evi-
dence either does or does not reside on the media. For reasons already stated, the
search tool must be able to use a keyword list.
Generate a Listing of All Logical Files
This listing must include not only all the regular files in a file system but also all files
with special attributes, such as hidden files, read-only files, system files, executable
files, directories, links to files, device files, and so on. The tool that creates this list
must be able to write the list of files to appropriate media, whether that is a network-
accessible volume, a local hard drive not under investigation, or some appropriate
removable media connected to the analysis machine. Preferably, the tool that gen-
erates the list of files would not allow the list to be written to the media being
searched.
In addition, an investigator requires an ability to generate a listing of all the
date/time stamps an operating system may store in relation to each file in the file
system. Some operating systems store various dates and times in relation to the files
in the file system. Those dates/times may include Date/Time Last Modified,
Date/Time Last Accessed, or Date/Time Created. Not all operating systems record
all date/time combinations, but if an operating system records any date/time stamp
data in relation to files in a file system, the tool must list all date/time data available.
Furthermore, an investigator requires the ability to identify and generate a list-
ing of all deleted files in the file system. Various operating systems handle deleting
files in various ways, so the specific capability of a tool will be dependent on the file
system the tool is examining, but to some degree, all file systems have a way of at
least identifying that a file once existed in a certain space.
690
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Search the Contents of the Regular Files
Searching the contents of the regular files is a particularly important requirement
for the search tool. If the search tool opens a regular file to search its contents for a
keyword, and that process changes either the file contents or a date/time stamp
maintained by the operating system about the file, then the investigator may have
to restore an image of the media to get back to the original file contents or date/time
stamps. Some search tools that operate at the logical level of the media do not quite
meet this requirement, because most operating systems keep a Date/Time Last Ac-
cessed time stamp and will attempt to update this stamp when the search tool opens
or closes the file.
It is particularly important to test search tools under very controlled conditions
to ensure they actually meet this requirement. If a search tool allows the operating
system to update Date/Time Last Accessed when the tool runs, then the investigator
must take steps to preserve those date/time stamps prior to using the search tool.
An investigator also needs the capability to validate file types where applicable
using known header-extension pairs and to hash all the logical files using a recognized
and appropriate hashing algorithm. In most cases, the minimum standard at a file
level is the CRC algorithm, but for very large files, the MD5 algorithm is preferred.
Ability to Identify and Process Special Files
Special files are in a format in which their contents are either not written to disk or
not maintained internally in a readily readable, searchable format. Special files in-
clude encrypted, compressed, or password-protected files; steganographic carrier
files; graphics, video, and audio files; format files; executable files or binary data
files; files housing email archives or active email content; swap files or virtual mem-
ory files; and other such file formats that obscure their plain text content. Some
password-protected files can be processed in a manner to remove or expose the
password. Other types of special files, such as encryption or steganography, may re-
quire a more dedicated effort to bypass the security mechanisms.
Recover Pertinent Deleted Files
Recovering pertinent deleted files would logically include a capability to identify
and search all file slack. This would also include identifying and searching all free
(unallocated) space, identifying relevant file headers in free space, identifying
deleted directories in free space, including directory entries for deleted files, and re-
covering deleted directory entries as well as all pertinent deleted files that are not
overwritten.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
691

Make Forensically Sound Images
Once the preview process has identified that certain systems or media contain in-
formation relevant to the issues at hand, an investigator must have tools capable of
making forensically sound images of those systems or media. The criteria for foren-
sically sound media images is fairly straightforward: the image must include a true,
validated copy of every bit of every byte contained on the media, without regard to
media contents, from the absolute beginning of the media to the end of the physi-
cal device.
The exact mechanism by which that data is retrieved from the evidence media,
stored in an image file, and validated will vary, but the image file must contain val-
idated copies of all data from the original media. In today’s world of smart cards
and “computer memory cards,” where cameras can store hundreds of pictures on
memory cards (where these cards can supply memory to portable or handheld de-
vices), the variety of media investigators are faced with is ever-widening. Today’s
media are outdated tomorrow. New imaging and analysis tools must keep apace.
Restore Forensic Images to Suitable Media
Where the functionality of an application is the issue, merely analyzing the files
comprising the application at a physical or logical level may not be enough to sat-
isfy the questions. This requirement stems from a need to be able to run applica-
tions installed on drives that have been preserved as evidence. For instance, in a
fraud investigation, if an investigator needs to print reports from a large financial
application installed on a drive that he has imaged, and he no longer has access to
the original drives, he may need to restore the image to run the application to print
the reports. Today’s large applications rely on installation processes that do more
than just copy the application files to the media, so running the application in its
installed environment may be necessary. This cannot currently be done from
within the image files, so the image must be restored.
Perform a Sector-by-Sector Comparison
To verify that one piece of media is an identical copy of another, investigators typ-
ically use media hashes of some type. But where two pieces of media are thought to
be identical copies of each other, but hash differently, it must be possible to com-
pare sector-by-sector. In most cases, simply knowing that two pieces of media have
different hashes will not give you an indication of where on the media the difference
occurs. This capability would be especially useful when an investigator must restore
an image of a piece of media to a dissimilar piece of media. This tool could verify
that any differences between the original and the copy are merely sectors filled with
hashes and are accounted for by geometry differences only.
692
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Thoroughly Document Investigative Activities
Thoroughly documenting investigative activities would preferably be an automated
part of the forensic analysis software. If the software is self-documenting and certain
reports are automatically generated for the user, based on the results of exercising
the capabilities of the software, this could help make reporting results much simpler.
Now that we’ve looked at computer forensics requirements definitions, let’s
look at digital evidence standards and principles. This next part of the chapter rec-
ommends the establishment of computer forensics standards for the exchange of
digital evidence between sovereign nations and is intended to elicit constructive
discussion regarding digital evidence.
Standards and Principles of Digital Evidence
The latter part of the 20th century was marked by the electronic transistor and the
machines and ideas made possible by it. As a result, the world changed from ana-
log to digital. Although the computer reigns supreme in the digital domain, it is not
the only digital device. An entire constellation of audio, video, communications,
and photographic devices are becoming so closely associated with the computer as
to have converged with it.
From a law enforcement perspective, more of the information that serves as
currency in the judicial process is being stored, transmitted, or processed in digital
form. The connectivity resulting from a single world economy in which the com-
panies providing goods and services are truly international has enabled criminals to
act transjurisdictionally with ease. Consequently, a perpetrator may be brought to
justice in one jurisdiction while the digital evidence required to successfully prose-
cute the case may reside only in other jurisdictions.
This situation requires that all nations have the ability to collect and preserve
digital evidence for their own needs as well as for the potential needs of other sov-
ereigns. Each jurisdiction has its own system of government and administration of
justice, but in order for one country to protect itself and its citizens, it must be able
to make use of evidence collected by other nations.
Although it is not reasonable to expect all nations to know about and abide by
the precise laws and rules of other countries, a means that will allow the exchange
of evidence must be found. This part of the chapter defines the technical aspects of
these exchanges.
Standards
To ensure that digital evidence is collected, preserved, examined, and transferred in
a manner that safeguards the accuracy and reliability of the evidence, law enforce-
ment and forensic organizations must establish and maintain an effective quality
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
693

system. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) are documented quality-control
guidelines that must be supported by proper case records and use broadly accepted
procedures, equipment, and materials.
Standards and Criteria
All agencies and organizations that seize or examine digital evidence must maintain
an appropriate SOP document. All elements of an organization’s policies and pro-
cedures concerning digital evidence must be clearly set forth in this SOP document,
which must be issued under the agency’s management authority.
The use of SOPs is fundamental to both law enforcement and forensic science.
Guidelines that are consistent with scientific and legal principles are essential to
the acceptance of results and conclusions by courts and other agencies. The devel-
opment and implementation of these SOPs must be under an organization’s man-
agement authority.
Management must review the SOPs on an annual basis to ensure their contin-
ued suitability and effectiveness. Rapid technological changes are the hallmark of
digital evidence, with the types, formats, and methods for seizing and examining
digital evidence changing quickly. To ensure that personnel, training, equipment,
and procedures continue to be appropriate and effective, management must review
and update SOP documents annually.
Procedures used must be generally accepted in the field or supported by data
gathered and recorded in a scientific manner. Because a variety of scientific proce-
dures may validly be applied to a given problem, standards and criteria for assess-
ing procedures need to remain flexible. The validity of a procedure may be
established by demonstrating the accuracy and reliability of specific techniques. In
the digital evidence area, peer review of SOPs by other organizations may be useful.
The organization must maintain written copies of appropriate technical pro-
cedures. Procedures should set forth their purpose and appropriate application.
Required elements such as hardware and software must be listed, and the proper
steps for successful use should be listed or discussed. Any limitations in the use of
the procedure or the use or interpretation of the results should be established. Per-
sonnel who use these procedures must be familiar with them and have them avail-
able for reference.
The organization must use hardware and software that is appropriate and ef-
fective for the seizure or examination procedure. Although many acceptable pro-
cedures may be used to perform a task, considerable variation among cases requires
that personnel have the flexibility to exercise judgment in selecting a method ap-
propriate to the problem.
Hardware used in the seizure or examination of digital evidence should be in
good operating condition and be tested to ensure that it operates correctly. Software
694
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

must be tested to ensure that it produces reliable results for use in seizure and 
examination.
All activity relating to the seizure, storage, examination, and transfer of digital
evidence must be recorded in writing and be available for review and testimony. In
general, documentation to support conclusions must be such that, in the absence
of the originator, another competent person could evaluate what was done, inter-
pret the data, and arrive at the same conclusions as the originator.
The requirement for evidence reliability necessitates a chain of custody for all
items of evidence. Chain-of-custody documentation must be maintained for all dig-
ital evidence. Case notes and records of observations must be of a permanent nature.
Handwritten notes and observations must be in ink, not pencil, although pencil (in-
cluding color) may be appropriate for diagrams or making tracings. Any corrections
to notes must be made by an initialed, single strikeout; nothing in the handwritten in-
formation should be obliterated or erased. Notes and records should be authenticated
by handwritten signatures, initials, digital signatures, or other marking systems.
Any action that has the potential to alter, damage, or destroy any aspect of
original evidence must be performed by qualified persons in a forensically sound
manner. As discussed in the preceding standards and criteria, evidence has value
only if it can be shown to be accurate, reliable, and controlled. A quality forensic
program consists of properly trained personnel and appropriate equipment, soft-
ware, and procedures to collectively ensure these attributes.
Finally, now that the establishment of computer forensics standards has been
made, it is time to recommend some auditing techniques. The following auditing
techniques are based on how to audit your internal computer forensics and Inter-
net security policies.
Computer Forensics Auditing Techniques
Companies that believe their networks and the Internet can be completely pro-
tected by a phalanx of add-on computer forensics and security products may be in
for a rude awakening. Underlying vulnerabilities, embedded and unseen many lay-
ers down in network infrastructures and the Internet, may be unwitting invitations
to even moderately skilled attackers.
Computer forensics and security-auditing companies can give a company ex-
pert analysis of obscure but potentially devastating loopholes, along with estimates
of cost versus risk for each of many possible approaches to address them—and a
basis for deciding whether spending a little more money up front will save much
more in the long run. This last part of the chapter makes some recommendations
into how computer forensic and security auditors go through a network and what
steps are necessary for companies to lock down their networks—especially the ones
that are connected to the Internet.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
695

How to Audit Your Network and Internet Security Policies with Computer Forensics
Techniques
The Internet has allowed businesses to communicate in new and strategic ways
with various types of people and organizations. System administrators do not have
to argue for an Internet connection anymore. Instead, they have to fight for the re-
sources to secure it. Auditing your Internet and network security with computer-
forensics techniques is a responsibility that should be frequently revisited and
improved, and you should not hesitate in dedicating resources to security when you
find shortcomings.
The Internet Octopus
Over the years, you have added feature upon feature to your Internet and network
connections. As needs have changed, you have found yourself needing more robust
services, faster connections, and more flexibility in what can be done. In the begin-
ning, services such as simple POP3-style email and Web access were the extent of
an Internet connection. Today, you have site-to-site Virtual Private Networks
(VPNs); client-side and home-user VPNs; streaming media; Web-based training;
company Web sites; Internet applications; e-commerce [4]; and business-to-
business extranets. During all these changes in the past few years, you have proba-
bly changed IT personnel, Internet platforms, and network connections at least
once. This scenario makes it easy to have some unforeseen, yet preventable, exposures.
Any network connection to the Internet is vulnerable to exploitation. The most
basic vulnerability that all network connections face is that they could be made un-
available and bring down mission-critical services with them. Today, you are find-
ing more intelligent defenses against attacks, such as denial-of-service attacks, as
routers and other devices can be set to verify source addresses and ignore packets if
they are bogus or carry a suspicious pattern. However, beyond the denial-of-service
category of vulnerabilities, there are always the standard concerns of open ports,
easy passwords, unsecured routers, and unknown “features” that any Internet de-
vice may have.
Many organizations have grown their Internet set of features across multiple
devices or possibly multiple network connections—a firewall for Web and email
traffic, a VPN appliance for remote connections, a different firewall for a business-
to-business relationship, or other possible combinations of lines and devices that
can push Internet vulnerabilities beyond control. These services can even be dis-
tributed across multiple Internet connections or across multiple Internet service
providers. Regardless of the number of devices that are on the Internet, each has
different services that can be potentially exploited. You can see how an enterprise
environment such as this could quickly become difficult to manage from a security
standpoint.
696
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

What You Can Do
There are a number of things you can do to keep your network connections secure
and to keep business running as usual. One of the easiest measures you can take is
to clean things up:
Verify that there are no accounts for terminated employees.
Check for any manufacturer or service provider default passwords that may be
easily known or guessed.
Verify that any temporary services or open ports are disabled.
Beware of potential internal threats.
Have the mindset of “deny all except that which is explicitly stated in the rule set.”
After this basic housekeeping is completed, it’s important to perform a “vul-
nerability chain assessment” with your computer forensics tools on your own. This
will allow you to gauge the entire scope of an Internet and network security policy.
A vulnerability chain assessment tells administrators what is affected by what and
who potential perpetrators could be.
All the items listed below have vulnerabilities—some of which are beyond your
control. For each item, consider the potential vulnerabilities that could cause an in-
terruption of service:
Internet (outside of your router): Internet being unavailable from your carrier
or region, phone line cut, denial of service, and so on.
Internet line: Physical disconnection—via a perpetrator or the carrier.
Internet router: ISP configuration may have well-known default passwords;
this could reroute all incoming mail, shut down an interface, or adversely affect
performance by some other means.
Internet/external network: If this segment is a managed device (hub, switch, or
other), it could be falsely managed to disable ports or could be affected by the
failure of the device.
VPN appliance and firewall: Security compromise, stale VPN accounts or vendor
default account, unwanted services, failure of device, and so on.
Internal network: Failure of any internal device, internal security threats on in-
terior devices to the Internet, and the like.
Obtain Peace of Mind
One thing you can do to bring some validity to your efforts is to get an external opin-
ion of your Internet and network security. You can obtain this opinion via:
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
697

A formal Internet and network security audit from a person or organization
with certified information system auditor (CISA) and computer forensics cer-
tification.
A third-party piece of computer forensic auditing software or original equipment
manufacturer (OEM-provided) tool to examine security issues.
A professional hacker trying to compromise an Internet presence.
The professional hacker approach is recommended, but you have to be careful.
These types of companies need to be true DEF CON followers and really know their
stuff. You want a professional hacker to do more than call vendors asking for pass-
words and back-door methods.
Many general IT vendors offer intrusion detection or an Internet exposure analy-
sis. These third-party computer forensic examinations can yield beneficial informa-
tion to solidify a security strategy. One of the benefits provided is when they attempt
to exploit vulnerabilities (although they will not actually destroy data or compromise
systems) and demonstrate how much damage they could do by how far they’re able
to get in. It’s a wonderful feeling to present management with a report saying that this
external group is impressed with the security of your Internet presence.
Continued Monitoring and Risk Distribution
You can solidify your security strategy by constantly monitoring it and by keeping
up with the latest computer-forensic and hacking tools and methodologies. You
can also find Web sites that host information on how to exploit specific products.
These are usually based on out-of-the-box configurations, so keep current with
vendors on new features, versions, or newly exposed risks.
There are countless free or time-trial pieces of computer forensics auditing
software you can use to peek at your connection, but be careful. These tools may be
dangerous to your operating environment, so a test computer is ideal for such com-
puter forensic investigations.
One of the things that is also very important is your ability to distribute risk.
That’s rather easy, actually. However, the better you distribute risk, the more ex-
pensive things become. Here are some recommended risk distribution tips:
If you need firewall and VPN services, consider having those on two different
devices—from different vendors.
Have an alternate Internet connection. If another ISDN or T1 line is not pos-
sible, consider testing the alternate serial interface of a router that may be con-
figurable to dial a modem.
Put up a honeypot to attract or distract would-be hackers. Give it a registered
DNS name such as lotusnotes.company.com but don’t host anything on it.
698
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Proactively renew or cancel your Internet service provider agreement before it
expires or before the carrier contacts you. Do not assume that they will continue
to bill you at the current rate or that someone will call you to discuss options.
With a bit of diligence, you can keep your Internet and network security at
peak, which will protect the business goals of the organization. Hopefully, this final
chapter has provided some fresh ideas on keeping security first.
FINAL WORD: COMPUTER FORENSIC NEEDS AND CHALLENGES
Reporting of economic and cyber crime is problematic and grossly underestimated,
as is apparent from the many risks associated with corporations’ reporting or shar-
ing fraud losses and activity. A uniform computer forensics crime reporting system
should be developed that includes specific economic crimes.
The Fraud Identification Codes established by the National Fraud Center are a
start. Until such a means of a computer forensics crime-reporting system is imple-
mented and the stigma of fraud victimization is removed, this problem will not be
solved. Uniform and thorough reporting is necessary in the war on economic and
cyber crime; resources for computer forensics investigation and prosecution will
naturally follow as the enormity of the problem unfolds.
The lack of agreed-on definitions regarding economic crime and computer
crime has resulted in a paucity of data and information on the size and scope of the
problem. Academics have not been able to agree on definitions and have, for the
most part, continued to focus on white-collar crime.
Economic crime is defined as an illegal act (or a constantly evolving set of acts)
generally committed by deception or misrepresentation (fraud) by someone (or a
group) who has special professional or technical skills for the purposes of personal
or organizational financial gain or to gain (or attempt to gain) an unfair advantage
over another individual or entity. To this day, the true nature of the amount of eco-
nomic crime is buried in the statistics of more conventional crimes. For example,
credit-card fraud is typically classified as larceny instead of access-device fraud.
Preventing, detecting, investigating, and prosecuting economic crimes must
become a priority in order to lessen their impact on the economy and the public’s
confidence. Law enforcement, as it stands now, is in danger of slipping further be-
hind the highly sophisticated criminals. New resources, support for existing orga-
nizations (the National Fraud Center, the National White Collar Crime Center, the
IFC, and the Economic Crime Investigation Institute), and innovative computer
forensics solutions are needed to control this growing problem in the United States
and the world.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
699

These computer forensics needs and challenges can be accomplished only with
the cooperation of the private, public, and international sectors. All stakeholders
must be more willing to exchange information on the effect economic and cyber
crime has on them and the methods they are using to detect and prevent it.
No single sector holds all the computer forensics resources, tools, or solutions.
In fact, industry has more resources than government, but it must be motivated
and authorized to partner and communicate. All parties must be willing to work to-
gether to effect change in existing laws and regulations and to promulgate new ini-
tiatives. The victims need to follow the lead of the criminals and organize
themselves, so that the organized bad guys are not operating in a lawless environ-
ment, where culpability is at a minimum.
The United States must take the lead. Current and future administrations must
recognize the full impact of economic and cyber crime, both domestically and glob-
ally, and make a concerted, strategic effort to combat it, for the benefit of all society.
Finally, let’s move on to the real interactive part of this chapter: review questions
and exercises. The answers and solutions by chapter can be found in Appendix E.
CHAPTER REVIEW QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
True/False
1.
True or False? When dealing with digital evidence, all the standard forensic and
procedural principles must not be applied.
2.
True or False? Upon seizing digital evidence, actions taken should not change
that evidence.
3.
True or False? People who access original digital evidence should not be trained
for the purpose.
4.
True or False? All activity relating to the seizure, access, storage, or transfer of
digital evidence must be fully documented, preserved, and available for review.
5.
True or False? Individuals are responsible for all actions taken with respect to
digital evidence while such evidence is in their possession.
Multiple Choice
1.
To help create cooperation between the United States and other nations, the G8
group of major industrialized nations has proposed six principles for procedures
relating to digital evidence, which it defines as information stored or transmitted in
binary form that may be relied on in court:
700
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

A. When dealing with digital evidence, all the standard forensic and procedural
principles must be applied.
B.
Upon seizing digital evidence, actions taken should not change that evidence.
C. People who access original digital evidence should be trained for the purpose.
D. All activity relating to the seizure, access, storage [1], or transfer of digital
evidence must be fully documented, preserved, and available for review.
E.
Individuals are not responsible for all actions taken with respect to digital
evidence while such evidence is in their possession.
2.
It is recommended that the following capabilities are useful as a starting point
to develop a set of minimum requirements:
A. An investigator requires a capability to simultaneously preview a large num-
ber of systems on site to determine which ones contain relevant evidence.
B.
An investigator requires the capability to conduct a search at the physical
level of the target media, ignoring operating system and file system logical
structures, and searching from sector 0 to the end of the media regardless
of the logical content.
C. The search tool must be able to unreliably report the physical location on
the media where responsive data were found.
D. An investigator requires the capability to conduct a thorough, read-only
search at the logical level of the target media.
E.
An investigator requires an ability to generate a listing of all logical files in
a file system.
3.
There are a number of things you can do to keep your network connections
secure and to keep business running as usual. One of the easiest measures you
can take is to clean things up, except:
A. Verify that there are no accounts for terminated employees.
B.
Check for any manufacturer or service provider default passwords that
may be easily known or guessed.
C. Verify that any temporary services or open ports are disabled.
D. Beware of potential external threats.
E.
Have the mindset of “deny all except that which is explicitly stated in the
rule set.”
4.
All the items listed below have vulnerabilities—some of which are beyond your
control. For each item, consider the potential vulnerabilities that could cause
an interruption of service, except which one:
A. Internet (outside of your router)
B.
Internet line
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
701

C. Internet router
D. Internet/external network
E.
VPN appliance and IDS
5.
One thing you can do to bring some validity to your efforts is to get an external
opinion of your Internet and network security. You can obtain this opinion via
the following, except:
A. A professional hacker trying to compromise an extranet presence.
B.
A formal Internet and network security audit from a person or organization
with CISA and computer forensics certification.
C. A third-party piece of computer forensic auditing software or OEM-provided
tool to examine security issues.
D. A professional hacker trying to compromise an Internet presence.
Exercise
When a leading United States–based drug manufacturer’s financial audit team re-
ceived a tip that certain employees were suspected of performing fraudulent ac-
tions, they responded immediately by launching a full-scale investigation. This
investigation presented significant but common challenges faced by global enter-
prises committed to addressing internal fraud. First, the fraudulent activity was
occurring on the other side of globe at the company’s Middle East office. Secondly,
as is typically the case, almost all of the critical evidence was in digital format,
stored on the hard drives of the workstations and servers at the site. Traditionally,
an effective investigation would require the investigation staff to travel to the re-
mote location. Such costly travel and disruptive activity would likely compromise
the integrity of the investigation and could even lead to destruction of evidence by
the suspects. In addition to fraud having a potentially serious impact on a com-
pany’s bottom line, Sarbanes-Oxley mandates that public companies have a dili-
gent, internal fraud investigation capability. It was imperative that this
investigation be handled in a professional and effective manner. This required the
diligent and thorough investigation of all relevant Middle East–based computer
activity, which could not be performed by local IT staff, as they were potential sus-
pects. Because this case called for specific and extensive IT expertise, company au-
ditors began their investigative process through the company’s United
States–based corporate computer forensics specialist team (CFST). How was the
CFST able to go about conducting their investigations?
702
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

REFERENCES
[1] Vacca, John R., The Essential Guide to Storage Area Networks, Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.
[2] Gottfried, Grant, “Emerging Technology: Taking a Byte Out of Crime,”
National Center for Forensic Science (NCFS), Orlando, FL, 2002.
[3] Vacca, John R., Net Privacy: A Guide to Developing & Implementing an Iron-
clad ebusiness Privacy Plan, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
[3a] “2004 Computer Crime and Security Survey,” Computer Security Insti-
tute of San Francisco and the FBI, 2004.
[4] Vacca, John R., Electronic Commerce, 3rd ed., Charles River Media, Hing-
ham, MA, 2001.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
703

This page intentionally left blank 

WHAT IS COMPUTER FORENSICS?
Computer forensics is the collection, preservation, analysis, and court presentation
of computer-related evidence.
WHY COMPUTER FORENSICS?
The vast majority of documents now exist in electronic form. No investigation in-
volving the review of documents, either in a criminal or corporate setting, is com-
plete without including properly handled computer evidence. Computer forensics
ensures the preservation and authentication of computer data, which is fragile by
its nature and can be easily altered, erased, or subject to claims of tampering with-
out proper handling. Additionally, computer forensics greatly facilitates the recovery
and analysis of deleted files and many other forms of compelling information nor-
mally invisible to the user.
WHAT IS DATA RECOVERY?
Data recovery is the process of retrieving deleted or inaccessible data from failed
electronic storage media such as computer hard disk drives, removable media, optical
devices, and tape cartridges. Your data can become inaccessible because of a software
problem, computer virus, mechanical or electrical malfunction, or a deliberate
human act. Regardless of the cause of your data loss, your experienced technicians
should be able to successfully recover lost data 80 to 85% of the time.
A
Frequently Asked
Questions
705

How Long Does Data Recovery Take?
Standard Data Recovery
Most recoveries will be completed in 2 to 5 days.
Expedited Data Recovery
If you should need this service, you need a dedicated technician assigned to your
drive within 4 hours of the time that you send in your hard disk. This process will
normally cut your turnaround time in half.
Emergency Data Recovery
If your situation is critical, you will need to make arrangements for a technician to be
available who will be assigned to work on your recovery until it is completed. The goal
here is to return your data to you within three to five working days. However, because
of the complexity of data recovery, there will be times when it will take longer.
ARE THERE INSTANCES WHEN DATA CANNOT BE RECOVERED?
Yes. There are instances when the damage to the hard drive is so severe that data re-
covery is not possible. This usually occurs when the read/write heads actually “crash”
and gouge the magnetic storage media to the point where the data is destroyed.
However, in a number of cases, data recovery was possible at the time the dam-
age first occurred, but the data became nonrecoverable through the use of com-
mercial recovery software. This software is designed to recover data from working
drives. If your drive has experienced a mechanical or electrical failure, the use of re-
covery software can cause permanent loss of your data.
What Can I Do to Protect My Data and Minimize My Chances of  Losing Data?
The adage in the industry is not “if my drive fails,” but, rather, “when my drive fails.”
Although your hard drive has many electronic components, it also has moving
parts. Over time, these mechanical components can fail as the result of use.
Avoid Heat and Vibration
All drive components, both electronic and mechanical, are sensitive to heat and vi-
bration. Keep your computer in a dry, controlled environment that is clean and
dust-free. Set up your computer in an area with little traffic to ensure that it does
not get bumped. Heat and vibration are two of the leading causes of hard drive fail-
ure. Also, beware of static.
706
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Back Up Your Data
The surest way to avoid data loss, even if your hard drive fails, is to back up your
data. If you don’t have a tape backup device or network drive at your fingertips,
back up your most important files to a floppy disk at least once a week.
To Avoid Premature Drive Failure, Run Scandisk
Scandisk examines your hard disk for logical inconsistencies and damaged sur-
faces. Run it every two or three weeks just to be safe. It is important to save any
changes to a floppy until you are sure that the changes you are about to make will
not adversely affect your hard drive.
Run Defrag Frequently
Files will most likely not be stored in adjacent clusters. Defrag rearranges the data
on your hard disk so that each file is stored in a set of contiguous clusters. This is
essential for data recovery because success is more likely when the damaged file’s
clusters are adjacent to each other.
Antivirus Software
Use antivirus software and update it at least four times a year. Also, use an unin-
terrupted power supply (UPS). In the event of a surge of electricity, black out,
brown out, or lightning strike, a UPS can protect your system from electrical dam-
age. A UPS is also a backup power source that keeps your computer running for a
short period of time, giving you the opportunity to properly save your work and
shut down, avoiding a potential data loss.
Be Cautious When Using Recovery Utilities
Use diagnostic and repair utilities with caution. Verify that your utility software is
compatible with your operating software. Never use file-recovery software if you
suspect an electrical or mechanical drive failure. Always make an undo disk when
you allow a utility to make changes to your hard drive.
How Do I Ship My Hard Drive?
It is extremely important that your hard drive is packaged carefully to avoid any ad-
ditional damage during shipment. Only your drive is required for data recovery.
Packaging the Hard Drive
Wrap the hard drive in an antistatic material. If an antistatic bag is not available, a
freezer bag will suffice. It is recommended that you ship the drive in its original
manufacturer’s packaging. If this is not possible, pack the hard drive in a sturdy
Frequently Asked Questions
707

corrugated cardboard box twice the size of the drive, with heavy foam padding,
bubble wrap, or other antivibration materials. Do not use styrofoam peanuts, as
they attract static electricity. Be sure the padding material is at least two inches
thick around the drive.
Water-Damaged Hard Drives
If your drive has suffered water damage, please do not dry it. Enclose the drive
along with a damp sponge in a sealed plastic bag to prevent it from drying out.
Controller Boards
When recovering data from older models, you may need to send the controller
along with the drive. Remove the controller carefully, enclose in it antistatic mate-
rial, and ship it along with the drive.
Other
Package all other types of media following the guidelines in the preceding for a typ-
ical hard drive.
Locations
Ship the drive directly to the recovery facility nearest you: It is recommended that
you ship via UPS or Federal Express domestically and DHL internationally, using
next-day service. If you elect to use another carrier, it is suggested that you use an
overnight service. Also, if you have any special shipping considerations, questions,
or concerns, please contact your overnight carrier.
How Do I Get My Data Back?
If your drive is repairable, the repair will be completed and your data returned to
you on your original drive. When your data is recovered and your drive is not re-
pairable, there are many different ways to return your data, including a new drive,
magnetic tapes, Zip cartridges, or CD-ROM.
708
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Disclaimer: This author and publisher do not endorse the contents of the links in
this Appendix. They are offered as resources that other systems security and foren-
sics professionals have found helpful.
GENERAL FORENSICS RESOURCES
AccessData (http://www.accessdata.com/)
Known best for their Password Recovery Toolkit. AccessData’s site offers information
about this and other security-related tools, and you will find several free tools here.
Also, you will find several articles and links regarding cryptography and related
subjects.
Digital Intelligence, Inc. (http://www.digitalintelligence.com/)
Digital Intelligence designs and builds computer forensic software and hardware.
They also offer free forensic utility software for law enforcement.
Fred Cohen & Associates (http://all.net/)
This site is full of network security and information warfare articles and white papers.
Fred Cohen is one of the most recognized, respected, and requested names in infor-
mation protection today.
B
Computer Forensics
Resources
709

Guidance Software (http://www.guidancesoftware.com/)
Guidance is the creator of the popular GUI-based forensic tool EnCase. Besides in-
formation regarding their EnCase forensic tool, there is a bulletin board with a
number of forums relating to their products and computer forensics.
High Tech Crime Investigation Association (http://htcia.org/)
This is an association that promotes the exchange of data and ideas about methods
relating to investigations and security among its membership.
International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists (http://cops.org/)
IACIS is an international, volunteer nonprofit corporation composed of law enforce-
ment professionals dedicated to education in the field of forensic computer science.
Mares and Company, LLC (http://www.dmares.com/)
Mares has been authoring computer forensic tools for law enforcement for many
years. This site provides access to all his tools as well as a number of articles and pa-
pers relating to computer forensics. Information regarding Mares’ computer foren-
sic training can also be found on this site.
NTI—Computer Evidence Leaders (http://www.forensics-intl.com/)
NTI has a comprehensive suite of computer forensic tools that have been used by
law enforcement for many years. There are also many good articles concerning
technical and legal issues surrounding computer forensics.
Porcupine.org (http://www.porcupine.org/wietse/)
This site is provided by Wietse Zweitze Venema, which provides tools and white
papers focused primarily on postmortem analysis of computer break-ins.
Sydex Inc. (http://www.sydex.com/)
Sydex can take hundreds of different floppy and tape types and convert them to
Windows-readable files. They use their own specially designed equipment to
process just about any format. They can also repair diskette data errors and perform
forensic analysis. They’ve written forensic software that’s been in use for years by
many government and private organizations.
The Coroner’s Toolkit (http://www.fish.com/tct/)
The Coroner’s Toolkit is a collection of tools that are oriented toward either gath-
ering or analyzing forensic data on a Unix system.
710
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

TUCOFS (http://www.tucofs.com/tucofs.htm)
The TUCOFS Web site is a great collection of computer forensics resources and tools.
Interpact, Inc. (http://www.infowar.com/)
The sole purpose of this site is for information warfare and computer security.
WetStone Technologies, Inc. (http://www.wetstonetech.com/page/page/1097778.htm)
WetStone Technologies is a developer of information security technologies. This
site includes some excellent technical papers concerning advancing crime scene
computer forensics, timelining computer evidence, and using smart cards and dig-
ital signatures to preserve electronic evidence.
COMPUTER CRIME
Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org/policy/terrorism/)
The Center for Democracy and Technology works to promote democratic values
and constitutional liberties in the digital age. With expertise in law, technology, and
policy, CDT seeks practical solutions to enhance free expression and privacy in
global communications technologies. CDT is dedicated to building consensus
among all parties interested in the future of the Internet and other new communi-
cations media.
FILE FORMATS AND EXTENSIONS
Computer Knowledge (http://filext.com/)
File extensions are often used to determine the program that created the file. Al-
though there is no guarantee that users will not rename files or associate odd ex-
tensions with particular programs, this site lists some fairly standard associations.
Wotsit’s Format (http://www.wotsit.org/)
This site contains file format information, including header/foot signatures, on
hundreds of different file types and all sorts of other useful programming informa-
tion: algorithms, source code, specifications, and so on.
Computer Forensics Resources
711

CRYPTOGRAPHY AND STEGANOGRAPHY
Counterpane Internet Security, Inc. (http://www.counterpane.com/)
An outstanding site about cryptography containing numerous technical papers
about the subject. Free tools can also be found here. Counterpane Internet Security,
Inc. offers leading-edge expertise in the fields of 24/7 intrusion detection and pre-
vention, preemptive threat discovery, forensic research, and organizational IT sys-
tems analysis.
Steganalysis—Attacks Against Steganography and Watermarking—Countermeasures
(http://www.jjtc.com/Steganalysis/)
An excellent site about steganography and steganalysis. Includes white papers on
steganalysis and countermeasures among other things.
URLs are subject to change without notice.
712
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Disclaimer: This author and publisher do not endorse the contents of the links in
this Appendix. They are offered as resources that other systems security and foren-
sics professionals have found helpful.
LAW ENFORCEMENT LINKS
Computer Crimes and Technology Links
http://www.co.pinellas.fl.us/bcc/juscoord/ecomputer.htm
Computer and Internet Security Resources
http://www.virtuallibrarian.com/legal/
Mitretek Systems
http://www.mitretek.org/Home.nsf/Main/BusinessAreas
Internet Resources on Technology Law
http://www.bitlaw.com/
Ira Wilsker’s Law Enforcement Sites on the Web
http://www.ih2000.net/ira/ira.htm
C
Links to Computer
Forensics and Related 
Law Enforcement 
Web Pages
713

Law Enforcment Guide to the World Wide Web
http://www.leolinks.com/
Legal and Court-Related Sites
http://www.ih2000.net/ira/legal.htm
Mega Links in Criminal Justice
http://faculty.ncwc.edu/toconnor/
The Police Officer’s Internet Directory
http://www.officer.com/
Web of Justice Links
http://www.co.pinellas.fl.us/bcc/juscoord/explore.htm
What’s on the Internet for Legal and Law Enforcement Personnel
http://www.knock-knock.com/forensic.htm
ORGANIZATIONS
High Tech Crime Cops
http://www.hightechcrimecops.org/
International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists
http://www.cops.org/
MAILING LISTS
High Tech Crime Cops List
http://groups.yahoo.com/subscribe.cgi/htcc
USDOJ GUIDELINES FOR SEARCHING AND SEIZING COMPUTERS
Main Table of Contents
http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/search_docs/toc.htm
714
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Update to USDOJ Guidelines
http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/supplement/ssgsup.htm
COMPUTER FORENSIC AND SECURITY SOFTWARE AVAILABLE
FREE OF CHARGE TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
New Technologies, Inc.
http://www.forensics-intl.com/download.html
MISCELLANEOUS
Berryhill Computer Forensics
http://www.computerforensics.com/index.htm
Computer Expert and Computer Forensics Consultant—Judd Robbins
http://www.computerforensics.net/
Computer Forensics Expert Witness Network
http://computerforensics.net/
Computer Forensics FAQ
http://www.surveil.com/frequent.htm
Computer Forensics Online
http://www.shk-dplc.com/cfo/
Florida Association of Computer Crime Investigators
http://facci.org/
The Risk Advisory Group Limited—Investigations
http://www.riskadvisory.net/index.html
CCIPS Searching and Seizing Computers
http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/searching.html
Links to Computer Forensics and Related Law Enforcement Web Pages
715

FDIC: Law, Regulations, Regulated Acts—Miscellaneous Statutes and Regulations
netForensics Home Page
http://www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/8000-900.html
Infowar, Info-Sec Portal, Information Warfare and Security Global Clearinghouse,
Cyber Crime Reporting
http://www.infowar.com/
FOCUS on Incident Handling: An Introduction to the Field Guide for Investigating
Computer Crime
http://www.securityfocus.com/focus/ih/articles/crimeguide1.html
FOCUS on Incident Handling: Overview of a Methodology for the Application 
of Computer Forensics
http://www.securityfocus.com/focus/ih/articles/crimeguide2.html
FOCUS on Incident Handling: Digital Media Forensics
http://www.securityfocus.com/focus/ih/articles/dforensics.html
FOCUS on Intrusion Detection: Know Your Enemy: A Forensic Analysis
http://www.securityfocus.com/focus/ih/articles/foranalysis.html
SMO: Legal Reporter 06/00
http://www.securitymanagement.com/library/000873.html
URLs are subject to change without notice.
716
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

C
laims of six-figure salaries earned without ever leaving the bedroom. A
hearty supply of free computer hardware and a never-ending mail inbox full
of victims. Credit-card accounts fished from fake porn sites or clever emails
promising “You’ve Got Pictures” that ask for AOL user names and passwords.
What do computer criminals do all day? Work the system—and reap the rewards.
So, what’s been the result? Fraud and credit-card theft have run rampant on the
Internet, and in-house corporate thieves abound. The following are some addi-
tional computer forensics case studies for your reading enjoyment and horror.
CASE STUDY 1: LOST FILES
A set of Word, Excel, and Project files that was created over 18 months relating to
a project currently under construction has been maliciously deleted by a departing
employee. The PC was not backed up. The action was discovered 3 days later and
the IT group endeavored to locate and restore the files. They were unsuccessful.
Management is assessing the options available. They are time consuming and ex-
pensive. Some data cannot be rekeyed in because the source data is missing. The IT
manager contacts a computer forensics firm. The firm finally restores the entire
project directory within 4 days from first contact.
D
More Computer 
Forensics Cases
717

CASE STUDY 2: CORRUPTED FILES
Files relating to a multimillion tender on a sales and marketing PC have been found
to be corrupted. The PC was not on the network and not backed up. The IT group
advises that the data is gone forever. The tender closes at the end of the month,
which is only 12 days away. Management is assessing the options available. The only
option appears to be to withdraw from the tender process. Their hardware supplier
recommends an inquiry to a computer forensics data-recovery firm. The firm re-
ceives the hard disk at 4:00 P.M. on Friday and has a CD-ROM containing the draft
tender response, worksheets, subcontractor quotations, graphics files, and periph-
eral material on the client’s premises by 11:00 A.M. on the following Monday.
CASE STUDY 3: DISAPPEARING FILES
The debtors module of an accounting package has somehow disappeared from the
accounting PC. The software-support company is unable to locate the files, and the
backup tapes do not restore correctly. The software-support company suggests that
the data be rekeyed in—a massive task. Management is assessing their options.
They are time-consuming and expensive. The distributor of the software recom-
mends contact be made with a computer forensics firm. The firm finally restores
the faulty data in time for the complete end-of-month statement run.
CASE STUDY 4: COMPUTER FORENSICS
The founder and majority shareholder of a consultancy business sold his interest to
a multinational communications corporation. The contract of sale contained re-
straint clauses, prohibitions on the removal of confidential information, and 
nonsolicitation of staff and client clauses. After about a year, the client—the multi-
national—became suspicious that he was acting in breach of contract. A computer
forensics firm was asked to investigate. At the outset, the firm suggested that the in-
dividual’s desktop and laptop computers be recovered to copy the hard disks and
analyze their contents. Within an encrypted file on his desktop, the firm found a
draft business plan for a new enterprise that would compete with his former busi-
ness. On his laptop, in a deleted file that was restored, the firm recovered details of
key clients and revenue streams. It was possible to demonstrate that information
had been updated within these files after he had left the company, but before he had
returned the computer. Taken together, the evidence was sufficient to initiate crim-
inal proceedings.
718
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CASE STUDY 5: FORENSIC ACCOUNTING
A multinational manufacturer reported significant losses in the company’s distribu-
tion division. It was not clear whether this was simply a result of an inequitable trans-
fer pricing policy within the group or whether the company had been defrauded.
Accountants from a computer forensics firm set out to investigate how the losses had
been incurred, reconstructing incomplete records and unraveling a confusing series
of transactions. They discovered that other companies within the group had trans-
ferred products to the division at over market value to maintain their own profitabil-
ity. More disturbingly, the division had sold much of its product at inexplicably low
prices to a number of key customers. The business manager was dismissed after the
computer forensics firm discovered that he had concealed ownership interests in
some of these customers and evidence came to light indicating that he had accepted
kickback payments. Poor and missing records prevented legal action from being
commenced. In the following period, the division was on track to report profits fol-
lowing tighter controls over transfer pricing and sales invoicing.
CASE STUDY 6: CORPORATE INVESTIGATION 
INTO PC PORNOGRAPHY
A computer forensics team was contracted to assist in an investigation for an orga-
nization that suspected an employee of downloading and storing inappropriate ma-
terial on a company PC. The team visited the site and, using correct forensic
procedures, created an image of the hard drive of the suspect PC. The team was then
able to recover a large amount of inappropriate material from the PC in a forensi-
cally sound manner, including files that had been deleted, renamed, and hidden in
an attempt to disguise their true nature. Using this evidence and the report the team
produced, the client was able to take the appropriate action against the employee.
CASE STUDY 7: DATA RECOVERY
A computer forensics team was asked to assist an organization that had lost data as
a result of a computer virus. The affected laptops were with field personnel and
away from the central office when the virus was introduced. Consequently, the data
collected over this period had not been backed up. The affected machines were
brought to the team’s secure laboratory, and, using forensic recovery techniques,
they were able to image data from the affected machines, recover all of the data that
had been stored since the machines had last been backed up, and eliminate the virus.
More Computer Forensics Cases
719

CASE STUDY 8: INDUSTRIAL ESPIONAGE
A computer forensics team was asked to assist in a case where it was suspected that
industrial espionage had taken place through the computer system. It was sus-
pected that a number of techniques had been used to plant spyware (remote con-
trol and covert information-gathering programs) on a network. After carrying out
a preliminary on-site analysis, the team removed a number of suspect machines to
their secure laboratory for further analysis. A number of machines had been com-
promised after employees had opened email attachments that contained trojan
horse programs (programs that are disguised as common files but actually contain
malicious code). Unfortunately, these had been missed by the organization’s anti-
virus measures. As an added service, the team’s security engineers were able to offer
advice and assistance in reconfiguring antivirus and firewall products to minimize
the chance of a repeat occurrence.
CASE STUDY 9: FAMILY MEMBERS BOLT
Family members bolt, take the IT department and the product design, sabotage the
originals, and go into competition. A family-owned product manufacturer and de-
signer on the verge of being bought for many millions of dollars found most of its
designs missing after the departure of key managers and designers. A program used
for deep file destruction had been implemented to destroy both product designs
and evidence of the procedure itself. An outside computer forensics consultant is
brought in to recover designs and overwrites evidence instead. A computer foren-
sics team is then brought in and discovers remnants of file destruction utility and
data patterns consistent with sabotage by the same utility. The suspects finally ad-
mitted to the use of the utility.
CASE STUDY 10: FORMER EMPLOYER
A former employer claims a competitor’s new hire has stolen designs for manufac-
ture. An individual working for a biomaterials firm gained employment with a
competing firm. The individual had used several dozen diskettes for storage at the
old firm and then used the same diskettes for new storage at the new firm. The pre-
vious employer claimed that the individual took designs to the new employer on
diskettes. A computer forensics team was engaged to demonstrate the employee’s
innocence. The original firm finally settled out of court.
720
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CASE STUDY 11: GOODS LEFT TO ROT
Goods were left to rot while documents were allegedly backdated. A computer foren-
sics team was hired to check the results of a police report that suggested the client’s
guilt. The client’s attorney was advised as to the potential veracity of the claim. In-
consistencies in the police report were discovered, and the sentence was mitigated.
CASE STUDY 12: MANAGERS START NEW COMPANY
Managers start a new company in the very offices of their employers; computers
and backups disappear. A foreign branch of the entertainment arm of a multina-
tional conglomerate suspects that key managers had been attempting to incorpo-
rate company intellectual assets into a competing product line. Once the suspects
believed they were under suspicion, the relevant office computers were reported as
stolen. Data backups were reported as missing. Under pressure, the original com-
puters were found and produced by a computer expert among the suspect group,
but with large amounts of data missing. A computer forensics team was hired to in-
vestigate. Unequivocal evidence of illegal activities was produced from the remains
of files on the computers in question.
CASE STUDY 13: FAMILY MEMBER STEALS CLIENTS
A member of a family-run communications business left the company. While denying
it, the individual started a business in direct competition with the family business. The
individual’s computer was identified as an asset of the original company. The individ-
ual claimed that no company information was on the computer. A computer forensics
team was hired to test the claim. Although the computer had been completely deleted,
reformatted, and had entirely new operating systems and applications installed on it,
the original database entries were, nonetheless, uncovered. The individual also claimed
innocence up until the moment that the team experts were seen awaiting a call into the
courtroom. The individual then admitted the wrongdoing and settled.
CASE STUDY 14: ERASED EMAIL
A private investigation firm was purchased, with a covenant by the previous own-
ers not to compete. Within weeks, suspicion arose that the covenant was not being
More Computer Forensics Cases
721

respected and that files and media that had been turned over had data removed. A
computer forensics team was hired to look into the matter. Thousands of files were
turned up by the investigation, showing a violation of the covenant.
CASE STUDY 15: BANK SUSPECTS
An employee of an FDIC-insured bank turned over a computer upon exiting from
his employer. The managers suspected that this individual had revealed confiden-
tial information regarding loan clients and credit information A computer foren-
sics team was hired to inspect the email server records for deleted email files that
might cast light on the individual’s actions. In short order, the text of the suspect
emails, which showed the former employee’s culpability was revealed.
CASE STUDY 16: FORMER MANAGERS
Several managers left a software-design firm. Within a few weeks, they started up a
new firm, producing similar products, in direct competition with the original firm. A
computer forensics team was hired to inspect former managers’ computers, which
had been erased. Evidence that the business plan and designs for a new firm were
taken directly from the original firm was uncovered. The new firm was enjoined by
the court from offering their product until sufficient time had passed for them to have
produced their own designs. The former managers were given a 9-month injunction.
CASE STUDY 17: FORMER CATALOG DESIGNERS
A company that had spent years producing a catalog and selling thousands of 
industry-specific parts found that a competing catalog with identical drawings and
designs had been produced in a scant few weeks by a new competitor. A computer
forensics team was hired to show that the designs of the new company were stolen
from the original company. After the findings were presented to a court showing
the original company’s artwork and text being used in new catalogue, the new com-
pany was enjoined from using designs for several months.
CASE STUDY 18: MODEL PURSUED
A wealthy suitor financed a young model. Once the model soured on the suitor, ev-
idence was presented to show that the model had committed libel. Inspection of the
722
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

model’s office computer was ordered. A computer forensics team was hired to at-
tend the inspection only to find that the aforementioned suitor’s computer forensic
consultants did not understand how to access the data on the computer in question.
With advice from the computer forensics team, an inspection was effected. With fur-
ther advice from the team, it was shown that any suspect email was liable to have
been forged by employees of the suitor. The suitor finally settled out of court.
CASE STUDY 19: ENCRYPTED MAIL
A former employee encrypted an email record, address book, and calendar to hide
information from an employer. A computer forensics team was hired. The team
then successfully cracked the file’s encryption and revealed its contents.
CASE STUDY 20: TWO ATTORNEYS CAN’T SPEAK CIVILLY
Two attorneys couldn’t speak civilly to each other. A computer forensics team was
hired to act as a neutral expert when opposing attorneys did not trust results of each
other’s experts. The team brought the voice of reason to an acrimonious meeting
between attorneys, and calm prevailed while the truth of the matter was revealed in
the computer inspection.
CASE STUDY 21: BIG REAL ESTATE DEAL
The manager of a real estate fund was accused of increasing the value of shares in
the fund by providing false information to potential investors when the value of the
fund plunged. The manager was further accused of faking and falsely dating com-
puter documents to support the claim of innocence. A computer forensics team
was hired. Information that was recovered by the team mitigated and diminished
claims against the client.
CASE STUDY 22: DOCTOR ACCUSED
A doctor was accused of withholding treatment based on the ethnicity of the ac-
cuser. A computer forensics team was hired to inspect hospital records of treatment
and meetings to support the medical provider’s innocence. Deep inspection of all
relevant computers and servers showed no evidence of wrongdoing.
More Computer Forensics Cases
723

CASE STUDY 23: FORMER EMPLOYEE CLAIMS
A former employee claims he never took any information with him when he left.
The firm suspected the former employee of absconding with proprietary informa-
tion. Under court order, the individual turned over a laptop computer, with no ob-
vious data related to the case. A forensic inspection by a computer forensics team
revealed enough relevant data to print two entire reams of documents. The suspect
finally settled.
CASE STUDY 24: EX-PARTNER CLAIMS
A partner in an information technology firm left and went into his own business. The
individual was accused of taking proprietary documents on his laptop. The individ-
ual produced the laptop, along with the claim that, although there were missing doc-
uments, none were relevant to the claims. Additionally, the individual claimed that a
prolific virus had destroyed the documents. A computer forensics team was hired and
was able to show fabrication of evidence, upon which the individual then admitted
wrongdoing in a deposition. The individual was then sanctioned.
CASE STUDY 25: FORMER MANAGER
A manager of a Big 10 consulting firm went to work for a competitor. Under court
order, the competitor provided a diskette that had gone with the individual to the
new firm. A computer forensics team was hired to inspect said diskette. Although
it was damaged, deleted, and overwritten, evidence of illegal customer lists and the
lists themselves were discovered on the diskette.
724
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

PART I: OVERVIEW OF COMPUTER
FORENSICS TECHNOLOGY
Chapter 1: Computer Forensics
Fundamentals
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. False
3. True
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. B
2. A
3. E
4. D
5. E
Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aide the
computer forensics specialist (CFS) in coming
up with his or her own solution to solve this
case. Applying forensic data analysis methods,
the CFS downloaded five years worth of gen-
eral ledger data from a mainframe computer
system, along with large volumes of data from
client file servers. Digital data preservation,
coupled with data mining and analysis, con-
firmed the extent of fraudulent activity and al-
lowed the company to correct its public record
filings about its financial worth.
Hands-on Projects
Your computer forensics team would provide
on-site computer forensic evidence preserva-
tion, digital evidence recovery, file inventory,
and data analysis. Data would be sent to an ad-
vanced document management services center
(DMSC) for the hosting and support of attor-
ney document and email review. The DMSC
would provide advanced document manage-
ment services for capturing, storing, retrieving,
analyzing, viewing, and sharing discovery in-
formation and work product. By providing
your own tools for discovery collaboration, you
can help reduce your costs and your risks. Most
DMSCs are housed in a highly secure 40,000+
square foot facility, and staffed by systems and
network engineers, database designers, soft-
ware developers, litigation support personnel,
and industry-focused professionals.
Case Project
The boss instructs the sysadmin to take imme-
diate steps to preserve the collected packets. He
E
Answers to Review
Questions and Exercises,
Hands-on Projects, Case
Projects, and Optional Team
Case Projects by Chapter
725

then contacts the company’s chief information
security officer (CISO) and informs him of the
situation. The CISO recognizes this as a secu-
rity incident that could compromise the com-
pany’s proprietary information and trade
secrets; it could also involve the employee
whose workstation contacted the competition’s
IP address. Fortunately, this is exactly the kind
of incident the company had in mind when it
developed the computer forensic annex to its
information security plan.
The CISO assigns an incident manager
from his organization to oversee the event. The
incident manager then contacts the company’s
general counsel to discuss the various legal is-
sues involved in the investigation. Next, he calls
out a forensics technician to collect and pre-
serve the evidence from the sysadmin’s com-
puter, the employee’s workstation, the database
server, and the firewall.
After conducting a routine examination of
the collected material, the forensic technician
notices a substantial amount of proprietary in-
formation on the employee’s hard drive that he
does not appear to need. Moreover, the forensic
technician can’t identify the mechanism used to
communicate with the competitor’s computer.
Analysis of the server and firewall logs reveals
that lots of information was transferred from the
database server to the competition.
After obtaining the general counsel’s ap-
proval, the incident manager engages a re-
searcher at a major university to review the
examination results and work product. The re-
searcher identifies code on both the employee
workstation and the database server that’s writ-
ten to send information from the database
server to the competitor’s computer on com-
mand from the employee’s workstation.
This command is determined to be the first
and middle name of the employee’s oldest
daughter. The incident manager uses the re-
ports from the forensic technician and the re-
searcher to write an incident report for
executive management. On the basis of this in-
cident report, the employee confesses to coop-
erating with an associate employed by the
competition. The general counsel sues the com-
petitor for damages, obtaining a restraining
order against the competition and demonstrat-
ing the company’s aggressive protection of its
trade secrets.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. You should deploy CFSs to
the client locations worldwide to preserve elec-
tronic evidence. The team should search
through the electronic data and provide an on-
site delivery strategy for legal review, thus al-
lowing the client to expeditiously comply with
the SEC requirements.
Chapter 2: Types of Computer Forensics
Technology
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
3. False
4. False
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. C
2. D
3. E, A
4. E
5. E, B
Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. Through DMSC’s remote ac-
cess and electronic data mapping tools, the re-
view team was reduced to six people working
from their remote offices, thus eliminating un-
necessary travel costs, and the review time was
reduced by 82%. The client ultimately saved
approximately $5.69 million in review and
travel costs while identifying key documents
and correspondence for additional follow-up.
726
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Hands-on Projects
The following is a partial solution to aide the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. The accounting firm’s com-
puter forensics team collected electronic and
hard copy evidence that contributed to an
extra-judicial confession revealing that the em-
ployee had embezzled a material sum over a
four-month period. They also identified pro-
grammatic and systemic internal control weak-
nesses that would have allowed other
employees to engage in similar embezzlement
schemes without detection.
Case Project
This case project is a blending of a number of in-
cidents examined in the latter part of 2004 and
doesn’t represent any single incident. However,
all of the incidents observed shared certain com-
mon traits: large enterprises supported by ex-
tremely high bandwidth Internet connections,
largely Windows NT and Windows 2003 enter-
prises, persistent compromise of administrator
and domain administrator accounts, and wide-
spread use of a distributed two-tier FTP server—
where the FTP root directory structure was
composed of a virtual file system of shared dri-
ves. The fictitious company, WebFile.com, suf-
fers from this same set of common criteria, and
like most of the real-world incidents, the attack-
ers are serving both warez and porn.
At this stage of the investigation, the CFS
has discovered the compromise (although the
CFS has yet to identify the compromise
method), identified the post-attack “finger-
print” of this particular group, and has begun
to understand what is happening in the enter-
prise. Should the CFS need to initiate correc-
tive action at this time, there are a number of
things he or she can do to end the current com-
promise, starting with changing the adminis-
trator passwords, and restricting NetBIOS
using packet filters on the switches supporting
the WebFile.com enterprise. However, before
the CFS starts with the eradication phase of the
incident response, he or she really needs to
complete the identification phase: the CFS has
yet to identify the initial compromise method
or to identify the scope of the compromise. In
the optional team case project, the CFS will
look at network traffic analysis techniques to
continue his or her response and resolve these
issues.
Optional Team Case Project
The network side of the analysis is often much
more time consuming than the “live ap-
proach” of a compromised host. As a CFS, you
have to learn to discriminate between normal
traffic and the traffic you believe to be abnor-
mal and possibly malicious. In the preceding
case project, the CFS had the home-field ad-
vantage over the attackers. After reading the
numerous emails the CFS has received from
the field, it may be more accurate to say that
the CFS ought to have the home-field advan-
tage. The CFS ought to know the policies net-
works operate under, and those policies ought
to be complied with. While this is not always
the case in reality, it is certainly something the
CFS ought to strive for.
Historically, the Windows environment
has been difficult to monitor, analyze, and se-
cure, simply because of the lack of security
tools that run on the platform. The astute
reader will note that this is the possible source
of the original compromise but cannot conclu-
sively prove it. The reality of the situation is
that this sometimes happens, particularly in
complex environments where there is poor ac-
cess control and monitoring. Some data
sources are usually not investigated, such as the
Windows Event and Security Logs, Web server
logs, etc. In a real incident these should ab-
solutely be studied. Often there is sufficient
data in the enterprise to rule out certain kinds
of attacks even if a robust network security
monitoring environment isn’t in place.
In this optional team case project, several
“cardinal rules” of security were violated. The
batch file would not have operated successfully
as written if the administrator account was not
identical on each host. The global domain ad-
ministrator account was actually the same as
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
727

each local administrator account, further re-
ducing the security of the enterprise as a whole.
The second major problem was the bad moni-
toring environment. Clearly some architectural
changes and a redesign of the network are
called for. By using some of the tools with min-
imal cost, it is possible to build a rudimentary
intrusion detection system (IDS) capability, al-
though monitoring it will probably take signif-
icant manpower.
At the risk of starting a religious dis-
cussion, Windows is neither more nor less
inherently secure than any other platform—
with a few arguable exceptions. It is one of the
most attacked operating systems on the face 
of the planet, thanks to its wide proliferation.
As a result, its flaws are exploited often and
well. If you are running a large Windows envi-
ronment, my advice is to prepare yourself 
for the inevitable compromise by doing the 
following:
•
Build a toolkit.
•
Characterize the network.
•
Implement an IDS—even a rudimen-
tary one.
Finally, take the time to prepare yourself.
This goes beyond characterizing the environ-
ment, although that’s a good first step. Most
importantly, take the time to dig into the tools
and practice using them. Learn their features
and filter languages in particular, as these will
be infinitely useful to you the more you learn.
Chapter 3: Types of Computer 
Forensics Systems
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. False
3. False
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. D
2. E
3. B
4. A, E
5. C, D
Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. Further analysis of all ac-
counts held by Larry is performed by the foren-
sics system. In addition to the ATM cash
withdrawal, an Internet banking transfer to an
overseas account has also been made. The sys-
tem creates an alert and escalates to bank secu-
rity staff for follow-up.
Hands-on Projects
At 11:37 A.M., the forensics system issues an
alert to the enterprise computer forensics team,
who investigate the incidents. They discover
that a person posing as a computer technician
advised other staff on the two floors that he had
to perform service work on the two PCs. With
no obvious evidence of tampering with the PC,
the computer forensics team call in another
staff member to perform a sweep of both of-
fices for hidden audio recording units. Such are
found in both offices, and at 12:56 P.M., the
police are notified of the incident.
Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. The CFS escalates the inci-
dent to a bank security officer to contact Karin
by telephone to determine the validity of the
Internet banking transaction. It is discovered
that the Internet banking transaction is fraudu-
lent. The bank’s CFS instructs the forensics sys-
tem to analyze all transactions related to IP
addresses from Turin, Italy, and discovers an-
other 39 suspect transactions.
Optional Team Case Project
The organization’s computer forensic technol-
ogy team uncovered digital evidence of a false in-
voicing scheme perpetrated by the executive and
vendor coconspirators over a six-year period, 
728
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

resulting in a major embezzlement of corporate
funds. Analysis of digital and other evidence
traced the flow of embezzled funds through an
elaborate interstate money-laundering scheme.
The investigation resulted in a referral to the FBI
and the subsequent indictment of the senior
executive.
Chapter 4: Vendor and Computer
Forensics Services
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
3. False
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. A
2. C
3. C
4. E
5. B
Exercise
The CFS identified numerous email messages
that exposed the company to sexual harass-
ment lawsuits. The CFS also recovered emails
between management officials and outside au-
ditors that called into question an auditor’s in-
dependence. The CFS advised the company to
establish a digital information destruction pol-
icy, create an equal employment opportunity
(EEO) and sexual harassment training pro-
gram, implement a computer and Internet
usage policy, educate employees about the new
policies, and monitor compliance.
Hands-on Projects
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. With help from the CFS team
(CFST), a high-quality large-format imaging
firm recently won its case against two former
employees. The CFST was able to recover the
email and the database for the imaging firm
and subsequently testified to the findings of
their forensic analysis. The former employees
lost their credibility and the case.
Case Project
In the preliminary stages of an employment
dispute case, a CFST was brought in by a large
computer services corporation to perform a
forensic recovery on an employee’s desktop
computer. After performing a forensic analysis,
the CFST could find no evidence of hacking on
the employee’s computer. Thus, the employee
was exonerated of any wrong-doing and other
costly proceedings were averted.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. A CFS team was hired to lo-
cate any deleted files and verify certain illicit
and non-work related contents of the hard 
drives in question. Forensic technicians were
able to locate spy software, illegal file-sharing
software, pornography, and information per-
taining to a personal side business. Both the
CEO and the network administrator were dis-
missed as a result of the investigation.
PART II: COMPUTER FORENSICS 
EVIDENCE AND CAPTURE
Chapter 5: Data Recovery
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. False
3. False
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. C
2. E, B
3. E, A
4. B
5. D
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
729

Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. The CFS received three
backup tapes and the hard drive from the sys-
tem. Within 48 hours, the CFS had successfully
recovered 100% of the data believed to have
been lost in the fire.
Hands-on Projects
The CFST was able to restructure and reformat
all the files needed for the claimant’s specific
software application and reprogram data.
Using electronic data discovery and forensic
and analysis applications, the CFST discovered
that the software installation had not caused
the data loss and determined the plaintiff had
manually erased the alleged lost data. When
shown the evidence, the plaintiff dropped the
suit and was promptly countersued.
Case Projects
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. Within three days, the CFST
was able to recover 100% of the data from four
of the drives; 99% was recovered from the fifth
drive.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. By using the password en-
cryption proprietary program and program-
ming knowledge of the email system, the CFST
was able to locate all emails and attachments
meeting selected criteria and electronically
transmitted them to the court within only five
days. The case was settled in the plaintiff’s
favor on the seventh day. The defendant was
charged with perjury.
Chapter 6: Evidence Collection
and Data Seizure
Review Questions/Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. False
3. False
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. D
2. A
3. A
4. C
5. E
Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. During the research of her
computer, the CFS was able to recover several
deleted email messages exchanged between the
young girl and a suspect. These emails led po-
lice to a nearby motel where the girl was located
and the adult male was taken into custody.
Hands-on Projects
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. A trained CFS was able to es-
tablish a timeline of Internet activity indicating
visits to several Web sites deemed inappropri-
ate by the parents.
Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. After an investigation, a
forensics specialist determined that the accused
roommate did indeed make the purchases and
had altered the computer’s time clock in an at-
tempt to hide his activity.
730
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the CFS
in coming up with his or her own solution to
solve this case. A CFS was able to recover several
profane emails sent by the plaintiff’s boss to an-
other supervisor planning ways to “get rid” of
her. The case was settled before trial.
Chapter 7: Duplication and Preservation
of Digital Evidence
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. False
3. False
4. True
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. A, B
2. C
3. D, A
4. D
5. A
Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. A CFST was engaged to copy
and archive each workstation computer hard
drive for future analysis in case a dispute over
intellectual property arose in the future.
Hands-on Projects
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. A CFS working alongside the
network administrator proved that the accused
employee did not download the images, but in
fact the images were “planted” there across the
network by another disgruntled employee.
When confronted with the evidence, the dis-
gruntled employee admitted to the incident
and left employment with the company. The
wrongly accused employee is also suing the em-
ployee who planted the images.
Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. CFS analysis produced evi-
dence of ties to other crimes and suspects in-
cluding car theft, prostitution, firearms
violation, and identity theft. Ultimately 28 ar-
rests were made, yielding 23 felony convictions.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. The findings revealed over
$20,000 of missing revenue in the previous 19
months. Once confronted with this informa-
tion, the bookkeeper admitted to the crime and
was forced to make restitution.
Chapter 8: Computer Image Verification
and Authentication
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. False
3. True
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. C, B
2. D
3. B
4. B
5. B
Exercise
To narrow the scope of meaningful data, the
CFST used forensics utilities to search for rele-
vance and responsiveness—a necessity in a dis-
covery request of this magnitude under the
given time constraints. This enabled the CFST
to better focus their tape conversion efforts.
Using further forensics processes, they con-
verted the company’s Microsoft Exchange data-
base (which housed the company’s email
archives, the focus of the discovery efforts) to
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
731

PST files, sorted by user. The CFST was thus
able to help the company meet its seemingly
impossible deadline. The CFST continued con-
ducting an ongoing analysis to keep the com-
pany in compliance with the discovery
mandate.
Hands-on Projects
Initially, the CFST was requested to perform
forensics examinations upon scores of the pub-
licly owned company’s computers from loca-
tions around the world—a service that would
easily add up to over $200,000 in initial con-
sulting services. Working with the accounting
firm and the company, the CFST convinced
both parties to significantly narrow the universe
of computers to be searched; the conjecture was
that given the parameters of the matter, any
trail of malfeasance would likely lead to the ex-
ecutive ranks. The accounting firm and client
agreed. Initial processing has revealed several
key leads for a fraction of the initial projected
expense. The matter is ongoing.
Case Project
A mirror image backup of the laptop’s hard
drive was made, and a forensic examination
was conducted. The CFST obtained a listing of
all deleted and undeleted files from the mirror
image backup and performed a search for key
words associated with the sensitive files sus-
pected of being downloaded. It was proved that
certain sensitive files had been on the laptop’s
hard drive. A file listing time-line analysis was
performed, and it showed that numerous files
were loaded on the computer while the em-
ployee was on leave of absence and the laptop
computer was in his possession. A network log
check was also performed with the help of the
bank’s computer systems staff. This showed
that the employee had been logged onto the
network during the times that the questioned
files first appeared on the laptop. Thanks to the
evidence gathered and leads developed during
the CFTS’s examination, the bank referred the
case to the FBI for criminal investigation.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. After making a mirror image
backup of the ex-boss’ hard drive, the CFST
was able to recover deleted electronic messages
that showed that the ex-boss had a history of
propositioning women under his supervision
for “special favors.” A situation that might have
been mired in a “he said/she said” continuum
was quickly resolved; the woman got her job
back (including all lost wages and benefits),
and the real culprit was terminated.
PART III: COMPUTER FORENSICS
ANALYSIS
Chapter 9: Discovery of
Electronic Evidence
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. False
3. False
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. E
2. D
3. B
4. A, B
5. C, D
Exercise
No evidence could be found that the second
angiogram images had ever been stored on the
computers, or that the images had been
deleted. Through inquiries of hospital staff, the
CFST learned that the system was prone to
problems and periodically “crashed.” The
CFST requested that the hospital perform a test
case on the system, and it was observed that the
system malfunctioned; in the test case, no im-
ages were recorded. Subsequently, the hospital
732
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

replaced this system with a new system because
of the periodic crashes that occurred. A CFST
examiner testified at the jury trial that system
crashes may have caused the images to not be
stored on the computer hard drives and that he
had personally observed the system crashing.
The plaintiff’s attorneys countered that the
manufacturer examined the system the day
after the patient’s death and could not find any
problems. The CFST’s examiner countered
that the system had been replaced by the hospi-
tal because of system malfunctions. He further
explained that because the system was func-
tioning normally on the day the manufacturer
examined the system, did not mean that it was
functioning on the day of the second an-
giogram procedure. The best outcome that the
insurance company expected was elimination
of any penalties for deliberate deletion of the
images. The jury ruled that no monetary dam-
ages would have to be paid to the plaintiffs. The
attorney for the insurance company later
stated, “Your investigation and testimony
played a significant role in our presentation of
the case to the jury ... all of the feedback from
the jurors has been extremely positive toward
you and your testimony.”
Hands-on Projects
After making mirror image backups of the hard
drives, the CFST identified a file directory that
had been deleted during the aforementioned
four-day period that had the same name as the
competitive company the executive had estab-
lished. A specific search of the deleted files in
this directory identified the executive’s “to do
list” file. This file indicated that the executive
planned to copy the company’s database (val-
ued at $100 million) for his personal use. An-
other “to do” item specified that the executive
was to “learn how to destroy evidence on a
computer.” The CFST’s examination also
proved that the executive had been communi-
cating with other competing companies to es-
tablish alliances, in violation of the executive’s
nondisclosure agreement with the company. It
was also shown that numerous key company
files were located on removable computer stor-
age media that had not been turned over by the
executive to the company. The company was
able to settle with the executive for all that it
had originally requested in its lawsuit.
Case Project
The entire acquisition occurred without the
knowledge of anyone in Asia and without dis-
rupting operations. The investigation also re-
vealed that the other drive did not contain
relevant evidence. The computer forensic tool es-
sentially enabled an investigation that otherwise
would likely not have taken place. An investiga-
tion involving international travel, flyaway kits,
and stand-alone computer forensics utilities
would have delayed the process by several days, if
not weeks, thus resulting in altered data or loss of
evidence. An on-site response process may have
comprised the investigation in this case or, at a
minimum, impacted business and morale be-
cause of the very non-clandestine physical pres-
ence of investigators.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. A large government agency
used a CFST’s computer forensic tool and a
high-speed network connection to image a
drive on its wide area network (WAN) located
approximately 10,000 miles (16,000 km) away.
This process enabled a rapid incident response
and the capturing of the data. Without the
CFST’s computer forensic tool, the response
would have been delayed by several days or
may not have occurred.
Chapter 10: Identification of Data
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. True
3. True
4. True
5. True
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
733

Multiple Choice
1. A
2. A, B
3. D, E
4. C
5. A
Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. The CFST successfully used a
computer forensics tool to preview the server
and collect key evidence, without disrupting
operations. Without the computer forensics
tool, the CFST would have either walked away
from the scene empty-handed or performed a
highly invasive and incomplete investigation by
making logical file copies of active data.
Hands-on Projects
The CFST used a computer forensics tool and
network logs to examine the files on 60 net-
work machines. The CFST determined that
large amounts of pornography were traveling
through the network. It was discovered that
unauthorized Web servers containing more
than 20 gigabytes of pornographic material had
been set up across the network. Using com-
puter forensics tool, they were able to deter-
mine which users had access privileges and had
logged onto the suspected machines. An unex-
pected result of the investigation revealed addi-
tional rogue servers placed above ceiling tiles,
communicating with the network via multiple
wireless access points. In a weekend, enough
evidence was gathered to determine that the
entire network administration team had been
part of a sophisticated porn operation. The
whole team was immediately terminated. By
using the CFST, the entire investigation was
performed in only 2 days—10 days fewer than
expected. The result was significant timesaving
and reduced investigative fees. In addition, the
company had sufficient evidence to protect it-
self from a wrongful termination suit. The
porn operation was shut down and the corpo-
rate bandwidth returned to normal, and the
company prevented a huge possible liability.
Case Project
The CFST was used to perform an exhaustive
search of all computer records within the com-
pany’s large finance division. It was soon dis-
covered that management ordered staff to
destroy key documents. However, certain staff
members did not fully comply with the order,
making the files easily recoverable. In addition,
on some systems, the CFST was able to recover
incriminating documents that had been
deleted. The entire process occurred without
affecting business operations or productivity.
Eventually, enough information was recovered
to reconstruct the actual events and prove that
numerous high-level managers had schemed to
alter the records of the company. The sus-
pected staff members were terminated and
criminal charges were brought against them.
Optional Team Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. Using a combination of
forensic analysis of the hard drives and investi-
gation (tracing IP addresses, etc.), the CFST
was able to identify the hacker, which would
enable law enforcement to obtain a search war-
rant if the client elected to press charges.
Chapter 11: Reconstructing Past Events
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. False
3. True
4. False
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. B
2. B
3. E
4. E
5. A
734
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Exercise
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. Using forensic analysis, the
CFST determined that the documents had been
created and printed out, but never saved on the
desktop computer at one of the workstations
utilized by one of the four suspects.
Hands-on Projects
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. The CFST’s analysis revealed
that the paralegal had in fact created the docu-
ment weeks prior to the deadline, and the file
had not been accessed or altered. The CFST ap-
peared as expert witnesses at the hearing, which
resulted in a favorable ruling for the client
when the judge set aside the default judgment
and re-opened the case.
Case Project
The following is a partial solution to aid the
CFS in coming up with his or her own solution
to solve this case. No evidence of the theft was
found, but significant evidence of other activi-
ties (for which he could be terminated) was
found.
Optional Team Case Project
The CFST forensically preserved all of the evi-
dence of the attacks and the harassing email.
Given the potential for violence, the CFST
posted armed security at its clients’ offices.
After tracing the origin of one of the harassing
emails to the fired developer’s new place of em-
ployment, the CFST enlisted the cooperation
of the new employer, which resulted in the
forensic imaging of the developer’s new laptop.
Found on the hard drive was cached informa-
tion showing that the developer had used the
laptop to transfer the stolen compensation in-
formation. The CFST presented this informa-
tion and results of its internal investigation to
the U.S. Secret Service and the U.S. Attorney’s
Office in Manhattan, which accepted prosecu-
tion. The developer was arrested, his home was
searched (leading to the recovery of hardware
stolen from the CFST’s client), and he was
placed under strict bail conditions to protect
the frightened clerk.
Chapter 12: Networks
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
3. False
4. True
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. D, E
2. C
3. A
4. A
5. B
Exercise
In the course of the engagement, the CFST im-
aged seven desktop and server hard drives and
performed forensic analysis. The CFST also
constructed Lotus Notes and Microsoft Out-
look test environments to explore arcane issues
relating to extended simple mail transfer pro-
tocol (ESMTP) timestamping and the genera-
tion of Lotus Notes message identification
numbers. Using the results of the forensic
analysis (including significant data recovered
from deleted file space) and the information
generated from the test environments, the
CFST was able to reach expert conclusions re-
garding the authenticity of the different ver-
sions of this critical email.
Hands-on Projects
The CFST provided the executive with critical
advice regarding whether to involve law en-
forcement, explaining in detail how the process
would work, dispelling incorrect notions, and
helping resolve conflict within the client’s
management regarding a criminal referral. The
CFST introduced the client to trusted former
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
735

colleagues at the FBI and acted as liaison. Car-
rying out the executive’s clear mandate to bring
the hackers to justice, the CFST assisted the FBI
in developing and executing an undercover
plan to lure the hackers to a Western country
for a face-to-face meeting. The CFST worked
closely with the law enforcement authorities in
that foreign country. Through its actions and
advice, the CFST provided its client with in-
comparable comfort that decisions were being
made properly, that safety was insured, that the
plan would be effective, and that the client still
had a large degree of control over the situation.
The CFST arranged for its client to travel to
that Western country, where—after a face-to-
face meeting in an undercover law enforce-
ment location—the hackers were arrested on
extortion charges. The CFST later provided
substantial liaison with the FBI, even providing
the forensic evidence needed to extradite the
hackers back to the United States.
Case Project
Within hours, the CFST had NT systems ex-
perts working closely with the company’s IT
personnel. Using utilities to perform macro-
by-macro and line-by-line comparisons be-
tween backups and the improperly accessed
databases, the CFST was able to deliver good
news to the company: the production data-
bases had in fact not been corrupted, contrary
to what the firewall logs had initially indicated.
The CFST also found serious weaknesses in the
company’s logging system. In fact, these weak-
nesses made it impossible to identify all of the
servers that the intruder accessed. As a result,
the company needed to decide whether to
incur the cost of a server-by-server search for
potentially corrupted files. Based upon an
analysis of the intruder’s skill level and behav-
ior, the CFST was able to offer the company the
guidance it needed to make that decision. For
the company, a complex decision remained—
whether to proceed criminally or civilly against
the ex-employee. Knowing the law enforce-
ment and legal options, each path opened up
and closed off, the CFST clarified important el-
ements, including which path would give the
bank the most control and which path would
most likely provide access to the ex-employee’s
home computer—something that would fill in
damage assessment gaps created by the weak-
nesses in the bank’s logging system. Crucial to
the company’s decision was the fact that the
CFST had uncovered and preserved significant
forensic evidence linking the ex-employee with
the computer break-in. Ultimately, this evi-
dence was used to support a successful applica-
tion for a temporary restraining order against
the ex-employee.
Optional Team Case Project
Working closely with the firm’s systems ad-
ministrators, the CFST quickly captured the IP
address used in one of the attacks. After then
guiding the firm through the factors involved
in making a criminal referral, the CFST re-
ferred the case to former colleagues at the U.S.
Attorney’s Office for the Western District of
Los Angeles and the U.S. Secret Service. Within
hours, the Secret Service had linked the cap-
tured IP address to a computer in the library of
the employee’s college, located a witness at the
library, and identified files belonging to the
employee on the relevant computer’s hard
drive. The employee was arrested, detained
without bail, and later indicted. He subse-
quently pleaded guilty to launching the attacks
in violation of the Computer Fraud and Abuse
Act. Once the suspect was in custody, the CFST
focused on making sure he would pose no fu-
ture threat. The CFST assessed the dollar value
of the loss suffered by the firm, knowing that
the assessment would prove critical in the cal-
culation of the employee’s sentence, in this case
an eight-month prison term.
736
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

PART IV: COUNTERMEASURES:
INFORMATION WARFARE
Chapter 13: Fighting Against Macro
Threats: Defensive Strategies for
Governments and Industry Groups
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
3. True
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. B
2. A
3. E
4. D
5. E
Exercise
Initially, the CFS was requested to perform
forensics examinations upon scores of the pub-
licly owned company’s computers from loca-
tions around the world—a service that would
easily add up to over $400,000 in initial consult-
ing services. Working with the accounting firm
and the company, the CFS convinced both par-
ties to significantly narrow the universe of com-
puters to be searched; the conjecture was that
given the parameters of the matter, any trail of
malfeasance would likely lead to the executive
ranks. The accounting firm and client agreed.
Initial processing revealed several key leads for a
fraction of the initial projected expense.
Hands-on Projects
A forensic image backup of the laptop’s hard
drive was made, and an examination was con-
ducted. The CFST obtained a listing of all
deleted and undeleted files from the mirror
image backup and performed a search for key
words associated with the sensitive files sus-
pected of being downloaded. It was proved that
certain sensitive files had been on the laptop’s
hard drive. A file listing timeline analysis was
performed, and it showed that numerous files
were loaded on the computer while the em-
ployee was on leave of absence and the laptop
computer was in his possession. A network log
check was also performed with the help of the
bank’s computer systems staff. This showed
that the employee had been logged onto the
network during the times that the questioned
files first appeared on the laptop. Thanks to the
evidence gathered and leads developed during
the CFST’s examination, the bank referred the
case to the FBI for criminal investigation.
Case Project
The hard drive from the executive’s notebook
and desktop machine were forensically imaged.
The CFS’s analysis established that the night
before the executive left, he downloaded all of
the company’s process specifications and dis-
tributor agreements, which he then zipped and
emailed via dial-up ISP to the competitor he
would be joining. Additionally, reconstruction
of deleted files located emails between the ex-
ecutive and the competitor discussing his in-
tent to provide the proprietary information if
he was offered additional options in the new
company.
Optional Team Case Project
A CFST was retained by the plaintiff’s attorneys
to investigate allegations of the former supervi-
sor’s harassing behavior. After making a forensic
image backup of the ex-boss’ hard drive, the
CFST was able to recover deleted electronic mes-
sages that showed that the ex-boss had a history
of propositioning women under his supervision
for “special favors.” A situation that might have
been mired in a “he said/she said” continuum
was quickly resolved; the woman got her job
back, and the real culprit was terminated.
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
737

Chapter 14: The Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. False
3. False
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. B
2. E
3. A
4. B
5. C
Exercise
After making a forensic image backup of the
hard drives, the CFST identified a file directory
that had been deleted during the aforemen-
tioned five-day period that had the same name
as the competitive company the executive had
established. A specific search of the deleted files
in this directory identified the executive’s “to
do list” file. This file indicated that the execu-
tive planned to copy the company’s database
(valued at $400 million) for his personal use.
Another “to do” item specified that the execu-
tive was to “learn how to destroy evidence on a
computer.” The CFST’s examination also
proved that the executive had been communi-
cating with other competing companies to es-
tablish alliances, in violation of the executive’s
nondisclosure agreement with the company. It
was also shown that numerous key company
files were located on removable computer stor-
age media that the executive had not turned
over to the company. The company was able to
settle with the executive for all that it had orig-
inally requested in its lawsuit.
Hands-on Projects
The investigation of Internet use and traffic
pinpointed a clash of IP addresses on the sys-
tem. The evidence started to point toward the
organization’s system administrator, but he de-
nied it. The CFS proved that it was the admin-
istrator who’d been using his local desktop
system to access numerous pornographic Web
sites. Over three months, he had visited 4,500
pornographic Web sites and downloaded over
48,000 images. To cover his tracks, and in an
attempt to frame a senior manager, he had
been altering his local system IP address so the
trail led to his senior manager colleague. The
expertise in computer forensics and incident
response saved an innocent person’s job and
good name and uncovered the real culprit. The
senior manager was cleared of all involvement,
and his reputation was restored.
Case Project
A CFST was asked to examine the departing
manager’s personal laptop computer to deter-
mine if the individual in question had been ne-
gotiating in bad faith. The CFST was able to
extract evidence from the laptop drive that:
•
The individual in question had nego-
tiated in bad faith and had never in-
tended to stay with the CFST’s client’s
company.
•
The individual had negotiated the
contract with the full intention of re-
signing immediately on signing.
•
The individual had repeatedly over a
period of months passed highly sensi-
tive information to his former col-
leagues in the competing company.
•
The individual had been a director of
the competing company even prior to
the original buy-out.
•
The individual had been involved in
the day-to-day management of the
competing company.
•
The individual had been involved in
the defection of key staff from the
CFST’s client to the new company.
•
The individual had conspired with
other employees of the subsidiary to
mismanage it, leaving the market
open to the new company.
738
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

•
The individual had used company re-
sources to research and solicit the ser-
vices of escorts.
•
The individual has used his computer
to store and manage a large quantity
of homemade pornographic imagery.
Court action was initiated to prevent the
transfer of $40 million to the individual re-
sponsible. Court action was initiated against
the individual and others for breach of contract
and fraud.
Optional Team Case Project
A CFST was able to confirm the extensive dam-
age to the casing and motherboard of the com-
puter, but the hard disk was undamaged and
the forensic company recovered all the data
from it, thus saving the insurance company
from a fraudulent claim.
Chapter 15: The Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics of Terrorists
and Rogues
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
3. True
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. A
2. A
3. D
4. E
5. D
Exercise
Using a combination of forensic analysis of the
hard drives and investigation (tracing IP ad-
dresses, etc.), a CFS was able to identify the
hacker, which would enable law enforcement
to obtain a search warrant if the client elected
to press charges.
Hands-on Projects
Within 48 hours, the CFST had successfully re-
covered 100% of the data that the company
thought they had lost in the fire.
Case Project
Using advanced data forensic recovery, the CFS
was able to recover 9 million emails within five
days. Within five days of obtaining the tapes,
working a normal eight-hour day, the CFS had
located 9.5 million emails on the November
and December 2004 tapes. Because of time
pressure, the parties agreed that the plaintiff
would produce all of the 4 million emails that
the CFS had been able to print out. This
strengthens the claim that off-the-shelf recov-
ery and e-evidence discovery tools are not the
most advanced way to recover data. In addi-
tion, the forensic investigator will most likely
benefit from and be able to prepare a better
case when employing advanced recovery ser-
vices. The courts are beginning to recognize
this and that better, more advanced technology
exists. Furthermore, not using the available
technology can lead to sanctions.
Optional Team Case Project
The CFS was able to recover the email and the
database for the format imaging firm and sub-
sequently testified to the findings of their
forensic analysis. The defendants lost their
credibility and the case. After a four-week trial,
a San Antonio, Texas, jury rendered a $2.98
million verdict in favor of the format imaging
firm. The jury of seven women and five men
heard the evidence in two phases. In the first
phase, among other things, the jury found that
the format imaging firm’s former general man-
ager breached his fiduciary duties, misappro-
priated trade secrets, and engaged in fraud. In
the second phase, the jury found that the de-
fendants acted with malice. Many lawyers,
judges and even would-be criminals incorrectly
assume that deleted or corrupted files are irre-
trievable. However, with the forensic technol-
ogy that’s available today, no computer crime
can go unsolved.
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
739

Chapter 16: The Information Warfare
Arsenal and Tactics of
Private Companies
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. False
3. True
4. False
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. C
2. B
3. A
4. D
5. A
Exercise
After performing a forensic analysis, the CFS
could find no evidence of hacking on the em-
ployee’s computer. Thus, the employee was ex-
onerated of any wrong-doing, and other costly
proceedings were averted.
Hands-on Projects
The CFST was able to locate spy software, illegal
file-sharing software, pornography, and infor-
mation pertaining to a personal side business.
Both the CEO and the network administrator
were dismissed as a result of the investigation.
Case Project
The CFS was able to restructure and reformat
all the files needed for the claimant’s specific
software application and reprogram data. By
using electronic data discovery and  forensic
and analysis applications, the CFS discovered
that the software installation had not caused the
data loss and determined that the plaintiff had
manually erased the alleged lost data. When
shown the evidence, the plaintiff dropped the
suit and was promptly countersued.
Optional Team Case Project
Within four days, the CFS was able to recover
100% of the data from four of the drives; 99%
was recovered from the fifth drive.
Chapter 17: Information Warfare:
Arsenal of the Future
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. False
3. False
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. B
2. B
3. A
4. C
5. A
Exercise
Using a password encryption proprietary pro-
gram and programming knowledge of the
email system, the CFS was able to locate all
emails and attachments meeting selected crite-
ria and electronically transmitted them to the
court within only four days. The case was set-
tled in the plaintiff’s favor on the eighth day.
The defendant was charged with perjury.
Hands-on Projects
The entire acquisition occurred without the
knowledge of anyone in Asia and without dis-
rupting operations. The investigation also re-
vealed that the other drive did not contain
relevant evidence. The CFST essentially en-
abled an investigation that otherwise would
likely not have taken place. An investigation in-
volving international travel, flyaway kits, and
stand-alone computer forensics utilities would
have delayed the process by several days, if not
weeks, thus resulting in altered data or loss of
evidence. An on-site response process may
740
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

have compromised the investigation in this
case or, at a minimum, impacted business and
morale because of the very non-clandestine
physical presence of investigators.
Case Project
This process enabled a rapid incident response
and the capturing of live data. Without the
CFS, the response would have been delayed by
several days or may not have occurred.
Optional Team Case Project
The CFS successfully previewed the server and
collected key evidence, without disrupting op-
erations. Without the CFS, law enforcement
investigators would have either walked away
from the scene empty-handed or performed a
highly invasive and incomplete investigation by
making logical file copies of active data.
Chapter 18: Surveillance Tools for
Information Warfare of the Future
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. True
2. True
3. True
4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. C
2. B
3. A
4. D
5. A
Exercise
Network logs and the files on 60 network ma-
chines were examined. The CFST determined
that large amounts of pornography were trav-
eling through the network. It was discovered
that unauthorized Web servers containing
more than 30 gigabytes of pornographic mate-
rial had been set up across the network. The
CFST was able to determine which users had
access privileges and had logged onto the sus-
pected machines. An unexpected result of the
investigation revealed additional rogue servers
placed above ceiling tiles, communicating with
the network via multiple wireless access points.
In a weekend, enough evidence was gathered
to determine that the entire network adminis-
tration team had been part of a sophisticated
porn operation. The whole team was immedi-
ately terminated. The CFST performed the en-
tire investigation in only 3 days; 11 days fewer
than expected. The result was significant time-
saving and reduced investigative fees. In addi-
tion, the company had sufficient evidence to
protect itself from a wrongful termination suit.
The porn operation was shut down and the
corporate bandwidth returned to normal, 
and the company prevented a huge possible 
liability.
Hands-on Projects
The CFS performed an exhaustive search of all
computer records within the company’s large
finance division. It was soon discovered that
management ordered staff to destroy key docu-
ments. However, certain staff members did not
fully comply with the order, making the files
easily recoverable. In addition, on some sys-
tems, the CFS was able to recover incriminat-
ing documents that had been deleted. The
entire process occurred without affecting busi-
ness operations or productivity. Eventually,
enough information was recovered to recon-
struct the actual events and prove that numer-
ous high-level managers had schemed to alter
the records of the company. The suspected staff
members were terminated and criminal
charges were brought against them.
Case Project
The CFST was able to reveal nearly 16 million
U.S. dollars worth of Central Excise duty eva-
sions. Handling the audit, the CFST was also
able to identify crucial evidence that resulted in
the safeguarding of 7.6 million U.S. dollars of
government revenue. The data retrieved by the
CFST exposed a central duty evasion scheme
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
741

that had robbed the Indian government of 2.5
million in U.S. dollars. In exposing false claims
and fabricated documents, the CFST was able
to provide analysis and information in the case
that supported the seizure of cash, equivalent
to $435,000. The CFST was also able to quickly
analyze dozens of hard drives and sift through
voluminous amounts of evidence against ply-
wood manufacturing companies based in
India. The examination uncovered five years’
worth of unaccounted transactions. The result-
ing data provided a critical foundation for fur-
ther investigation by India’s Central Excise
Intelligence Department. The incident exposed
an evasion of excise duties totaling nearly 5.4
million in U.S. dollars. Qualitatively and quan-
titatively, the outputs provided by the CFST
were an invaluable contribution to the inter-
ests of government revenue.
Optional Team Case Project
APD did have the authority from the court to
seize the server in this case. They were able to
secure the scene, and the CFS called the system
administrator and requested administrative ac-
cess to the server. The CFS knew he could do
the acquisition on scene and offered the com-
pany the ability to cooperate with the APD
while the he conducted the investigation in the
least intrusive manner available. If the com-
pany didn’t agree to the CFS having system ac-
cess, APD would have had the authority to
seize the hardware, and any loss of productivity
or data would have been their own responsibil-
ity. After having received access to the com-
pany’s system, the CFS was able to conduct a
live acquisition using a portable forensic com-
puter plugged into an available port on a 36-
port switch. The CFS ended up downloading
two 33.6 SCSI drives full of data. The CFS had
brought with him enough target media for 720
gigabytes worth of data. The CFS then walked
onto the scene with six 120-gigabyte drives not
knowing what to expect. The CFS seized the
workstations and conducted the acquisition of
these computers back at the APD, where he had
the ability to do four acquisitions at a time.
APD executed the search warrant at 7:00 A.M.
on Monday morning and had every system
processed, reinstalled, and up again by noon on
Wednesday. In two and a half days, the CFS
had that business back up and running. The
CFS is now working on the analysis after hav-
ing conducted a triage of the emails. If it wasn’t
for the CFS’s speed and efficiency and avail-
ability to acquire data through a network, the
city of Austin would be looking at a huge liabil-
ity. APD did everything possible to limit that
company’s loss of productivity. Basically, APD
conducted the data seizure in a manner that
was in the best interest of the city and this com-
pany. Interestingly enough, on that Wednesday
afternoon the, case agent called the CFS and
said that the company’s attorney was demand-
ing that APD return their computers immedi-
ately. The CFS told him that the computers had
already been returned and had been up and
running in their business since noon.
Chapter 19: Civilian Casualties: 
The Victims and Refugees of
Information Warfare
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. False
3. False
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. C
2. A
3. B
4. C
5. D
Exercise
Network logs and the files on 60 network ma-
chines were examined. The CFST determined
that large amounts of pornography were travel-
ing through the network. It was discovered that
unauthorized Web servers containing more
than 30 gigabytes of pornographic material had
been set up across the network. The CFST was
742
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

able to determine which users had access privi-
leges and had logged onto the suspected ma-
chines. An unexpected result of the investigation
revealed additional rogue servers placed above
ceiling tiles, communicating with the network
via multiple wireless access points. In a week-
end, enough evidence was gathered to deter-
mine that the entire network administration
team had been part of a sophisticated porn 
operation. The whole team was immediately 
terminated. The CFST performed the entire in-
vestigation in only 3 days; 11 days fewer than ex-
pected. The result was significant timesaving
and reduced investigative fees. In addition, the
company had sufficient evidence to protect itself
from a wrongful termination suit. The porn op-
eration was shut down and the corporate band-
width returned to normal, and the company
prevented a huge possible liability.
Hands-on Projects
The firm had an instance of an inappropriate
email circulating through their network and vi-
olating their corporate policy. The firm didn’t
know where that email originated from, but
they were able to interrogate a number of dif-
ferent machines using a CFS. First, the firm was
able to identify the source of the email, which
was sent externally. Second, they put together
an extremely accurate timeline as to what had
happened. The reports that the firm was able to
generate from the corporate relationship stand-
point were excellent. The firm sent information
to the director of human relations or the chief
operating officer (COO). When the evidence
was sent to them, the quality and completeness
were such that they rarely asked for more infor-
mation. The CFS investigation reports were 
extremely thorough—more than enough infor-
mation to allow human relations to decide how
to move forward with the incident.
Case Project
The challenge in doing further analysis was that
the manager in question was located in Califor-
nia, while the investigators were in New Jersey.
The CFS was able to do a remote forensic inves-
tigation of the manager’s computer without
drawing suspicion that an investigation was tak-
ing place. Upon further analysis, it was deter-
mined that the dialog in question was in an
email from the manager’s spouse, accusing him
of vile and unlawful behavior. The couple was
going through a bitter divorce proceeding and
the accusations were completely unfounded.
The investigation was completed in 30 minutes,
without the CFS having to travel cross-country,
without harming the employee’s reputation,
and without having to alert anyone outside of
corporate security about the potential situation.
The organization was able to quickly investigate
this potential incident remotely, discreetly, im-
mediately, and cost effectively.
Optional Team Case Project
Within six hours of the CFS’s initial involve-
ment with this case, the CFS was able to iden-
tify information necessary to support the
client’s claims. The goal of the investigation
was to prove that the files the opposition was
using as the basis for the client’s product line
were indeed a derivative of client’s files. The in-
vestigation revealed that the files used by the
opposition in their manufacturing process pos-
sessed the identical metadata of the files origi-
nally created by the client. By extracting this
vital information, the CFS was able to prove
that the files being used by the opposition were
taken from the client’s computer and modified
to suit the opposition’s desires. The similarities
in document format, font selection, file cre-
ation dates, and document metadata would
prove to be the compelling evidence the client
needed to present their case.
PART V: ADVANCED COMPUTER
FORENSICS SYSTEMS AND 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Chapter 20: Advanced Computer
Forensics
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
743

3. False
4. False
5. False
Multiple Choice
1. D
2. B
3. C
4. D
5. E
Exercise
On a case-by-case basis, human resources noti-
fies the company’s CFST of reported allega-
tions. The CFST then further investigates and
analyzes employee actions including inappro-
priate material, email abuse, instant messaging,
and other nonbusiness-related activity. The
CFST is also used to capture evidence, docu-
ment findings, and produce reports with sup-
porting evidence for submission to all relevant
parties. This information assists in proving or
disproving the allegations against employees.
The CFST enables the employee investigation
process to be discreet and thorough, minimiz-
ing the potential of creating employee ill-will
during investigations and enabling verifiable
support of allegations.
Hands-on Projects
This organization was able to investigate ma-
chines that may have been compromised by a
malicious entity. Instead of pulling machines
off the network for analysis and potentially los-
ing valuable information relevant to the inves-
tigation, they used a CFST to remotely capture
and analyze relevant artifacts critical to the in-
cident. IDS alerts notified the CFST about the
suspect machines. The CFST used a snapshot
capability to quickly identify unauthorized
running processes, who was communicating
with the suspect machines, and users currently
logged on. This information assisted them in
identifying the exact application tunneling
through the corporate firewalls and making
calls to the Internet. The snapshot information
enabled the CFST to thoroughly document the
incident and to take appropriate actions for
initial remediation. During incident post-
analysis, the CFST reviewed findings and im-
plemented new controls to prevent similar
incidents from occurring in the future.
Case Project
By proactively acquiring and preserving em-
ployees’ computer hard drives, they protect
themselves from employees denying knowl-
edge or possession of proprietary or confiden-
tial data when the employee was notified of
termination. In the event of a wrongful termi-
nation lawsuit or when defending against em-
ployee accusations, the company has a forensic
copy of the hard drive. It can be used to prove
the employee had knowledge of a particular
matter or was in fact exhibiting a particular be-
havior that was grounds for termination.
Optional Team Case Project
The company uses a CFS to examine employee
hard drives and check for claim IDs related to
cases that have been determined or suspected
as fraudulent. The CFS can match these claim
IDs on employee computers and then locate
artifacts that may prove employee collabora-
tion. The CFS can also conduct further analysis
to locate relevant manipulated and deleted
documents on employee computers that can be
used to prove or disprove culpability. When in-
criminating artifacts are identified, the evi-
dence is captured and preserved, which enables
the CFS to present the case that an employee
was or was not defrauding the company by cre-
ating claims for events that didn’t actually
occur. The entire investigation is performed
covertly without creating employee ill-will and
without the need for in-person investigations.
Chapter 21: Summary, Conclusions
and Recommendations
Review Questions and Exercises
True/False
1. False
2. True
3. False
744
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

4. True
5. True
Multiple Choice
1. E
2. C
3. D
4. E
5. A
Exercise
To commence the investigation, the CFST faced
difficult barriers. Flying a CFST overseas is im-
practical because it could require several weeks to
coordinate and clear special computer equip-
ment through customs. In addition, on-site busi-
ness and investigative operations would be
compromised. Fortunately, the CFST was able to
remotely investigate any computer system in a
forensically sound and noninvasive manner any-
where on a wide area network—without disrupt-
ing system operations. Prior to using the CFST as
standard practice for organizational investiga-
tions, employee computer examinations con-
ducted by the company were cumbersome and
highly disruptive. Suspect employees would
often be alerted to an investigation because of the
inability to conduct rapid and discrete investiga-
tions. It was not uncommon for machines to
“mysteriously” disappear or be destroyed before
CFSTs arrived on-site for removal. The use of 
a CFST introduced a new level of efficiency 
and efficacy to organization-wide investigative
processes, saving the company time and money
while dramatically reducing legal and financial
exposure.
In addition, the CFST remotely previewed
and acquired information from several com-
puters housed in the Middle East office. Upon
analysis, they found important evidence point-
ing toward certain fraudulent actions tied to
key individuals. By launching the investigation
from the United States, the company saved
time and money while validating the financial
audit team’s suspicion to the point of identify-
ing potential suspects. Coincidentally, this suc-
cessful analysis took place just before the
financial audit team was traveling to the Mid-
dle East office to conduct what once was a pre-
viously scheduled, routine audit. Armed with
hard data, auditors targeted certain individuals
with specific questions while at the foreign of-
fice. Interview information was then passed on
to the U.S. CFST, who used the answers to con-
tinue searching for additional evidence. This
multidepartmental team approach led to the
identification of the employees who eventually
admitted to fraudulent activity. Those individ-
uals were swiftly terminated. This case demon-
strates how a CFST has enabled timely remote
capture of evidence. It allowed investigative
teams to identify that fraud had occurred, pin-
point potential suspects and narrow the inves-
tigative scope to specific topics and individuals.
Overall, the CFST saved this organization time
and money, while greatly improving its fraud
investigation procedures.
Answers to Review Questions, Exericses, and Projects
745

This page intentionally left blank 

PART I: OVERVIEW OF COMPUTER FORENSICS TECHNOLOGY
Chapter 1: Computer Forensics Fundamentals
Table F1.1 Evidence Identification and Retrieval Checklist Form
Evidence Identification and Retrieval Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure that the following provi-
sional list of actions for retrieval and identification of evidence are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Protect the subject computer system during the forensic examination from
any possible alteration, damage, data corruption, or virus introduction.
____ 2.
Discover all files on the subject system. This includes existing normal files,
deleted yet remaining files, hidden files, password-protected files, and en-
crypted files.
____ 3.
Recover all (or as much as possible of) discovered deleted files.
____ 4.
Reveal (to the greatest extent possible) the contents of hidden files as well
as temporary or swap files used by both the application programs and the
operating system.
____ 5.
Access (if possible and legally appropriate) the contents of protected or en-
crypted files.
F
Checklists by Chapter
747

____ 6.
Analyze all possibly relevant data found in special (and typically inaccessi-
ble) areas of a disk. This includes but is not limited to what is called unallo-
cated space on a disk (currently unused, but possibly the repository of
previous data that is relevant evidence), as well as slack space in a file (the
remnant area at the end of a file in the last assigned disk cluster that is un-
used by current file data, but once again, may be a possible site for previously
created and relevant evidence).
____ 7.
Print out an overall analysis of the subject computer system, as well as a list-
ing of all possibly relevant files and discovered file data.
____ 8.
Provide an opinion of the system layout; the file structures discovered; any
discovered data and authorship information; any attempts to hide, delete,
protect, and encrypt information; and anything else that has been discovered
and appears to be relevant to the overall computer system examination.
____ 9.
Provide expert consultation and/or testimony, as required [1].
Table F1.2 Principal Computer Forensic Activities Checklist Form
Principal Computer Forensic Activities Checklist Form
Date: _______________________
The computer forensic specialist should ensure that the following provisional
list of actions for some of the principal computer forensic methods are ad-
hered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Safely seize computer systems and files to avoid contamination and/or inter-
ference.
____ 2.
Safely collect data and software.
____ 3.
Safe and noncontaminating copying of disks and other data media.
____ 4.
Review and report on data media.
____ 5.
Source and review backup and archived files.
____ 6.
Recover/reconstruct deleted files—logical methods.
____ 7.
Recover material from swap and cache files.
____ 8.
Recover deleted/damaged files—physical methods.
____ 9.
Core-dump: Collect an image of the contents of the active memory of a
computer at a particular time.
____ 10.
Estimate if files have been used to generate forged output.
748
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
749
____ 11.
Review single computers for proper working during relevant period, in-
cluding service logs, fault records, and the like.
____ 12.
Prove/test reports produced by complex client/server applications.
____ 13.
Review complex computer systems and networks for proper working during
relevant period, including service logs, fault records, and the like.
____ 14.
Review system/program documentation for design methods, testing, audit,
revisions, and operations management.
____ 15.
Review applications programs for proper working during relevant period,
including service logs, fault records, and the like.
____ 16.
Identify and examine audit trails.
____ 17.
Identify and review monitoring logs.
____ 18.
Conduct telecoms call path tracing (PTTs or path-tracing telecoms and tele-
coms utilities companies only).
____ 19.
Review access control services—quality and resilience of facilities (hardware
and software, identification/authentication services).
____ 20.
Review and assess access control services—quality of security management.
____ 21.
Review and assess encryption methods—resilience and implementation.
____ 22.
Set up proactive monitoring to detect unauthorized or suspect activity
within application programs and operating systems and across local area
and wide area networks.
____ 23.
Monitor email.
____ 24.
Use special alarm or trace programs.
____ 25.
Use honeypots.
____ 26.
Interact with third parties (suppliers, emergency response teams, and law
enforcement agencies).
____ 27.
Review and assess measuring devices and other sources of real evidence, in-
cluding service logs, fault records, and the like.
____ 28.
Use routine search programs to examine the contents of a file.
____ 29.
Use purpose-written search programs to examine the contents of a file.
____ 30.
Reconcile multisource files.
____ 31.
Examine telecoms devices and location of associated activity logs and other
records perhaps held by third parties.
____ 32.
Reconstruct events.
____ 33.
Reconstruct complex computer intrusion.
____ 34.
Reconstruct complex fraud.

____ 35.
Reconstruct system failure.
____ 36.
Reconstruct disaster affecting computer-driven machinery or process.
____ 37.
Review expert- or rule-based systems.
____ 38.
Reverse compilation of suspect code.
____ 39.
Use computer programs that purport to provide simulations or animations
of events: review of accuracy, reliability, and quality.
Chapter 2: Types of Computer Forensics Technology
Table F2.1 Forensics Technology Types Checklist Form
Forensic Technology Types Checklist Form
Date: ____________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for some
of the forensic technology types are adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Move documentary evidence quickly from the printed or typewritten page
to computer data stored on floppy diskettes, Zip disks, CDs, and computer
hard disk drives.
____ 2.
Create a new type of virtual evidence for e-commerce transactions and email
communications over the Internet.
____ 3.
Share computer files over the Internet, when tied to the commission of a crime,
(creates a new and novel twist to the rules of evidence and legal jurisdiction).
____ 4.
Keep the venue in mind when criminal activities involve the use of the Inter-
net (venue can be in different cities, counties, states, and/or countries). The
evidence needed to prove such computer-related crimes potentially resides
on one or more computer hard disk drives in various geographic locations.
____ 5.
Keep in mind that the computer hard disk drives may also be the property
of criminals as well as innocent third parties (Internet service providers).
Such evidence is commonly referred to as computer evidence, but it is not
limited to cases involving computer crimes.
____ 6.
Rely on computer evidence that is connected to a computer crime (not to
traditional crimes that are committed using one or more computers as tools
in the commission of a crime). Computer crimes are specifically defined by
federal and/or state statutes.
____ 7.
Make sure computer evidence resides on computer storage media as bytes of
data in the form of computer files and ambient data.
750
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
751
____ 8.
Make sure ambient data (which is usually beyond the awareness of most
computer users) provides the computer forensics investigator with the ele-
ment of surprise when computer users are interviewed. For example, a com-
puter user who believes that he or she destroyed the computer evidence may
confess when confronted with part or all of the evidence extracted from am-
bient data sources.
____ 9.
Make sure your computer investigations rely on evidence that is stored as
data and that the timeline of dates and times of files that were created, mod-
ified, and/or last accessed by the computer user are recorded. Timelines of
activity can be especially helpful when multiple computers and individuals
are involved in the commission of a crime.
____ 10.
Make sure your computer forensics investigator always considers timelines
of computer usage in all computer-related investigations. The same is true in
computer security reviews concerning potential access to sensitive and/or
trade secret information stored in the form of computer files. Computer in-
vestigations play an important role in cases involving the theft of company
trade secrets.
____ 11.
Make sure your intellectual property lawyers rely on computer evidence and
computer investigations in such cases as stock frauds, financial frauds, and
embezzlements. The same is true concerning criminal litigation involving
stock frauds, financial frauds, and embezzlements. Much of the evidence re-
lated to these types of crimes will be in computer data form. In the past, doc-
umentary evidence used to prove these crimes was exclusively in paper form.
However, many computer-related communications and transactions are
now conducted without paper documents ever being created. Financial
fraud investigators have been forced to change the way they do business.
____ 12.
Make sure your computer-related investigations involve the review of Inter-
net log files to determine Internet account abuses in businesses or govern-
ment agencies.
____ 13.
Make sure your computer investigations involve the analysis of the Win-
dows swap file.
____ 14.
Make sure you use computer forensics procedures, processes, and tools, 
so that the computer forensics specialist can identify passwords, network 
logons, Internet activity, and fragments of email messages that were dumped
from computer memory during past Windows work sessions. When such
leads are identified, they can be perfected through the use of computer
forensics text search programs.
____ 15.
Use other computer forensics software tools to document the computer ev-
idence once it has been preserved, identified, and extracted.

Chapter 3: Types of Computer Forensics Systems
Table F3.1 Forensics Systems Types Checklist Form
Forensic Systems Types Checklist Form
Date: ____________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for some
of the forensic systems types are adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Have procedures in place to establish your organization’s security.
____ 2.
Have procedures in place to develop your security policy.
____ 3.
Have procedures in place to secure the Web client.
____ 4.
Have procedures in place to deter masqueraders and ensure authenticity.
____ 5.
Have procedures in place to prevent eavesdropping to protect your privacy.
____ 6.
Have procedures in place to thwart counterfeiters and forgery to retain integrity.
____ 7.
Have procedures in place to avoid disruption of service to maintain availability.
____ 8.
Have procedures in place to configure your operating system and network
security.
____ 9.
Have procedures in place to enhance your Web server security.
____ 10.
Have procedures in place to issue and manage certificates.
____ 11.
Have procedures in place to examine the impact of security policies.
____ 12.
Have procedures in place to identify hacking techniques.
____ 13.
Have procedures in place to be able to recognize attacks.
____ 14.
Have procedures in place to deploy an IDS.
____ 15.
Have procedures in place to commission your IDS.
____ 16.
Have procedures in place to manage your IDS.
____ 17.
Have procedures in place to install and configure your firewall.
____ 18.
Have procedures in place to support outgoing services through firewall
configuration.
____ 19.
Have procedures in place to secure external services provision.
____ 20.
Have procedures in place to protect internal IP services.
____ 21.
Have procedures in place to manage your firewall.
____ 22.
Have procedures in place to measure risk to avoid disaster.
752
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
753
____ 23.
Have procedures in place to design SAN security solutions.
____ 24.
Have procedures in place to be able to manage and document the recovery.
____ 25.
Have procedures in place to create the recovery plan.
____ 26.
Have procedures in place to assure the plan and apply document management.
____ 27.
Have procedures in place to analyze and design PKIs.
____ 28.
Have procedures in place to implement PKI.
____ 29.
Have procedures in place to manage PKI.
____ 30.
Have procedures in place to design wireless network security.
____ 31.
Have procedures in place to be able to plan for wireless network security.
____ 32.
Have procedures in place to install and deploy wireless network security.
____ 33.
Have procedures in place to maintain wireless network security.
____ 34.
Have procedures in place to be able to implement satellite encryption.
____ 35.
Have procedures in place to prevent misuse of satellite encryption technology.
____ 36.
Have procedures in place to conduct a privacy-needs audit.
____ 37.
Have procedures in place to develop an enterprise privacy plan.
____ 38.
Have procedures in place to implement an enterprise privacy plan.
____ 39.
Have procedures in place to manage privacy on the enterprise Web site.
____ 40.
Have procedures in place to manage privacy on the Internet supply chains.
____ 41.
Have procedures in place to design and plan for ID management.
____ 42.
Have procedures in place to install and deploy ID management.
____ 43.
Have procedures in place to maintain ID management.
____ 44.
Have procedures in place to plan for identity theft protection techniques.
____ 45.
Have procedures in place to install and deploy identity theft protection
techniques.
____ 46.
Have procedures in place to deploy enterprise biometrics solutions.
____ 47.
Have procedures in place to organize homeland security efforts.
____ 48.
Have procedures in place to launch a national cybersecurity awareness and
training program.

Chapter 4: Vendor and Computer Forensics Services
Table F4.1 Vendor and Forensics Services Types Checklist Form
Vendor and Forensic Services Types Checklist Form
Date: ____________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for some of
the vendor and forensic services types are adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides an analysis of comput-
ers and data in criminal investigations.
____ 2.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides an on-site seizure of
computer data in criminal investigations.
____ 3.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides an analysis of comput-
ers and data in civil litigation.
____ 4.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides an on-site seizure of
computer data in civil litigation.
____ 5.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides an analysis of the com-
pany computers to determine employee activity.
____ 6.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides assistance in preparing
electronic discovery requests.
____ 7.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides reporting in a compre-
hensive and readily understandable manner.
____ 8.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides court-recognized com-
puter expert witness testimony.
____ 9.
Make sure your computer forensics service conducts computer forensics on
both PC and MAC platforms.
____ 10.
Make sure your computer forensics service provides a fast turnaround time.
____ 11.
Have procedures in place to employ the latest tools and techniques to re-
cover your data.
____ 12.
Have procedures in place to allow you to find your files and restore them for
your use.
____ 13.
Have procedures in place to allow you to recover even the smallest remain-
ing fragments.
____ 14.
Have procedures in place to safeguard your data with such methods as en-
cryption and backup.
754
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
755
____ 15.
Have procedures in place to thoroughly clean sensitive data from any com-
puter system you plan on disposing of.
____ 16.
Have procedures in place to survey your business and provide guidance for
improving the security of your information. This includes such possible in-
formation leaks as cordless telephones, cellular telephones, trash, employees,
and answering machines.
____ 17.
Be cognizant of the IP address limitations for determining the possible at-
tribution of the event you are investigating. Although this process will edu-
cate the administrator on how to characterize the threat to his or her
company from analyzing IP addresses that appear in the logs, a complete de-
termination of the threat your organization faces is a more involved process.
____ 18.
Have procedures in place to investigate the possibility of staffing a profes-
sional competitive intelligence cell in your company or sponsoring an as-
sessment of the threat to your company’s systems from a group of
intelligence and information security specialists.
____ 19.
Have procedures in place to know what the threat against your system is as
well as its vulnerabilities.
PART II: COMPUTER FORENSICS EVIDENCE AND CAPTURE
Chapter 5: Data Recovery
Table F5.1 Data Recovery Checklist Form
Data Recovery Checklist Form
Date: ____________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for data
recovery are adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Make sure you are ready and have procedures in place for disasters like
floods, tornadoes, earthquakes, and terrorism when they strike.
____ 2.
Make sure you are ready and have a plan in place to take periodic image
copies and send them off-site.
____ 3.
Perform change accumulation to reduce the number of logs required as
input to the recovery, which saves time at the recovery site. However, per-
forming this step consumes resources at the home site.

____ 4.
Evaluate your environment to decide how to handle the change accumula-
tion question/problem in action/task #3.
____ 5.
Have procedures in place to implement your plan.
____ 6.
Check your assets to make sure they’re ready as part of your plan.
____ 7.
Build your recovery JCL correctly. JCL is tricky, and you need to get it ex-
actly right. Data integrity and your business rely on this task.
____ 8.
Clean your RECON data sets. It can take hours if done manually, and it’s an
error-prone process. When your system is down, can you afford to make
mistakes with this key resource?
____ 9.
Test your plan. There’s a lot to think about. In the real world, there’s much
more.
____ 10.
Make sure your plan works before you are required to use it.
____ 11.
Have procedures in place to deal with issues of increased availability, shrink-
ing expertise, growing complexity, failures of many types, and the costs of
data management and downtime.
Chapter 6: Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
Table F6.1 Evidence Collection and Data Seizure Checklist Form
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure Checklist Form
Date: ____________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for evi-
dence collection and data seizure are adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Make sure that once you’ve created a master copy of the original data, you
don’t touch it or the original itself—always handle secondary copies.
____ 2.
Have procedures in place to document the nature, extent, and reasons for
changes to the data.
____ 3.
Make sure you understand what you are doing, because you have to be able
to account for any changes you made and describe exactly what you did. If
you ever find yourself out of your depth, either learn more before continu-
ing (if time is available) or find someone who knows the territory.
____ 4.
Make sure your plan of action is not based on trial and error. No one is
going to believe you if they can’t replicate your actions and reach the same
results.
756
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
757
____ 5.
Work fast, so that there is a less likelihood that the data is going to change.
____ 6.
Always try to collect the most volatile evidence first, because some electronic
evidence is more volatile than others. You should proceed from volatile to
persistent evidence.
____ 7.
Never, ever shut down a system before you collect the evidence.
____ 8.
Avoid rebooting at all costs. It is even worse than shutting a system down
and should be avoided. As a general rule, until the compromised disk is fin-
ished with and restored, it should never be used as a boot disk.
____ 9.
Any programs you use should be on read-only media (such as a CD-ROM
or a write-protected floppy disk) and should be statically linked. Because the
attacker may have left trojaned (trojan horse) programs and libraries on the
system, you may inadvertently trigger something that could change or de-
stroy the evidence you’re looking for.
____ 10.
Make sure your planning stage takes place prior to any investigator arriving
at the computer crime scene, including two ways to structure a team of in-
vestigators.
____ 11.
Make sure that you have good case management software. It can go a long
way in easing the burden of carrying out a search and seizure.
Chapter 7: Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence
Table F7.1 Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence Checklist Form
Duplication and Preservation of Digital Evidence Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Shut down the computer.
____ 2.
Document the hardware configuration of the system.
____ 3.
Transport the computer system to a secure location.
____ 4.
Make bit-stream backups of hard disks and floppy disks.
____ 5.
Mathematically authenticate data on all storage devices.
____ 6.
Document the system date and time.
____ 7.
Make a list of key search words.
____ 8.
Evaluate the Windows swap file.

____ 9.
Evaluate file slack.
____ 10.
Evaluate unallocated space (erased files).
____ 11.
Search files, file slack, and unallocated space for keywords.
____ 12.
Document file names, dates, and times.
____ 13.
Identify file, program, and storage anomalies.
____ 14.
Evaluate program functionality.
____ 15.
Document your findings.
____ 16.
Retain copies of software used.
____ 17.
Establish a solid relationship with local law enforcement, as they will be a
valuable resource in the evidence collection process [1].
Chapter 8: Computer Image Verification and Authentication
Table F8.1 Computer Image Verification and Authentication Checklist Form
Computer Image Verification and Authentication Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Alter the data on the cartridge. To successfully subvert the digital integrity
verification and authentication protocol, it would be necessary to do the fol-
lowing without detection: either in a manner that ensures that the relevant
data block produces the same hash value or that the relevant hash value is
recalculated and inserted into the vault, (1) recalculate all the subsequent
derivative hash values; (2) recalculate and rewrite the relevant encrypted
block; break the seals on the relevant digital integrity verification and authen-
tication floppy disks; and rewrite the data and repair the seals. 
____ 2.
Alter the data on the machine and then re-DIBS® it (if the machine in ques-
tion was available). This would require the original DIBS drive; the original
password known only to the copying officer (and encrypted on each car-
tridge in the series); exact knowledge of the date and time settings within the
computer at the time of the original copy; and either a similarly numbered
tamperproof bag on which the defendant’s signature would be forged, or the
original bag opened and resealed with the new floppy inside.
758
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
759
____ 3.
Examine and analyze any discrepancies between the defendant’s floppy disk
and that of the investigators to determine whether such discrepancies dis-
qualified any or all of the copied data. The digital integrity of the floppy disk
and the physical integrity of the tamperproof bag are, in this case, the ar-
biters of whether such discrepancies were deliberately manufactured.
____ 4.
Make sure the digital integrity of any element in the chain (cartridges and
floppies) is verified independently of the others (especially through the in-
clusion of the encryption phase). It is, thus, useless for a defendant to de-
stroy his or her floppy disk in the hope that its absence will assist any
challenge to the digital integrity verification and authentication protocol.
____ 5.
Make sure that security-conscious CIOs meet with their counterparts to dis-
cuss security issues with their senior executives, have a dedicated chief secu-
rity officer, perform a formal assessment of security risk, conduct simulated
security breaches, force users to change passwords more frequently, and
consult with vendors about their own security precautions.
____ 6.
Take steps to make sure security is a higher priority for your company. 
PART III: COMPUTER FORENSICS ANALYSIS
Chapter 9: Discovery of Electronic Evidence
Table F9.1 Discovery of Electronic Evidence Checklist Form
Discovery of Electronic Evidence Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Do not alter discovered information.
____ 2.
Always back up discovered information.
____ 3.
Document all investigative activities.
____ 4.
Accumulate the computer hardware and storage media necessary for the
search circumstances.
____ 5.
Prepare the electronic means needed to document the search.
____ 6.
Ensure that specialists are aware of the overall forms of information evi-
dence that are expected to be encountered as well as the proper handling of
this information.

____ 7.
Evaluate the current legal ramifications of information discovery searches.
____ 8.
Back up the information discovery file or files.
____ 9.
Start the lab evidence log.
____ 10.
Mathematically authenticate the information discovery file or files.
____ 11.
Proceed with the forensic examination.
____ 12.
Find the MD5 message digest for the original information discovery file or files.
____ 13.
Log all message digest values in the lab evidence log.
____ 14.
When forensic work is complete, regenerate the message digest values using
the backups on which work was performed; log these new values alongside
the hashes that were originally generated. If the new values match the origi-
nals, it’s reasonable to conclude that no evidence tampering took place dur-
ing the forensic examination of the information file(s).
____ 15.
Briefly compare the physical search and seizure with its logical (data-oriented)
counterpart, information discovery.
Chapter 10: Identification of Data
Table F10.1 Identification of Data Checklist Form
Identification of Data Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Use NTP for security reasons.
____ 2.
Buy special radios that interpret the signals and send them out on serial
(and even parallel) cables to the computers that will serve as your top stra-
tum. WWV broadcasts time signals over short wave, so this information is
available worldwide.
____ 3.
Use GPS devices. GPS relies on accurate timekeeping for calculating position
and movement. GPS devices are fairly inexpensive, although you’ll want to
buy ones that already have drivers written for them.
____ 4.
Remember to have multiple sources. Note that most Cisco Systems routers
and switches come with NTP software and are ready for use as NTP servers.
(You should disable this service if you’re not using it.)
760
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
761
____ 5.
Keeping all your systems synchronized to accurate time is not a luxury.
Good timekeeping is important to many security functions, such as elec-
tronic transactions, certain authentication systems, and, in particular, any
forensics activity that might ever be required of you. If you find yourself
comparing logs from disparate systems, you’ll be exceedingly grateful that
you decided to implement NTP.
Chapter 11: Reconstructing Past Events
Table F11.1 Reconstructing Past Events Checklist Form
Reconstructing Past Events Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Create a timeline to reconstruct the events that led to your system being cor-
rupted. This can be particularly difficult when it comes to computers—clock
drift, delayed reporting, and differing time zones can create confusion in
abundance.
____ 2.
Do not change the clock on an affected system.
____ 3.
Record any clock drift and the time zone in use, as you will need this later,
but changing the clock just adds in an extra level of complexity that is best
avoided.
____ 4.
Synchronize the log files. Log files usually use timestamps to indicate when
an entry was added, and these must be synchronized to make sense.
____ 5.
Use timestamps. You’re not just reconstructing events; you are making a
chain of events that must be accounted for as well.
____ 6.
Use the GMT time zone when creating your timestamps, because the inci-
dent may involve other time zones than your own. Using a common refer-
ence point can make things much easier.
____ 7.
Make sure you have a dedicated host for the job when analyzing backups.
This examination host should be secure, clean (a fresh, hardened install of
the operating system is a good idea), and isolated from any network—you
don’t want it tampered with while you work, and you don’t want to acci-
dentally send something nasty down the line.

762
Computer Forensics, Second Edition
____ 8.
Commence analysis of the backups once the system is available. Making
mistakes at this point shouldn’t be a problem—you can simply restore the
backups again if required.
____ 9.
Document everything you do. Remember the mantra.
____ 10.
Ensure that what you do is not only repeatable, but that you always get the
same results.
____ 11.
Reconstruct the chain of events leading to and following the attacker’s
break-in now that you have collected the data.
____ 12.
Make sure you correlate all the evidence you have gathered (which is why ac-
curate timestamps are critical). It’s probably best to use graphical tools, di-
agrams, and spreadsheets.
____ 13.
Include all of the evidence you’ve found when reconstructing the attack—no
matter how small it is, you may miss something if you leave a piece of evi-
dence out.
____ 14.
Review audit trails of system activity to pinpoint how, when, and why the in-
cident occurred, since the amount of damage that occurred with an incident
can be assessed.
Chapter 12: Networks
Table F12.1 Networks Checklist Form
Networks Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following are adhered to
(check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Provide expert data visualization techniques to the problem of network data
pattern analysis.
____ 2.
Apply standard research and analysis techniques to datasets provided by a
company or organization.
____ 3.
Apply the lessons learned from company-provided datasets to open datasets
as the research advances.
____ 4.
Provide initial datasets, project initiation, and training in network traffic
datasets and analysis techniques.

Checklists by Chapter
763
____ 5.
Provide expert network forensic rule-based algorithms for incorporation by
researchers.
____ 6.
Repeatedly test and verify new visualization techniques and procedures to
ensure that new patterns are, in fact, accurate representations of designated
activities.
____ 7.
Develop a test database.
____ 8.
Develop a design methodology for visualizing test data.
____ 9.
Develop a query interface to the database.
____ 10.
Map data structures to a visualization model.
____ 11.
Build a prototype.
____ 12.
Refine a prototype.
____ 13.
Incorporate live Internet data.
____ 14.
Test live Internet data.
____ 15.
Deliver a final build.
____ 16.
Produce new visualization techniques to streamline and enhance analysis of
network forensic data.
____ 17.
Produce a Web browser–compatible prototype that demonstrates these
techniques to visualize and query vast amounts of data. The resulting inter-
active visualization interface will advance the usability of the system, solve
the volumetric problem with analyzing these datasets, and advance the adap-
tation of the solution in the INFOSEC market.
____ 18.
Routinely archive all email as it is received on your server for a certain period
of time (for example, 30–60 days).
____ 19.
Clear the archives after an additional specified time.
____ 20.
Physically segregate the backup copies of the email system from backups of
the rest of the computer system.
____ 21.
Automatically erase email from the computer system, including backups,
after a short period (15–30 days).
____ 22.
Apply uniform retention and deletion standards and features outside the
server to workstations and laptops.
____ 23.
Formulate and distribute a statement that the automatic deletion of elec-
tronic records will be suspended and steps taken to preserve records in the
event of investigation or litigation.
____ 24.
Maintain an appropriate SOP document. All agencies that seize and/or ex-
amine digital evidence must do this.

____ 25.
Clearly set forth in this SOP document all elements of an agency’s policies
and procedures concerning digital evidence, which must be issued under the
agency’s management authority.
____ 26.
Review the SOPs on an annual basis to ensure their continued suitability and
effectiveness.
____ 27.
Make sure the procedures you use are generally accepted in the field or sup-
ported by data gathered and recorded in a scientific manner.
____ 28.
Maintain written copies of appropriate technical procedures.
____ 29.
Use hardware and software that is appropriate and effective for the seizure or
examination procedure.
____ 30.
Record all activity relating to the seizure, storage, examination, or transfer of
digital evidence in writing.
____ 31.
Make sure all digital evidence is available for review and testimony.
____ 32.
Make sure that any action that has the potential to alter, damage, or destroy
any aspect of original evidence is performed by qualified persons in a foren-
sically sound manner.
____ 33.
Be alert. One of the best ways to ensure that your network is secure is to keep
abreast of developing threats. Security experts agree that ignorance is the
most detrimental security problem. Most hacks occur because someone
wasn’t paying attention. Web sites such as the CERT home page
(http://www.cert.org) are excellent places to get current information.
____ 34.
Apply all service patches. Many companies will sit on patches rather than
put them to use. Others are not diligent enough about searching for and
downloading the latest virus definitions. Smart hackers bank on the negli-
gence of others.
____ 35.
Limit port access. Although just about any application that uses TCP re-
quires a port, you can minimize exposure by limiting the number of ports
accessible through a firewall. NNTP (Network News Transport Protocol) is
an excellent example: unless your shop requires newsgroup access, port 119
should be shut down.
____ 36.
Eliminate unused user IDs and change existing passwords. Poor mainte-
nance is almost as dangerous as ignorance.
____ 37.
Make sure system administrators routinely audit and delete any idle user IDs.
____ 38.
Make sure that in order to limit the likelihood of successful random guess-
ing, all user and system passwords be system-generated or system-enforced.
____ 39.
Avoid the use of simple network management protocol (SNMP) across the
firewall.
764
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
765
____ 40.
Check routers to make sure they do not respond to SNMP commands orig-
inating outside the network.
____ 41.
Secure remote access. Try to break into your own network. You can learn a
lot by hacking into your own system.
____ 42.
Test your packet-filtering scheme. If you can gain access to your systems
from a workstation outside your network, you can easily test your packet-
filtering scheme without any outside exposure. If you do spot a weakness,
you’ll be one step ahead of the hackers.
____ 43.
Ask a consultant when in doubt. If you don’t have the technical wherewithal
in-house or if your staff is too busy working on other projects, don’t hesitate
to call in a consultant. Many companies offer security assessment and train-
ing services.
____ 44.
Assess your company’s networking needs and shut down any ports that
aren’t necessary for day-to-day operations, such as port 53 for DNS access
and port 119 for NNTP services.
____ 45.
Be sure to eliminate unused user IDs and to avoid provisioning SNMP ser-
vices through the firewall.
PART IV: COUNTERMEASURES: INFORMATION WARFARE
Chapter 13: Fighting Against Macro Threats: Defensive Strategies for
Governments and Industry Groups
Table F13.1 Defensive Strategies for Governments
and Industry Groups Checklist Form
Defensive Strategies for Governments and Industry Groups Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for
preparing for defensive strategies for governments and industry groups are
adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Implement leadership. Who should be in charge in the government? An
immediate and badly needed first step is the assignment of a focal point for
federal government leadership in support of a coordinated U.S. response to
the strategic IW threat. This focal point should be located in the Executive
Office of the President, because only at this level can the necessary interagency

coordination of the large number of government organizations involved in
such matters—and the necessary interactions with the Congress—be effec-
tively carried out.
____ 2.
Establish leadership responsibility with industry. The Executive Office
should also have the responsibility for close coordination with industry, be-
cause the nation’s information infrastructure is being developed almost ex-
clusively by the commercial sector. Once established, this high-level
leadership should immediately take responsibility for initiating and manag-
ing a comprehensive review of national-level strategic IW issues.
____ 3.
Conduct an immediate risk assessment. The federal government leadership
entity should, as a first step, conduct an immediate risk assessment to deter-
mine, to the degree possible, the extent of the vulnerability of key elements
of current U.S. national security and national military strategy to strategic
information warfare.
____ 4.
List the components of this review. Strategic target sets, IW effects, and par-
allel vulnerability and threat assessments should be among the components
of this review. In an environment of dynamic change in both cyberspace
threats and vulnerabilities, there is no sound basis for presidential decision
making on strategic IW matters without such a risk assessment.
____ 5.
Create a robust national information infrastructure. In this context, there is
always the hope or the belief that the kind of aggressive response can be de-
layed while cyberspace gets a chance to evolve robust defenses on its own.
This is, in fact, a possibility—that the healing and annealing of an immune
system that is under constant assault, as cyberspace is and assuredly will con-
tinue to be, will create the robust national information infrastructure that
everyone hopes to use. But it may not, and we’re certainly not there now.
____ 6.
Address the government’s role. The appropriate role for government in re-
sponding to the strategic IW threat needs to be addressed, recognizing that
this role (certain to be part leadership and part partnership with the domes-
tic sector) will unquestionably evolve.
____ 7.
Facilitate and maintain information systems and the infrastructure. In addi-
tion to being the performer of certain basic preparedness functions (such as
organizing, equipping, training, and sustaining military forces), the govern-
ment may play a more productive and efficient role as facilitator and main-
tainer of some information systems and infrastructure; through policy
mechanisms such as tax breaks to encourage reducing vulnerability and im-
proving recovery and reconstitution capability.
____ 8.
Establish a new traditional change in the government’s role. An important fac-
tor is the traditional change in the government’s role as one moves from na-
tional defense through public safety toward things that represent the public
766
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
767
good. Clearly, the government’s perceived role in this area will have to be bal-
anced against public perceptions of the loss of civil liberties and the commer-
cial sector’s concern about unwarranted limits on its practices and markets.
____ 9.
Establish a national security strategy. Once an initial risk assessment has
been completed, U.S. national security strategy needs to address prepared-
ness for the threat as identified. Preparedness will cross several traditional
boundaries from “military” to “civilian,” from “foreign” to “domestic,” and
from “national” to “local.”
____ 10.
Create a minimum essential information infrastructure (MEII) as a possible
strategic defensive IW initiative. The MEII is conceived as that minimum
mixture of U.S. information systems, procedures, laws, and tax incentives
necessary to ensure that the nation continues functioning even in the face of
a sophisticated strategic IW attack.
____ 11.
Maintain the strategic nuclear Minimum Essential Emergency Communi-
cations Network (MEECN). One facet of such an MEII might be a set of
rules and regulations sponsored by the federal government to encourage the
owners and operators of the various national infrastructures to take mea-
sures to reduce their infrastructure’s vulnerability or to ensure rapid recon-
stitution in the face of IW-type attacks.
____ 12.
At an early date conduct an assessment of the feasibility of an MEII. The
MEII construct is conceptually very attractive even though there was some
uncertainty as to how it might be achieved.
____ 13.
Establish a national military strategy. The current national military strategy
emphasizes maintaining U.S. capability to project power into theaters of op-
eration in key regions of Europe and Asia. Because of the emerging theaters
of operation in cyberspace for such contingencies, strategic IW profoundly
reduces the significance of distance with respect to the deployment and use
of weapons. Therefore, battlefield command, control, communications, and
intelligence (C3I) vulnerabilities may become less significant than vulnera-
bilities in the national infrastructure.
____ 14.
Create a plan for a national military strategy. Planning assumptions funda-
mental to current national military strategy are obsolescent. Consideration of
these IW features should be accounted for in U.S. national military strategy.
____ 15.
Make sure the U.S. military plan and strategy is not vulnerable to IW attack.
Against this difficult projection and assessment situation, there is the ever-
present risk that the United States could find itself in a crisis in the near
term, facing the possibility of, or indications of, a strategic IW attack. When
the president asks whether the United States is under IW attack (and, if so,

by whom) and whether the U.S. military plan and strategy is vulnerable, a
foot-shuffling “we don’t know” will not be an acceptable answer.
____ 16.
Implement the new IW strategy. It must be acknowledged that strategic IW
is a very new concept that is presenting a wholly new set of problems. These
problems may well yield to solution—but not without the intelligent and in-
formed expenditure of energy, leadership, money, and other scarce resources.
Chapter 14: The Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military
Table F14.1 Information Warfare Arsenal 
and Tactics of the Military Checklist Form
Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of the Military Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for
preparing for information warfare arsenal and tactics of the military are ad-
hered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Review of the military organization’s mission. The first suggested action
involves a review of the military organization’s mission in light of the emerg-
ing threat. A few military organizations may find that IW-D adds a mission
or increases the importance of an existing mission.
____ 2.
Review new relationships. New relationships with external organizations
may be required, or perhaps existing relationships may need to be modified.
Thus, a review of these relationships is in order.
____ 3.
Allocate responsibilities. Who is responsible for IW-D in the military orga-
nization? Perhaps the military organization has a chief information officer
(CIO) and it would be appropriate for the CIO to take on this responsibil-
ity. Perhaps the responsibility for IW-D is spread out among several indi-
viduals. In any event, a clear allocation of responsibilities is required.
____ 4.
Identify which information and systems are critical. Not all information or
all systems should be considered equal with respect to the protection they
merit. It is important, given resource constraints, to identify which infor-
mation and systems (and functions of these systems) are critical and which
are not critical.
____ 5.
Conduct a vulnerability analysis. How vulnerable are the information and
systems? What is the specific nature of the vulnerabilities? Answers are
768
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
769
needed to provide a basis for planning and developing defenses. It needs to
be remembered that vulnerabilities are relative to the threat, the nature of
which is constantly evolving. Thus, vulnerability analyses are not a one-time
task but must be part of a continuing effort.
____ 6.
Develop a comprehensive IW-D strategy. Isolated actions to improve secu-
rity are helpful, but they are not a substitute for the development of a com-
prehensive IW-D strategy for a military organization.
____ 7.
Develop a plan to manage risks. Because it is not possible to avoid all the
risks associated with IW, each military organization needs to develop a plan
to manage these risks.
____ 8.
Discuss the issues. In the course of developing and articulating a military or-
ganizational IW-D strategy and risk-management plan, many issues will be
raised and discussed. These discussions will create a greater awareness of the
problem within the military organization and improve the organization’s
ability to meet the challenges associated with IW-D.
____ 9.
Review investment strategies and supporting technologies. Combating IW is
a long-term proposition. There are many long poles in the tent. A military
organization’s investment strategies need to be reviewed, and investments in
defenses and supporting technologies must be made.
____ 10.
Reallocate resources. Some reallocation of resources may be made necessary
by changes in the operating costs associated with introducing new proce-
dures and safeguards.
Chapter 15: The Information Warfare Arsenal 
and Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
Table F15.1 Information Warfare Arsenal and 
Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues Checklist Form
Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics 
of Terrorists and Rogues Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for
preparing for information warfare arsenal and tactics of terrorists and rogues
are adhered to (check all tasks completed):

____ 1.
Default settings for software products sold to consumers should be at the
highest level of security.
____ 2.
Nations developing information strategies should consider investment, both
intellectually and financially, across the gamut of information operations.
____ 3.
Air power’s pervasiveness and speed are advantages in the face of transnational
and transregional terror. In an era when terrorism may take place across the
globe and sponsors may cross national and regional lines, the global sight and
reach of Air Force assets should be valuable to national decision makers.
____ 4.
Air and space power should not always be the instruments of choice in the
U.S. counterterrorism arsenal. They can, however, play an important role in
intelligence and covert action.
____ 5.
Air and space power should rarely be used independently; instead, they will
have a synergistic effect with other counterterrorism instruments such as
covert action, diplomacy, economic instruments, and joint military opera-
tions. The same instruments may be used in parallel against terrorist sup-
porters, terrorist infrastructure and networks, and terrorists themselves.
____ 6.
Air power in the service of counterterrorism should include, but also go be-
yond, surveillance and punishment of state sponsors.
____ 7.
Deterrence and response should probably evolve in the direction of a more
“personalized” approach emphasizing the monitoring and attack of key
nodes in terrorist networks and the forcible apprehension of individual ter-
rorist suspects.
____ 8.
Demands on air power should be driven as much by the requirement to in-
tercept and extract suspects as by the need to attack training camps or strike
supporting regimes.
____ 9.
Air and space power should help make terrorism—an increasingly amor-
phous phenomenon—more transparent.
____ 10.
The ability to identify and target terrorist-related activity and help expose
terrorism and its sponsors for policy action and international censure
should be key contributions of Air Force assets.
____ 11.
As terrorism becomes more diffuse and its sponsorship increasingly hazy,
finding the “smoking gun” should become more difficult but essential to
building a consensus for action.
____ 12.
Space-based sensors, surveillance by unmanned air vehicles, and signals in-
telligence should facilitate the application of air power and other counter-
terrorist capabilities.
____ 13.
Counterterrorism should increasingly focus on urban areas and thus face
strong operational constraints. For political reasons, terrorists find key targets
in cities. The use of air power for counterterror, therefore, faces the more
770
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
771
general problem of operating in urban environments, a situation where the
difficult Israeli experience in Beirut and south Lebanon is instructive.
____ 14.
The value of air power here should depend on its capacity for discriminate
targeting and less-than-lethal technologies.
Chapter 16: The Information Warfare Arsenal 
and Tactics of Private Companies
Table F16.1 Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of 
Private Companies Checklist Form
Information Warfare Arsenal and Tactics of
Private Companies Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The CFS should ensure that the following provisional list of actions for
preparing for information warfare arsenal and tactics of private companies
are adhered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
It is recommended that, traditionally, private companies be organized in a
hierarchical way and also be viewed as such. Much like a Norman mote and
bailey castle, where a keep on a central raised mound was encircled by a
ditch and a picket, private companies are viewed as entities that are, or
should be, impervious to the outside world, allowing entry only at desig-
nated, protected points. Once within the structure, movement up to the
pinnacle of command is meant to be within certain set parameters, and devi-
ation from these parameters is not encouraged.
____ 2.
Flat management structures, it is recommended, should make the internal
passage within the corporate entity somewhat less linear. Flat management
does not allow for free ingress from the outside as one of its goals—it may
allow for more points of contact between points inside the structure and
outside, but these are monitored and controlled.
____ 3.
Over the years, layers of protection have accreted around the structure,
much like the walls that were thrown up around the keeps of concentric cas-
tles. All of these concentric defenses should repeat the pattern of controlled
and protected points of ingress and egress.
____ 4.
The growth of the information network and the increasing porosity of cor-
porate entities should lead to a rethinking of the reliance on concentricity
and control of entrances.

____ 5.
Corporate entities should have new points of ingress (such as telephony and
Internet access points)—consumers demand it. Added to this intentional ac-
cumulation of entry points must be those that are either unwittingly left
open by a corporate entity, because the advances of technology are not un-
derstood, or those that are left open through intention or negligence, where
the possibility of unwanted or uncontrolled ingress is appreciated, but noth-
ing is done about it.
____ 6.
Attention should also be paid to points of egress. Much damage can be done
by an information outflow caused by a disgruntled employee.
____ 7.
A hierarchical corporation, based on a fortress structure, may be vulnerable
if an information flow is disrupted. This may be so even where a flat man-
agement structure exists within the fortress. The entity may be hard put to
regroup and function without great delay.
____ 8.
A corporate entity based on a network may be much better placed to respond
to a potentially disabling attack. Diversified information and command lines
should be called into action and utilized should one line be cut. Such a corpo-
ration would be able to continue its core operations in a much shorter time-
frame than a defensive-fortress structure. This does not mean to say that a
corporation should abandon all controls of ingress and egress, and open its
doors to the world. Defenses from cyberterrorism should be put in place. This
discussion highlights the first primary step in risk management—identification.
____ 9.
Potential threats should be identified and provided for. A simple treatment
of defensive structures may not be wise, because the chaotic nature of the in-
formation network and the development of new technologies will inevitably
mean that new forms of attacks and new holes in the armor will always open,
often in unexpected places.
____ 10.
A diversified command-and-control structure, and the duplication of infor-
mation supplies should go some way in both treating current risk and cop-
ing with problems when unforeseen or currently nonexistent risks appear.
Chapter 17: The Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future
Table F17.1 Preparation for the Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future Checklist Form
Information Warfare Arsenal of the Future Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following actions are ad-
hered to (check all tasks completed):
772
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
773
____ 1.
Identify substate groups who have embraced the information revolution, as
has the rest of society. Going a stage further and attacking the NII can cer-
tainly be an attractive option for substate groups. However, as the Provi-
sional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) case shows, to inflict even a portion of
the disruption that the doomsday mongers suggest would require a tremen-
dous investment in intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB), not to
mention actually implementing the assault. More technology-savvy groups
such as environmental protesters may be the first to use offensive IW tech-
niques but they will have limited aims and not pose a national security
threat. It is likely to be some time yet before professional cyberterrorists
become a significant IW threat.
____ 2.
Institute a review of national vulnerabilities to an IW arsenal of the future.
This prospect leaves governments with a window of opportunity that needs
to be seized. In the past, states have tended to react to changing terrorist
threats rather than preempting them, and the substate group usually retains
the initiative. This may also be the case with cyberterrorism. As yet, though,
there has not been national leadership of the sort provided by the White
House and the Congress.
____ 3.
Proactively monitor the threat. Performing a holistic assessment of national
vulnerabilities and creating a rigorously enforced information assurance pro-
gram can meet this new threat. Although it is obvious that the American NII
is far more vulnerable to the IW arsenal of the future than the British NII, be-
cause of the far higher level of connectivity, there is little room for compla-
cency. For once, the British government, in conjunction with its European
partners, has the opportunity of staying ahead of an emerging threat from
terrorist and other substate groups. It will not be long before substate groups
graduate from exploiting the Internet for propaganda to using it offensively.
____ 4.
Conduct strategic IW campaigns. The introduction of nonnuclear electro-
magnetic bombs into the IW arsenal of a modern air force considerably
broadens the options for conducting strategic campaigns. Clearly, such
weapons are potent force multipliers in conducting a conventional war, par-
ticularly when applied to electronic combat, offensive counterair (OCA),
and strategic air attack operations.
____ 5.
Develop the use of IW weapons responsibly. The massed use of such IW
weapons would provide a decisive advantage to any nation with the capabil-
ity to effectively target and deliver them. The qualitative advantage in capa-
bility so gained would provide a significant advantage even against a much
stronger opponent not in the possession of this capability.
____ 6.
Commit to strategic IW campaigns. Electromagnetic weapons, however,
open up less conventional alternatives for the conduct of a strategic campaign,

which derive from their ability to inflict significant material damage without
inflicting visible collateral damage and loss of life. Western governments
have been traditionally reluctant to commit to strategic campaigns, as the
expectation of a lengthy and costly battle, with mass media coverage of its
highly visible results, will quickly produce domestic political pressure to
cease the conflict.
____ 7.
Develop a strategy of graduated response. In this strategy, an opponent who
threatens escalation to a full-scale war is preemptively attacked with electro-
magnetic weapons to gain command of the electromagnetic spectrum and
command of the air. Selective attacks with electromagnetic weapons may
then be applied against chosen strategic targets to force concession. Should
these fail to produce results, more targets may be disabled by electromag-
netic attack. Escalation would be sustained and graduated to produce
steadily increasing pressure to concede the dispute. Air and sea blockades are
complementary means via which pressure may be applied.
____ 8.
Develop advanced electromagnetic weapons. Because electromagnetic
weapons can cause damage on a large scale very quickly, the rate at which
damage can be inflicted can be very rapid, in which respect such a campaign
will differ from the conventional, where the rate at which damage is inflicted
is limited by the usable sortie rate of strategic air attack capable assets.
____ 9.
Implement a full-scale conventional strategic air attack campaign. Should
blockade and the total disabling of vital economic assets fail to yield results,
these may then be systematically reduced by conventional weapons, to fur-
ther escalate the pressure. Finally, a full-scale conventional strategic air at-
tack campaign would follow to wholly destroy the hostile nation’s
war-fighting capability.
____ 10.
Use the strategy of graduated response. Other situations where electromag-
netic bombs may find useful application is in dealing with governments that
actively implement a policy of state-sponsored terrorism or infoterrorism,
or alternately choose to conduct a sustained low-intensity land warfare cam-
paign. Again, the strategy of graduated response, using electromagnetic
bombs in the initial phases, would place the government under significant
pressure to concede.
____ 11.
Regulate nanotechnology because of its immense abuse potential.
____ 12.
Do not use advanced nanotechnology to build small self-replicating ma-
chines that can feed on organic matter—a bit like bacteria but much more
versatile, and potentially more destructive than the H-bomb.
774
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
775
Chapter 18: Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare of the Future
Table F18.1 Surveillance Tools for Information Warfare 
of the Future Checklist Form
Surveillance Tools for Information
Warfare of the Future Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following actions are ad-
hered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Use electromagnetic devices. As a punitive weapon, electromagnetic devices
are attractive for dealing with belligerent governments. Substantial economic,
military, and political damage may be inflicted with a modest commitment of
resources by their users, and without politically damaging loss of life.
____ 2.
Use cookies wisely and visitors will appreciate their value. Use them gratu-
itously and visitors will resent the intrusion. It’s up you to help keep cook-
ies from being the most unpalatable junk food on the Web.
____ 3.
Get rid of the ability to link to Web images from Word documents. There re-
ally is no solution to being able to track Word documents using Web bugs.
Because this linking ability is a useful feature, the Privacy Foundation does
not recommend its removal.
____ 4.
Do not disable Web browser cookies inside of Word documents.
____ 5.
Use a program such as ZoneAlarm (http://www.zonelabs.com/store/content/
home.jsp) to warn about Web bugs in Word documents. ZoneAlarm moni-
tors all software and warns if an unauthorized program is attempting to 
access the Internet. ZoneAlarm is designed to catch trojan horses and spy-
ware. However, because Word typically does not access the Internet,
ZoneAlarm can also be used to catch bugged Word documents.
____ 6.
The data to be mined should have a direct connection to the goal task, and
the new information should be directly applicable to the task situation.
____ 7.
Collect appropriate data. Think first about what kind of information is
needed and how it will be used.
____ 8.
If the data already exist, understand its strengths and limitations as they re-
late to the task specification and the available data-mining techniques.
____ 9.
Consider alternative data sources.
____ 10.
Augment the existing data with additional data.
____ 11.
Alter the objectives if no additional data can be obtained and the existing
data is inadequate for the original task specification.

Chapter 19: Civilian Casualties: The Victims and
Refugees of Information Warfare
Table F19.1 Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees of 
Information Warfare Checklist Form
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and Refugees
of Information Warfare Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following actions are ad-
hered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Make sure that general or centralized monitoring of communications are
not a chief or central component of the government’s response to computer
security.
____ 2.
Give other activities (notably the identification and closing of existing vul-
nerabilities) higher priority.
____ 3.
Reject the authority for increased monitoring of information systems.
____ 4.
Strengthen the underlying laws for monitoring communications systems
and accessing stored data.
____ 5.
Limit the role of the FBI and the NSA in computer security: it has been
demonstrated that their surveillance agendas trump their protective mis-
sions, and their activities are often so cloaked in secrecy as to generate un-
derstandable suspicion.
____ 6.
Oversight of infrastructure protection should be institutionalized within the
executive branch and should be accessible to the public.
____ 7.
There should be established within the executive branch appropriate mech-
anisms for oversight of computer security issues, involving both industry
representatives and privacy advocates.
____ 8.
Congress must follow this issue carefully and should insist on periodic re-
ports on the status, scope, and effectiveness of critical infrastructure activi-
ties, with special focus on monitoring and intrusion detection initiatives and
the protection of privacy.
____ 9.
Limit the government’s role in private sector infrastructure protection, even
though the cyber masses acknowledge the need for government participa-
tion, especially in educating society about what is at stake.
____ 10.
The private sector should set information security standards, and the gov-
ernment should clearly define and limit what information it seeks from busi-
nesses and how that information will be used.
776
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
777
PART V: ADVANCED COMPUTER FORENSICS SYSTEMS 
AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Chapter 20: Advanced Computer Forensics
Table F20.1 Advanced Computer Forensics Checklist Form
Advanced Computer Forensics Checklist Form
Date: _________________
The computer forensics specialist should ensure the following actions are ad-
hered to (check all tasks completed):
____ 1.
Install patches.
____ 2.
Secure old computers: inventory your systems, and unplug from the net-
work any that no one uses anymore.
____ 3.
If a networked computer is shared, make sure it receives the same security
updates as other systems.
____ 4.
Encrypt data every place it’s stored, including PC hard drives.
____ 5.
Perform frequent security audits, including trying to gain access using eas-
ily available hacking tools.
____ 6.
Ensure that you only run the services you need and only open the ports
needed by your network.
____ 7.
Make sure your gateway to the Internet is a system without any important
company data or a hardware solution backed up by a firewall.
____ 8.
Always check security bulletins and consider joining hacking mailing groups
to find out what’s happening on the other side of computer security.
____ 9.
Regularly test the security yourself; then you know what to find solutions for.
____ 10.
Make sure no one person controls the system front to back.
____ 11.
Require every person logging-on to use a password.
____ 12.
Assign supervisory rights to as few people as possible.
____ 13.
Back up all systems weekly.
____ 14.
Have a strict sign-in/sign-out system for backup tapes.
____ 15.
Always have a current copy of the backup tape stored remotely.
____ 16.
Perform backups of desktops and laptops as well as servers.
____ 17.
Rotate backup tapes—don’t use the same one over and over again.
____ 18.
Change passwords every three months.
____ 19.
Keep servers in a secured area.

____ 20.
Stay up-to-date on software patches.
____ 21.
Use intrusion detection software that alerts you when you are being hit.
____ 22.
Make sure two pairs of eyes have checked code before it is entered into the
system.
____ 23.
Have an information security department (at least one person and then one
other for every 1,000 users) that is separate from the IT department and re-
ports directly to the chief information officer.
____ 24.
Spend at least 6 to 8% of the IT budget on information security.
____ 25.
Train information security personnel to be aware of any employee who
shows signs of being troubled or disgruntled, particularly if that employee
holds an information-critical position.
____ 26.
Beef up security during certain events, such as mergers or downsizings, that
could upset workers and cause them to lash out at the company.
____ 27.
Monitor the network—set up software that will alert you if someone is
working in a different part of the network or at a different time than usual.
____ 28.
Scan email to see what’s going out of the company; double-check backup
tapes and have someone else do the backups if that person is the one in
question.
____ 29.
Make sure the person in charge of the system is not the same person in
charge of the backup.
____ 30.
Have specific policies and punishments built into employee contracts.
____ 31.
Make sure critical IT workers are bonded.
____ 32.
Change everyone’s passwords so he or she can’t use them to break into the
system.
____ 33.
Verify that your backup tapes are where they should be; make sure the in-
formation has been saved correctly and the tape is functioning properly.
____ 34.
Do a new backup.
____ 35.
Lock down every system that a terminated employee had access to on the
day of termination.
____ 36.
Have a new network administrator ready to step into the open position
immediately.
____ 37.
Go up on the system and check user names and passwords, looking for any-
thing unusual.
____ 38.
Make sure there’s a password for every logon.
____ 39.
Lock down all the inside doors, such as the file servers, application servers,
and mail servers.
778
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Checklists by Chapter
779
____ 40.
Look for back doors on the system.
____ 41.
Make sure there aren’t any known vulnerabilities that haven’t been
patched—the administrator could have left those holes behind so he could
get back in.
____ 42.
Strengthen your intrusion detection system.
____ 43.
Set a trip wire—software that alerts the administrator to system anomalies,
such as the size of a file changing.
REFERENCES
[1]
Robbins, Judd, “An Explanation of Computer Forensics,” National Foren-
sics Center, 774 Mays Blvd. #10-143, Incline Village, NV 89451, 2004 [The
Computer Forensics Expert Witness Network, 472 Scenic Drive, Ashland,
OR 97520, 2004]. (© 2004, National Forensics Center. All rights reserved),
2001.

This page intentionally left blank 

CD-ROM FOLDERS
Products: A collection of forensic tools, demonstrations, and docs.
Figures: All of the figures from the book, in folders by chapter. There are no fold-
ers for chapters with no figures.
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
Please visit the developer Web sites listed in this appendix for exact system re-
quirements, FAQs, updates, ordering information, licenses, and links to other
tools and sources. Nevertheless, the minimum system requirements for all of these
software products include Adobe Acrobat 5.0 or higher, Windows 2000, XP, and
2003 and WinZip, as well as an Internet connection; some also require basic hard-
ware such as: Firewire, USB devices, Zip, Jaz, floppy diskettes, or hard disk drives
(IDE, EIDE, SCSI, ATA, SATA).
PRODUCTS
The following forensic tools, demos, documentation, and presentations are in-
cluded on the accompanying CD-ROM.
The information contained on the CD-ROM is the property of the respective
developers. It may not be distributed without their permission. Inquiries regarding
the software contained on the CD-ROM should be directed to the developers of the
products. In addition, please review the publisher’s disclaimer at the beginning of
the book. The developers in this appendix and CD-ROM are listed in alphabetical
G
About the CD-ROM
781

order, followed by a list of software products and documentation. When accessing
the CD-ROM for a particular developer, just click on the developer’s name (folder),
and a list of software products and documentation files/folders will be displayed for
you to access.
Also, a number of the companies’ contributions include large numbers of sup-
port files which are not meant to be opened directly by the user (for example, LC
Technology, ManTech Security & Mission Assurance and New Technologies,
Inc.). For these, it is indicated in the list of companies below which files the users
should be able to access directly. The filename and/or the entire folder (if all the
files can be opened by the user) have been added after the product name, and all
other files in that folder are support files and not meant to be opened by the user.
Finally, please read all of the text files (.txt) that accompany each developer file
and folder. Inside most of the text files are the files needed to create the program
disks and manuals. Just read and follow the instructions carefully before accessing
any .exe file.
ACR Data Recovery, Inc.
4487 Park Drive, Suite B Norcross, GA 30093 USA
Products:
Media Tools Professional, Media Tools Manual
Phone: 800-444-3225; 770-925-4420
Fax: 770-925-8808
http://www.atl-datarecovery.com
ACR provides a full-scale data recovery center, computer forensic software (Media
Tools Professional and Media Tools Manual), and in-house services to corporations
and individuals. They also offer software for do-it-yourself recovery situations.
Computer Forensics Inc.
1749 Dexter Avenue North, Seattle, Washington 98109
Products (documents/presentations):
Discovery of Databases in Litigation, Instant Messenger Programs, Ten
Steps to Successful Computer Discovery, Ten Ways to Torpedo Your Data
Discovery Expert 
Phone: 206-324-6232
Fax: 206-322-7318
email: cfinc@forensics.com
http://www.forensics.com/
782
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Computer Forensics Inc. offers services in electronic discovery, forensic analysis,
expert witness services, and risk control programs for companies.
Computer Forensics Labs
14 Inverness Drive East B-140, Englewood, CO 80112
Products (documents/presentations):
File Structure Taxonomy, Forensic Examination Checklist
Phone: 800-625-6451; 303-649-1181
Fax: 303-649-1697
http://www.computerforensiclabsinc.com/
CFL specializes in the use of advanced forensic, analytical, and recovery tech-
niques for reconstruction and preservation of data.
CyberEvidence
5 Grogan’s Park, Suite 211, The Woodlands, TX 77380
Products (documents/presentations):
Articles, Online training manuals and presentations, Newsletters
Phone: 281-296-0465
http: //www.cyberevidence.com
CyberEvidence, Inc., is a computer forensics company that provides both training
and services. The computer forensics training classes run all year and are available
for both the novice and the advanced investigator. The computer forensic investi-
gations service helps companies and law firms conduct forensic data recovery for
policy violations or litigation support.
CY4OR
Northern office:
CY4OR Limited, 116a Bury New Road, Whitefield, Manchester, M45 6AD
Phone: 0161-767-8123
Fax: 0161-766-2225
Southern Office:
CY4OR Limited, 7 Midshires Business Park, Smeaton Close, Aylesbury,
Bucks, HP19 8HL
About the CD-ROM
783

Products (documents/presentations):
Are You Sitting Next to a Criminal?
Phone: 01296-488123
Fax: 01296-488124
http://www.cy4or.co.uk/
CY4OR is a computer forensics company that provides proactive and reactive
computer forensic investigation services to the public and private sector including
law enforcement agencies, solicitors, and corporate companies.
Digital Mountain, Inc.
1762 Technology Drive, Suite 204, San Jose, CA 95110
Products (documents/presentations):
Where Data Resides—Data Discovery from the Inside Out
Phone: 866-DIG-DOCS (866-344-3627)
Fax: 408-327-0544
info@digitalmountain.com; http://www.digitalmountain.com
Digital Mountain is a provider of computer forensics, electronic discovery, net-
work forensics, and electronic management services on a national basis. They also
provide expert witness services for law firms and enterprises.
e-fense, Inc.
Corporate Headquarters:
120 N. Saint Asaph St., Alexandria, VA 22314
Products (documents/presentations):
Helix and GRAB
Phone: 800-793-8205
http://www.e-fense.com/
e-fense, Inc. is a certified computer forensic professionals firm that offers com-
puter forensics, network security, and electronic discovery. They have offices in
Colorado, Texas, Virginia, and Washington, DC.
784
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

eMag Solutions
3495 Piedmont Road, Eleven Piedmont Center, Suite 500, 
Atlanta, GA 30305
Products (documents/presentations):
Data recovery, Electronic discovery, Exchange server data recovery, Facts
about tape, MMPC, MMTMS, Novell GroupWise data recovery, Optical
conversion recovery
Phone: 800-364-9838; 404-995-6060
Fax: 800-334-8273; 404-872-8247
http://www.emaglink.com/
Based in the U.S. and U.K., eMag provides computer forensic software and 
services.
Forensicon, Inc.
53 W. Jackson Boulevard, Suite 603, Chicago, IL 60604
Products (documents/presentations):
Electronic Evidence Best Practices
Phone: 312-427-5667
Fax: 312-427-5668
http://www.forensicon.com/
Forensicon, Inc., provides top-notch assistance to law firms and corporations
nationwide in expert computer forensics and electronic discovery services.
Guidance Software Inc
215 North Marengo Ave., Second Floor, Pasadena, CA 91101
Products (documents/presentations):
Career Track Program, Corporate, eDiscovery Services, EnCase Enterprise,
EnCase Forensic, EnCase Snapshot, EnCase Legal Journal, EnCE Certifica-
tion, FastBloc, litigation support, professional services, PSD-IR Program,
training option programs and training
Phone: 626-229-9191
Fax: 626-229-9199
http://www.guidancesoftware.com/
About the CD-ROM
785

Guidance Software’s Professional Services Division offers expertise in computer
forensics and enterprise investigations. As the creator of EnCase®, the most widely
used computer forensics tool, Guidance Software combined its staff of seasoned law
enforcement and corporate investigators to create a team of consultants offering
technical services, forensics labs, and a direct link to legal and engineering support.
Kroll Ontrack Inc.
9023 Columbine Road, Eden Prairie, MN 55347
Products (documents/presentations):
Computer Forensics Case Profiles, “Computer Forensics Process Graphic,”
“Where Can You Find Email? Graphic” 
Phone: 800-347-6105 (7:30 A.M. – 5:30 P.M. CST, weekdays)
http://www.krollontrack.com
Kroll Ontrack provides a wide range of services, consulting, and software to
help locate, review, and retrieve electronic evidence.
LC Technology International Inc.
28100 US Hwy 19 N., Suite 203, Clearwater, FL 33761
Products (software):
LC Technology's Forensic Utility Suite: FPRO-DEMO Folder (recovery_
demo.exe Help\English\index.html, FPROlicense.txt), FRWIN-DEMO (re-
covery_demo.exe,help\English\index.html, FRW-license.txt), PR3-DEMO
(PRGUIDemo.exe, PRLanguage.exe,PR-license.txt), autorun.exe.
Phone:
Sales: 866-603-2195
Customer Service: 727-449-0891
Technical Support: 727-449-0891
Fax: 727-449-0893
Email:
Sales: Sales @ LC-Tech.com
Support: Support @ LC-Tech.com
Customer Service: Service @ LC-Tech.com
Training: Training @ LC-Tech.com
Investigations: Investigations @ LC-Tech.com
Press: Press @ LC-Tech.com
786
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Europe:
High Pavement Business Centre, 3-5 High Pavement, Nottingham, 
UK NG1 1HF
Phone: +44 (0)115 9596490
Fax: +44 (0)115 989 7301
Email: kenc@lc-tech.com
http://www.lc-tech.co.uk
Asian Distributor:
American Megatrends Inc., Japan, 6-13-11, Mikuni BLDG.8F, Sotokanda,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0021, Japan
Phone: +81-3-5812-0020
http://www.amij.com
LC Technology manufactures undelete and recovery software and offers com-
puter forensic training classes in its Florida training facility.
ManTech Security & Mission Assurance
12015 Lee Jackson Hwy, Fairfax, VA 22033
Products (software):
NwReader/Setup.exe
Phone: 703-218-6000; 703-218-8200
http://www.mantech-ist.com
ManTech Security & Mission Assurance specializes in providing secure, 
environment-tailored computer forensics, information assurance, and informa-
tion system security support to federal, state, and local intelligence, defense, law
enforcement, and corporate customers.
New Technologies, Inc.
2075 Northeast Division Street, Gresham, Oregon 97030 USA
Products (software):
Read First—NTA Stealth Demo Instructions; NTA Stealth Demo
(NTA.exe, NTA 60.pdf, ntasflop.pdf, ntasusb.pdf, and ntavqsi.pdf) and a
copy of the NTA Viewer program (NTAVIEW.exe and NTAVIEW.pdf)
Phone: 503-661-6912
Email: info@forensics-intl.com
About the CD-ROM
787

Forensics Web site: http://www.forensics-intl.com
Security Web site: http://www.secure-data.com
Litigation support Web site: http://www.dataforensics.com
New Technologies, Inc. works primarily with large companies and government
agencies in the field of forensic consultation, training, and risk assessment.
Project Leadership Associates
250 S. Wacker Dr., Suite 345, Chicago, IL 60606
Products (documents/presentations):
CALSM article and Electronic Data Discover Sheet
Phone: 312-441-0077
Fax: 312-441-0088
http://www.projectleadership.net
Project Leadership Associates offers expertise in computer forensics, data
analysis, and expert testimony.
Renew Data
9500 Arboretum Blvd., Suite L2-120, Austin, TX 78759
Products (documents/presentations):
RenewData Electronic Evidence Services Brochure
Phone: 512-276-5500 (office); 888-811-3789
Fax: 512-276-5555
http://www.renewdata.com
Renew Data supplies the legal community with services including consulting, re-
trieving, and restoring data, analyzing forensic results, and expert witness testimony.
Total Recall (BinaryBiz North America)
700 Ken Pratt Blvd., Suite 204-171, Longmont, CO 80501
Products (software):
VirtualLab and iDriveRepair (please note the file vLabAuth in
vLabAuth.zip is a support file and you are not meant to run it directly.)
Phone: 800-743-0594
http://www.binarybiz.com
788
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Total Recall (BinaryBiz North America) offers computer forensics and both in-
lab data recovery as well as advanced remote data recovery to companies and indi-
viduals around the world. They count over 80,000 successful recoveries.
Vogon International Data Recovery
Talisman Business Centre, Talisman Road, Bicester OX26 6HR, UK
Products (software):
Digital fingerprints containing MD5, SHA-1 and SHA-512; newsletters;
Forensic Software 4pp; Imaging System 4pp; Lab Forensic Works; Mobile
Forensic Works; and VICAR 6
Phone: +44 (0) 1869 355255
Fax: +44 (0) 1869 355256
http://www.vogon-international.com
Based in the U.K., Germany, and the U.S., Vogon rescues data from all types of
disks, tape media, storage devices, files, databases, and email and operating systems.
They also have a forensic and investigative department for all sorts of forensic ser-
vices and training. They are capable of detecting, analyzing, and presenting com-
puter evidence in the broadest range of criminal activities. Reports produced by
their investigation service comply with legal requirements for admissibility in court,
and they can provide expert witnesses to give evidence.
About the CD-ROM
789

This page intentionally left blank 

2600
A hacker organization whose main product is
2600 magazine. This publication has (at times)
been considered the premier hacker print
product.
8lgm
Eight (8) Little Green Men hacker group that
compiles and distributes security tips.
Abuse of privilege
Formal nomenclature for user action not in
accordance with organizational policy or law.
Actions falling outside, or explicitly proscribed
by, acceptable use policy.
Acceptable level of risk
A judicious and carefully considered assessment
by the appropriate authority that a computing
activity or network meets the minimum re-
quirements of applicable security directives. The
assessment should take into account the value
of assets, threats and vulnerabilities, counter-
measures, and operational requirements.
Acceptable use policy (AUP)
DoD nomenclature for documented standards
or guidance on usage of information systems
and networked assets.
Accountability
The principle that individuals using a facility
or a computer system must be identifiable.
With accountability, violations or attempted
violations of system security can be traced to
individuals who can then be held responsible.
Accuracy
DoD parlance for the notion that information
has been maintained and transferred in such a
way as to be inviolate (the information has been
protected from being modified or otherwise
corrupted either maliciously or accidentally).
Accuracy protects against forgery or tampering.
Typically invoked as a synonym for integrity.
Acme of skill
To subdue an adversary without killing him.
Active attack
A form of attack in which data is actually mod-
ified, corrupted, or destroyed.
Adapter
A device that serves as an interface between the
system unit and a device attached to it, such as a
SCSI Adapter. Often synonymous with expan-
sion card or board. Can also refer to a special
type of connector.
H
Glossary of Terms 
and Acronyms
791

Advanced WWW Counter
Full-featured advanced counter that is highly
customizable, allowing you to change digit for-
mats, colors, time, and adjustable data counts.
Ambient data
This is a forensic term that describes, in general
terms, data stored in nontraditional computer
storage areas and formats. The term was coined
in 1996 to help students understand computer-
evidence-processing techniques that deal with
evidence not stored in standard computer files,
formats, and storage areas. The term is now
widely used in the computer forensics commu-
nity and it generally describes data stored in the
Windows swap file, unallocated space, and file
slack.
Anomaly detection
A label for the class of intrusion detection tac-
tics that seek to identify potential intrusion at-
tempts by virtue of their being (presumably)
sufficiently deviant (anomalous) in compari-
son with expected or authorized activities.
Phrased another way, anomaly detection be-
gins with a positive model of expected system
operations and flags potential intrusions on the
basis of their deviation (as particular events or
actions) from this presumed norm.
Anonymous FTP
Allows visitors to upload or download predeter-
mined files from designated directories without
usernames or passwords. For example, distrib-
ute your latest software package by allowing vis-
itors to download it through an anonymous ftp.
This is different from a regular ftp account
Antivirus
Software that detects, repairs, cleans, or removes
virus-infected files from a computer.
Application
A more technical term for program.
Application gateway
One form of a firewall in which valid applica-
tion-level data must be checked or confirmed
before allowing a connection. In the case of an
ftp connection, the application gateway ap-
pears as an ftp server to the client and an ftp
client to the server.
ASIM
(automated security incident measurement)
Current DoD automated security tool that
monitors network traffic, collects information
on targeted unit networks, and detects unau-
thorized network activity.
Assurance
A measure of confidence that the security fea-
tures and architecture of an information sys-
tem or network accurately reflect and enforce
the given security policy.
Asynchronous attacks
Attacks that take advantage of dynamic system
actions—especially by exploiting an ability to
manipulate the timing of those actions.
Attack
With specific regard to IW—a specific formu-
lation or execution of a plan to carry out a
threat. An attempt to bypass security controls
on a computer. An active attack alters data. A
passive attack releases data. Whether an attack
will succeed depends on the vulnerability of
the computer system and the effectiveness of
existing countermeasures.
Attitudes
Positively or negatively learned orientations to-
ward something or someone that have a ten-
dency to motivate an individual or group
toward some behavior. Experienced soldiers,
for example, have negative attitudes toward
slovenliness.
792
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Audit trail
In computer security systems, a chronological
record of when users login, how long they are
engaged in various activities, what they were
doing, and whether any actual or attempted
security violations occurred. An automated or
manual set of chronological records of system
activities that may enable the reconstruction
and examination of a sequence of events or
changes in an event.
AUP
Acronym for acceptable use policy.
Autoresponders
Sends an automated email response to incoming
mail sent to a specific address. For instance, you
can have your visitors send an email to info@
yourdomain.com to get an email explaining
your latest product or automatically reply to or-
ders with a prewritten thank you email message.
Back door
A hole in the security of a computer system de-
liberately left in place by designers or maintain-
ers. Synonymous with trap door. A hidden
software or hardware mechanism used to cir-
cumvent security controls. A breach created in-
tentionally for the purpose of collecting, altering,
or destroying data.
Bandwidth
Bandwidth is the sum of all the data transferred
from and to your Web site, including email,
Web pages, and images. See “Monthly Traffic.”
Bank
The collection of memory chips or modules that
make up a block of memory. This can be one,
two, or four chips. Memory in a PC must always
be added or removed in full-bank increments.
Basic psyop study (BPS)
A detailed background document that describes
the psyop-relevant vulnerabilities, characteristics,
insights, and opportunities that are known about
a specific country susceptible to exploitation.
Battlefield visualization
The process whereby the commander develops
a clear understanding of the current state with
relation to the enemy and environment, envi-
sions a desired end-state that represents mis-
sion accomplishment, and then subsequently
visualizes the sequence of activity that moves
the commander’s force from its current state
to the end-state.
Battlespace
The field of military operations circumscribed
by the aggregate of all spatial (geographic
range, altitude) and virtual (communicational
connectivity) dimensions in which those op-
erations are realized. This is a generic term
connoting no limitation to the geographical
constraints suggested by the term battlefield.
Components are determined by the maxi-
mum capabilities of friendly and enemy forces
to acquire and dominate each other on the
ground and in the electromagnetic spectrum.
Between-the-lines entry
Access that an unauthorized user gets, typically
by tapping the terminal of a legitimate user that
is inactive at the time.
BIOS
The part of the operating system that provides
the lowest level interface to peripheral devices.
The BIOS is stored in the ROM on the com-
puter’s motherboard.
BLOB
Binary large object used to describe any ran-
dom large block of bits, usually a picture or
sound file; can be stored in a database but is
normally not interpretable by a database pro-
gram. Can be used as a mild hacker threat
(mailbomb) when mailed. Can also be used to
hide malicious logic code.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
793

Blue box devices
Gadgets created by crackers and phone hackers
(“phreakers”) to break into the telephone sys-
tem and make calls bypassing normal controls
and billing procedures.
BMC4I
Battle(space) management command, control,
communications, and intelligence. Briefly
stated, the overall label for those components
and processes comprising the “nervous sys-
tem” of a modern military force in a theater of
operations. The planning, tasking, and control
of the execution of missions through an archi-
tecture of sensors, communications, automa-
tion, and intelligence support.
Boot
To start up your computer. Because the com-
puter gets itself up and going from an inert state,
it could be said to lift itself up “by its own boot-
straps”—this is where the term boot originates.
Boot Record
Once the BIOS determines which disk to boot
from, it loads the first sector of that disk into
memory and executes it. Besides this loader
program, the boot record contains the parti-
tion table for that disk. If the boot record is
damaged, it can be a very serious situation.
Bootstrap
To load and initialize the operating system on a
computer. Often abbreviated to boot.
Bulletin board
Web-based message forum where visitors can
read, post, and reply to messages or questions
left by other visitors.
Bus
A set of conductors (wires or connectors in an
integrated circuit) connecting the various func-
tional units in a computer. There are busses
both within the CPU and connecting it to exter-
nal memory and peripheral devices. The bus
width (i.e., the number of parallel connectors) is
one factor limiting a computer’s performance.
C2
Acronym for command and control.
C2 attack
Sometimes written “C2-attack.” Abbreviation
for command-and-control attack. Any action
against any element of the enemy’s command-
and-control system.
C2 counterwar
Presumed synonym for command-and-control
counterwar.
C2 protect
Abbreviation for command-and-control protect.
C2W
Acronym for command-and-control warfare.
C3
Acronym for command, control, and commu-
nications.
C3I
Acronym for command, control, communica-
tions, and intelligence.
C4I
Acronym for command, control, communica-
tions, computers, and intelligence.
C4ISR
Acronym for command, control, communica-
tions, computer intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance.
Cache
(Internet browser) The files and graphics
saved locally from Web sites you have previ-
ously visited.
794
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Card
A circuit board that is usually designed to plug
into a connector or slot. See also “Adapter.”
Center of gravity
A term commonly encountered that connotes a
component or feature of a given system (an ad-
versary’s deployed instrumentality) that is crit-
ical to either (a) the viability of that given
system and/or (b) the viability of the supersys-
tem within which that given system is a partic-
ipating component.
CERT
Acronym for computer emergency response
team. Supports others in enhancing the security
of their computing systems; develops standard-
ized set of responses to security problems; pro-
vides a central point of contact for information
about security incidents; and assists in collecting
and disseminating information on issues related
to computer security, including information
on configuration, management, and bug fixes
for systems.
CGI-BIN
CGI stands for common gateway interface. It’s
simply a way for your visitor’s computer to
communicate with programs, such as shopping-
cart scripts, on your server. The CGI-BIN is a
special directory where you store executable
programs, such as shopping-cart scripts and
counters, on the server. If you don’t have access
to a CGI-BIN directory, you can’t run pro-
grams (scripts) on your Web site.
CGI email
Allows you to custom-build email results from
a Web page form, much like a mail merge letter.
CIP
Acronym for critical infrastructure protection.
Click
To click an item means to point to it with the
screen pointer and then press quickly and re-
lease the left mouse button at once.
Cluster
Windows allocates space to files in units called
clusters. Each cluster contains from 1 to 64 sec-
tors, depending on the type and size of the disk.
A cluster is the smallest unit of disk space that
can be allocated for use by files.
CMOS
A part of the motherboard that maintains sys-
tem variables in static RAM. It also supplies a
real-time clock that keeps track of the date, day,
and time. CMOS setup is typically accessible by
entering a specific sequence of keystrokes dur-
ing the POST at system start-up.
Cold boot
Starting or restarting a computer by turning on
the power supply. See also “Warm boot.”
Computer evidence
Computer evidence is quite unique when com-
pared to other forms of documentary evidence.
Unlike paper documentation, computer evi-
dence is fragile, and a copy of a document stored
in a computer file is identical to the original. The
legal “best evidence” rules change when it comes
to the processing of computer evidence. An-
other unique aspect of computer evidence is the
potential for unauthorized copies to be made of
important computer files without leaving 
behind a trace that the copy was made. This 
situation creates problems concerning the inves-
tigation of the theft of trade secrets (client lists,
research materials, computer-aided design files,
formulas, and proprietary software).
Computer forensics
Computer forensics deals with the preservation,
identification, extraction, and documentation
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
795

of computer evidence. The field is relatively new
to the private sector but it has been the main-
stay of technology-related investigations and in-
telligence gathering in law enforcement and
military agencies since the mid-1980s. Like any
other forensic science, computer forensics in-
volves the use of sophisticated technology tools
and procedures, which must be followed to
guarantee the accuracy of the preservation of
evidence and the accuracy of results concerning
computer-evidence processing. Typically, com-
puter forensic tools exist in the form of com-
puter software. Computer forensic specialists
guarantee accuracy of evidence-processing re-
sults through the use of time-tested evidence-
processing procedures and through the use of
multiple software tools, developed by separate
and independent developers. The use of differ-
ent tools that have been developed indepen-
dently to validate results is important to avoid
inaccuracies introduced by potential software
design flaws and software bugs. It is a serious
mistake for computer forensics specialists to
put “all of their eggs in one basket” by using just
one tool to preserve, identify, extract, and vali-
date the computer evidence. Cross-validation
through the use of multiple tools and tech-
niques is standard in all forensic sciences. When
this procedure is not used, it creates advantages
for defense lawyers who may challenge the ac-
curacy of the software tool used and thus the
integrity of the results. Validation through the
use of multiple software tools, computer spe-
cialists, and procedures eliminates the potential
for errors and the destruction of evidence.
Computer investigations
Computer investigations rely on evidence
stored as data and the timeline of dates and
times that files were created, modified, and last
accessed by the computer user. Timelines of ac-
tivity can be especially helpful when multiple
computers and individuals are involved in the
commission of a crime. The computer foren-
sics investigator should consider timelines of
computer usage in all computer-related inves-
tigations. The same is true in computer security
reviews concerning potential access to sensitive
or trade secret information stored in the form
of computer files.
Context menu
Also called a “context-sensitive menu,” or a
“shortcut menu,” a context menu includes the
commands that are commonly associated with
an object on the screen. To activate an item’s
context menu, point to it with the screen
pointer, then press and release the right mouse
button once.
Cookies
(Internet browser) Holds information on the
times and dates you have visited Web sites.
Other information can also be saved to your
hard disk in these text files, including informa-
tion about online purchases, validation infor-
mation about you for members-only Web sites,
and more.
CPU
Stands for central processing unit, a program-
mable logic device that performs all the in-
struction, logic, and mathematical processing
in a computer.
Crash
A sudden, usually drastic failure. Can be said of
the operating system or a particular program
when there is a software failure. A disk drive
can crash because of hardware failure.
Cross-linked files
Two files that both refer to the same data.
Customizable missing docs page
By placing a file in your main directory called
missing.html, you will be able to provide a cus-
tomized page to any browser that requests a file
that does not exist on your server. You can use
it to steer visitors to your front page, so you
don’t lose them if they click on a bad link
somewhere.
796
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

CyberCash
Used for secure processing of credit-card
transactions. It actually takes the payment in-
formation and sends it via the banking gate-
ways to obtain real-time approvals for credit
cards and checks.
Data
Representation of facts, concepts, or instruc-
tions in a formalized manner suitable for com-
munication, interpretation, or processing by
humans or by automatic means. Any represen-
tations such as characters or analog quantities
to which meaning is or might be assigned. A
representation of facts, concepts, or instruc-
tions suitable for communication, interpreta-
tion, or processing by humans or computers.
Data-driven attack
A form of attack that is encoded in seemingly
innocuous data that is executed by a user’s or
other software to implement an attack. In the
case of firewalls, a data-driven attack is a con-
cern because it may get through the firewall in
data form and launch an attack against a sys-
tem behind the firewall.
Datum
Any numerical or geometrical quantity or set of
such quantities that may serve as reference or
base for other quantities. Where the concept is
geometric, the plural form is datums in con-
trast to the normal plural data.
DBA
Acronym for dominant battlespace awareness.
DBK
Acronym for dominant battlespace knowledge.
Deception
Those measures designed to mislead the enemy
by manipulation, distortion, or falsification of
evidence to induce him or her to react in a
manner prejudicial to his or her interests.
Decision
In an estimate of the situation, a clear and con-
cise statement of the line of action intended to
be followed by the commander as the one most
favorable to the successful accomplishment of
the mission.
Defense information infrastructure (DII)
A label for the composite information assets of
DoD (the American defense establishment).
Defensive counterinformation
Actions protecting the military information
functions from the adversary.
Defragment
As modern file systems are used and files are
deleted and created, the total free space be-
comes split into smaller noncontiguous blocks.
Eventually new files being created, and old files
being extended, cannot be stored each in a sin-
gle contiguous block but become scattered
across the file system. This degrades perfor-
mance as multiple seek operations are required
to access a single fragmented file. Defragment-
ing consolidates each existing file and the free
space into a contiguous group of sectors. Ac-
cess speed will be improved as a result of re-
duced seeking. A nearly full disk system will
fragment more quickly. A disk should be de-
fragmented before fragmenting reaches 10%.
Degradation of service
Any reduction (with respect to norms or ex-
pectations) in a service processes’ reaction or
response time, quantitative throughput, or
quality parameters. This term is often used to
denote the general set of service impairments
that at the extreme (total degradation to a “zero
state” with respect to the given parameters)
constitutes an absolute denial of service. Note
that (owing to operational constraints such as
“time before timing out” settings) a disruptive
tactic capable of only degrading service may re-
sult in a complete denial of said service from
the perspective of the end user.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
797

Denial of service
Actions that prevent any part of an automated
information system (AIS) from functioning in
accordance with its intended purpose. Denial
of service attacks may include denying services
or processes limited to one host machine.
However, the term is most often invoked to
connote action against a single host (or set of
hosts), which results in the target’s inability to
perform services for other users— particularly
over a network. One may consider denial of
service to be the extreme case of degradation of
service in which one or more normal func-
tional parameters (response, throughput) get
“zeroed out,” at least as far as the end user is
concerned. It is important to note that denial is
delineated with respect to whether the normal
end user(s) can exploit the system or network
as expected. Seen in this light, denial (like
degradation) is descriptive of a functional out-
come and is not therefore definitive with re-
spect to cause (tactics effecting said result).
Forms of attack not geared to denial per se may
lead to denial as a corollary effect (when a sys-
tem administrator’s actions in response to an
intrusion attempt lead to a service outage). As
such, denial of service is not a good criterion
for categorizing attack tactics.
Denial time
The average length of time that an affected
asset is denied to the organization. The tempo-
ral extent of operational malaise induced by a
denial of service attack.
DII
Acronym for defense information infrastructure.
Direct information warfare
Changing the adversary’s information without
involving the intervening perceptive and ana-
lytical functions.
Directed-energy protective measures
That division of directed-energy warfare involv-
ing actions taken to protect friendly equipment,
facilities, and personnel to ensure friendly effec-
tive uses of the electromagnetic spectrum that are
threatened by hostile directed-energy weapons
and devices.
Directory
An index into the files on your disk. It acts as a
hierarchy and you will see the directory repre-
sented in Windows looking like manila folders.
Disk space
The amount of storage space you’re allocated
to use on the server; also server space and Web
space. The more disk space you have, the big-
ger your Web site can be. It’s used to store
everything related to your Web site such as
your regular html files, images, multimedia
files, anonymous ftp files, POP mail messages,
CGI scripts, and any other files that make up
your Web site.
DMA
Stands for direct access memory. DMA is a fast
way of transferring data within a computer.
Most devices require a dedicated DMA channel
(so the number of DMA channels that are
available may limit the number of peripherals
that can be installed).
Domain name registration
A domain name is a textual address that is a
unique identifier for your Web site and that cor-
responds to your site’s numerical Internet pro-
tocol (IP) address and is usually related to your
business, such as www.acmecatapults.com.
DRAM
Dynamic random access memory (see also
“SDRAM”). A type of memory used in a PC for
the main memory (such as your 32 Mbytes of
RAM). Dynamic refers to the memory’s mem-
ory of storage—basically storing the charge on
a capacitor. Specialized types of DRAM (such
as EDO memory) have been developed to work
with today’s faster processors.
798
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Driver
A program designed to interface a particular
piece of hardware to an operating system or
other software.
Economic info-warfare/economic
information warfare
The application of IW tactics to leverage one’s
interests in the economic realm. A subclassifi-
cation of IW.
Economic warfare
Aggressive use of economic means to achieve
national objectives.
EIDE
Stands for enhanced integrated drive electron-
ics. A specific type of attachment interface
specification that allows for high-performance,
large-capacity drives. See also “IDE.”
Electromagnetic intrusion
The intentional insertion of electromagnetic
energy into transmission paths in any manner,
with the objective of deceiving operators or
causing confusion.
Electronic warfare
Any military action involving the use of elec-
tromagnetic and directed energy to control the
electromagnetic spectrum or attack the enemy.
Also called EW.
Electronics intelligence (ELINT)
Technical and geolocation intelligence derived
from foreign noncommunications, electromag-
netic radiations emanating from sources other
than nuclear detonations or radioactive sources.
Electronics security
The protection resulting from all measures de-
signed to deny unauthorized persons informa-
tion of value that might be derived from their
interception and study of noncommunications
electromagnetic radiations (radar). This term
is also (more loosely) used to connote the top-
ical area or task specialization focusing on
achieving this type of protection.
Electro-optical intelligence 
(ELECTRO-OPTINT)
Intelligence other than signals intelligence 
derived from the optical monitoring of the
electromagnetic spectrum from ultraviolet
(0.01 micrometers) through far infrared (1,000
micrometers).
ELINT
Acronym for electronics intelligence.
Email accounts (POP3)
Your email boxes on a server that can be ac-
cessed directly to retrieve your mail using such
programs as Outlook Express and Netscape
Mail. Each POP3 has its own password to en-
sure privacy, so each of your employees can
have their own email address. 
Email aliases
Your main POP account for your domain al-
lows the system to capture any name that may
be sent to your domain name. This means as
long as the @yourdomain.com is proper, any
name in front of it will be delivered to your
main POP account. Each alias can be for-
warded or redirected to any other address of
your choice.
Email forwarding
Any email address at your domain may be con-
figured to forward to any other real internet email
address. For example, sales@yourname.com
can forward to you@aol.com if you like.
Email mini mailing lists
Can be used to send your customers news and
updates about your product or services without
emailing each one separately. Visitors can add
themselves to your list or take themselves off
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
799

automatically. You send one email and it goes
to every email address on the list. The system is
capable of multiple lists, each of which can
handle up to 1,000 email addresses and outgo-
ing messages up to 75 K each.
Entrapment
The deliberate planting of apparent flaws in a
system for the purpose of detecting attempted
penetrations.
Essential elements of friendly information
Key questions likely to be asked by adversary
officials and intelligence systems about specific
friendly intentions, capabilities, and activities
so they can obtain answers critical to their op-
erational effectiveness.
Executable
A binary file containing a program in machine
language that is ready to be executed (run).
Windows machines use the filename extension
.exe for these files.
Expansion card
An integrated circuit card that plugs into an ex-
pansion slot on a motherboard to provide ac-
cess to additional peripherals or features not
built into the motherboard. See also “Adapter.”
Extract
To return a compressed file to its original state.
Typically, to view the contents of a compressed
file, you must extract it first.
FDISK
The disk-partitioning program used in other
operating systems to create the master boot
record and allocate partitions for the operating
system’s use.
File
A collection of data grouped into one unit on
a disk.
File allocation table
(FAT or FAT32) The FAT links together all of
the clusters belonging to each file, no matter
where they are on disk. The FAT is a critical
file: you should be sure to back it up regularly.
FAT32 is a newer type of FAT, which was de-
signed to handle large hard disks. The older
FAT (FAT16) can only support partitions up
to two gigabytes in size. FAT32 can handle par-
titions that are thousands of gigabytes.
File slack
File slack potentially contains randomly se-
lected bytes of data from computer memory.
This happens because Windows normally
writes in 512-byte blocks called “sectors.” Clus-
ters are made up of blocks of sectors. If there is
not enough data in the file to fill the last sector
in a file, Windows makes up the difference by
padding the remaining space with data from
the memory buffers of the operating system.
This randomly selected data from memory is
called “RAM slack” because it comes from the
memory of the computer. RAM slack can con-
tain any information that may have been cre-
ated, viewed, modified, downloaded, or copied
during work sessions that have occurred since
the computer was last booted. Thus, if the
computer has not been shut down for several
days, the data stored in file slack can come
from work sessions that occurred in the past.
File system
A system for organizing directories and files,
generally in terms of how it is implemented in
the disk-operating system.
Firewall
A metaphorical label for a set of hardware and
software components protecting system re-
sources (servers, LANs) from exogenous attack
via a network (from Internet users) by intercept-
ing and checking network traffic. The mix of
hardware and software accomplishing firewall
operations can vary. For LAN installations of any
size, the typical approach is to install one or more
800
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

computers positioned at critical junctures (gate-
ways) and dedicated to the firewall functions. It is
typically the case that such installations are con-
figured such that all external connections
(modems, ports) are outside the firewall (with
respect to its domain of protection), or at least
abut it on its external face. The firewall’s own in-
ternal connection into the protected domain is
typically the focus of monitoring functions. A
firewall is also a system or combination of sys-
tems that enforces a boundary between two or
more networks or a gateway that limits access be-
tween networks in accordance with local security
policy. The typical firewall is an inexpensive
micro-based Unix box kept clean of critical data,
with numerous modems and public network
ports on it but only one carefully watched con-
nection back to the rest of the cluster.
Firewall machine
A specific computer dedicated to effecting a
firewall.
Firmware
Software contained in a read-only memory
(ROM) device.
First-wave war(fare)
The term for the mode or character of warfare
exemplified in primitive, pastoral, and agricul-
tural societies and dating from prehistory.
Fishbowl
A defensive IW tactic in which a suspicious or
unauthorized user is permitted to continue es-
tablished access to the protected system or net-
work, but whose interactions with that system or
network are (unknown and unapparent to the
subject) encapsulated within a secure domain of
operations (rerouted to an isolated computer or
redirected to a dummy environment simulating
an actual server) so that IW defenders can ob-
serve and analyze the user’s intentions, tactics,
and identity. To contain, isolate, and monitor an
unauthorized user within a system in order to
gain information about the user.
Fog of war
The aggregate of factors that reduce or preclude
situational certainty in a battlespace.
Fork bomb
A disruptive piece of code directed toward a
Unix-based system that causes runaway “fork-
ing” (splitting or replication) of operating sys-
tem processes to degrade or (if saturation is
achieved) deny that target system’s operations.
Code that can be written in one line of code on
any Unix system; used to recursively spawn
copies of itself, explode, and eventually eat all
the process table entries. It effectively locks up
the system.
Formmail
Use formmail to email the contents of forms on
your Web page to you when a visitor fills it out.
Fragmentation
The state of having a file scattered around a
disk in pieces rather than existing in one con-
tiguous area of the disk. Fragmented files are
slower to read than unfragmented files.
Free for all links page
Allows visitors to add links to any Web site
onto the list, categorized by subject.
Friction (of war)
The aggregate of factors and events that reduce
or degrade operational efficiency (and hence
effectiveness) in the real world of war-making.
The label is a metaphorical allusion to the heat
loss that is an inescapable part of physical–
mechanical systems.
FrontPage extensions
FrontPage is Microsoft’s simple Web-page ed-
itor designed for nonprogrammers. It includes
many of its own scripts and special effects, but
to use them, you have to install the FrontPage
“extensions” on your Web site. You should
either plan to use CGI-based applications or
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
801

FrontPage. FrontPage does not provide the
ability to edit or maintain files in your home
directory and does not upload in true ASCII.
FTP account
Used to upload and download files to and from
your Web site. You have unlimited access to
your account 24 hours a day. You’ll need to
have FTP client software.
Global information environment
All individuals, organizations, or systems, most
of which are outside the control of the military
or national command authorities, that collect,
process, and disseminate information to na-
tional and international audiences.
Guestbook
Visitors sign-in to your Web site, leaving a
message to let you know what they thought of
your site.
Hacker
The label “hacker” has come to connote a per-
son who deliberately accesses and exploits
computer and information systems to which he
or she has no authorized access. Originally, the
term was an accolade for someone highly mo-
tivated to explore what computers could do or
the limits of his or her technical skills (espe-
cially in programming). “A great hack” was a
common compliment for an especially cun-
ning or innovative piece of software code. The
term cracker was then reserved for people in-
truding into computer or information systems
for the thrill of it (or worse). Over time, cracker
faded from usage and hacker came to subsume
its (unfortunate) connotations.
Head
A small electromagnetic device inside a drive
that reads, writes, and erases data on the drive’s
media.
Heat Sink
A mass of metal attached to a chip carrier or
socket for the purpose of dissipating heat.
Hijacking
A term (typically applied in combination with
another) to connote an action to usurp activity
or interactions in progress. Most commonly
used for those tactics that allow an intruder to
usurp an authorized user’s session for his or
her own ends.
History
(Internet browser) Stores the internet addresses
(URLs) of the Web sites you have visited.
Hyperwar
A term (attributed to Air Force planners) de-
scribing the notion that war is becoming
unimaginably and unmanageably fast.
I2WAR
Acronym for infrastructural and information
warfare.
I/O Port
I/O stands for input/output. I/O is the com-
munication between a computer and its user,
its storage devices, other computers (via a net-
work), or the outside world. The I/O port is the
logical channel or channel endpoint in an I/O
communication system.
I&W
Acronym for indications and warnings. This is
a sort of catch-all label for any and all data sig-
nifying an operant or potential threat. Typi-
cally, indications and warnings connotes a
summarization or fusion of raw data into a
synopsis of current threat conditions (a report
from an intel unit).
802
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

I&W/TA
Acronym for indications and warnings or
threat assessment. This label is occasionally
used to connote the summarization of incom-
ing data with respect to threat conditions (ex-
tant or predicted).
IBW
Acronym for information-based warfare or in-
telligence-based warfare.
IDE
Stands for integrated drive electronics. De-
scribes a hard disk with the disk controller 
integrated within it. See also “EIDE”.
IDS
Acronym for intrusion detection system.
IDW
Acronym for information-dominance warfare.
IEW
Acronym for intelligence and electronic warfare.
Indications and warning(s) (I&W)
Those intelligence activities intended to detect
and report time-sensitive intelligence informa-
tion on foreign developments that could in-
volve a threat to the United States or allied
military, political, or economic interests or to
U.S. citizens abroad. It includes forewarning
of enemy actions or intentions; the imminence
of hostilities; insurgency; nuclear or nonnu-
clear attack on the United States, its overseas
forces, or allied nations; hostile reactions to
U.S. reconnaissance activities; terrorist attacks;
and other similar events.
Indirect information warfare
Changing the adversary’s information by creat-
ing phenomena that the adversary must then
observe and analyze.
Industrial warfare
The class or character of war or warfare exem-
plified by the 18th century through to the pres-
ent. Synonymous with second-wave warfare.
Information
Facts, data, or instructions in any medium or
form. The meaning that a human assigns to
data by means of the known conventions used
in their representation. In intelligence usage,
unevaluated material of every description that
may be used in the production of intelligence.
Information Age
A label generally used to connote the present
or prospective era in which information tech-
nology (IT) is the dominant technical artifact.
The future time period when social, cultural,
and economic patterns will reflect the decen-
tralized, nonhierarchical flow of information;
contrast this to the more centralized, hierar-
chical, social, cultural, and economic patterns
that reflect the Industrial Age’s mechanization
of production systems.
Information Age warfare
That subset of war-making that uses informa-
tion technology as a tool to impart combat op-
erations with unprecedented economies of
time and force. This is exemplified by a cruise
missile on precision force projection.
Information attack
Directly corrupting information without visi-
bly changing the physical entity within which it
resides. In the wake of an information attack,
an information function is indistinguishable
from its original state except through inspect-
ing its data or instructions.
Information-based warfare (IBW)
Synonym for information warfare. An approach
to armed conflict focusing on managing and
using information in all its forms and at all levels
to achieve a decisive military advantage, espe-
cially in the joint and combined environment.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
803

Information collection
That aspect of IW activities concerned with the
acquisition of data. An organization needs a va-
riety of information to support its operations.
Information collection includes the entry points
for information into an organization from
both internal and external sources. Issues in-
clude quantity (completeness), quality (accu-
racy), and timeliness of this information.
Business examples of collection systems in-
clude point-of-sale (POS) systems, market 
surveys, government statistics, and internal
management data. Military examples of collec-
tion systems include tactical radars and other
sensors.
Information compromise
That class or type of IW threat that involves a
competitor gaining access to an organization’s
proprietary data.
Information denial
Measures beyond normal protection to specif-
ically target an adversary’s collection systems.
There are two types of denial: direct attacks on
the adversary’s information systems, and pro-
viding misinformation to its systems to deceive
and induce the adversary to take actions that
are not to its advantage. For the military, direct
attacks include electronic warfare (jamming) of
sensors and radio links. Besides direct attacks,
there are safer ways to corrupt an adversary’s
databases. These rely on providing false infor-
mation to the targeted competitor’s collection
systems to induce this organization to make
bad decisions based on this faulty information.
Information destruction
That class or type of IW threat to one’s data as-
sets that involves the loss of these data (or loss
of access to these data) as the result of a hostile
attack by an adversary.
Information dominance
In warfare, an operational advantage obtained
through superior effectiveness of informa-
tional activity (acquisition and processing of
data, information, and/or knowledge), to the
extent that this advantage is demonstrated in
practice through superior effectiveness of in-
strumental activity.
Information dominance warfare (IDW)
The subcategory of information warfare (IW)
aimed at leveraging data, information, and
knowledge to tactical and strategic advantage,
as opposed to leveraging the media, channels,
and vehicles of information transfer and pro-
cessing. The goal of IDW is to achieve informa-
tion dominance.
Information function
Any activity involving the acquisition, trans-
mission, storage, or transformation of infor-
mation.
Information in war 
(IinW)/information in warfare (IIW)
A term that has come to be used to denote the
application of information (and information
processing or technology) in the context of
military operations (conventionally delin-
eated), as opposed to that connotation ac-
corded IW to the effect that information and
information systems are the substance, the
tools, and the targets in an emerging warform.
Information operations 
(also information ops)
This term is typically encountered in IW dis-
cussions as a label for those concrete tasks and
activities by which one pursues one’s own 
interests in the information realm. As such, 
information operations (or “info ops”) most
commonly denotes specific paths of action, in
contrast to IW denoting the broader sphere
within which these actions are undertaken.
Information ops (also “info ops”)
Synonym for information operations.
804
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Information protect (IP)
A (seemingly ungrammatical) synonym for in-
formation protection, quite frequently used in
the U.S. military IW literature.
Information protection (IP)
Information protection addresses two types of
threats: information compromise and destruc-
tion. Compromise involves a competitor gain-
ing access to an organization’s proprietary
data. Destruction involves the loss of these data
(or loss of access to these data) as the result of
a hostile attack by an adversary.
Information realm
A commonly used term to denote the virtual
space of data networks, contents, and commerce.
Information security (INFOSEC)
The protection of unauthorized access to or
modification of information, whether in stor-
age, processing, or transit, and against the de-
nial of service to authorized users or the
provision of service to unauthorized users, in-
cluding those measures necessary to detect,
document, and counter such threats.
Information superiority
That degree of dominance in the information
domain that permits the conduct of operations
without effective opposition. Information su-
periority combines the capabilities of intelli-
gence, surveillance, reconnaissance (ISR) and
command, control, communications, comput-
ers, and intelligence (C4I) to acquire and as-
similate information needed to effectively
employ our own forces to dominate and neu-
tralize adversary forces. It includes the capabil-
ity for near-real-time awareness of the location
and activity of friendly, adversary, and neutral
forces throughout the battlespace and a seam-
less, robust C4I network linking all friendly
forces that provides common awareness of the
current situation.
Information system(s) (INFOSYS)
The entire infrastructure, organization, per-
sonnel, and components that collect, process,
store, transmit, display, disseminate, and act on
information.
Information systems security
A synonym for INFOSEC. Protection of infor-
mation systems against unauthorized access to
or modification of information, whether in
storage, processing, or transit and against the
denial of service to authorized users.
Information systems warfare (ISW)
The subcategory of information warfare (IW)
aimed at leveraging media, channels, and vehi-
cles of information transfer and processing to
tactical and strategic advantage.
Information terrorism
An ill-defined term (as yet) invoked to connote
cyberspace mischief undertaken with inten-
tions or ramifications analogous to the fear-
inducing physical attacks one associates with
terrorist activity.
Information transport
That element of IW activities that involves mov-
ing data from points of collection to points of
storage or use. The speed with which this is done
affects the timeliness of the data availability and,
therefore, the responsiveness of the organization
to situations. Transport considerations must be
viewed within the overall IW perspective, be-
cause the same efficiency that facilitates rapid
message and data transportation may also be
used by a competitor to download proprietary
databases in seconds or minutes.
Information war
Activities intertwined with, and superimposed
on, other military operations, exploiting data
and information in support of traditional mil-
itary tasks such as command and control.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
805

Information warfare (IW)
The broad class of activities aimed at leveraging
data, information, and knowledge in support
of military goals. Subcategories of information
warfare can be differentiated into two general
classes: (a) those aimed at leveraging the vehi-
cles of information transfer or processing 
(information systems warfare [ISW]) and (b)
those aimed at leveraging the informative con-
tent or effect of such systems.
IRQ
Stands for interrupt request. IRQ is the name of
the hardware interrupt signals that PC periph-
erals (such as serial or parallel ports) use to get
the processor’s attention. Because interrupts
usually cannot be shared, devices are assigned
unique IRQ addresses that enable them to com-
municate with the processor. Peripherals that
use interrupts include LAN adapters, sound
boards, scanner interfaces, and SCSI adapters. 
Java chat rooms
Real-time chat via a Java applet that allows vis-
itors to your Web site to engage in live discus-
sion with you or with each other. You can
provide it just for fun or use it to interact with
your customers in real-time. 
Jumper
A small, plastic-covered metal clip that slips over
two pins protruding from a circuit board. When
in place, the jumper connects the pins electron-
ically and closes the circuit, turning it on.
Kernel
An essential part of the operating system, re-
sponsible for resource allocation, low-level
hardware interfaces, security, and more.
Key communicator
An individual or group having the economic,
social, or political power to persuade the indi-
viduals or groups with which he or she inter-
acts to change or reinforce existing opinions,
emotions, attitudes, and behaviors.
Keystroke monitoring
A form of user surveillance in which the actual
character-by-character traffic (that user’s key-
strokes) are monitored, analyzed, and logged
for future reference. A specialized form of audit
trail software, or a specially designed device,
that records every key struck by a user and
every character of the response that the host
computer returns to the user.
Knowledge
The state or mechanism ascribed to a system to
explain complex mediation between effective ac-
quisition of data from, and effective action in, an
operational environment. This approach to
knowledge explicitly ties it to the processes of
both education and inaction with respect to the
given operational environment and hence links
it to one or more specific actors in that given do-
main. These connections explain the IW litera-
ture’s claims that knowledge is active and must
be possessed if it is to exist— let alone be useful.
Knowledge-based warfare
The ability of one side to obtain essential and
key elements of truth while denying these same
elements of truth to the other side. The key at-
tributes of knowledge-based warfare are timely,
high fidelity, comprehensive, synthesized, and
visual data. The end game is a complete picto-
rial representation of reality that the decision
maker can tune to his or her unique needs at
any given time. This picture must include both
blue (one side) and red data (the other side),
although this advanced concept technology
demonstration (ACTD) concentrates on the
provision of blue data only.
Knowledge dominance
In warfare, an operational advantage (vis-à-vis
an adversary) in exploiting information to
guide effective action. This is the goal of infor-
mation dominance.
Knowledge war
A synonym for IW, or third-wave war.
806
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Leapfrog attack
Any form of intrusion or attack accomplished
by exploitation of data or information obtained
on a site or server other than the attack’s target.
Letter bomb/letterbomb
Malicious or disruptive code delivered via an
email message (or an attachment to said mes-
sage). A piece of email containing live data in-
tended to do malicious things to the recipient’s
machine or terminal. Under UNIX, a letter-
bomb can also try to get part of its contents
interpreted as a shell command to the mailer.
The results of this could range from silly to
tragic.
Logic bomb
The term for a mischievous or destructive piece
of software (virus, trojan horse) that lies resi-
dent on the victim computer or system until
triggered by a specific event (onset of a prede-
termined date or set of system conditions).
Lost cluster chain
A cluster on disk that is not registered as free
but does not have any known data in it.
Mail bomb/mailbomb
Unlike a logic bomb (a thing), mail bomb is a
verb used to connote deliberately deluging a
target system or host with email messages for
purposes of harassment, degradation of service,
or even denial of service.
Mail storm/mailstorm
What the target system or users see when being
mail bombed. Any large amount of incoming
email sufficient to disrupt or bog down normal
local operations. What often happens when a
machine with an Internet connection and ac-
tive users reconnects after extended down-
time—a flood of incoming mail that brings the
machine to its knees.
Majordomo list
This is a very flexible tool for allowing your
clients to interact with each other by email. In
simple terms, it is an interactive email discus-
sion group that allows all subscribers to send
and receive messages to and from everyone on
the list through email, sort of like an email chat
room, but not in real-time. Majordomo lists
usually focus on a particular topic of common
interest, such as dried flower arranging, foren-
sics, or anything that people can share in-
formation or talk about. There are many
configurable features including automatic sub-
scribe and unsubscribe. Each list can email up
to 1,500 emails per day.
MASINT
Acronym for measurement and signature in-
telligence.
Measurement and signature intelligence
Scientific and technical intelligence obtained
by quantitative and qualitative analysis of data
(metric, angle, spatial, wavelength, time depen-
dence, modulation, plasma, and hydromag-
netic) derived from specific technical sensors
for the purpose of identifying any distinctive
features associated with the source, emitter, or
sender and to facilitate subsequent identifica-
tion and measurement of the same.
MEII
Acronym for minimum essential information
infrastructure.
Message
Any thought or idea expressed briefly in a
plain or secret language and prepared in a
form suitable for transmission by any means
of communication.
MIE
Acronym for military information environ-
ment.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
807

Military deception
Actions executed to deliberately mislead adver-
sary military decision makers as to friendly mil-
itary capabilities, intentions, and operations,
thereby causing the adversary to take specific
actions (or inactions) that will contribute to
the accomplishment of the friendly mission.
Military information environment (MIE)
The environment contained within the global
information environment, consisting of infor-
mation systems and organizations (friendly and
adversary, military and nonmilitary) that sup-
port, enable, or significantly influence a specific
military operation.
Military information function
Any information function supporting and en-
hancing the employment of military forces.
Military technical revolution (MTR)
A term from Soviet military theory of the late
1970s. It denotes the phenomenon of extreme
transformations in warfare occurring as a re-
sult of the exploitation of technology. The So-
viets saw the operational and organizational
innovations resulting from the exploitation of
the technology as defining a military technical
revolution.
Minimum essential information
infrastructure (MEII)
A label for the least set of own-force informa-
tion assets that can serve to support a given
mission or operation.
Mirror image backups
Also referred to as bit-stream backups, these
involve the back up of all areas of a computer
hard disk drive or other type of storage media
(Zip disks, Jaz disks, etc.). Mirror image back-
ups exactly replicate all sectors on a given stor-
age device. Thus, all files and ambient data
storage areas are copied. Such backups are
sometimes referred to as “evidence grade back-
ups” and they differ substantially from stan-
dard file backups and network server backups.
Misuse detection
The class of intrusion detection tactics that pro-
ceed on the presumption that problematical in-
trusions (attacks) can be positively characterized
and that detection of their characteristic profile
is sufficient for identifying potential threats.
Mockingbird
A computer program or process that mimics
the legitimate behavior of a normal system fea-
ture (or other apparently useful function) but
performs malicious activities once invoked by
the user.
Monthly traffic (bandwidth)
The sum of outward-bound or inward-bound
Web pages, files, email, and anonymous FTP
traffic. Each time a Web page, image, audio,
video, or other element of your Web site is ac-
cessed by your visitor, traffic is generated.
Motherboard
The “heart” of your PC—it handles system re-
sources (IRQ lines, DMA channels, I/O loca-
tions), as well as core components such as the
CPU and all system memory. It accepts expan-
sion devices such as sound and network cards
and modems.
mSQL database
A database engine used for accessing individual
records.
MTR
Acronym for military technical revolution.
National information infrastructure (NII)
A general label for the composite network of
data or information systems and connectivity
channels that serve as the foundation for U.S.
economic, political, and military operations.
808
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Navigation warfare (NAVWAR)
A term for activities directed toward disrupt-
ing, degrading, or denying the adversary’s ca-
pabilities for geographical location, tracking,
and control (navigation) based on such capa-
bilities. This term is currently used specifically
to connote those EW and IW (and counter-EW
and -IW) measures involving the global posi-
tioning system (GPS) network of satellites and
terrestrial, airborne, or shipborne receivers.
Netwar
A synonym for cyberwar.
Network spoofing
In network spoofing, a system presents itself to
the network as though it were a different sys-
tem (system A impersonates system B by send-
ing B’s address instead of its own). The reason
for doing this is that systems tend to operate
within a group of other “trusted” systems.
Trust is imparted in a one-to-one fashion; sys-
tem A trusts system B (this does not imply that
system B trusts system A). Implied with this
trust is that the system administrator of the
trusted system is performing his or her job
properly and maintaining an appropriate level
of security for his or her system. Network
spoofing occurs in the following manner: if sys-
tem A trusts system B and system C spoofs (im-
personates) system B, then system C can gain
otherwise denied access to system A.
Network worm
A worm that migrates across platforms over a
network by copying itself from one system to
another by exploiting common network facili-
ties, resulting in execution of the (replicated)
worm on that system and potentially others.
NII
Acronym for National Information Infrastruc-
ture.
NTFS
Windows NT file system.
Offensive counterinformation
Actions against the adversary’s information
functions.
OODA loop (also O-O-D-A loop)
Observation, orientation, decision, action loop.
Taken to describe a single iteration of the cycle
proceeding from data acquisition, through in-
formation integration and decision making, to
inaction of a response. Disruption or other
damage to the OODA loop is a common way of
portraying the goal or main effect of IW.
OOTW
Acronym for operations other than war (mis-
sions carried out by the military that lie outside
the scope of what is conventionally termed
“war”). Examples include humanitarian and
police actions.
Open-source intelligence (OSINT)
Information of potential intelligence value that
is available to the general public.
Operational intelligence
Intelligence that is required for planning and
conducting campaigns and major operations to
accomplish strategic objectives within theaters
or areas of operations.
Operations security (OPSEC)
A process of identifying critical information
and subsequently analyzing friendly actions 
attendant to military operations and other 
activities.
Opinion
A view, judgment, or appraisal formed in the
mind about a particular matter or particular
matters. It may also be said to be an intellectu-
ally defined judgment of what is true for the in-
dividual or group. It may be more influenced
by attitudes than facts.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
809

Orientation
An interactive process of many-sided implicit
cross-referencing projections, empathies, cor-
relations, and rejections that shapes and is
shaped by the interplay of genetic heritage, cul-
tural tradition, previous experiences, and un-
folding circumstances.
OSINT
Acronym for open-source intelligence.
Packet sniffer
A device or program that monitors the data
traveling between computers on a network.
Packet sniffing
Packet sniffing is a technique in which attack-
ers surreptitiously insert a software program at
remote network switches or host computers.
The program monitors information packets as
they are sent through networks and sends a
copy of the information retrieved to the hacker.
By picking up the first 125 keystrokes of a con-
nection, attackers can learn passwords and user
identifications, which, in turn, they can use to
break into systems.
Partition
A logical section of a disk. Each partition nor-
mally has its own file system.
Partition table
A 64-byte data structure that defines the way a
PC’s hard disk is divided into logical sectors
known as partitions. The partition table de-
scribes to the operating system how the hard
disk is divided. Each partition on a disk has a
corresponding entry in the partition table. The
partition table is always stored in the first phys-
ical sector of a disk drive.
Passive attack
A form of attack in which data is released (cap-
tured or obtained) from the target system. At-
tack that does not result in an unauthorized
state change, such as an attack that only moni-
tors or records data.
Passive threat
The threat of unauthorized disclosure of infor-
mation without changing the state of the system.
A type of threat that involves the interception,
not the alteration, of information.
Password cracking/password theft
Password cracking is a technique used to sur-
reptitiously gain system access by using another
user’s account. Users often select weak pass-
words. The two major sources of weakness in
passwords are easily guessed passwords based
on knowledge of the user (for example, wife’s
maiden name) and passwords that are suscepti-
ble to dictionary attacks (brute-force guessing
of passwords using a dictionary as the source of
guesses). Password cracking and theft is a tech-
nique in which attackers try to guess or steal
passwords to obtain access to computer sys-
tems. Attackers have automated this technique;
rather than attackers trying to guess legitimate
users’ passwords, computers can very efficiently
and systematically do the guessing. For exam-
ple, if the password is a dictionary word, a com-
puter can quickly look up all possibilities to find
a match. Complex passwords comprised of al-
phanumeric characters are more difficult to
crack. However, even with complex passwords,
powerful computers can use brute force to
compare all possible combinations of charac-
ters until a match is found.
Password sniffing
A form of sniffing that entails sampling specific
portions of the data stream during a session (col-
lecting a certain number of initial bytes where the
password can be intercepted in unencrypted
form on common Internet services) so as to ob-
tain password data that can then be exploited.
Path
A location of a file. The path consists of di-
rectory or folder names, beginning with the 
highest-level directory or disk name and end-
ing with the lowest-level directory name. A
path can identify a drive (C:\), a folder
(C:\Temp), or a file (C:\Windows\ftp.exe).
810
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Penetration
With regard to IW, a successful attack—the
ability to obtain unauthorized (undetected) ac-
cess to files and programs or the control state of
a computer system.
Penetration signature
The description of a situation or set of condi-
tions in which a penetration could occur or of
system events that in conjunction can indicate
the occurrence of a penetration in progress.
Perception
The process of evaluating information that has
been received and classified by the five physical
senses (vision, hearing, smell, taste, and touch)
and interpreted by criteria of the culture and
society.
Perception management
Actions to convey and deny selected informa-
tion and indicators (1) to foreign audiences to
influence their emotions, motives, and objec-
tive reasoning and (2) to intelligence systems
and leaders at all levels to influence official es-
timates, ultimately resulting in foreign behav-
iors and official actions favorable to the
originator’s objectives. In various ways, per-
ception management combines truth projec-
tion, operations security, cover and deception,
and psychological operations.
Peripheral
Any part of a computer other than the CPU or
working memory (RAM and ROM). For exam-
ple, disks, keyboards, monitors, mice, printers,
scanners, tape drives, microphones, speakers,
and other such devices are peripherals.
Phracker
Individual who combines phone phreaking
with computer hacking. Formed by a play on
both phreaker and hacker.
Phreak/phone phreak
A term for hacking or cracking-type exploita-
tion directed at the telephone system (as op-
posed to the data communications networks).
When the intrusion or action involves both
telephone and data communications net-
works, that portion of the intrusion activity
directed toward manipulating the telephone
system is typically called phreaking.
Phreaker
Individual fascinated by the telephone system.
Commonly, an individual who uses his or her
knowledge of the telephone system to make
calls at the expense of another.
Plug-and-Play (PnP)
A hardware and software specification devel-
oped by Intel that allows a PnP system and a
PnP adapter to configure automatically. PnP
cards generally have no switches or jumpers but
are configured via the PnP system’s BIOS or
with supplied software for non-PnP computers.
POST
Stands for power-on self test. Each time a PC
initializes, the BIOS executes a series of tests
collectively known as the POST. The test
checks each of the primary areas of the system,
including the motherboard, video system,
drive system, and keyboard, and ensures that
all components can be used safely. If a fault is
detected, the POST reports it as an audible se-
ries of beeps or a hexadecimal code written to
an I/O port.
RAM
Random zccess memory (see also “DRAM,”
“SDRAM”). A data-storage device for which
the order of access to different locations does
not affect the speed of access. This is in con-
trast to magnetic disk or magnetic tape, where
it is much quicker to access data sequentially
because accessing a nonsequential location re-
quires physical movement of the storage
medium rather than just electronic switching.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
811

The most common form of RAM in use today
is built from semiconductor integrated cir-
cuits, which can either be static (SRAM) or dy-
namic (DRAM).
Random text displayer
Visitors see random messages you have saved
in a text file, such as famous quotes or an-
nouncements. Generally, the visitor will see a
different message every time they visit the site.
Raw stats/graphic stats/advanced stats
You have access to a raw access log so you can
analyze your site’s usage with any program you
desire. Graphical stats are a detailed graphical
and tabular view of your Web site’s traffic
grouped by weeks, days, and hours in an easy to
read format.
Real Audio/Video
A client–server based system where both the
browser and server must have real audio/video
components to provide streaming media to vis-
itors at a Web site without waiting for the clip
to download.
Retro-virus
A virus that waits until all possible backup
media are also infected, so that it is not possible
to restore the system to an uninfected state.
Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA)
Current term for the transformations driven by
the proliferation of information technology
(IT) as tools for optimizing military operations
and weapons of military utility. The current
RMA is an instance of a military technical rev-
olution (MTR).
Right-click
To right-click an item is to point to it with the
screen pointer and then quickly press and re-
lease the right mouse button once.
Risk
With specific regard to data or information sys-
tems—accidental or unpredictable exposure of
information, or violation of operations in-
tegrity because of the malfunction of hardware
or incomplete or incorrect software design.
RMA
Acronym for revolution in military affairs.
ROM
Read-only memory. A type of data-storage 
device that is manufactured with fixed con-
tents. The term is most often applied to 
semiconductor-integrated circuit memories.
ROM is inherently nonvolatile storage—it 
retains its contents even when the power is
switched off, in contrast to RAM. It is used in
part for storage of the lowest level bootstrap
software (firmware) in a computer.
SA
Acronym for situation awareness.
Scavenge/scavenging
Searching through object residue (discarded
disks, tapes, or paper) to acquire sensitive data
without authorization.
Scripts
Scripts are programs written to run with Web
pages and perform a specific task in response to
visitor actions such as clicking a button. For ex-
ample, a Perl script counts the visits to the
page, and a JavaScript script makes the buttons
change colors when you put your mouse
pointer over them. Scripts can be written in
Perl, Java, JavaScript, VBScript, and a dozen
other programming languages.
SCSI
Stands for small computer system interface. A
standard that allows multiple devices to be
connected in daisy-chain fashion.
812
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

SDRAM
Stands for synchronous dynamic random
access memory (see also “DRAM”). SDRAM
incorporates new features that make it faster
than standard DRAM and EDO memory.
Search engine
A CGI script that allows visitors to perform
keyword searches of a Web site.
Second-wave war(fare)
A synonym for industrial warfare—the mode
of warfare characteristic of nation states as they
developed during the Enlightenment, through
the Industrial Revolution, and through the
20th century.
Sector
The tracks on a disk are divided into sectors.
Clusters contains from 1 to 64 sectors.
Secure server (SSL)
One method of ensuring that information en-
tered through your Web site is protected. In-
formation submitted via a secure form is sent
to the server in encrypted mode. This is most
commonly used for credit card transactions.
Security
Measures taken by a military unit, an activity,
or installation to protect itself against all 
acts designed to, or which may, impair its 
effectiveness.
Security audit
A search through a computer system for secu-
rity problems and vulnerabilities.
Security breach
A violation of controls of a particular informa-
tion system such that information assets or sys-
tem components are unduly exposed.
Security classification
A category to which national security informa-
tion and material is assigned to denote the de-
gree of damage that unauthorized disclosure
would cause to national defense or foreign re-
lations of the United States and to denote the
degree of protection required.
Select
To select an item is to identify to the computer
one or more files or folders that you wish to do
something with. This is usually done by point-
ing to an item with the screen pointer and then
quickly pressing and releasing the left mouse
button once.
Sensor-to-shooter
A descriptive phrase employed to connote the
cumulative feed-forward of data and informa-
tion through an operational military system,
from initial acquisition of novel data elements
(via the sensors) through to the element effect-
ing instrumental response as needed (the
shooter). A loose descriptor for the scope of
processing for intrasystemic functions to ob-
tain advantage in a theater of operations.
Server
A special computer designed for the Internet
or another network, usually far more powerful
than a regular desktop computer, that has a
full-time direct connection to the Internet.
Some servers even have two or more proces-
sors working together. Servers run special soft-
ware called Web server software, which enables
them to receive requests and deliver files to
other computers across the Internet.
Server side includes (SSI)
Allows the server to understand and respond
to special page commands. As an example, if
you had a footer you wanted on all your pages
that may change from time to time, you can
create a text file with the desired footer and
place it in your document. On each page you
put a simple include to read the file and place it
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
813

at the bottom of the desired pages. Changing
the footer on all your pages would be as simple
as changing the one text file.
Session hijacking
Taking over an authorized user’s terminal ses-
sion, either physically when the user leaves his
or her terminal unattended or electronically
when the intruder carefully connects to a just-
disconnected communications line.
Shared situation awareness (SSA)
The collective perception, comprehension, and
projection of environmental elements among a
set of actors.
Shopping cart
Keeps track of what your customers have or-
dered online as they add and remove items.
When a customer is ready to check out, the
program tallies the order for processing and
takes their credit card and other information. 
SIGINT
Acronym for signals intelligence.
Signal
As applied to electronics, any transmitted elec-
trical impulse.
Signal security (SIGSEC)
A generic term that includes both communica-
tions security and electronic security.
Signals intelligence (SIGINT)
A category of intelligence composed of—either
individually or in combination—all communi-
cations intelligence, electronics intelligence, and
foreign instrumentation signals intelligence,
however transmitted.
SIGSEC
Acronym for signal security.
Simple counter
Graphical count of visitors to your Web site,
which appears on your Web page.
Site submission
Submits your site information to a database of
over 1,900 search engines, link engines, and 
directories.
Situation awareness (SA)
Sometimes termed “situational awareness.”
The perception of the elements in the environ-
ment within a volume of time and space, the
comprehension of their meaning, and the pro-
jection of their status in the near future. This
term is broadly used to denote the state of
awareness that a subject (operator, pilot) has
in the course of a task at a given point in time.
As such, it connotes a degree of orientation to
those circumstances at that point in time—
particularly those that are germane to the task
itself. The term is also (more loosely) used to
connote such a state of awareness or orienta-
tion with respect to multiple actors or organi-
zational units. As such, the notion of situation
awareness maps straightforwardly onto the ori-
entation phase of the OODA Loop.
Slot
A physical connector on a motherboard to
hold an expansion card, SIMM, DIMM, or a
processor card in place.
Sniff/sniffing
The act of surreptitiously monitoring data
streams so as to intercept and capture exploitable
information.
Sniffer
A tool used to intercept potentially exploitable
data from the traffic on a network. A program
to capture data across a computer network.
Used by hackers to capture user-ID names and
passwords. A software tool that audits and
identifies network traffic packets.
814
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

Social engineering
A term for personal (social) tactics employed
in support of attempts to achieve unauthorized
access to a computer or information system.
This is something of a catch-all category for
any tricks used to obtain the intended access or
to obtain information critical to achieving that
access.
Socket
A receptacle, usually on a motherboard, that
processors or chips can be inserted into.
SOS
Acronym for system of systems.
Spam
The act of bombarding a target (system, Usenet
news group, set of email addresses) with suf-
ficient volume of data (or a volume of suf-
ficiently massive data items) such that
degradation or even denial of service is
achieved. This term is also pejoratively applied
to describe the perceived harassment of receiv-
ing profligately broadcast data (junk email ad-
vertising). To crash a program by overrunning
a fixed-site buffer with an excessively large
input data. Also, to cause a person or news-
group to be flooded with irrelevant or inappro-
priate messages.
Spectrum management
Planning, coordinating, and managing joint
use of the electromagnetic spectrum through
operational, engineering, and administrative
procedures, with the objective of enabling elec-
tronic systems to perform their functions in the
intended environment without causing or suf-
fering unacceptable interference.
System registry
The system configuration files used by Win-
dows 2000, XP, 2003, and NT to store settings
about user preferences, installed software,
hardware and drivers, and other settings re-
quired for Windows to run correctly. The sys-
tem updates the registry every time you add
new hardware or a new program to your sys-
tem. When the registry becomes “broken,” it
can cause serious system problems. 
Tactical internet
A battlefield communication system net-
worked together using commercially based in-
ternet protocols.
TECHINT
Acronym for technical intelligence.
Technical attack
An attack that can be perpetrated by circum-
venting or nullifying hardware and software
protection mechanisms, rather than by sub-
verting system personnel or other users.
Technical intelligence (TECHINT)
Intelligence derived from exploitation of 
foreign materiel, produced for strategic, opera-
tional, and tactical level commanders. Techni-
cal intelligence begins when an individual
service member finds something new on the
battlefield and takes the proper steps to report
it. The item is then exploited at succeedingly
higher levels until a countermeasure is pro-
duced to neutralize the adversary’s technologi-
cal advantage. 
Telnet account
Telnet allows real-time access to the command
line of your server to run programs and install
and configure scripts. Most CGI scripts can be
installed without Telnet unless you need it for
debugging purposes. 
Terminal hijacking
Allows an attacker on a certain machine to
control any terminal session that is in progress.
An attack hacker can send and receive terminal
I/O while a user is on the terminal.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
815

Terminator
Most commonly found in relation to a SCSI
chain, this prevents the reflection or echoing of
signals that reach the ends of the SCSI bus.
Usually terminators are hardware circuits or
jumpers.
Third-wave war(fare)
A synonym for IW or knowledge war. The allu-
sion is to Toffler’s “Third Wave” of economic
activity, which concentrates on information
and knowledge as raw material and product.
This three-tiered economic or political model
was a major influence on the DoD thinkers
whose work led to today’s interest in IW.
Time bomb
A logic bomb that is specifically triggered by a
temporal event (a predetermined date or time).
A logic bomb that is triggered by reaching
some preset time, either once or periodically. A
variant of the trojan horse, in which malicious
code is inserted to be triggered later.
TRANSEC
Acronym for transmission security (communi-
cations security).
Trap door
A hidden software or hardware mechanism
used to circumvent security control.
Trojan horse
An independent program that, when called by
an authorized user, performs a useful function
but also performs unauthorized functions,
often usurping the privileges of the user.
Troll
To subvert a forum by deliberately posting
provocative (especially provocatively stupid)
messages with the intention of distracting oth-
ers into response.
Unallocated file space
Unallocated file space and file slack are both im-
portant sources of leads for the computer foren-
sics investigator. The data-storage area in a
factory-fresh hard disk drive typically contains
patterns of sectors that are filled with patterns
of format characters. The same format pattern
is sometimes used in the format of hard disk
drives, but the format patterns can consist of es-
sentially any repeat character as determined by
the factory test machine that made the last
writes to the hard disk drive. The format pat-
tern is overwritten as files and subdirectories are
written in the data area.
Unzip
To unzip is to extract (see “Extract”) a Zip
archive.
UUencode
Many file formats are 8-bit (also called binary),
which means the basic unit of information—a
byte—comprises 8 on/off signals. Email, how-
ever, is a 7-bit (or text) medium, preventing
the transfer of 8-bit data. UUencoding com-
pensates for this restriction by converting 8-bit
data to 7-bit data. UUencode accomplishes this
by joining all of the file’s bits together into a
single stream and then dividing the stream into
7-bit chunks. The data are then emailed and re-
ceived by someone who must UUdecode it.
Vandal
As contrasted with crackers and criminals in a
tripartite taxonomy of cyberspace intruders,
this term is used to denote anyone whose goal
is to destroy information and information sys-
tems in the course of their intrusion attempts.
Video adapter
An expansion card or chip set built into a
motherboard that provides the capability to
display text and graphics on the computer’s
monitor. If the adapter is part of an expansion
816
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

card, it also includes the physical connector for
the monitor cable. If it is a chip set on the
motherboard, the video connector will be on
the motherboard also.
Virtual battlespace
The ether occupied by communications im-
pulses, databases, and computer codes. In this
usage, the term is synonymous with cyber
medium, cyberspace, and infosphere.
Virtual realm
A synonym for information realm or cyber-
space.
Virus
The generic label for a unary set of code that is
designed to cause mischief or other subversive
effect in a target computer system.
Vulnerability
With specific regard to IW—a known or sus-
pected flaw in the hardware or software or op-
eration of a system that exposes the system to
penetration or its information to accidental
disclosure.
War
An event characterized by the open, total, and
(relatively) unrestricted prosecution of warfare
by lethal means. As such, war is not synony-
mous with warfare.
War dialer
A cracking tool, a program that calls a given list
or range of numbers and records those that an-
swer with handshake tones (and so might be
entry points to computer or telecommunica-
tions systems).
Warfare
The set of all lethal and nonlethal activities un-
dertaken to subdue the hostile will of an adver-
sary or enemy. The distinction between this
and war ties into the delineation of informa-
tion warfare as an activity, which could or
should be conducted outside the situational
frame of war itself.
Warm boot
Rebooting a system by means of a software
command as opposed to turning the power off
and on. See also “Cold boot.”
Web-based Telnet
Invoke a telnet session directly from your Web
browser. There’s no need for any other appli-
cations or software.
Windows swap files
Windows swap files are relied on by Windows,
Windows 2000, Windows XP, and Windows
2003 to create “virtual memory” (using a por-
tion of the hard disk drive for memory opera-
tions). The storage area is important to the
computer forensics specialist for the same rea-
son that file slack and unallocated space are im-
portant (large volumes of data exist for which
the computer user likely has no knowledge).
Windows swap files can be temporary or per-
manent, depending on the version of Windows
involved and settings selected by the computer
user. Permanent swap files are of more interest
to a computer forensics specialist because they
normally store larger amounts of information
for much longer periods of time.
Wizard
A wizard is a series of dialog boxes that guides
you step by step through a procedure.
World Wide Web
The World Wide Web, or WWW, is the part of
the Internet that you use to view a particular
Web page. The Web is just a set of protocols, or
standards, for transferring data from one com-
puter to another; just one aspect of the Inter-
net, but by far the most popular. Telnet, FTP,
Veronica, and Archie are some other Internet
data-transfer protocols. Without protocols,
computers wouldn’t be able to communicate
with or understand each other.
Glossary of Terms and Acronyms
817

Worm
A class of mischievous or disruptive software
whose negative effect is primarily realized
through rampant proliferation (via replication
and distribution of the worm’s own code).
Replication is the hallmark of the worm.
Worm code is relatively host-independent, in
that the code is self-contained enough to mi-
grate across multiple instances of a given plat-
form, or across multiple platforms over a
network (network worm). To replicate itself, a
worm needs to spawn a process; this implies
that worms require a multitasking operating
system to thrive. A program or executable code
module that resides in distributed systems or
networks. It will replicate itself, if necessary, in
order to exercise as much of the systems’ re-
sources as possible for its own processing. Such
resources may take the form of CPU time, I/O
channels, or system memory. It will replicate
itself from machine to machine across network
connections, often clogging networks and
computer systems as it spreads.
Zip
To zip (notice the lower case z) a file is to com-
press it into an archive so that it occupies less
disk space. 
Zip archive
An archive of one or more Zip-compressed
files. When used as a noun, Zip is typically cap-
italized. Compressed files can come in many
formats besides Zip.
Zip file
A Zip archive that Windows presents as a single
file. In general, the contents cannot be accessed
unless the archive is decompressed.
818
Computer Forensics, Second Edition

819
Index
3COM Corporation, 293
8lgm, 791
12WAR defined, 802
802.11b standard, security measures in,
116, 117, 579
2600, 791
A
Abuse of privilege, 791. See also Inter-
net, abuse, detection of
Acceptable level of risk, 791. See also
Risk assessment
Acceptable use policy, 791
Access, controlling
corporate information, 295–296,
300, 312, 330
in identity management, 133, 150
in IW, 337, 477, 496
overview, 88–90, 104–106
Web services/file sharing, 325–326
AccessData, 709
Accountability, 791
Accuracy, 791
Acme of skill, 791
Acquiring bank defined, 87
ACR Data Recovery, Incorporated, 782
Active attack, 791
Act of War defined, 591–592
Adapter, 791
Addresses
MAC filtering, 117, 679
source, 650–651
Administrator privileges, 529
Admissibility of evidence, 6, 29, 155,
220, 230, 235, 248, 254
Advanced Computer Forensic Checklist
Form, 777–779
Advanced encryption standard (AES),
631, 632
Advanced WWW count counter, 792
Adware described, 61–63
AES (Advanced encryption standard),
631, 632
Aggregation in digital identity manage-
ment, 130
Agricultural bioterrorism targets,
430–431
Air power in counterterrorism,
392–394, 462, 465, 519
Algerian Armed Islamic Group (GIA),
416
Al-Muhajiroun (The Emigrants), 417
Ambient data, 792
American Bankers Insurance Company
of Florida v. Caruth et al, 319
American Fundware, Inc., Computer
Associates International, Inc. v., 320
American International Group (AIG),
598
America Online (AOL), 605
Ames, Aldrich, 434
AnaDisk software described, 43–44
Angle of arrival method, 557
Anna Kournikova worm, 598
Anomalies, identifying, 245–246,
655–656, 792
Anonymity
and IW, 604–606
in log file retrieval, 650–653
Anonymizers
and encryption, 497, 604–605
Web surfing with, 650, 653
Anonymous FTP, 792
Answers to review questions and
exercises, 725–745
Antennae in PLS, 556, 557, 560
Antivirus software, 792
configuring, 56, 57, 707
in IW, 388
prevalence of, 270
AOL (America Online), 605
Appliances, 656–657
Application, 792
Application gateway, 792
Application service providers (ASPs)
and network security, 486, 487, 488,
665
ARP (Address Resolution Protocol)
cache, 679
Article 41, US charter, 592
Article 51, US charter, 592
Artifacts as evidence, 226
ASCII, 688, 690
ASIM (Automated Security Incident
Measurement), 792
ASPs. See Application service providers
(ASPs) and network security
Assurance, 792
Asynchronous attacks, 792
Attack, 792
Attackers, identifying, 161, 167–172,
186, 453–459
Attacks
archived postings, accessing, 171
data-driven, 107, 797
information, 803
from inside, 161–162
investigating, 97, 586, 658–660
leapfrog, 806
packet-level, 98
passive, 810
reconstructing, 229
responding to, 159–160
technical, 815
types of, 338, 470, 476–477, 504
wireless, 115–116
Attitudes, 792. See also Security,
awareness
AT&T Research, 652
Audits
documents, searching, 11, 79, 273,
568
and firewalls, 103
in identity management, 133, 151
networks, 696–699, 701
of privacy policies, 489
security policy, 696–699, 813
techniques, 695–699
Audit trail, 793
Aum Shinrikyo and IW, 342, 427, 428
Authentication
of cellular telephones, 611–612
of data, 76, 97, 182, 236, 243, 264,
677–678
digital signatures, 248, 259
of evidence, 182
of identity, 122, 133, 135
identity management security
systems, 258–259
of images, 260–264, 266, 268, 284
of messages, 634
and offensive containment IW,
478–480
of online payment information, 87
by TCP/IP, 97–98, 288
time stamps in, 263–264
Authenticode described, 260–265, 271,
272
Autokey, 291
Automated Security Incident Measure-
ment (ASIM), 792
Autoresponders, 793
Aviation safety, 571
AVS/Express described, 316–317
Azzam Publications, 419
B
Back doors
in cyberterrorism, 508, 521

described, 793
information, obtaining, 658
Back Orifice, 644
Backup procedures
analysis of, 228–229
and data recovery, 192–203,
212–213, 243
features, recommended, 199–200
future of, 194–195
mirroring in, 201, 202, 214, 808
obstacles to, 193–194, 214–215
SANs in, 108–109, 194–195, 213
viruses and, 388
Backup window defined, 197
Bandwidth
and data backup, 193
defined, 793
fiber-channel connections, 111
Bank accounts and identity theft, 140,
150
Bank defined, 793
Bankruptcy and identity theft, 140
Basic psyop study (BPS), 793
Battlefield visualization, 793
Battlespace, 793
BellSouth, 600
Berryhill Computer Forensics, 715
Best evidence rule defined, 236, 237,
239, 257, 279
Between-the-Lines entry, 793
BIND (Berkeley Internet Name Do-
main), 324–325
Bin Laden, Osama, 417, 418, 454–459,
461
Binning defined, 319
BioFusion, 617–618
Biological agents in terrorism,
402–403, 427–428, 431
Biometric security systems
cost of, 483
described, 72–73, 78–79, 141–142,
147, 283
and offensive containment IW,
478–480
privacy and, 483
samples, collecting, 479
BIOS, 793
BIOS level copying, 269
Bioterrorism, 430–433
Bit stream image backups in 
evidence preservation, 239, 241,
243, 676
Black bag jobs, 552, 553
BLOB, 793
Block hash values, generating,
263–264, 268
Block-level incremental backup de-
fined, 198
Blowfish, 631
Blue box devices, 794
Bmap tool described, 208
BMC41, 794
Bomb-making materials, obtaining,
420
Boot process, understanding, 180, 794,
795
Boot record, 794
Bootstrap, 794
BPS (Basic psyop study), 793
Brand Name Prescription Drug 
Antitrust Litigation, 319
Bricsnet, 665
Bristol-Meyers-Squibb Company,
291–292
Britain, IW policy, 494
Broadband Internet service, 578
Browsers and cookies, 565–566
Bugging devices. See Surveillance,
electronic
Bulletin board, 794
Bus defined, 794
Business technology, types of, 52–61.
See also individual software by name
C
C2 Attack, 794
C2 Protect, 794
C2W. See Command and control
warfare (C2W)
C3, 794
C3I, 794
C4I (Command, control, communica-
tion, and computer intelligence),
495, 794
C4ISR, 794
Cache defined, 795
Call counting, 612
Calling patterns, tracking, 613
Campaign for Defense of Legitimate
Rights (CDLR), 416–417
Card defined, 794
Carnivore software, 528–529, 552
Cartridges, information stored on, 272
Caruth et al, American Bankers Insur-
ance Company of Florida v., 319
Case histories
data erasure, 26–27
data recovery, 209–212
evidence integrity/reproducibility,
24–25
forensic response, planned,
180–182
fraud investigations, 25–26
Case studies
civil litigation, 723, 724
computer forensics, 718–719
data recovery, 27–28, 304,
717–718, 719
email recovery, 721–723
employees, disgruntled, 722–724
industrial espionage, 720, 721
pornography, 719
CCIPS Searching and Seizing Comput-
ers, 716
cDc (Cult of the Dead Cow Communi-
cations), 421
CDLR (Campaign for Defense of
Legitimate Rights), 416–417
CDMA (Code division multiple access)
cellular telephones, 610
CD-ROM technology in evidence
collection, 269
Cell-Loc Incorporated, 551
Cellular One, 608
Cellular telephones
authentication of, 611–612
cloning of, 609, 611, 612
encryption of, 638–639
frequency bands of, 610
tracking, 549–551, 561–563,
609–613
CEMP. See Comprehensive emergency
management procedures (CEMP)
Censorship and encryption, 637–638
Center for Democracy and Technol-
ogy, 711
Central processing unit (CPU), 796
Ceramics, piezoelectric in simulation
of movement, 537
CERT/CC (CERT Coordination
Center), 266, 267, 654, 795
Certificate authorities
described, 262–263
in identity verification, 89
Certified information systems security
professional (CISSP), 173, 174,
175, 675
Certified Internet Webmaster (CIW),
173
CESA (Cyberspace Electronic Security
Act), 494, 552
CFIRP. See Computer Forensic Inci-
dent Response Procedures (CFIRP)
overview
CFX-2000. See Computer Forensics
Experiment 2000 (CFX-2000)
CGI-BIN, 795
CGI email, 795
Chain of custody
defined, 247
documentation, 321, 695
establishing, 18, 19, 65
and evidence notebooks, 250
in evidence preservation, 228–229,
236, 251, 255, 679–680
maintaining, 281, 282
Charlemagne Hammer Skins, 420
Chemical agents in terrorism, 402–403,
427–428, 431
Chicago Convention, 596
Chief Information Officers (CIOs)
functions of, 294–296, 299–300
in security policy implementation,
270, 424
Children
exploitation of, evidence gathering
in, 13
protecting, 128, 232, 535
tracking, 564
China. See People’s Republic of China
Chipping described, 388–389, 508, 521,
545, 595
820
Index

The Chubb Group, 599
CIAO (Critical Infrastructure Assur-
ance Office), 430, 588
CIP (Critical Infrastructure Protec-
tion), 795
CISSP. See Certified information
systems security professional
(CISSP)
Civil communication in society, 349
Civilian Casualties: The Victims and
Refugees of Information Warfare
Checklist Form, 776
Civilians
in IW, 585–587, 618–619
networks, protecting, 544
Civil litigation
case studies, 723, 724
and computer forensic specialists,
8, 18, 31, 166
electronic evidence in, 20, 74, 279
and email, 10, 319
sources of, 30–31
CIW. See Certified Internet Webmaster
(CIW)
Click defined, 795
Clipper Chip, 494, 597
Clock filters, 290–291
Cloning of cellular telephones, 609,
611, 612
Closed community model of identity
management, 134
Cluster defined, 795
CMOS defined, 795
CNN.com, 597
COCOM (Coordinating Committee
for Multilateral Strategic Export
Controls), 638
Code, malicious, 358, 642
Cold boot defined, 795
Cold war mentality, limitations of,
378–379
Collaborations in IW preparation,
375–376
Collaborative Virtual Workplace
(CVW), 543, 544, 545
Collection of biometrics, 142
Command, control, communication,
and computer intelligence (C4I),
495
Command and control warfare (C2W)
applied, 383, 410
described, 380–383, 409, 794
Communications
attacking, 351, 516–517
identifying, 50
and LBS, 551
and psyops, 367
systems in IW, 586
truth in, 348–350
Company private information defined,
85
Comparison/matching of biometrics,
142
Competition Act, 283
Comprehensive emergency manage-
ment procedures (CEMP), 144
Computer and Internet Security
Resources, 713
Computer Associates International,
Inc. v. American Fundware, Inc,
320
Computer clocks, mechanism of, 289
Computer crime
evolution of, 4, 287, 310
financial gains, average, 5
investigating, 155
overview, 5–6, 154–155, 184
prevalence, 153, 681
regulating, 358–359
resources, 711
Computer Crimes and Technology
Links, 713
Computer evidence defined, 795. See
also Evidence, electronic
Computer Expert and Computer
Forensics Consultant, Judd Rob-
bins, 715
Computer Forensic Incident Response
Procedures (CFIRP) overview,
158–162
Computer forensics
costs, personnel, 680
described, 3–8, 29–31, 35, 75–76,
297, 299, 705, 795–796
documentation in, 42, 77, 177, 227,
236, 245, 246, 321, 660, 676
future of, 684–685, 699–700
history of, 280, 495–497
limitations, 18, 281–282
methodology, 17–18, 21–24, 32,
42, 57–61, 675
priority, 6–7, 659–660, 673–674
resources, 709–712
technology checklists, 747–753
Web pages related to, 713–716
Computer Forensics, Incorporated,
782
Computer Forensics Experiment 2000
(CFX-2000), 36–38
Computer Forensics FAQ, 715
Computer Forensics Laboratories, 783
Computer Forensics Online, 715
Computer forensic specialists
attributes, required, 647–648, 660,
685–701
certification, 173–175
choosing, 8–9, 660
described, 7, 19–20, 32–33, 76
employers of, 8, 18, 31, 182
salary of, 647
service levels offered, 14–15
services offered, 10–17, 55–56, 78,
162–167, 182
training, 51–52, 55, 172, 175–180,
185
Computer-free encryption, 629–630
Computer Image Verification and
Authentication Checklist Form,
758–759
Computer investigations defined, 796
Computer Knowledge, 711
Computers
architecture, changes in, 23
and cyberterrorism, 433–438, 451
disabling, 470
evolution of, 284
log files, retrieving, 650–653
molecular, 542
remote monitoring of, 52–53
role of in crime, 6, 280, 674
sabotage of, 663–666
security
testing, 640–641
vulnerabilities of, 280–281,
284, 516
seizure, USDOJ guidelines, 715
stolen, recovery of, 53–55, 77
Computer searching programs de-
scribed, 477
Computer Security Institute, 640, 674
Computer Security Resource Center,
640
Concept learning, supervised, 572–573
Conclusions, verifying, 30
Conditioning defined, 71
Conflict, low-level, 592
Consultation services, 7, 15–16
Containment in IW tactics, 380–383
Context menu, 796
Control of agent-based systems
(CoABS) in IW, 375
Conxion, 491
Cookies, 564–566, 567, 582, 604, 796
Coordinating Committee for Multilat-
eral Strategic Export Controls
(COCOM), 638
Copper media and EMP attack, 518
Coppolino standard defined, 237
Copy mode, SafeBack, 40
Copy process, characteristics of, 250,
327
CopyQM software described, 43,
44–47
Copyright infringement, detecting, 569
Corporate information (CI) described,
292–296
Corporations
and computer forensic specialists,
8, 18, 282
cybersecurity policy, implement-
ing, 475–476
and industrial espionage, 291–296
and IW, 341–343, 364–365, 436,
469–476, 501–502
IW tactics, defensive, 472–475,
483, 487–490
offensive IW, recovery from,
476–480, 490–501
security policy, establishing, 148
Index
821

and terrorist groups, 471–472
Counterpane Internet Security, Incor-
porated, 712
Counterterrorism
activities of the FBI, 5
air power in, 392–394, 462, 465,
519
policy, US, 390–393, 463, 466
rogue IW, 397–402
space power in, 392–394
Countries with IW capabilities, 355,
368, 461
CPU (Central processing unit), 796
Crash defined, 796
Credit card association defined, 88
Credit cards
data recovery of, 210
fraud
defined, 699
losses, reducing, 483
and identity theft, 139
transactions, processing, 797
Credit reports and identity theft, 608
Crime scene, preserving, 238–239
Criminal law, electronic evidence in,
20, 74, 166, 279
Criminal prosecutors and computer
forensic specialists, 8, 18, 31
Criminals, tracking, 553–564, 645
Critical Infrastructure Assurance
Office (CIAO), 430, 588
Critical Infrastructure Protection
(CIP), 795
Cross-linked files, 796
Crowds, 652
Cryptography resources, 712
CSI/FBI Computer Crime and Security
Survey, 2003
on attack points, 154, 165
on intrusion detection systems, 156
Cuba and IW, 461
Cult of the Dead Cow Communica-
tions (cDc), 421
Customer data, selling, 487, 488
Customer defined, 88
Customer Issuing Bank defined, 88
Customizable missing docs page, 796
CY4OR, 784
Cyber Agents, Incorporated, 783
CyberArmy in IW-D, 406–407
Cyberattacks
economic burden of, 601
planning/launching, 481–482
CyberCash(c), 797
Cyber crime. See Computer crime
Cyberdisarmament, proponents of,
363
CyberEvidence, 783
Cyber forensics. See Computer foren-
sics
Cyberincident Steering Group,
341–342
Cyberinsurance, 166–167
Cybersecurity, strengthening, 343
Cyberspace Electronic Security Act
(CESA), 494, 552
Cyberspace Policy Institute of George
Washington University, 639
Cyberterrorism
back doors in, 508, 521
computers and, 433–438, 451
countermeasures, 389–394,
530–532, 680–681
described, 379, 391, 411, 423, 463
effects of, 400–402, 425, 600,
644–645
on the Internet, 417, 420, 424, 460,
597
public key encryption and,
424–425
risk management, 156–162, 502,
503
worms in, 508, 545, 595
Cyberwarfare. See also Information
warfare (IW)
described, 340–341, 380
disadvantages, 341
military strategy in, 350–354,
359–360, 371–374, 376–377,
392–394, 580
D
DARPA agent markup language
(DAML), 374–375
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency) on IW capabili-
ties, 354, 372–373, 588
Data
ambient, 792
archiving, 198
compression, 180
converting, 304–310
copy process, characteristics of, 250
defined, 797
distribution, impact of, 570–573
duplication/preservation of, 11,
15–16, 163–164, 185
encryption, 51, 64–65 (See also
Encryption)
erasure
case histories, 26–27
discovering, 52, 71, 95, 180
exporting, 106
hiding techniques, 43, 51–52, 71,
178, 206–209, 297–298, 498
identification of, 287–288
persistence, 213, 496
protection measure tips, 488, 683,
706–707
recovery (See Data recovery)
retention in crime investigation,
359
seizure
described, 11, 21, 53
rules of, 230, 715
storage/analysis of, 251–252
testing, 308
and text, structured, 575
unrecoverable, 706
vulnerability of, 628–629
Databases
data mining in, 569–577, 605
files, searching, 307, 308, 309
forensic, for networks, 318–319
hidden, 71
Data-driven attacks defined, 107, 797
Data encryption standard (DES), 631,
632
DataHaven Project Inc Web site url,
421
Data mining, 569–577
Data objects defined, 327
Data recovery
automated, 205–206
backup and, 192–203, 212–213,
243
case studies, 27–28, 304, 717–718,
719
described, 11, 15, 61, 191–192,
203–206, 214, 705–708
of email, 216, 467, 546, 623
exercises, 186
from fax machines, 10, 183
financial records, 10, 278
on hard disks, 7, 496
hidden, 206–209
from laptop computers, 27, 210,
240
on linux systems, 207–209, 213
principles of, international, 329
software for, 496
on Unix systems, 207, 216, 505,
677, 678, 679
Data Recovery Checklist Form,
755–756
Data storage media
duplication of, 14
examination of, 22
Data theft via wireless systems, 116
Data warehouse, stages of, 317, 
328
DAT (digital audio tapes) tapes, data
recovery from, 28, 211
Dates, decoding, 70
Datum defined, 797
Daubert standard defined, 237
DBA (Dominant battlespace aware-
ness), 797
DBK (Dominant battlespace knowl-
edge), 797
DDOS attacks. See Distributed denial
of service (DDOS) attacks
Dead Addict, 645
Deception defined, 797
Deception network as countermeasure,
530–531
Decision defined, 797
DEE. See Discovery of electronic
evidence (DEE)
822
Index

Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) on IW capabili-
ties, 354, 372–373, 588
Defense information infrastructure
(DII), 797
Defensive counterinformation, 797
Defensive Strategies for Governments
and Industry Groups Checklist
Form, 765–768
Defragment, 707, 797
Degradation of service, 797
Democracy and IW defense, 596–597
Denial of service (DOS) attacks. See
also Distributed denial of service
(DDOS) attacks
in cyberterrorism, 424, 597
defined, 798
and IDSs, 653–656
thwarting, 480–481, 490
Denial time defined, 798
Departmental information defined, 85
Department of Defense (DoD) in IW,
588, 594–595
Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS), 432, 614, 615
DES (Data encryption standard), 631,
632
Deterrence as response to attacks,
159–160, 299, 354, 392, 590, 621
Diablo, 644
Differential GPS, 526
Diffie-Hellman scheme for data
encryption, 86, 87, 291, 635, 636
Digital Angel chip, 550
Digital certificates
described, 271
in PGP, 123, 124
types of, 89, 262, 264
Digital evidence bags (DEBs) de-
scribed, 37
Digital identity. See Digital certificates;
Identity management security
systems
Digital Intelligence Incorporated, 
709
Digital Mountain, Incorporated, 784
Digital signatures
authentication
of log files, 248
of software, 259
described, 263
matching, 655–656
penetration, 811
and PKI, 113, 114
RSA standard for, 64
Dig-x utility defined, 168
DII (Defense information infrastruc-
ture), 797
Direct Access Memory (DMA), 798
Directed-energy protective measures,
798
Direct information warfare, 798
Directory defined, 798
DIRT-CDS (Data Interception by
Remote Transmission from Codex
Data Systems) described, 52–53
Disaster recovery systems
networks, 112–113
Discount rate defined, 88
Discovery of electronic evidence (DEE)
as litigation tool, 278–281
overview, 277–278, 281
Discovery of Electronic Evidence
(DEE) Checklist Form, 759–760
Disks. See also Floppy disks; Hard
disks; RAID (redundant array of
independent disks) disks
duplication of, 44–47
matching, 51
structure, understanding, 51, 179
Disk space defined, 798
Distributed denial of service (DDOS)
attacks
classification of, 117–118
and IDSs, 654
prevalence, 269, 325, 439
tracing, 183, 330–331
DLT (digital linear tapes), preserving,
33
DMA (Direct Access Memory), 798
Documentary evidence, 183, 278–279,
283
Documentation in computer forensics,
42, 77, 177, 227, 236, 245, 246, 321,
660, 676
Documents
authenticity, proving, 29, 74, 312
in computer forensics, 42, 77, 177,
227, 236, 245, 246, 321, 660,
676
encrypting with PKI, 113
recovering, 61, 279
searching, 11, 79, 273, 568
storage, 76
traceable, creating, 53, 566–569,
583
DoDi, 443
Domain name registration, 798
Domain Name Service (DNS) in
intrusion detection, 324–325
Dominant battlespace awareness
(DBA), 797
Dominant battlespace knowledge
(DBK), 797
DOS attacks. See Denial of service
(DOS) attacks
DOS operating system, security of, 280
Dow Chemical, 616
Dragonflies, mechanical, 536–538
DRAM (Dynamic random access
memory), 798
Driver defined, 799
Driver firmware, data erasure on, 26
Duplication and Preservation of
Digital Evidence Checklist Form,
757–758
Dutch Shell Group, 295
Dynamic ports, assigning, 72
Dynamic random access memory
(DRAM), 798
E
Echelon, 475, 495, 616, 617
E-commerce investigations, software
for, 46–47
Economic crime defined, 699
Economic espionage. See Industrial
espionage
Economic information warfare, 799
e-Fense, Incorporated, 785
EIDE (Enhanced integrated drive
electronics), 799
Electrical power, disruption of in IW,
446, 588–589
Electrohippies, 491
Electromagnetic bombs
defense against, 515–517
delivery of, 513–515, 517–518
described, 509–510
limitations of, 517–518
proliferation of, 518–519
targeting, 512–513
technology of, 511
Electromagnetic intrusion, 799
Electromagnetic pulse (EMP), applica-
tions in IW, 444, 445, 509,
510–511, 546, 581. See also Electro-
magnetic bombs
Electronic hardness defined, 510, 516
Electronic jamming, 522
Electronics intelligence (ELINT), 799
Electronics security, 799
Electronic surveillance. See Surveil-
lance, electronic
Electronic warfare (EW) described,
381, 409, 799
Electro-optical intelligence (ELEC-
TRO-OPTINT), 799
El-Hage, 455–456
Eligible Receiver, 434
e-Mag Solutions, 785
Email
accounts, 799
aliases, 799
anonymous, 651
case studies, 721–723
CGI, 795
civil litigation and, 10
copies, providing, 34
data recovery of, 216, 467, 546, 623
destruction of, 319–320, 330
encryption of, 63, 64, 497
evaluation and company policy,
242
forwarding, 799
mailing lists, mini, 799–800
Majordomo list, 807
message contents, hiding, 120–121
retention policies, 320
Index
823

storage of, 10, 183
tracing methods, 25, 65–69
transactions, one/two-way, 122
wiretapping, 529–532, 545
Embezzlement
investigating, 185, 312
prevalence of, 241
Emergency management defined, 144
The Emigrants (Al-Muhajiroun), 417
EMP (Electromagnetic pulse) in IW,
444, 445
Employees
and computer sabotage, 664, 665,
670–671, 702
in security, 267, 485, 659, 674, 720
Employer Safeguard Program de-
scribed, 9–10
Employers of computer forensic
specialists, 8, 182
Employment proceedings
and computer forensic specialists,
9–10, 273, 312
data recovery for, 505
Encase software, 676
Encryption
anonymizers, 497, 604–605
of cellular telephones, 638–639
computer-free, 629–630
of data, 51, 64–65
of email, 63, 64, 497
future of, 499–500, 666–667
hashes in, 263–264, 268, 634, 677
and IW defensive tactics, 493–495
methods/vulnerabilities, 63–64,
179, 268, 636
open-source software for, 500
prevention vs. detection, 120
and privacy, 90, 627–628
public key (See Public key encryp-
tion)
purpose of, 628
regulation of, 637–640
satellite (See Satellite encryption
security systems)
symmetric, 630–632
English Civil Evidence Act of 1968, 28,
29
Enhanced 911 (E911), 551, 554, 561
Enhanced integrated drive electronics
(EIDE), 799
Enhanced signal strength (ESS)
method, 560, 563
Enmeshing phenomenon, 473
Entrapment, 800
Environmentalists, terrorism by, 404
Escrowed encryption, 494–495, 597
Essential elements of friendly informa-
tion, 800
Ethics of information warfare (IW),
590–597, 619–620
Eudora, 68
Event reconstruction
described, 30, 303–304, 309
procedure, 304–305
Evidence
admissibility, 6, 29, 155, 220, 230,
235, 248, 254
authentication, 182
collection
legal requirements, 247–253,
272, 327
methodology, 164–165,
218–219, 224–230, 263
overview, 70, 217–218,
229–231, 309, 684
processing procedures, 39, 42,
58, 177, 221, 239–247,
254–255
services, obtaining, 163–164
copy process, characteristics of, 250
defined, 20
documentary, 183, 278–279, 283
electronic
converting, 304–310
damaging of, 321–323
defined, 327, 700
problems with, 18, 65, 74, 75,
235, 254
procedures, 3, 19, 38, 327,
673–676, 693–695, 700
storing, 37
integrity/security of, 7, 24–25, 41,
98, 106, 258, 268, 307
legal tests for, 21–22, 58–60, 79
notebook, maintaining, 249–251,
321–322, 678
preservation, 17–18, 39, 59, 239,
241, 250, 254, 679–680, 686
proving, 23
rules of, 220–223, 232, 236–238
standards, 237, 320
trace, value of, 10
types of, 20, 219
volatile, 223
Evidence Collection and Data Seizure
Checklist Form, 756–757
Evidence Identification and Retrieval
Checklist Form, 747–748
EvilPing attack, 441
Exculpatory evidence defined, 220, 230
Executable defined, 800
Executive IW-D Oversight Office, 399
Executives
in computer crime commission,
285
in security policy implementation,
270
Exercises, answers to, 725–745
Expansion card defined, 800
Expert witness services, 7, 12, 60, 222
Extortion in cyberspace, 439
Extract defined, 800
Extraction of biometrics, 142
F
Fair Credit Reporting Act, 603, 605
Falun Dafa, 637
Falun Gong, 339–340
FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions),
705–708
Faraday cage, 516
Fast save function, 496
Fax machines, data recovery from, 10,
183
FBI survey 2003 on computer crime
financial impacts, 5
FDIC netforensics home page, 716
FDISK defined, 800
Federal Computer Incident Response
Center (FCIRC), 681–682
Federal Intrusion Detection Network
(FIDNet)
described, 495
and intrusion detection, 384–385
Federal rules of civil procedure on data
seizure, 11
Federal Rules of Evidence on electronic
evidence, 29, 58, 77, 237
Federated model of identity manage-
ment, 135–137
Feynman, Richard, 540
Fiber-optic connections, bandwidth of,
111, 577–578
Fidelity and Deposit Companies, 599
FIDNet. See Federal Intrusion Detec-
tion Network (FIDNet)
File allocation table (FAT), 800
Files
contents, searching, 691
converting, 304–310
copy process, characteristics of, 250
cross-linked, 796
defined, 800
encrypted, reading, 60, 61
erased, searching for, 245, 496, 690,
691
executable, copying, 207
extensions, searching, 307, 711
formats, 305–306, 311, 711
hiding, 207, 214 (See also Data,
hiding techniques)
logical, listing of, 690
space, unallocated, 816
File sharing, access control for,
325–326
File slack
defined, 800
evaluating, 244, 245
and evidence preservation, 42, 75,
177–178
and hidden data, 207–208, 240, 279
File system described, 800
Filter_G software described, 50–52
Final Conflict newsletter, 419
Financial records, recovery of, 10, 278
Fingerprinting
as ID verification tool, 483
location, 560–561
radio frequency (RF), 609, 611
824
Index

Fingers, silicon, 539–540
Finger utility defined, 68, 169–170
Fire damage, data recovery from,
27–28
Firewall machine defined, 801
Firewalls
benefits, 103–105, 424
and data encryption, 63, 86
described, 99–103, 107–108, 146,
315, 800–801
and intrusion detection, 93–94,
148, 149, 325
limitations, 71–72, 79–80,
106–108, 667
prevalence of, 270
stateful inspection, 662
Firmware, 26, 801
First-wave warfare, 801
Fishbowl tactic, 801
Flash, organization of, 71
F-letters, 675
FloodNet attacks, 441
Floppy disks
copying, 269, 271
examination of, 22, 43, 242–246
formats
converting, 46
custom, 44
matching, 51, 179
as security risk, 106, 108
virus-scanned, creating, 45
and virus transmission, 57
Florida Association of Computer
Crime Investigators, 716
FOCUS on incident handling pages,
716
FOCUS on intrusion detection pages,
716
Fog of war defined, 801
Forensic Challenge, 649
Forensicon, Incorporated, 785
Forensic psycholinguists in IW defen-
sive tactics, 492
Forensic Systems Types Checklist
Form, 752–753
Forensic Technology Types Checklist
Form, 750–751
Forgery, demonstrating, 29
Fork bomb described, 801
Formats of files, 305–306, 311
Formmail described, 801
Forms for reporting incidents,
323–324, 329
Forward link trialteration (FLT), 557
Fragmentation defined, 801. See also
Defragment
Fraud investigations
case histories, 25–26
electronic evidence in, 20, 278
of employees, 154
Fred Cohen and Associates, 709
Fred software, 676
Freedom Network, 652
Free for all links page, 801
Free speech, proliferation of, 438
Friction of war, 801
FrontPage extensions, 801–802
Frost & Sullivan, 655
Frye standard defined, 237
FTP (file transfer protocol)
account defined, 802
anonymous, 792
encryption issues with, 63
Funds, diverting, 79
Fuzzy logic tools in text searching, 179
G
G8 Group, 673, 700
Gateway defined, 119
Ghost accounts in computer sabotage,
663
GIA (Algerian Armed Islamic Group),
416
GIAC. See Global Information Ac-
count Certification (GIAC)
Giant magnetoresistant materials
(GMRs), 541
Global Information Account Certifica-
tion (GIAC), 173, 174
Global information environment, 802
Global Internet Project and cybercrime
regulation, 358
Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
described, 522–527, 545
and electromagnetic warhead
delivery, 515
and LBS, 550, 557–558
privacy issues of, 563
server-assisted, 558–559, 564
Global System for Mobile Communi-
cations (GSM), 638–639
GLONASS, 526
GMRs (Giant magnetoresistant mate-
rials), 541
Guestbook, 802
Guidance Software, 710, 786
Gulf War, C2W in, 383
Guttoso, Herve, 420
H
Hack back tactic, 491
Hacker insurance, 598–600
Hackers
profile of, 422–423, 643–644,
645–647, 802
responses, studying, 531
tracking, 453–459, 647–663
Hacking
access, gaining, 326, 330, 340
advanced, 640–647
evolution of, 645
exercises, 186, 467
and IW, 362, 386–387, 428–429
methodology, 661–662, 667, 669,
670
prevalence, 484, 641–642
punishment for, 600
tools, obtaining, 452–453, 460, 531,
642–643
Hacktivists in IW, 407, 409, 421, 501
Hamas, 415, 418
Hanssen, Robert P., 684
Hard disks
backup/restoration of, 40, 41
copying, 269, 271
data recovery on, 7, 496
examination of, 22, 242–246
shipping, 707–708
Hardware
evidence collection, labeling in,
231–232, 242
failures and backup procedures,
204
requirements
for data conversion, 306, 311
for evidence processing, 321
Hashes
block values, generating, 263–264,
268
in encryption, 263–264, 268, 634,
677
SHA256 (See Secure Hash Algo-
rithm (SHA256))
Head defined, 802
Header of email and Internet tracing,
65–69
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPPA), 614,
615
Hearsay evidence defined, 20, 219
Heat sink defined, 802
Helsingus, Johann, 651
HERF (High-energy radio frequency)
guns in IW, 363, 444, 445, 509
High Tech Crime Cops, 714
High Tech Crime Investigation Associ-
ation, 710
Hijacking defined, 802
HIPPA (Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act), 614, 615
History defined, 802
Hizb-ut-Tahrir (Islamic Liberation
Party), 417
Holocaust deniers in IW, 419
Homeland security systems described,
143–144, 147
Honeynet described, 668
The Honeynet Project, 530–531, 649,
650
The HoneyPot Project described,
266–267
Honeypotting defined, 226, 668, 669
+host:domain name and hack com-
mand defined, 170
Hotspots, locating, 296
Human resources and computer
forensic specialists, 9–10
Hycamtin, 291, 292
Hyperwar defined, 802
Index
825

I
IBM 3590 drive, data recovery from,
210
IBW (Information-based warfare), 803
ICMP. See Internet Control Message
Protocol (ICMP)
ICTs. See Information and communi-
cation technologies (ICTs)
IDC, 655
IDEA (International Data Encryption
Algorithm), 631
Identification of Data Checklist Form,
760–761
Identify-preserve-analyze-report
model, 686
Identity fraud, prevalence of, 131
Identity management
access, controlling, 133, 150
audits in, 133, 151
digital, aggregation in, 130
Identity management security systems
in authentication, 258–259
described, 129–137, 147
Identity theft
exercises, 150–151
overview, 137–141, 606–609
Identity Theft Hotline contact infor-
mation, 141
IDW (Information Dominance War-
fare), 804
IIW (Information in Warfare), 804
Images. See also Bit stream image
backups in evidence preservation
authentication of, 260–264, 266,
268, 284
making, 692
protection of, 45, 46, 198, 239
Incident handling, 95, 97, 183, 249,
323–324
Incremental backup defined, 197–198
India, IW capabilities of, 355, 356, 357,
363, 368
Indirect information warfare, 803
Individuals
tracing, 68
verifying, 72, 73
Industrial espionage
case studies, 720, 721
and computer evidence, 74
computers in, 434–435, 593
countries engaged in, 355, 356
and the Internet, 127, 291–296
investigating, 623
and MIWT, 387
in People’s Republic of China,
436–439, 448–451
prevalence of, 469, 683
tactics, defensive, 474–475
Industrial warfare defined, 803
Industry. See Corporations
Info-niche attacks in netwar, 346, 347
Information
collection, 804
compromise, 804
defined, 360, 803
denial, 804
destruction, 804
dominance, 804
friendly, essential elements of, 800
function, 804
protection, 805
realm, 805
superiority, 805
terrorism, 805
transport, 805
warfare (See Information warfare
(IW))
Information Age defined, 803
Information Age warfare, 803
Information and communication
technologies (ICTs)
applications in IW, 394, 396, 415,
418, 419
C2W and, 420
Information attack, 803
Information-based warfare (IBW), 803
Information Dominance Warfare
(IDW), 804
Information extraction (IE) in data
mining, 576–577
Information infrastructures, impor-
tance of, 585–588, 621
Information in Warfare (IIW), 804
Information Operations, 804
Information strategies defined, 408
Information systems (INFOSYS), 805
Information systems warfare (ISW),
805
Information technology
diffusion of, 587
system defined, 360, 366
Information Technology Sharing and
Analysis Center (IT-ISAC) de-
scribed, 343, 490
Information Warfare: Arsenal of the
Future Checklist Form, 772–775
Information Warfare Arsenal and
Tactics of Private Companies
Checklist Form, 771–772
Information Warfare Arsenal and
Tactics of Terrorists and Rogues
Checklist Form, 769–771
Information Warfare Arsenal and
Tactics of the Military Checklist
Form, 768–769
Information warfare (IW). See also
Cyberwarfare
anonymity and, 604–606
countermeasures, 497–498
defensive (IW-D), 384–389, 399,
407–408, 482–487
defined, 587, 619, 805–806
direct, 798
economic, 799
ethics of, 590–597, 619–620
impact of, 482
indirect, 803
and intrusion detection, 99
limitations of, 349, 514
and the media, 345–347
military tactics (See Military
strategy in cyberwarfare)
objectives of, 336, 353, 367, 466,
519
offensive, 378–383
overview, 335–341, 368–369,
394–408, 507–509
personal assets, destruction of,
597–600
preventive, planning, 480–482
response to, 508
rogue, countering, 492–500
security in, 161
space power in, 531–532
and strategic diplomacy, 344–354
tools, obtaining, 452–453
weapons, future, 532–538, 543
INFOSEC certification, 173, 805
INFOSYS (Information systems), 805
InfraGard described, 159, 364–365
INMARSAT Convention, 596
Instant messaging (IM) security
systems described, 125, 147
Insurance companies
and computer forensic specialists,
31, 166, 183
email in litigation, 319
embezzlement exercise, 185
fraud exercise, 671
image verification exercise, 284
Integrated platforms, 564–566
Intellectual property investigation, 303,
468, 659, 682
Intelligence
collection in IW, 366, 374, 376
and industrial espionage, 474
open source, 473, 809
operational, 809
reality, distorting, 544
technical, 815
Intelligent forensic filter. See Filter_G
software
INTELSAT Convention, 596
International Association of Computer
Investigative Specialists, 648, 710,
714
International Data Encryption Algo-
rithm (IDEA), 631
International Organization on Com-
puter Evidence (IOCE) described,
322, 329
International organizations in IW,
354–359
International Telecommunications
Convention of 1982, 596
Internet
abuse, detection of, 52, 74, 180,
315, 701
authentication on, 259
826
Index

as Big Brother, 577–578
children, protecting, 128, 232, 535
and cyberterrorism, 417, 420, 424,
460
encryption described, 64
and industrial espionage, 127,
291–296
and privacy awareness, 127
security systems, 84–91, 146, 148
tactical, 815
tracing methods, 65–69, 96
wireless, 579–580
Internet Control Message Protocol
(ICMP), 104, 289
Internet Merchant Account defined, 88
Internet Resources on Technology
Law, 713
Internet Security Systems Incorporated
(ISS), 666
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and
network security, 480–481,
484–487
Interpact Incorporated, 711
Intrusion detection systems
anomaly-based, 655–656
appliance-based, 656–657
described, 91–99, 146, 148, 149,
157, 315, 329–330, 667–668
firewalls and, 93–94, 148, 149, 
325
history of, 384, 653–656
implementing, 163
network signature-based, 655, 668,
669, 697
outsourcing of, 657
and packet sniffers, 528
response in, 160, 323–324
speed of, 656
IOCE. See International Organization
on Computer Evidence (IOCE)
described
Iomega Zip drives, cost of, 305
I/O port defined, 802
IPK, elements of, 504
IP spoofing described, 490
Iraq invasion, propaganda in, 345
Ira Wilsker’s Law Enforcement Sites on
the Web, 713
IRQ (Interrupt request) defined, 806
Islam, dissemination of, 418
Islamic Liberation Party (Hizb-ut-
Tahrir), 417
Islamists and netwar, 395, 416
Israeli Internet Underground (IIU),
442–443
Isreal, IW capabilities of, 355, 356, 357,
363, 368, 442–444
ISW (Information systems warfare),
805
IT-ISAC. See Information Technology
Sharing and Analysis Center (IT-
ISAC) described
IW. See Information warfare (IW)
I&W (Indications and Warnings)
defined, 802, 803
I&W/TA (Indications and Warnings or
Threat Assessment) defined, 803
J
Japan, PLS in, 554, 560
Java chat rooms, 806
Jihadists in netwar, 416
Jitter defined, 289
Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS),
375
Jondos, 652
Jumper defined, 806
Junkbusters, 602–603
Jus ad bellum, 591, 621
Jus in bello, 592
K
Kerberos described, 105, 122, 289
Kernel defined, 806
Keyboard activity, monitoring, 52,
552–553, 808
Key communicator defined, 806
Kill assessment in EMP attack, 517
Klatt, Bernard, 420
Knowledge-based warfare, 806
Knowledge defined, 806
Knowledge dominance, 806
Knowledge war. See Information
warfare (IW)
Kroll Ontrack, Incorporated, 786
L
Ladenese Epistle, 418–419
LAN 802.11b standard, security mea-
sures in, 116, 117, 579
Laptop computers
damage costs, tracking, 676
data recovery from, 27, 210, 240
security vulnerabilities of, 280–281,
284
theft recovery software described,
53–55, 77
Lasers in IW, 446
Law enforcement
and computer forensic specialists,
8–9, 18, 31, 282, 299
technology, types of, 38–52 (See
also individual software by
name)
Web sites useful to, 713–715
Law Enforcement Guide to the World
Wide Web, 714
LBS. See Location-based services (LBS)
LC Technology, 787
LC Technology International, Incorpo-
rated, 786–787
Leads, identifying, 38
Leapfrog attack, 806
Lee, Wen Ho, 434, 452
Legal/court related sites, 714
Legal issues
in computer forensic evidence,
20–21, 58–60, 79, 155, 247–253
in cyberwarfare, 341, 586
evidence
collection, 247–253, 272, 327
overview, 21–22, 58–60, 79
Legislation for IW defensive measures,
493–494
Letter bombs, 807
Liability, demonstrating, 30
Libertarian Party, 422
Liberty virus, 115
+link:domain name command de-
fined, 170
Linux systems
data recovery on, 207–209, 213
file cleansing utilities, 208–209
Litigations, sources of, 30–31
Loc8.net, 564
Local area networks (LANs)
intrusion detection on, 101, 102,
149, 316
in IW, 373
Location-based services (LBS),
549–551
Location fingerprinting, 560–561
Log files
admissibility of, 248
in evidence collection, 70, 98, 221,
224–225
and firewalls, 103, 105
retrieving, 650–653, 678
Unix, 678, 679
utilities for creating, 309
Word documents, 568
Logic bombs in IW, 477, 508, 520–521,
807
Lost cluster chain, 807
Love Bug virus, losses from, 600
Low Earth orbit (LEO) network
described, 120
M
MAC address filtering, 117, 679
Mafiaboy, 597
Mailservers, tracing, 68, 69
Mail storm, 807
Majordomo list, 807
Managed security service providers
(MSSPs), 655, 657
ManTech Security and Mission Assur-
ance, 787–788
Mares and Company, LLC, 710
Markov, Georgi, 427
Marshall Law and cyberspace, 361–363
Marsh and McClennan Companies,
599
Marx standard defined, 237
MASINT (Measurement and Signal
Intelligence) defined, 807
MD5. See Message Digest 5 (MD5)
Measurement and Signal Intelligence
(MASINT) defined, 807
Index
827

Measurement and Signature Intelli-
gence defined, 807
Media
conversion, 11
previewing, 687–689
Media broadcasts in IW, 345–347
Medical ID cards, 613–615
MEII (Minimum essential information
infrastructure) defined, 807, 808
Memory
copying, 272
dumps and evidence preservation,
42, 77
resident programs, understanding,
180
MEMS (Microelectrical and mechani-
cal systems), 535
Merchant defined, 88
Message defined, 807
Message Digest 5 (MD5)
hash functions in, 634
in PGP, 122, 123
in timekeeping, 291
MessageID described, 67
Metal oxide semiconductor (MOS)
devices in IW, 511
Microbes in IW, 521
Microelectrical and mechanical sys-
tems (MEMS), 535
Microsoft and privacy issues, 603
Microsoft Internet Explorer, 604
Microsoft Outlook/Outlook Express,
viruses in, 57
Microsoft Word in crime scene investi-
gation, 238
Microsoft WordPerfect™ in crime
scene investigation, 238
Middle East cyberwars, 441–444, 464
MIE (Military Information Environ-
ment) defined, 807, 808
Military computer forensics technol-
ogy, types of, 36–38
Military deception, 807
Military Information Environment
(MIE) defined, 807, 808
Military information function, 808
Military Information Operations
(MIOs), 360, 446
Military information warfare tactics
(MIWT) described, 376–377, 387
Military operations and information
systems, 587
Military strategy in cyberwarfare,
350–354, 359–360, 371–374,
376–377, 392–394, 580
Military technical revolution (MTR),
808
Minimum essential information
infrastructure (MEII) defined, 807,
808
Mirkin, Chad, 540
Mirror image backup software. See
SafeBack software
Mirroring in backup procedures, 201,
202, 214, 808. See also Bit stream
image backups in evidence preser-
vation
Misbehavior in the face of the enemy
defined, 477–478
Missiles and electromagnetic warheads,
514
Misuse detection, 808
Mitnick, Kevin, 422
Mitretek Systems, 713
Mockingbird, 808
Mohammed, Ali, 454, 455, 456
Mohammed, Omar Bakri, 417
Monthly traffic defined, 808. See also
Bandwidth
Motes, 532–536
Motherboard, 808
Motion, simulating, 537, 541–542
MSANEWS, 416, 418
mSQL database, 808
MSSPs (Managed security service
providers), 655, 657
M-Sweep™ software described, 48
MTR (Military technical revolution),
808
Myatt, David, 420
N
Nanomushrooms, 542
Nanoscale products, fabricating, 542
Nanotechnology in IW, 521, 538–543,
546
National Information Infrastructure
(NII) defined, 808, 809
National Infrastructure Protection
Center (NIPC)
and cyberterrorism, 429–430
described, 641, 654
on InfraGard, 364–365
National Law Enforcement and Cor-
rections Technology Center
(NLECTC), 36, 37
National security activities of the FBI, 5
National Security Agency (NSA)
and cyberterrorism, 508
function of, 335, 379
National Security Council (NSC), 429
Navigation warfare (NAVWAR), 808
NAVWAR (Navigation warfare), 808
Neo-nazis and netwar, 395, 420
NetBIOS and hack attacks, 325
Netforensics home page, 716
NetMotion, 580
Net privacy systems described,
126–129
Netscape.hst file, 496
Netscape Navigator, log files in, 496, 604
Netstat command, 679
Net Threat Analyzer software de-
scribed, 46–47
Netwar. See also Cyberwarfare; Infor-
mation warfare (IW)
described, 344–347, 394–396, 809
and strategic diplomacy, 350–352
Networks
anonymity on, 651–653
auditing, 696–699, 701
backup
data path, 196
issues with, 201–203
civilian, protecting, 544
and computer forensics, 35
disaster recovery systems (NDRs),
112–113, 147, 148
encryption of, 63
forensics, 316–319
intrusion detection on, 93, 98, 326,
661–662
investigating, 242
privacy on, 105
recovery of in IW, 375
security, 86, 97, 160, 315–316, 343,
357–358
ASPs and, 486, 487, 488, 665
ISPs and, 480–481, 484–487
spoofing, 809
traffic, monitoring, 225
viruses in, 57
worms, 809
Networks Checklist Form, 762–765
Network Time Protocol (NTP),
288–291, 299
New Technologies, Incorporated, 47,
715, 788
Nida’ul Islam Web site, 419
NII (National Information Infrastruc-
ture) defined, 808, 809
NLECTC (National Law Enforcement
and Corrections Technology
Center), 36, 37
Nmap utility in attack identification,
364, 528, 662
Norseen, John, 617–618
North, Oliver, 319
Notebook, evidence maintaining,
249–251, 321–322, 678
Nslookup utility defined, 168
NTFS file system, 809
NTI-Computer Evidence Leaders, 710
NTP. See Network Time Protocol
(NTP)
Nuclear weapons
obtaining, 452–453
in terrorism, 402–403, 425–427,
450–451, 545
NutraSweet, intelligence unit of, 293
O
Objective reasoning, threats to, 347,
350, 352, 353, 369. See also Percep-
tions
O’Connor v. Ortega, 248
Odd person out attacks described,
120–121
Offensive counterinformation, 809
828
Index

Omega Engineering, 664
One-time pad method of encryption,
629–630
The Onion Router Project, 497–498, 653
Onion routing described, 498, 651–652
OODA loop
and C2W, 382–383
defined, 809
Open-source intelligence, 809
Operational intelligence, 809
Operation Desert Storm, 519
Operation Iraqi Freedom, C2W in, 383
Operation Other Than War (OOTW),
590–591, 809
Operations security (OPSEC) defined,
381, 809
Opinion defined, 809
OPLAN 3600, 378
OPSEC (Operations security) defined,
381, 809
Optical networking and IW, 373, 518
Oracle Corporation, 297
Orientation defined, 809
Ortega, O’Connor v., 248
P
Packets in intrusion detection, 98, 810
Packet sniffers described, 477, 528,
655–656, 810
PAGEFILE.SYS in evidence detection,
75
Palestine in cyberterrorism, 441
Parallel warfare described, 393–394
Partitions. See also FDisk defined
analyzing, 246
defined, 810
Partition table defined, 810
Passive attack defined, 810
Passive threat defined, 810
Passwords
caching and identity fraud, 132
obtaining, 552, 680, 810
protection
of diskette images, 45, 46
in IW, 337, 388, 483
limitations, 63–64, 216
Path defined, 810
Payment gateway defined, 88
Payments, processing, 87–88
PCPhoneHome™ software described,
54–55
Pegasus Mail, 67, 68
Penet, 651
Penetration defined, 810
Penetration signature defined, 811
Pentagon and IW, 385–386, 459–460,
588
Pentaguard, 644
People, tracking, 553–564
People’s Republic of China
and encryption, 637
industrial espionage in, 436–439,
448–451
IW capabilities of, 342–343, 355,
368, 378
Perceptions. See also Objective reason-
ing, threats to
defined, 811
manipulation of, 349, 366
Performance of SANs, 111
Peripherals
changes in, 23
described, 811
Personal assets, destruction of,
597–600
Personal identification numbers
(PINs) and cellular telephony, 611
Personal Locator System (PLS)
applications, 561–564
architecture, 555–556
implementing, 564
overview, 554
technologies, 556–561
PGP. See Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
Phone tapping, 103
Phracker defined, 811
Phreak defined, 811
Phreaker defined, 811
Pierre-Louis, Herbert, 664
Ping command defined, 169
Pister, Kristopher, 532–536
PKI. See Public key infrastructure
(PKI) systems described
Plagiarism, detecting, 569
Plants as bioterrorism targets, 430–431
PLS. See Personal Locator System
(PLS)
Plug-and-play (PnP) defined, 811
PnP (Plug-and-play) defined, 811
The Police Officer’s Internet Directory,
714
Political extremists and netwar,
395–397
Politics and the Internet, 127, 128
Porcupine.org, 710
Pornography viewing
investigating, 232, 255, 287–288,
719
statistics, 165, 241
Port numbers
attack points, common, 661, 669
ranges, 71–72, 78
Position, computing, 559
Post-apocalyptic terrorist groups,
403–404
POST (Power-on self test) defined, 811
Poulsen, Kevin, 422
Pragmatic communication defined,
348–349
Premiums for hacker insurance,
598–599
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 64,
122–124, 636
Prevention defined, 94
Principle Forensic Activities Checklist
Form, 748–750
Principle of least privilege defined, 102
Privacy
and biometric systems, 483
encryption and, 90, 627–628
in evidence collection, 248,
267–268, 675
and firewalls, 105–106
and hacker pursuit, 460
and LBS, 550, 563
maintaining, 529–530, 602–603,
627
medical, 613–615
monitoring, 609–613
net systems described, 126–129
policy
enforceability of, 489
key elements of, 132–133, 
147
in Windows environments,
566–569
Privacy agreements described, 488–489
The Privacy Foundation, 529–530, 545,
566, 567, 616
Private companies. See Corporations
Private key encryption described, 86
Processor defined, 88
Productivity, loss of, 165
Program Loader and evidence collec-
tion, 70
Project Leadership Associates, 788
Promiscuous network cards, 527–528
Propaganda in IW, 345, 347
Proxy servers as source addresses,
650–651
Psychological operations (Psyops)
described, 336–338, 367, 381, 409,
595
Psyops. See Psychological operations
(Psyops)
Public information defined, 85
Public key encryption
and cyberterrorism, 424–425
described, 63, 86, 114, 120–121,
147
for IW defensive measures, 494
limitations of, 632–636
message path, 121
in PGP, 124
in timestamping, 291
Public key infrastructure (PKI) systems
described, 113–114, 147
Publisher IDs, 264
Punishment for hacking, 600
Purity Wholesale Grocers, 664
Q
QuickFire attack, 441
R
Radar in cyberterrorism, 451
RadioCamera system, 560
Radio frequency (RF) fingerprinting,
609, 611
Index
829

RAID (redundant array of indepen-
dent disks) disks
data recovery from, 211
data storage on, 22, 26
management of, 110–111
RAM (Random Access Memory), 811
Random text displayer described, 812
RC4, 631
Read heads, development of, 540–541
Real evidence defined, 20, 29
Real time audio/video described, 812
Reconstructing Past Events Checklist
Form, 761–762
Records, access to, 277–278, 283
ReFLEX two-way paging, 564
Registry, the, 685, 815
Reject all cookies option, 566
Relevancy test of evidence defined, 237
Reliability of SANs, 111
Remailers and encryption, 497
Remediation of IW attacks, 356–357
Renew Data, 788–789
Replay attacks, 290
Reports as evidence, 29, 317
Requirements definition, 685–700
Research in Motion (RIM) wireless
technology
evidentiary value of, 69–70
file system in, 70–71
Restoration ecologists, terrorism by, 404
Retina, 662
Retro-virus described, 812
Review questions, answers to, 725–745
Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA),
587, 812
Right-click defined, 812
RIM devices. See Research in Motion
(RIM) wireless technology
The Risk Advisory Group Limited-
Investigations, 716
Risk assessment
equipment purchases, 389
overview, 85, 812
procedure, 167–172
software for, 45
Risk management techniques in cyber
crime fighting, 156–162, 502, 503
Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman (RSA)
standard
for digital signatures, 64
in encryption, 635
in PGP, 122, 123
RMA (Revolution in Military Affairs),
587, 812
Robbins, Judd, 715
Robots in IW, 536–538
Rockets in IW, 451
Roessler, Thomas, 649
ROM (Read-only memory), 812
Root access, application of, 442, 658,
682
RSA standard. See Rivest, Shamir, and
Adleman (RSA) standard
Rules of engagement, 596
Rules of evidence. See Evidence, rules of
Russia
infrastructure, control of, 471
IW capabilities of, 355, 363
S
Sabotage of computers, 663–666
SafeBack software described, 39–43,
676
Sandboxing defined, 226
SANS. See Systems Administrator
Networking and Security (SANS)
SANs. See Storage area networks
(SANs)
Satellite encryption security systems,
118–124, 147
Satellites and GPS, 524
Scalability of SANs, 111
ScanDisk, 707
Scarfo, Nicodemo S., 552, 553
Scavenging defined, 812
SCPAs. See Super Cyber Protection
Agencies (SCPAs) in IW
Script kiddies, 644
Scripts defined, 812
SCSI (Small computer system inter-
face) defined, 812
SDRAM (Synchronous dynamic
random access memory) defined,
812
Search engine defined, 813
Searching
anonymous, 170
database files, 307, 308, 309
file extensions, 307, 711
files, 245, 496, 690, 691
spreadsheet files, 307, 308, 309
text, 47–50, 178–179, 207,
243–244, 560–577, 685
Windows swap files, 240, 241, 244,
279
Word processing files, 307, 308
Second-wave warfare defined, 813
Sector defined, 813
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA256)
hash functions in, 634, 678
in SafeBack, 39, 40, 41
Secure Sockets Layer (SSI) encryption,
114, 813
Secure Virtual Private Networks
(SVPNs), 90
Security
advice, providing, 15–16
awareness, 267, 268, 504, 641, 682
breaches, 269, 813
budgets for, 270
classification, 813
costs of, 648–650
defined, 813
electronics, 799
employees in, 267, 485, 659, 674,
720
environment, changes in, 470–471
evidence (See Evidence,
integrity/security of)
in image verification, 266–268
information protection strategies,
101–102, 586
layers of, 102
of LBS/PLS, 563
MIWT, 376
overview, 83–84, 145–146
policy
auditing, 696–699, 813
establishing, 148, 159, 425, 426,
440
in evidence collection, 222, 674
guidelines, 96, 97
professionals, 440
reviews, software for, 47–50
of systems, 94–95, 485
testing, 640–641
threats, sources of, 5, 33–34, 42
user identity, verifying, 130–132
weaknesses, identifying, 76, 79–80
Web sites, 662
wireless, 69–71 (See also Wireless
security systems)
Security scanners described, 315
Select defined, 813
Semiconductor devices, damaging via
EMP, 516
Sendmail program described, 476–477
Sensor-to-shooter defined, 813
Servers
backup, 194–195
described, 813
in GPS, 558–559, 564
proxy as source addresses, 650–651
timestamping in, 290
tracing, 68, 69
Server side includes (SSI), 813
Service, degradation of, 797
Service level agreements (SLAs) de-
scribed, 486
Service levels offered by computer
forensic technicians, 14–15
Service set identifier (SSID)
security measures in, 117
Session hijacking defined, 813–814
Settlement defined, 88
Sextracker survey on online pornogra-
phy viewing, 165
Shared situation awareness (SSA), 814
Shipping manifests, falsifying, 439
Shopping cart described, 814
Sid-Ra, 421
SI-FI. See Synthesizing Information
from Forensic Investigations (SI-
FI) environment
Signal defined, 814
Signal direction PLS, 556–557
Signal security (SIGSEC), 814
SignalSoft Corporation, 551
Signal strength method, 559–560
830
Index

Signature matching, 655–656
SIGNCODE.EXE utility, 263
Silicon fingers, 539–540
Silo model of identity management,
134
Simple counter defined, 814
Simple Network Management Protocol
(SNMP) described, 327, 328
Site submission defined, 814
Situation awareness, 536
Situation awareness (SA), 814
Slot defined, 814
Smart cards
applications of, 90–91, 148–149
described, 73, 78–79
security of, 91
Smart dust, 532–536
SmithKline Beecham Corporation,
291–293
SMO Legal Reporter 06/00, 716
Sniffing. See also Packet sniffers de-
scribed
defined, 814
passwords, obtaining, 552
tools, 527–529, 595
in wireless systems, 116
Sniffit software, 527–528
Snooping tools, 527–529
Social engineering, 376, 663, 814
Societal aspects in cyberspace, 469–470
Socket defined, 815
SODA Project, 443–444
Software
antivirus (See Antivirus software)
for attack detection, 156–157
backdoors, planting, 363
case-management, 282
changes in, 23, 646
copying packages, 269
for data recovery, 496
designing, 47
doomsday, 342
integrity, maintaining, 357
publisher IDs, 264
for risk assessment, 45
for security reviews, 47–50
theft recovery, 53–55, 77
tools, capabilities of, 684
useful sites, 168, 170, 179, 715
vulnerabilities
communication of, 646
hacking, 662
SOS (System of systems) defined, 815
Source addresses, 650–651
Source address spoofing, 650
Soviet Union. See Russia, IW capabili-
ties of
Space Imaging, 531, 532
Space power
in counterterrorism, 392–394
in IW, 531–532
Spam defined, 815
Spamming defined, 470
Spectrum management defined, 815
Spreadsheet files, searching, 307, 308,
309
Spyware described, 61–63
SSI. See Secure Sockets Layer (SSI)
encryption
SSID. See Service set identifier (SSID)
State tables, 679
Statistics described, 812
Steganalysis-Attacks Against Steganog-
raphy and Watermaking-Counter-
measures, 712
Steganography, 498
Stegonography, 712
Steinberg Diagnostic Medical Imaging,
665
Storage abstraction defined, 109
Storage area networks (SANs)
as backup systems, 108–109,
194–195, 213
benefits of, 110–111
overview, 109–110, 147, 148
Storage-centric model of computing
described, 110
Storage devices
backup, 198–199
previewing, 687–689
Strategic diplomacy and IW, 344–354
Stupp, Samuel, 542
Subscriber fraud, cellular telephones,
609, 612–613
Subsidy fraud, cellular telephones, 609,
613
Super Cyber Protection Agencies
(SCPAs) in IW, 363–365
Surfing in attack identification, 170
Surveillance
electronic
hacker tools, 531
overview, 552–553
services described, 13, 16
services
described, 13, 16
global, 495
identification/analysis of,
291–297
workplace, 616–618
Surveillance Tools for Information
Warfare Checklist Form, 775
Sydex Incorporated, 710
Symmetric encryption, 630–632
Synthesizing Information from Foren-
sic Investigations (SI-FI) environ-
ment
described, 37
System of systems (SOS) defined, 815
System Registry defined, 815
Systems Administrator Networking
and Security (SANS), 173, 174
T
T12, 644
Tactical Internet defined, 815
Taiwan, IW capabilities of, 355, 356,
368
Tape drives
as backup devices, 199, 201, 269
data recovery from, 211
Target concept defined, 572
Taxol, 291
TCP/IP, authentication by, 97–98, 288
Team play in information manage-
ment, 296
Technical attack, 815
Technical intelligence, 815
Technology, 23–24, 35–36
Telephone services and identity theft,
139–140
Telnet account, 815
TEMPEST surveillance, 513
Terminal hijacking, 815
Terminator described, 815
Terror Incorporated, 454–459
Terrorism, 405–406, 444–451. See also
Cyberterrorism
information, 805
religious, 463
state-sponsored, 464
Terrorists
cells, disrupting, 457
methodology, 430–433
organization of, 395, 463, 464
profile of, 421–424, 428, 438–439,
645
recruitment of, 458–459
tactics in IW, 415–421, 424–427
Testimonial evidence defined, 20, 219
Testing
evidence, 21–22, 58–60, 79
security, 640–641
of systems, 324–326
Text, searching, 47–50, 178–179, 207,
243–244, 560–577, 685
TextSearch Plus software described, 45,
47–50
TFL:IDS, 657
The Coroner’s Toolkit, 710
Theft defined, 155
Theft recovery software described,
53–55, 77
Thermionic technology and EMP
attack, 517
Third-wave warfare, 815–816
Threats, passive, 810
Time bomb described, 816
Time difference of arrival (TDOA)
method, 557
Time element deductibles, 599
Time stamps
in authentication, 263–264
in evidence collection, 228, 243,
690
overview, 288–291
Timing attacks, 635
TJPing utility and Internet tracing, 67,
68
Index
831

Total Recall (Binary Biz North Amer-
ica), 789
Trace evidence, value of, 10
Traceroute command defined, 169
Trade sanctions, evading, 439
Traffic amplification via Web site, 442
Transactions, electronic, demonstrat-
ing, 30
TRANSEC (Transmission Security),
816
Trans Union, 607
Trap doors
in cyberterrorism, 508, 521
defined, 816
information, obtaining, 658
Triple DES (Data encryption stan-
dard), 631
Trojan horse programs
described, 816
and evidence preservation, 42, 177
in IW, 336, 477, 508, 520, 521, 545,
595
protection from, 56–57, 668
Troll described, 816
TrustE, 489
TUFCOFS, 711
Tunneling defined, 94
Twofish, 631
U
Unallocated file space, 816
UN Convention on Law of the Sea, 596
UNICODE, 688, 690
Unilever, 294, 295
Unintentional emission (UE), detec-
tion/tracking of, 513
United States
cyberwarfare, protecting against,
462
IW capabilities of, 357, 365–366,
378, 622
IW preparation status, 335–339,
350–351, 362, 366–367,
423–424, 439, 587
PLS in, 554
on privacy issues in IW, 602
and terrorism, 391–392, 400, 408,
429–432
on weapons availability of enemies,
446–448
UNITY, 443
University of Central Florida-Orlando,
648
University of Delaware Web site url,
290
Unix systems
data recovery on, 207, 216, 505,
677, 678, 679
DNS service on, 324
timekeeping in, 289, 290
Unzip defined, 816
US. Secret Service, 663
Useful sites, software, 168, 170, 179, 715
Usenet in threat identification, 171
User activities
in IW, 339
reconstructing, 4, 16, 17, 74, 273,
622
tracing, 95, 183, 300
User identity, verifying, 130–132, 610
UUencode, 816
V
Validation of data, 76. See also Authen-
tication
Vandal described, 816
Van Eck radiation, suppressing, 513
Vector-space method of text exploita-
tion, 575–576
Vehicles, locating, 554, 573–574
Vendor and Forensic Services Types
Checklist Form, 754–755
Vendors in software evolution, 646
Verification. See Authentication
Verify mode, SafeBack, 40
Verisign, 89, 260–263, 271, 272
Victims of identity theft, options of,
607–609
Video adapter described, 816
Violent crime, prevalence of, 5
Virtual battlespace, 816
Virtualization defined, 109
Virtual private networks (VPNs)
budget for, 267
intrusion detection on, 99
security for, 484
Virtual realm, 817
Viruses
described, 817
and employee cooperation, 267
and firewalls, 107
and IW, 387–388, 485, 508, 520,
545, 595
protection from, 56–57, 230 (See
also Antivirus software)
scanners and intrusion detection,
94
wireless, 115–117
Visualization interfaces in network
forensics, 316–319, 326–327
Visual query interface described, 318,
328
Vogon International Data Recovery,
789
Voice identification as ID verification
tool, 483
Volatile evidence, 223
Vulnerability assessment systems. See
Intrusion detection systems
Vulnerability defined, 817
W
Wal-Mart Stores, 293
War, Act of defined, 591–592
War defined, 817
War dialer defined, 817
War driving/flying defined, 296
Warfare defined, 817
Warm boot defined, 817
Wassenar Management, 639
Weapons of mass destruction
electromagnetic bombs, 509–510
and IW-D, 401–402, 405
tools, obtaining, 452–453
Weapons of precise disruption, 376
Web-based Telnet, 817
Web bugs in Word documents,
566–569, 583
Web images, copying, 56
Web of Justice Links, 714
Webraska, 551
Web services
access control for, 325–326
and digital identity management,
130–131
Web sites
crime, case histories, 25
defacement of, 443
security of, 662
traffic amplification via, 442
WEP. See Wired equivalent privacy
(WEP)
WetStone Technologies, 711
What’s on the Internet for Legal and
Law Enforcement Personnel, 714
White-collar crime, prevalence of, 5
White supremacists and netwar, 395
Whois command defined, 169
Wide area networks (WANs), intru-
sion detection on, 101, 102, 149
Wildlife, tracking, 556
Windows 2003, 38, 176, 646
Windows environments
access control for, 325–326
data persistence in, 635
forensics in, 80
hacking, 646
log files in, 231, 496
privacy in, 566–569
Windows NT log files, 678, 679
Windows Registry, 685
Windows Scripting Host, disabling, 56
Windows swap files
described, 817
searching, 240, 241, 244, 279
Windows XP, 38, 176, 646
WinSmurf tool, 441–442
Wired equivalent privacy (WEP),
security measures in, 117, 579, 580
Wireless application protocol (WAP),
security measures in, 116
832
Index

