ISSUE 
274
JANUARY 2018
£6.99 • US$16.99
pRiNted iN  
the UK
SUCCEED AS A 
DESIGNER-MAKER 
All you need to create, produce 
and sell your own range of products
InSIdEr advIcE
25 GIFT IDEAS!   muST-hAvE CREATIONS BY ENTREpRENEuRIAl DESIGNERS
IMPrOvE YOUr TYPOGraPHY 
Sharpen your typesetting skills with 
our junior designer manual
POwEr POlITIcS In dESIGn 
Our industry is not immune from #MeToo 
moments, argues Gemma Germains
The hoTTesT colour paleTTes for The coming year
PANTONE 7541 C
C7 m1 y3 k2
PANTONE 2627 C
C85 m100 y6 k38
PANTONE 607 C
C3 m0 y34 k0
Colour
     trends
PANTONE 290 C
C23 m0 y1 k0
2 0 1 8


january 2018
COVER ARTIST
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 3 -
Making  
the cover
COLOUR 
TRENDS ‘16 
With a pantone 
chip-inspired 
cover, issue 258 
hosted our first 
colour trends 
report, by regular 
ca collaborator 
Franklintill.
COLOUR THEORY 
Focused on colour 
theory, issue 266 
featured a blend 
of six pantone 
inks (including 
three fluoros). it 
was so popular 
that ca Hq has  
run out of copies.
If there was a golden rule of cover 
design, it would probably be ‘Don’t 
use the same trick twice in a row’ – 
also known as the ‘Familiarity Breeds 
Contempt’ clause.* But sometimes an 
opportunity arises that’s impossible  
to resist, and despite our four-way 
split cover run last month (the 
printer’s floors are still stained with 
fluoro ink), our annual colour trends 
report from FranklinTill demanded 
a different cover for each of the 
three palettes it identified.
With six Pantones available, 
we chose two colours from each trend 
for each cover, and converted the rest 
to their CMYK equivalent (check out 
www.pantone.com/color-finder for 
researching your own colours). 
Oh, and then we threw down the 
images and actually designed them…
* There’s actually only one golden rule: 
get to the ******* printers on time.
COLOUR 
TRENDS ‘17 
one year on, our 
second Franklintill 
colour report 
inspired merijn 
Hos’ abstract 
cover for issue 261, 
referencing the key 
palettes inside.
left and above: the three different trends covers: 
interactive, primitive and playful. 
above: all 15 featured colours, with the six pantones 
we chose highlighted in magenta.
mark wynne 
these covers are the closest 
ca art editor mark has come 
to fulfilling his dream of art 
editing a glossy fashion mag.  

january 2018
WELCOME
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 4 -
Editor’s letter
@computerarts
@computerarts
/computerarts
/computerartsmag
Keep in touch with…
Colour is a wonderfully evocative design tool, with 
the right palette packing an emotional punch as well 
as boosting aesthetic appeal. And as our cover feature 
attests, palettes can also express wider trends that 
span graphic design, fashion, products, and more.
In our annual colour trend report (page 40), long-
running CA collaborator FranklinTill identifies three 
distinct movements, with accompanying palettes. Like 
the trends they represent, these are fluid, expressive 
and adaptable: lazy eye-dropper users need not apply.
On page 58, you’ll find an in-depth guide to making it 
as a designer-maker – whether you’re tapping the lucrative 
Christmas gift market, or keen to kick off the new year 
with an exciting new income stream. Thanks to the 
inexorable rise of Etsy, Not On The High Street and other 
global platforms for crafty creatives, it’s never been easier to 
put your talents to good use creating and selling products, 
and the feature also doubles as a handy gift list for anyone 
keen to avoid chain stores and support independent artists.
We also pay a visit to Koto, a young studio that combines 
infectious passion with a strong work ethic, and has made a 
splash on the design scene in just three short years, largely 
thanks to its global rebrand of Fanta. Discover the secrets 
of its success in our video profile on page 76.
On a more serious note, two months after the Weinstein 
scandal first broke, the #MeToo debate is still going strong. 
In her column on page 20, Gemma Germains points out 
that design is in no way immune from abuses of power, 
and we all share the responsibility for addressing the issue.
Next month, we’ve got another very special collectable 
cover to kick off 2018: you’ll have to wait to find out the 
full details, but to whet your appetite, the issue is dedicated 
to chasing your dreams, nailing your new year’s resolutions 
and making it the best year ever. See you on the other side!
NICK CArSON
Editor
nick.carson@futurenet.com
Featuring
ricardo cavolo 
spanish mural artist ricardo discusses 
life on the ‘b side’, how he’s learned 
to cope with mental health problems 
and the importance of vibrant colour  
in his work on page 50. 
www.ricardocavolo.com
alice walker 
Director of verbal strategy at london 
studio Koto, alice reveals how the right 
client conversations can reveal all you 
need to formulate a strategy – part of 
our video profile on page 76. 
www.studiokoto.co
abi overland 
brighton-based designer and illustrator 
abi shares how she makes a living by 
applying her designs to ceramics – part 
of our feature on becoming a successful 
designer-maker, starting on page 58. 
www.abioverland.com
gemma germains 
Gemma is senior content strategist at 
digital agency Dare. on page 20, she 
considers whether design is having a 
#metoo moment as she explores the 
power struggles at play in the industry. 
www.thisisdare.com
james sommerville 
James – vice president of global design 
at coca-cola – reveals the thinking 
behind new design challenge coke x 
adobe x You on page 82, and shares some 
of the stunning work already created. 
www.cokexadobexyou.com


january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 6 -
Future plc is a public
company quotes on the 
London Stock Exchange
(symbol: FUTR).
www.futureplc.com
mark wynne
Art editor
our art ed is thrilled to be on his way to the us by 
Night conference in antwerp. sadly, the only way he’ll 
arrive  without getting lost en route is for him to be 
dismembered and packed snugly in Nick’s suitcase. 
gareth jones
video producer
Gareth has been crying his eyes out at call me by 
Your Name. He’s still weeping two days later. He’s 
also heard rosie’s trying to set up a bowling team, 
quashing his hopes of a badminton resurgence. 
julia sagar
freelAnce writer
Julia lost her phone in a rock jumping venture at the 
seaside this month. sadly her replacement phone 
only works in loudspeaker mode, which makes 
complaining to talktalk in the office a bit tricky.
rosie hilder 
operAtions editor 
aside from silent disco dancing and excessive selfie-
taking at Nick’s wedding, rosie accidentally met 
philip pullman, saw Danish comedian sofie Hagen 
and watched italian drama call me by Your Name.
DISCLAIMER All contents © 2017 Future Publishing Limited or published under licence. All rights reserved. No part of this magazine may be 
used, stored, transmitted or reproduced in any way without the prior written permission of the publisher. Future Publishing Limited (company 
number 2008885) is registered in England and Wales. Registered office: Quay House, The Ambury, Bath BA1 1UA. All information contained in 
this publication is for information only and is, as far as we are aware, correct at the time of going to press. Future cannot accept any responsibility 
for errors or inaccuracies in such information. You are advised to contact manufacturers and retailers directly with regard to the price of products/
services referred to in this publication. Apps and websites mentioned are not under our control. We are not responsible for their contents or any 
other changes or updates to them. This magazine is fully independent and not affiliated in any way with the companies mentioned herein.
If you submit material to us, you warrant that you own the material and/or have the necessary rights/permissions to supply it, and automatically 
grant Future and its licensees a licence to publish your submission in whole or in part in any/all issues and/or editions of publications, in any format 
published worldwide and on associated websites, social media channels and associated products. Any material you submit is sent at your own 
risk and, although every care is taken, neither Future nor its employees, agents, subcontractors or licensees shall be liable for loss or damage. 
We assume all unsolicited material is for publication unless otherwise stated, and reserve the right to edit, amend, adapt all submissions.
Future Publishing ltd 
Quay House, The Ambury, Bath,BA1 1UA 
 editorial
 
nick Carson
Editor
nick.carson@futurenet.com
Mark Wynne 
Art editor 
mark.wynne@futurenet.com
rosie hilder
Operations editor
rosie.hilder@futurenet.com
gareth Jones
Video producer
gareth.jones@futurenet.com
 
 
Creative bloq
www.creativebloq.com
Julia sagar 
Acting editor 
ruth hamilton
Associate editor
ella taylor
Production editor 
dom Carter
Staff writer 
 
ManageMent
amy hennessey 
Editor-in-chief
Will shum
Senior art editor
dave harfield
Head of editorial operations
 
Contributions
The AOI, Nadieh Bremer, Bruce Duckworth, 
FranklinTill, Gemma Germains, Ruth 
Hamilton, Lisa Hassell, Anna Higgie, Russell 
Lewin, Tom May, Julia Sagar, Craig Ward, 
Garrick Webster, Steve Wright
All copyrights and trademarks are 
recognised and respected.
 
advertising
Media packs are available on request.
Claire dove Commercial director 
clare.dove@futurenet.com
 
Mike Pyatt Advertising manager 
01225 788204 michael.pyatt@futurenet.com 
Chris Mitchell Account director 
01225 687832 chris.mitchell@futurenet.com
 
international
Computer Arts is available for licensing. 
Contact the International department  
to discuss partnership opportunities.
Matt ellis Head of international licensing 
matt.ellis@futurenet.com
 
subsCriPtions 
Email: contact@myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
UK order line and enquiries: 0344 848 2852
International: +44 (0) 344 848 2852
Online: www.myfavouritemagazines.co.uk
sharon todd Head of subscriptions
 
CirCulation 
tim Mathers Head of newstrade
tim.mathers@futurenet.com 
 
ProduCtion
Mark Constance Head of production, US/UK
Clare scott Production project manager
Joanne Crosby Advertising project manager
Jason hudson Digital editions controller 
steve Wright Digital edition coordinator
vivienne Calvert Production manager
 
senior ManageMent
aaron asadi Managing director 
Paul newman Editorial director 
ross andrews Art and design director   
greg Whittaker Head of art and design 
dan Jotcham Commercial finance director 
 
Printed by:  
Wyndeham Peterborough, Storey’s Bar Road, 
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire, PE1 5YS 
Finishing partner: Celloglas Ltd  
 
distributed by:  
Marketforce, 5 Churchill Place, 
Canary Wharf, London, E14 5HU 
www.marketforce.co.uk Tel: 0203 787 9001
 
We are committed to only using magazine 
paper which is derived from responsibly 
managed, certified forestry and chlorine- 
free manufacture. The paper in this magazine 
was sourced and produced from sustainable 
managed forests, conforming to strict 
environmental and socioeconomic 
standards. The manufacturing paper 
mill holds full FSC (Forest Stewardship 
Council) certification and accreditation. 
 
next issue on sale  
9 January 2018
issn 1360-5372
want to work for future?
visit www.futurenet.com/jobs
printers 
text AND COVeR CMYK, pANtONe 
290 C, pANtONe 7437 C, pANtONe 
1807 C, pANtONe 1665 C, 
pANtONe 286 C, pANtONe 3275 C 
william Gibbons 
 
 
pRiNt fiNishiNg pARtNeR
paper
COVeR  
precision special Gloss fsc 250gsm 
p3–74: ultra Mag plus Gloss 90gsm 
p75–98: Graphoinvent 70gsm
typefaces
trump Gothic west, Akkurat, 
simplo, Kondola and calluna
Production notes
Future is an award-winning international media group and leading digital business. We reach 
more than 57 million international consumers a month and create world-class content and 
advertising solutions for passionate consumers online, on tablet & smartphone, and in print.
Chief executive Zillah Byng-Thorne
Non-executive chairman Peter Allen
Chief financial officer Penny Ladkin-Brand
Tel +44 (0) 1225 442 244
nick carson
editor 
Despite being November in scotland, the sun was 
(intermittently) shining for Nick’s wedding, and it was 
an incredible day. the silent disco also went down a 
storm at the bristol reception the following weekend.
Meet the teaM
KeY Contributors 


computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 8 -
ISSUE 274
january 2018
10
  Trends  
We explore new statement aesthetic, normcore, 
which focuses on clean lines and a minimal palette
14
  my design space 
Christian Montenegro and his wife Laura Varsky 
share how their studio reflects their ideal selves
15
  new venTures 
Why the founders of Manchester studio The 
Neighbourhood are closing its doors after 10 years
16
  evenTs 
We dive into the indie magazine scene at London’s 
ModMag and report from Adobe MAX in Las Vegas
18 
 
inspiraTion feed
  Designer Mike Kus talks us through his Instagram
20
  design’s #meToo momenT 
Gemma Germains explores power 
politics in the design industry
22
  design maTTers  
When are you most creative? How 
do you plan your day accordingly?
23
  my kids ruined my career 
Craig Ward on why having children 
caused him to rethink his working life
24
  science museum rebrand 
We get three perspectives on North’s 
Science Museum Group rebrand
76
  video insigHT 
London studio Koto reveals how it 
built a global reputation overnight, 
aided by its rebrand of Fanta
82
  coke x adobe x you 
Why Coca-Cola is letting designers 
get creative with its brand assets
88
  How To visualise daTa 
Nadieh Bremer shares the making 
of her award-winning visualisation
 92
  advenTurous spiriT 
How Jack Renwick Studio crafted 
an identity for outdoor learning 
charity Wide Horizons
cUltUrE
InSIght
ProjEctS
contEntS
26
  caTwalk ready 
Hot new work, including a vibrant 
identity for fashion collection Cienne
ShowcaSE

contents
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 9 -
70
 improve your TypograpHy 
 Part five of our junior designer   
 
manual focuses on typesetting
back to baSIcS
InDUStrY ISSUES
58  how to succeed as  
a designer-maker  
We discover how best to turn your 
design ideas into sellable objects. 
Plus, 25 unique gift ideas from  
those who have made the leap
96
  illusTraTor advice 
AOI member Sarah Fanelli shares 
what to do when legal issues arise
98
  design icon  
Bruce Duckworth on how his poster 
collection reflects his career so far
rEgUlarS
never miss an issue of computer arts. Subscribe today for pro advice and practical 
insight every month, and save up to 49%! See page 38 for more details
SUbScrIbE anD SaVE UP to 49%
In conVErSatIon wIth 
SPEcIal rEPort
40 colour trends 2018
50 ricardo 
  
cavolo
The Spanish mural 
artist discusses life 
on ‘the B side’, and  
overcoming mental 
health problems
Creative consultancy FranklinTill reveals the three hottest palettes for 
the coming year, and looks back on how green made its mark in 2017

CULTURE
Trends    PeoPle    evenTs    InsPIrATIon
each month, our Trends section is curated by experienced 
creative consultancy FranklinTill www.franklintill.com
january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 10 -

normcore
Continuing a shift away from excessive consumption, normcore is 
a new statement aesthetic that focuses on stripped-down simplicity, 
with clean lines and a minimal, monochrome palette
TRENDS
PhotograPhy: We Have seen (André Hemstedt & Tine reimer)
january 2018
  trends 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 11 -
ArKeT 
Arket, the newest H&M brand, 
caters for upmarket essentialist 
needs across homeware 
and apparel, adhering to 
consistent considerations  
of quality and simplicity. 
www.arket.com 
LeSS 
less cosmetics reduce 
complex, laborious skincare 
regimes down to three simple 
steps. The brand’s core values 
are ‘objectivity, naturalness 
and a consequent reduction 
to the essential.’ 
www.welcometoless.com

FranklinTill STudio
design Futures / Material Futures / Colour Futures
FranklinTill Studio is a forecasting agency and creative consultancy that 
works with lifestyle brands across the disciplinary spectrum to provide 
research-based insights that drive creative innovations in materials, 
colour and design. It creates reports, publications, exhibitions and events 
with the aim of making its research both accessible and inspiring. It also 
edits and produces two magazines, published by View Publications, 
which you can buy from www.viewpoint-magazine.com.
VIewPoInT DeSIgn
Viewpoint delivers visual, editorial and statistical information to brands, 
designers, agencies and consumer insight teams determined to create 
lifestyle products, campaigns and environments that anticipate consumer 
demand. written by professionals in the branding and design business, 
each issue explores how a significant trend will impact consumer 
behaviour and the global design landscape. 
VIewPoInT Colour
launched December 2016, Viewpoint Colour offers visual inspiration, 
design direction and a global perspective on colour. The inaugural 
issue provides an in-depth analysis of the personality traits of emerging 
colour stories, explaining why they are relevant now and how they are 
currently being applied. 
LeAn STorAGe BY mAP
www.mapfurniture.com 
BorInG coLLecTIon BY LenSVeLT 
AnD SPAce encoUnTerS 
As stated on the designer’s website, the 
Boring Collection "does not pretend 
to be beautiful" and "does not claim 
attention". In its sheer simplicity and 
modesty, the collection becomes bold 
and suggests absolute confidence. 
www.space-encounters.eu 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 12 -
january 2018
CULTURE


january 2018
CULTURE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 14 -
H
usband and wife 
illustrators Christian 
Montenegro and Laura 
Varsky have been working in their 
home studio in Argentina’s capital 
since 2006. Varsky originally 
planned to tear down the walls 
and create one big space, but the 
birth of the couple’s children 
meant that in the end, the walls 
stayed, and became bookcases. 
“We love books, not only design 
or illustration-related titles, but 
literature, essays, history, anything 
we find interesting,” enthuses 
Montenegro, who adds that the 
couple have also amounted a 
collection of objects, paintings and 
silly things that “tell the world who 
we are and who we want to be.”
Among these objects is a Yellow 
Submarine model (1). “The movie  
is a very good summary of what 
was happening with illustration in 
that decade,” says Montenegro, 
who has been influenced by the 
humour, colour, style and “attitude” 
of the Beatles’ film for many years.
Another film reference comes 
from Daniel Santoro’s painting (2). 
“The image is a political riff on King 
Kong,” says Montenegro. “Instead of 
a gorilla being expelled by humans, 
the painting shows a human worker 
expelled from the city by gorillas 
[an Argentine political group].”
The painting was a 40th 
anniversary gift, but Montenegro  
still errs on the side of caution when 
it comes to buying books – the 
couple own two copies of Design 
Der Wiener Werkstätte (3). “This 
was my idea,” he grins, “because 
I know that when a couple breaks 
up, books can be a problem...”
Montenegro has a more positive 
spin on two childhood books he 
has rediscovered as an adult – one 
on Russian folktales and the other  
a comic-like book on birth (4). 
“Everything I want to achieve as an 
illustrator is in these books,” he says.
Further inspiration comes in 
the form of his favourite Miyazaki 
character (5), which he bought in 
the artist’s museum in Tokyo. 
our sACred pLACe 
How Christian Montenegro and Laura Varsky’s collection of books and objects represent their ideal selves
our design space is...
Christian Montenegro and Laura Varsky are designer-
illustrators based in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Christian enjoys 
mixing illustration with design and comics, while Laura loves 
working with objects and has her own line of stationery. 
www.christianmontenegro.com.ar, www.lauravarsky.com.ar
 

january 2018
  PeoPle 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 15 -
2
3
4
tough deCisions
Co-founders Ben Davies and Jon Humphreys reveal why Manchester-
based studio The Neighbourhood is closing its doors after 10 years
new Ventures
on humphreys and Ben davies 
started the neighbourhood with 
an ambition to create something 
people felt part of, where they couldn’t 
wait to go every morning. A decade on, 
humphreys feels they’ve achieved that, and 
davies describes the experience as having 
been a “privilege”. We found out more 
about why they’ve decided to call it a day...
Why did you choose to close the studio?
Jon humphreys: The business isn’t in bad 
health, and we haven’t fallen out. But it’s 
no secret that agency life can be hard and 
uncompromising. It requires a massive 
amount of personal energy, and we give 
that freely because you usually get back 
what you put in. When that energy isn’t 
being replenished, it’s time to make a 
change. We needed the time and mental 
space to rejuvenate and protect ourselves 
from compromising as business owners, 
creative people, husbands and dads.
What advice would you give fellow studio 
owners making hard decisions like this? 
Jh: It’s easy to battle on and try and make 
the best out of a situation. Timing is crucial: 
knowing when enough is enough and a 
radical change is needed. I find the heart has 
more insight than the head in these matters. 
Ben davies: Having a support network who 
aren’t working day-to-day in your business, 
but understand it, and you, is also invaluable.
You’ll rarely be certain. But don’t just 
defer and procrastinate. Keeping moving is 
more important than standing still. Trust your 
gut, and resist the temptation to over-analyse. 
There’s no factual data about the future.
how did you communicate it to the team? 
Jh: With absolute honesty. There’s no other 
way. People respect that more in the end, 
no matter how hard the news is to hear. 
Bd: We’re utilising our network of agency 
leaders in Manchester, the UK and beyond 
to open doors for our team. In some cases 
we’re also mentoring team members looking 
to form new ventures and businesses. 
how did your clients take the news?
Jh: Clients have been very understanding 
and supportive. Again, honesty is hugely 
important – there are no multiple scripts in 
play. We are focused on making sure we 
deliver on our existing commitments right 
now, and making sure they can form new 
relationships with people we know and trust.
Bd: As we’re a project-focused business, 
transitioning clients is quite quick – in most 
cases, over a period of weeks rather than 
months. We want to recommend partners 
who are a strong potential ‘fit’ for each client, 
and in many cases are playing a very active 
role in the transition process.
What are your longer-term ambitions?
Jh: My creative ambitions haven’t changed, 
but I want to operate in a more flexible way, 
building agile teams around specific projects. 
Bd: To continue to work with impassioned, 
intelligent and creative people on unusual 
and ambitious projects. To make things 
happen. To form something out of nothing. 
To innovate. To grow. Exactly how that 
will manifest I don’t know, but some fresh 
mountain air between this incarnation of 
The Neighbourhood and whatever comes 
next may fuel some of the answers! 
Co-founders Ben Davies (left) and 
Jon Humphreys (right) cut the cake at 
The Neighbourhood’s 10th birthday 
party. The Manchester-based studio will 
officially close its doors in March 2018.
5
1
J

january 2018
Culture
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 16 -
C  
elebrating the fight back 
of print against digital, 
the wealth of new and 
established titles on show at the 
fifth edition of ModMag proved 
many small magazines are thriving 
rather than just surviving. 
Isabel Seiffert and Justinien 
Tribillon kicked off proceedings 
with Migrant Journal, an 
ongoing sequence of six print-
only magazines investigating 
immigration. The stunning blend 
of photography, infographics and 
essays demonstrated the advantages 
magazines offer over books and 
internet publications: deeper content 
spaced over a longer period of time 
than a book; more permanent   
(and beautiful) than a website. 
Lydia Garnett’s acclaimed 
quarterly Accent (an anti-Vogue, 
anti-celebrity love letter to 
‘authenticity’) was both bold and 
beautiful. Accent evolved from a 
website, which Garnett admitted 
could be a great place to learn 
editorial in a “safe, non-permanent 
way,” but for her was a stepping 
stone to the real prize: print. 
Tony Brook lived up to his 
‘Design Legend’ billing with a 
frank and funny breakdown of his 
anti-boredom work ethos. With an 
enviable portfolio of clients and self-
initiated projects, Brook, like many 
speakers, juggles time partly to 
stave off boredom (cue some witty 
animations of spinning plates). 
“Build it and they will come,” he 
advised, laughing off concerns of 
‘viability’. A sneak preview of his next 
Spin (Adventures in Typography 2) 
offered a mouth-watering glimpse 
of his “poems without words”.
Vestoj’s Anja Aronowsky 
Cronberg shared Accent magazine’s 
antipathy toward the “thinly veiled 
propaganda” of the fashion industry.  
Her title discusses industry taboos 
(issue six: On Failure) and dares to 
challenge “the buying mood” at the 
heart of fashion glossies with rich 
editorial and killer design.
long live print
Mark Wynne reports from 2017’s ModMag, a defiant showcase 
of continued rejuvenation from the indie magazine scene
event report: ModMag17
KEY INFO:
Location
Conway Hall, London  
www.magculture.com 
When
2 November 2017
Attendees
300
Key speakers
Isabel Seiffert, Justinien 
Tribillon, Lydia Garnett, 
Tony Brook, Takahiro 
Kinoshita, Liv Siddall, 
Danielle Pender, Matt 
Phare, Mirko Borsche, 
Francesco Franchi, 
Nicholas Blechman
PhotograPhy: Owen RichaRds

january 2018
  EVENTS 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 17 -
O  
ne highlight from Adobe Max 2017 in  
las vegas was the event’s Sneaks session, 
where attendees previewed radical 
innovations from the company’s research teams 
that might – or might not – make it into the 
products. these potential products use Adobe 
Sensei – Adobe’s new Ai and machine learning 
framework – to “take away the drudgery of 
routine tasks,” helping designers work faster.  
Here are eight of the most exciting apps.
Project Lincoln flips the typical creative process 
for designing a chart or infographic on its head. 
Rather than using data as the starting point, this 
app puts the creative stage first, letting users craft 
their graphics and then bind the data to them. 
As the data populates the chart, the graphics 
automatically adjust to the information presented. 
Another clever timesaver is Project Quick 3D, 
which converts basic sketches into 3D models for 
apps such as new 3D application Dimension CC 
by using Adobe Sensei to search Adobe Stock.
There’s also good news for illustrators. Playful 
Palette reinvents the traditional painting experience 
by bringing the best aspects of physical painting 
(namely, the ability to mix colours on a palette) 
into the digital sphere – while offering the best of 
digital painting. You can rethink colour choices at 
any time, for example, and won’t lose old palettes. 
Other quick fixes include Scene Stitch, which 
takes the idea of Content-Aware Fill to the next 
level. Instead of searching the image you’re 
working on for content to fill a gap, it uses Adobe 
Sensei to look through other images (such as those 
on Adobe Stock) to find content that’s a better fit.
Project Cloak is similar, but for video, and 
enables you to mask unwanted items and remove 
them from your footage, using Adobe Sensei  
to intelligently speed up the process.
Other highlights include Physics Pak, which 
places elements in the perfect position within 
Illustrator, Project Scribbler for colouring black-
and-white images in a single click, and SonicScape 
– for 360 sound to accompany 360 video. 
It’s Nice That’s Owen Pritchard 
delivered a brief overview of his 
design website’s phenomenal 
success, but admitted its physical 
spin-off – Printed Pages – was  
a treasured forum for the team to 
prove their own creative mettle.
Italian design legend Mirko 
Borsche’s showreel of his work 
for Zeit Magazin displayed equal 
passion for the printed page, 
although despite insisting upon  
the importance of editorial and 
design working hand in hand, 
some of the (beautifully) illegible 
work suggested that design may on 
occasion have had the last word.
A frank panel discussion was 
dominated by the creative duo 
behind new indie-darling Mushpit, 
Bertie Brandes and Charlotte 
Roberts. Their anti-everything 
DIY-zine for 20-something women 
was both aggressively nihilistic and 
quaintly old-fashioned in its youthful 
enthusiasm. (It was great to see 
young talent drawn to print, too.)
sneak peek
Julia Sagar discovers the future of 
innovation at 2017’s adobe Max
event report: adobe Max 2017
Paul Gorman – promoting his 
The Story of The Face –  observed 
the parallels between the desperate 
politics of the ‘80s and the present, 
noting that only magazines have the 
capacity to communicate quickly 
and directly to the heart of culture. 
Elsewhere, Eye editor John L 
Walters pointed to the benefits of 
new technology – with the 8,000 
unique covers for a recent edition 
of Eye showing that digital evolution 
doesn’t have to mean obsolescence.
The event was closed by two 
maestros: Italian designer Francesco 
Franchi and The New Yorker’s 
Nicholas Blechman. Franchi’s art 
direction of titles like IL Magazine 
and La Repubblica scaled new 
heights of ambition and beauty, 
while Blechman’s iconic title 
proved that print offers a unique 
(and timeless) platform. Blechman 
closed with a mantra that summed 
up the whole day, describing The 
New Yorker as “a beautiful dialogue 
between the future and the past.”  
Clockwise  
from left:  
a lively panel 
debate; Lydia 
Garnett with 
accent; Takahiro 
Kinoshita on 
Japanese title 
Popeye; and a 
virtual tour of 
The new Yorker 
by nicholas 
Blechman.

january 2018
culture
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 18 -
 Mike Kus
inspiration feed
Designer Mike Kus has always had an interest in 
photography. “I joined a photography club at school, 
where I shot and then developed pictures in my lunch 
break,” he recalls. “Post-school days, I left photography 
behind and it wasn’t until the iPhone 4 was launched 
that my interest in taking pictures was rekindled. For 
me taking pictures is a spontaneous action, it is a 
response to my surroundings at any given moment.”
Kus’ love of photography has grown to become 
part of his professional life, and he has partnered with 
many companies through Instagram including Land 
Rover, LG, Victorinox, Getty and San Miguel. “I work 
with brands that have a synergy with my work and 
that want to tell an experiential brand story,” he says.
“I like to share images from my everyday life 
on my feed,” says Kus. “More often than not I tend 
to capture my pictures off the cuff. I’ll be in a 
certain place at a certain time when a photographic 
opportunity presents itself. I try my best for my images 
to convey what it felt like to be there at the time.”
www.instagram.com/mikekus

The number one destination 
for graphic design news, 
views and how-tos
www.creativebloq.com
Graphic design       Art       Web design       3D       Digital art
Get Creative  
Bloq direct to 
your inbox with 
our weekly 
graphic design 
newsletter 

january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 20 -
 Gemma Germains, senior content 
strategist at Dare, explores the power 
struggles at play in the design industry
#DesignToo
ESSAY
crAig wArd
design director
www.wordsarepictures.co.uk
gEmmA gErmAinS
senior content 
strategist, dare
www.thisisdare.com
Strong opinion and 
analysis from across the 
global design industry
inSight
Craig is a British-born design director based in New 
York. On page 23, he discusses how having children 
caused him to re-evaluate his career, and why he’s 
recently decided to give up his agency day job and 
take the plunge back into freelance life.
Gemma is a senior content strategist at London-
based digital creative agency Dare. 2017 marks 
her fifteenth year in the design industry, yet she 
couldn’t identify the Creative Cloud icon if her 
life depended on it. Luckily, it doesn’t.
DESIGN MATTERS: When are you most 
creative, and how do you plan your time 
accordingly? – page 22
PLUS: Three views on North’s rebrand 
of the Science Museum Group – page 24
Illustrations: 
Anna Higgie
www.annahiggie.co.uk

january 2018
  GEMMA GERMAINS  
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 21 -
T
he day after the Harvey Weinstein scandal 
broke, I spoke to the Computer Arts team 
about writing something on ‘design’s 
Weinstein moment’. I think both the editor and   
I half-expected the whole idea to slide, and for 
the ruckus to blow over, as these things tend to. 
We celebrate violent men and paedophiles 
because their work in some way inspires us. We 
idolise photographers and ‘edgy’ CEOs despite 
mounting accusations of rape, violence and abuse. 
Is it any wonder we all expected Weinstein and 
his alleged horrors to slip quietly off the front pages? 
Activist Tarana Burke’s #MeToo campaign – 
revived by actress Alyssa Milano – was the tipping 
point sexual harassment needed. It’s hard to discredit 
over 500,000 women as attention-seeking fantasists 
when all of them are saying the same thing.
So far, there’s hasn’t been a big outing in the 
design industry. I doubt there will be. Design 
superstars don’t really count for much in the real 
world. Our creeps are small fry when compared 
to glamorous Hollywood sexual abusers. That’s 
not to say that abuse isn’t rife in design. It is.   
We’re just less high-profile, and a bit better at 
masking it. At the moment.
You only need to look at our senior leaders to 
know that something isn’t right. Despite a decade  
of diversity initiatives, our CDs and CEOs are 
resoundingly male and pale. The UK design industry 
is overwhelmingly white – 87 per cent so in fact. 
And just 12 per cent of London’s CDs are female. 
It’s perhaps ironic that Tarana, a woman of colour, 
is responsible for helping the sexual abuse scandal 
gain traction, seeing as a damning TUC report into 
workplace racism in the UK barely registered. 
Perhaps we’re too worn down by austerity, Trump 
and Brexit to focus on more than one national horror 
at a time. This might explain why we chose to neglect 
the TUC’s report. This might explain why we’ve 
compartmentalised diversity and made it a white 
woman’s issue. Perhaps the plan is to ‘fix’ white 
women before moving onto people of colour, LGTB+ 
communities and people with disabilities. It’s like the 
supermarket meat counter – take a number and wait. 
Let’s be clear. It took American Apparel years to 
fire Dov Charney, despite multiple harassment cases. 
Vogue only severed ties with Terry Richardson 
recently, despite a cacophony of complaints. The 
industry, in fact, the world, only stopped disbelieving 
women because they had no choice. 
It’s nice to think that some handsy creative 
directors might be sweating it out right now, but 
that’s just the tip of the iceberg. This type of abuse  
is part of a much bigger problem. I’m not here to 
mitigate or diminish the experiences of every woman 
who’s been assaulted, but focusing solely on sexual 
harassment won’t solve the problem of who has the 
power and why it’s being abused. 
The Harvey Weinstein story has forced men  
(don’t you dare #notallmen me) to confront some 
very sketchy behaviour. It’s given women an 
opportunity to be heard, and to an extent, to be 
believed. We must now share that same courtesy 
with others who’ve had their opportunities limited  
by the discrimination that’s rife in our industry. 
We pretend the design industry is a meritocracy.  
That we’ll get far with hard work and the right 
attitude, but that’s not the case. There’s a reason why 
we’re so white, and it’s the same reason so many of 
our leaders are male. Power is abused to be retained. 
Women are taught rape is a consequence of their 
actions. Under-represented people in the industry  
are taught the same lessons. They’re put in charge of 
underfunded, unsupported diversity initiatives and 
tasked with solving an enormous problem from   
a position of limited authority. And when these 
initiatives fail, we blame them, not the leaders who 
continue to remake the industry in their own image.
I work at Dare, the only truly diverse agency I’ve 
ever encountered. Diversity isn’t a link in its footer, 
it’s a guiding principle. The board’s diverse and so  
are the staff. It really is that simple. 
How we, as an industry, move forward from 
Weinstein, sexual harassment and institutional 
discrimination will either make or break us. People 
like me have been speaking about these subjects for  
a long time. Nothing changes. We need to hear these 
words from the people with power, from those 
actually able to do something about it. 
Is power being abused in the design industry? Tweet 
your thoughts to @ComputerArts using #DesignToo
There’s a reason why design 
is so white, and it’s the same 
reason so many of our 
leaders are male. Power is 
abused to be retained

january 2018
INSIGHT
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 22 -
DISCUSSION
TWEET @COMPUTERARTS OR fIND US ON fACEbOOk
ANDREW SOANS
Creative director, Ministry of Motion
www.ministryofmotion.tv
AlExANDRA DAvy
Freelance production designer
www.alexdavy.net
“As a freelancer and business owner 
I tend to work long hours and wear 
many hats throughout the day. 
Between 9am–5pm is usually spent 
developing and managing projects, 
dealing with enquiry emails and 
answering phone calls. I like to use this 
time to be creative with the client and 
formulate a plan. The most creative – 
or maybe more to the point, productive 
– time for me, however, comes between 
10pm and 2am. Those four hours are 
often worth eight daytime hours. 
Creativity comes in many forms, 
so I think it’s important to use 
the different creative times 
to complement each other.”
“My best times are 7.30–11am, then 
from 6pm till late. I do production 
freelance for a studio 9am-5pm, but 
my main love is storyboarding, so 
I need to squeeze as many extra bits of 
storyboarding and practising into my 
day when I’m not doing my main job. 
I’ve used the Readdle app Calendars for 
years, using the Week View in coloured 
blocks. Recently, though, I’ve swapped 
into Day View so I can find those little 
nuggets of time before 9am, or between 
making dinner and relaxing. The 
alarm is good too, to remind me 
that even if I’m at the pub or a 
basketball game I can still get a bit 
of sketching done whilst I’m there.”
When are you most creative, and how 
do you plan your time accordingly?
ROb ClARkE 
Type and logo designer 
www.robclarke.com
“I find working early in the morning 
and late at night the best times. In the 
morning there are fewer distractions, 
but also I feel more positive and 
energised about the day ahead. After 
lunch I find my mind wandering and 
I become more easily distracted, and 
a little drowsy. So I try to take a break 
from around 3pm until 7 or 8pm. 
After that my creative juices should 
be flowing again, but the atmosphere is 
more relaxed as I don’t feel the pressure 
of answering emails or phone calls. 
I try to switch off when going to sleep, 
but often have a pad on the bedside 
table, ready for the best idea I’ve ever 
had to ping into my brain at 1am.”
AnDy MARSh 
I’ve always scheduled my 
most intensive creative 
tasks for the morning. 
The periods close to sleep 
are the times our minds 
are closest to our dreams.
@EMIlyJoyhAkIn
last few moments before 
sleep. When all the ideas 
spill out, I have to write 
them down and keep them 
safe before I start dreaming!
ChARlES JoSEph 
Around 10pm–5am, when 
everyone is dead asleep 
and all I can hear are the 
crickets and frogs: that’s 
when my talents kick in.
AMADEJA SpES
Usually in the evenings. 
It kicks in around 7–8pm, 
so I do the majority of my 
work in the evening and 
plan my day around that.
TúlIo MACIEl 
olIVEIRA  
Usually my most creative 
period comes two hours 
after breakfast, when 
I’m full – but not too full. 
you can repeat at dinner.

january 2018
  craig ward 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 23 -
H  
ere’s a riddle: I take up 
your spare time and 
keep you up late. I don’t 
thank you yet I’m extremely 
rewarding. What am I?
Well, there are two answers 
here: your job or your kids. But rarely both.
I’ve always found it interesting how few of my close friends in 
the creative industries have children – or at the very least, have put 
procreation off until much later in life. 
After some soul searching prior to the arrival of my first daughter 
in 2013, I decided the main problem is that creative people already feel 
they have a proxy child in the form of their work. It bleeds out into 
our personal lives, we’re emotionally invested, and the worry is that a 
mewling, needful child will take up too much time for us to focus on  
the important stuff – usually more work.
I was two years into running my studio when Holly arrived and, 
despite my initial misgivings, what happened next took me by surprise:  
I went on to have the most productive year of my career. 
I didn’t grow up with a dad around so had very few expectations 
of myself as a father, but it turned out I loved it. In fact I was besotted. 
And immediately after she arrived, everything else – to paraphrase 
Fight Club – got the volume turned down. Every cover or commission 
I had completed suddenly felt much less important. I was still proud of 
my work, but the endorphins kicked in and I was at the mercy of my 
hormones as much as the next gushing father. 
When our second arrived in late 2016, I was in a different place 
entirely, creatively speaking. After five years of flying solo, I missed 
the support system an agency 
provided and that spring had 
accepted a senior vice president 
role at a mid-sized agency.  
Overall I was feeling optimistic 
that I would be able to balance  
life as a father with the demands of New York agency life.
My goodness. It was a change. The money was lovely. Having a 
support system and art buyers and account handlers and producers 
(producers!) was absolutely glorious. Initially, I felt really good about  
my decision to go back into agency land.
But sure enough, the pitches went as they usually do: a late night 
here, a weekend there, a holiday got cancelled, the hours became longer, 
and the agency’s creative ambitions no longer matched my own. After  
a year, I was not only disenfranchised, but I was missing my family. 
Many evenings would go by when the kids were already in bed when  
I got home and I’d see them only for a snatched hour in the mornings. 
So last week, just before my second daughter’s first birthday, I decided 
it wasn’t worth it and resigned from my role. This is truly disastrous 
timing. We’ve just bought and renovated a house, and now I’m exposing 
myself to the costs and insecurities of running my own business again. 
In the US, this also means finding thousands of dollars for healthcare 
and once again, all I can see is financial outlay.
But you know what? It’s 3:15pm, I am once again master of my 
own destiny, and I’m about to head out and pick up my daughter 
from preschool. And I cannot wait.   
How do you juggle agency life with being a parent of young children?  
Tweet your thoughts to @ComputerArts using #DesignMatters
Craig Ward explains why having 
children caused him to re-evaluate 
his working life (for the better)
My kids ruined my career
COLUMN

january 2018
INSIGHT
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 24 -
GreG Spraker
Senior art director, Grafik
www.grafik.agency
LouiS MikoLay 
Senior designer,  
North
www.northdesign.co.uk
“Given the family of organisations the new 
identity aims to unite, it does a decent job  
of establishing a cohesive visual language and 
remaining serviceable across a wide variety  
of applications. With its use of colour gradients 
and fading character weights, it dutifully 
checks all of the necessary boxes except one: 
it’s vacant of any excitement whatsoever. There 
it is, in all of its custom sans-serif, expertly 
typeset glory, and yet I feel absolutely nothing 
towards it. No wonder or awe. No inspiration. 
Not even anger. The whole of it is exquisitely 
forgettable. The greatest achievement of this 
identity is also its greatest failing: it’s so broad 
in function that it’s rendered meaningless. 
With a brand mission of ‘inspiring futures’, 
it will need to work harder and more creatively 
to help it reach such a lofty goal.”
“The Science Museum Group is the world’s 
leading alliance of science museums; five 
world-class museums around the UK that 
share five million visitors and the world’s 
largest collection of science and tech objects. 
The group have been aligning themselves 
by pooling their collection, increasing shared 
programming, and developing a new site 
with a shared architecture and assets. 
To support these strategies and foster 
a sense of unity and purpose, North was 
briefed in three areas. Firstly, to help 
develop a strategy to unite the museums 
with a shared mission that allows each 
site to pursue their specialities. Secondly, 
to support the renaming of the National 
Media Museum. And thirdly, to create a 
new group visual language that helps present 
the sites as a cohesive ‘family’ of museums.”
oLLy BrowNiNG 
Head of marketing and 
freelance art director  
www.twitter.com/yourolly 
“Seeing the Science Museum had rebranded 
came as a shock to me, especially as there was 
always a little place in my heart for the old 
logo. With that said, the new identity seems 
to give the museum a sense of cohesion in 
a way I hadn’t really seen there before; from 
wayfinding to shops to those lovely gradient 
staff T-shirts I want to steal. The new colour 
palette and gradients seem sufficiently 
‘science-y’ too, and I hope they won’t tire of 
them too quickly. Whilst the new font SMG 
Sans has utterly divided opinion, I actually find 
I prefer its use in the reverse – where the font 
graduates from thin to heavy like on the event 
posters; it seems to do a better job of ‘inspiring 
futures’ as per the museum’s brand mission – 
not fading into the distance. I’m excited to see 
what they make with the new look. ”
North has united the Science Museum Group with a new visual 
identity. We present three views of the new branding...
Focus on: Science Museum rebrand
REBRAND FOCUS

january 2018
  science museum rebrand 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 25 -
illumination is a 
central feature of the 
new identity, which 
unites museums in 
london, bradford, 
manchester, York and 
shildon. this concept 
is explored through 
the use of vibrant 
colour gradients, as 
well as the changing 
font weight in the logo. 

Computer Arts selects the hottest new 
design, illustration and motion work  
from the global design scene
sHoWcase
Rich visuals
Cienne identity
by Lotta Nieminen Studio 
www.lottanieminen.com
Brooklyn-based designer and art director Lotta 
Nieminen was asked to create a visual identity  
for Cienne, a socially and environmentally 
conscious women’s ready-to-wear fashion 
collection. Inspired by stripes of fabric used in 
the brand’s very first collection, Nieminen created 
a bold, vibrant colour palette that runs across 
everything from Cienne’s business cards to its 
packaging, envelopes and promotional materials. 
“The brand colours are designed to be layered 
or stand alone, and last longer than just a season,” 
explains Nieminen. “While the red and magenta 
form the key colours of printed implementations, 
the website – which was developed by Hugo 
& Marie – relies heavily on black in order to 
give centre stage to the imagery.” 


january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 28 -
 
 
 

january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 29 -
    
    
     
Just as Cienne’s founders sought 
a more purposeful approach to 
everyday dressing, the brand’s 
stationery exudes an elevated 
and chic aesthetic.   
     
The website, created by Hugo & 
Marie, champions a contemporary 
  
Lotta Nieminen created a rich 
colour palette around red and 
magenta for the women’s brand.
     
Cienne’s sophisticated printed 
collateral visually reflects the brand’s 
core values of empowerment  
and craftmanship.
e-commerce experience with 
smooth animations and transitions. 
      
The identity’s occasional use of black 
and white helps elevate the bold 
colour palette elsewhere.
   

january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 30 -
New perSpectiveS 
DRone alphabet
by Anthony Velen 
www.instagram.com/anthonyvelen
Multi-disciplinary Swiss designer Anthony Velen took to the 
skies for his recent 36 Days of Type project. “I always loved 
aerial shots, especially when the camera is pointing down. This 
can lead to unusual discoveries, such as interesting shapes, 
lines and sometimes typography,” he explains.
Velen uses Google Maps to locate typographically 
interesting buildings, before photographing them with the 
help of a drone. He likens his process to a “treasure hunt” and 
admits he’s almost crashed more than once. “The landing can 
be difficult in Swiss narrow streets,” he laughs. “My goal is to 
achieve a complete alphabet. I love the idea of design with 
things that already exist; to see them from a different angle.”

FLowiNg grouNdS 
MigRant issue thRee
by Offshore Studio 
www.migrantjournal.com
launched in 2016, six-issue publication migrant Journal – by offshore 
studio – explores the circulation of people, goods, information, fauna 
and flora around the world. For its third issue, Flowing Grounds, the 
team explored movement and migration in the air and at sea. “these 
mobile spaces of death, pleasure, traffic and infrastructure are our most 
flamboyant and tragic issue to date,” says offshore’s christoph miller. 
“the magazine’s visual concept ensures a unique voice: bold colours 
and a custom-made typeface that guide the reader through the narrative 
layers of the publication; intricate maps and vivid infographics that 
invite one to explore topics in a greater, atlas-like depth; and eclectic 
sequences of images accentuating the publication’s rhythm.”
january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 31 -


january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 33 -
death aNd LiFe
MoRte e viDa uteRina Music viDeo
by Daniel Bruson 
www.dogday.tv
 
Brazilian animator and designer Daniel 
Bruson worked with singer/songwriter Paula 
Cavalciuk to create the music video for her 
song Morte E Vida Uterina. “Paula expanded 
on her motivations for the lyrics, and I came 
up with this idea of a girl entering puberty 
and having to go through life being broken 
to pieces at every step,” he explains. 
Bruson used stop-motion to reflect the 
character’s fractured experiences and topics 
of gender oppression and misogyny.  
“This concept of a cycle where the 
character’s body and mind were shattered 
and rebuilt, using fragments of whatever is 
left, suggested to me that everything should 
feel very tactile, intimate,” he says. “The 
resilience of when the character puts her 
glasses on, near the end, and just keeps 
going is my favourite part.” 
MeSMeriSiNg 
MoveMeNtS
noise x giF Fest iDentity
by BÜRO UFHO 
www.ufho.com
 
Noise x GIF Fest is Singapore’s biggest 
GIF festival. When it came to crafting the 
event’s loud identity, local studio BÜRO 
UFHO realised the design would need to 
work as both a static piece of print as well 
as an animation. “It was pretty much set 
from the start that the poster would have 
to be an animated GIF,” laughs BÜRO 
UFHO creative director Jun T. 
The team created 13 different logo 
variations, which, when played as a 
sequence, create an illusion of movement. 
Meanwhile, textures move across the 
event’s poster to produce a sense of depth 
and animation. “We also constructed the 
face in 3D,” adds Jun T, “resulting in a 
looping GIF poster that’s in line with the 
theme and concept.”

january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 34 -
privacy MatterS
spyscape bRanDing
by SomeOne 
www.someoneinlondon.com
“Spyscape is an entirely new endeavour setting 
out to be the planet’s go-to brand for matters 
concerning spying, espionage and privacy,” 
begins Simon Manchipp, founder and executive 
strategic creative director at London-based 
agency SomeOne. “It could sound scary, 
but Spyscape shows people how spy skills 
are transferable to your everyday life, helping 
you see the world more clearly.”
SomeOne’s brief was to create the visual 
and verbal branding for the project. Starting 
from the position of ‘question everything’, the 
team decided to tamper with notions of clarity. 
Question marks facing the wrong way replace 
the letter ’S’ in the typographic logo, while 
other letterforms are shown only in part.  
“We wanted to make people work harder 
to obtain information,” explains Manchipp, 
“just like the intelligence services have to.”  
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 34 -


january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 36 -
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 36 -
party eNergy
MoRiaRty bRanDing
by Bond 
www.bond-agency.com
Briefed to create a new brand identity for 
luxury event planning specialist Moriarty, 
creative agency Bond explored the notion 
that curating great events is an artform. 
“We crafted a series of abstract illustrations 
as a distinctive supporting brand element 
in contrast with the more structured 
typographic language,” explains creative 
director Hugh Miller. 
Working across the Moriarty website, 
stationery and pitch documents, Bond 
created a language of contrasts. Vibrant 
colour and abstract forms juxtapose cool 
grey tones and navy blue materials. “The 
abstract art has a kind of punk spirit, which 
we like,” adds creative director Tyrone Lou. 
“Allowing accidents to happen through 
mark-making gives a dynamic energy and  
a rebellious spirit.” 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 36 -

january 2018
SHOWCASE
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 37 -
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 37 -
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 37 -

myfavouritemagazines
Official Magazine Subscription Store
SAVE up to 49% on 
A SubScription thiS 
chriStmAS
From  
JuSt
£12.70
Biggest savings when you buy direct
Choose from a huge range of titles
Delivery included in the price
FROM £12.70 EVERY 3 MONTHS (€104 / $137 PER YR) 
plEASE quotE XmAS17 whEn ordEring by phonE
Lines are open monday - friday 8am to 7pm and saturday 10am to 2pm (Gmt)
ordEr hotlinE: 0344 848 2852

You might also like...
FROM £12.65 EVERY 3 MONTHS  
(€104 / $137 PER YR) 
FROM £12.75 EVERY 3 MONTHS  
(€104 / $137 PER YR) 
FROM £11.60 EVERY 3 MONTHS  
(€103 / $105 PER YR) 
FROM £13.75 EVERY 3 MONTHS  
(€73.40 / $92.88 PER YR) 
FROM £12.65 EVERY 3 MONTHS  
(€104 / $137 PER YR) 
SEE thE Full rAngE And ordEr onlinE
thE pErFEct  
prESEnt For  
EVEryonE
myfavouritemagazines.co.uk/xmas17
*Terms and conditions: Savings calculated against the full RRP (single issue price x frequency). Dollar prices quoted are for the United States, other global territory dollar pricing may vary. This offer is for new 
subscribers only. You can write to us or call us to cancel your subscription within 14 days of purchase. Your subscription is for the minimum term specified and will expire at the end of the current term.  Payment is 
non-refundable after the 14 day cancellation period unless exceptional circumstances apply.  All gift subscriptions will start with the first issue in January 2018.  Your statutory rights are not affected.  Prices 
correct at point of print and subject to change. Full details of the Direct Debit guarantee are available on request.  For full term and conditions please visit: bit.ly/magtandc. Offer ends 31st December 2017.
oFFEr EndS  
31 dEcEmbEr 2017

January 2018
special report

  Colour trends 2018 
colour  
trends 
2
0
1
8
 
 
Creative consultancy FranklinTill reveals 
 
 
the hottest colour palettes for the coming year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Featured image: Kairos by Lucy Hardcastle

January 2018
special report
G
reen had its year in 2017. 
Not only did Pantone 
stamp its seal on Greenery 
for Colour of the Year, but a 
variation of the hue also won the 
people’s vote in GF Smith’s World’s 
Favourite Colour campaign. 
2017 also saw the realisation of 
the impact of our impending urban 
future come to the fore; the UN 
affirmed that more than 50 per cent 
of us live in cities, and owing to our 
increased urbanisation, pollution 
levels became a key global concern. 
Perhaps then it is no wonder 
that green – the colour most 
synonymous with nature and the 
great outdoors – saw such appeal. 
Our environments, both work 
and play, have become awash with 
greenery, from the cultivation of 
house plants, window boxes and 
mini-ecosystems, to allotments, 
pop-up green oases and even  
vast vertical gardens.  
Designers and architects  
are increasingly buying into the 
biophilia hypothesis – which 
states that as humans, we have 
an inherent need to connect 
with greenery and the natural 
world – and are ‘designing-in’ 
nature to new spaces more and 
more. Boutique houseplant stores 
and city conservatories have 
gained high design status, while 
accounts from the likes of plant-
loving photographers Haarkon 
attract hundreds of thousands   
of followers on Instagram.
While the grassy shade of 
Pantone’s Greenery may not have 
filtered into commercial design 
on a mass-market level, related 
green tones and shades have 
become firmly established across 
specialisms. Khaki has affirmed 
itself a staple shade akin to navy 
and black, prolific in fashion, while 
more exotic tones of jade and forest 
green are combined with rose and 
warm metals for a luxury aesthetic.  
GF Smith’s World’s Favourite 
Colour campaign invited people to 
engage with an interactive website 
in order to finely tune and select 
their personal favourite colour from 
a seemingly infinite spectrum. The 
colours submitted were analysed to 
pinpoint ‘the world’s favourite’ and 
ultimately saw Annie Marrs’ teal-
esque green initiated into the paper 
manufacturer’s Colourplan range.  
Last year, we predicted the onset 
of an Engineered Nature palette 
(issue 261), in which organic shades 
work in synergy with scientifically 
manipulated synthetic greens. As 
we enter 2018, we are seeing shades 
of green in design expand beyond 
the expected. What began as the 
pursuit for a greater connection 
with nature – with organic greens 
infused into spaces and products 
– has evolved into more luxurious 
uses of green, engineered nature 
and the emergence of Art Deco 
and tropical luxe-inspired palettes.
Over the next few pages, we 
provide you with the key colours 
for 2018, with the  insights driving 
these palettes. At FranklinTill 
we don’t believe in reporting 
flash-in-the-pan seasonal trends. 
Trends don’t simply disappear, but 
movements gather momentum and 
colour palettes evolve, manifesting 
in different ways as they move 
from the periphery towards the 
mainstream. Neither do we believe 
in mimicking great design in an 
attempt to be ‘on trend’. We aim to 
draw attention to the people behind 
emerging design movements and 
celebrate their creativity. So read on 
to discover three such movements, 
and the palettes that reflect them...
gree
2 0 1 7  r e c a p
The Broadview Hotel by Blok
Biophilia by GF Smith
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 42 -

  Colour trends 2018 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 43 -
en light
Pantone Colour of the Year with Airbnb
Collection 06 by Thisispaper
january 2018

special report
january 2018
Pantone 7437 C
C14 m35 y0 k0
Pantone 2627 C
C85 m100 y6 k38
Pantone 7541 C
C7 m1 y3 k2
Poketo Aurora Wall Planner
Jennifer Young Studio by Kati Forner
Kairos  by Lucy Hardcastle 
Glow by Lucy Hardcastle 
Pantone 290 C
C23 m0 y1 k0
intera

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 45 -
  Colour trends 2018 
january 2018
T
he way we interact with 
colour is changing. We live 
in a digital reality in which 
hyperreal and digital-real aesthetics 
are so ubiquitous that  
we often can’t tell the difference 
between synthetically generated 
and real imagery. Realer-than-real 
effects, once the dominion of 
Hollywood editing suites, have 
been democratised through the 
advancements of CAD technologies 
so that creatives in wider areas 
can exploit the possibilities of 
boundless digital creation, often  
to a highly experimental degree. 
These designers are creating 
New Age aesthetics. This look 
and feel suggests boundless 
movement and is being increasingly 
adopted by design in the physical 
world, as product packaging and 
communication lean towards this 
idea of an alternative real aesthetic. 
One of the new wave of artists 
and designers exploring the digital 
aesthetic is Lucy Hardcastle, whose 
work regularly interrogates the 
relationship between digital 
and real-world design. Glow, a 
collection of abstract, rendered 
images and objects, uses high-gloss 
and reflective surfaces, with textures 
of silk and velvet, to ground the 
work. Hardcastle describes her 
palette as “emotive, and atmospheric”, 
using “millennial” pastels 
contrasted with strong colour.
We are so used to colour being 
dynamic, fluid and interactive in 
our screen-based experiences that 
we are now demanding the same 
qualities from physical tangible 
colour. A host of product and 
spatial designers are reprieving  
the aesthetics of the light and space 
movement of the ’60s and creating 
optical effects through reflection, 
refraction and light dispersion in 
order to transform environments. 
Artists are experimenting with 
various materials and colour 
compositions to subvert perceptions 
of surface and space through use 
of clever, sensitive colour and light 
applications. A new generation of 
designers is picking up the mantle 
of established light artists, such as 
Larry Bell and DeWain Valentine,  
to reinterpret the experimental art 
movement in tangible forms. 
Echoing the principles of the 
light and space movement, Sabine 
Marcelis examines how far she can 
push the relationship between light 
and materiality. The Rotterdam-
based designer uses light as a 
tool to transform. Mutating the 
presumed aesthetic characteristics 
of materials such as glass, mirror 
and metal, Marcelis’ pieces disrupt 
paths of light through opaque 
matter and form tinted reflections.
The Curved Twist screen by Kia 
Utzon-Frank, in collaboration with 
Fay McCaul, incorporates 21,500 
dichroic rods that have been knitted 
into the screen in order to create  
a colour-changing effect. The 
perceived colour of the screen is 
unpredictable and totally 
dependent on the quality of light 
and the angle of the viewer.  
The idea that colour should 
move is influencing graphic design 
and visual communication, by 
way of iridescence and special 
treatments. Designers are making 
smart use of special finishes and 
foil to bring ethereal movement 
to printed work. Holographic and 
iridescent special foils mimic 
in print the effects achieved by 
product designers using glass 
reflective surfaces as well as the 
fluid gloss quality of hyperreal 
digital colour. An otherworldly 
palette synthesises the ephemeral 
quality of coloured light and is 
combined with hyperreal pastels.  
Christopher Kane F/W 2017
Pantone 607 C
C3 m0 y34 k0
Broken White at Design Academy Eindhoven and Van Abbemuseum
ctive

special report
m
january 2018
Pantone 1807 C
C10 m93 y71 k33
Pantone 727 C
C2 m21 y32 k6
Pantone 1665 C
C0 m79 y100 k0
Fornace Brioni by Cristina Celestino. Photography by Mattia Balsamini
Jaile An at Central St Martins, 2016
Petra Lilja for Swedish Ninja
Powder Variations by Carl Emil Jacobsen. 
Photography by Mindcraft/www.jeppegudmundsen.com
primitive

  Colour trends 2018 
Pantone BlaCk 5
C42 m69 y37 k85
Pantone 5025 C 
C3 m30 y13 k7
L
ast year, we presented a colour 
story titled Material Reveal. 
This was a celebration of the 
organic beauty of unadulterated 
natural materials and was driven by 
a backlash against industrial, mass 
produced design in a homogenised 
minimalist aesthetic. This shift 
towards crafted material colour is 
showing no signs of disappearing, 
but the muddy earthen brown 
hues have evolved into saturated 
terracotta and burnt sienna shades.
Designers are reinitiating 
intimate connections to tactile 
materials, products and spaces, 
embracing a creative regression. 
They are devolving fabrication 
techniques in order to reconnect 
with matter and craftsmanship. 
The imprints of techniques and 
processes are embedded in the 
aesthetic outcomes of new crafted 
products as designers employ slow, 
laborious methods and allow 
material origins to dictate final 
outcomes. Surfaces are rough-hewn 
and natural, appealing to a desire 
for tactile reconnection. 
The imperfect finishes bear 
testament to the considered 
creation of each item and the 
respect of new craftspeople for 
traditional techniques. With a 
focus on materiality, surfaces 
display respectful manipulations 
that retain natural aesthetic 
qualities in honest material colours. 
Rich earth tones, clay browns and 
nude have a grounding effect on 
the user, evoking a reassuring 
connection to organic matter. 
Terracotta is becoming a 
key material of the moment. 
The functional unpretentious 
earthenware is being celebrated for 
its natural orange hue, in marked 
contrast to more purist ceramic 
materials. Primitive resources 
suggest longevity and rough-hewn, 
hand-worked surfaces are respected 
for their honest imperfections. 
In a true act of colour activism, 
sculptor Carl Emil Jacobsen created 
the Powder Variations series. 
Dissatisfied with the mass 
produced standardised pigments 
of stoneware glaze, Jacobsen 
looked to his environment to create 
various native pigments. Collecting 
fieldstones, tiles and bricks from  
his local landscape in Denmark, he 
crushed and ground the materials 
to create bespoke pigments with  
a truly local narrative.
These vibrant earthen shades 
are even finding a place in the world 
of luxury fashion. The Bureau 
Betak design catwalk setting for 
Ermenegildo Zegna’s spring/
summer 2018 show saw a blanket 
of striking burnt orange sand 
coat the ground, punctuated by 
reflective geometric plinths. 
In graphic design, illustration 
and packaging fibrous papers allow 
the material to do the talking. 
They add texture to colour in 
printed material. Paper derived 
from unorthodox origins, waste 
food, such as coffee grounds or 
spent hops, for example, suggest 
and celebrate sustainable 
alternatives through the use 
of inherent natural aesthetics. 
Talisman by Daphne Laurens
Terracotta Furniture by Chris 
Wolston. Photography by Clemens 
Kois for Patrick Parrish Gallery  
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 47 -
Commes Des Garcons F/W 2017
january 2018

special report
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 48 -
playful
Pantone 383 C
C29 m1 y100 k18
Pantone 286 C
C100 m75 y0 k0
Pantone 7422 C
C0 m16 y3 k0
Pantone 172 C
C0 m73 y87 k0
Neverland by Emily Forgot 
Suspended Confetti by Chiaozza and Studio Proba
Walala X Play by Camille Walala for the Now Gallery 
Galerie Party by Studio GGSV

J
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 49 -
  Colour trends 2018 
A
s an antidote to everyday 
mundane stresses and 
pressures, we are finding 
release in regression, replacing 
highbrow pursuits with honest 
and innocent play and reverting 
to childlike experimentation 
and inquiry.
Our increasingly urban 
environments are witnessing 
a transformation as shared city 
spaces are reinvented as convivial 
play spaces both literally and 
metaphorically. The city is no 
longer a drab grey industrial 
landscape of concrete, metal and 
motors, redolent of utility and 
business. Instead it is a vibrant, 
energetic, constantly evolving 
entity – a sensory landscape that  
is inspiring a refreshed playful 
approach across design categories 
from visual communication to 
fashion and interiors. 
Designers are rediscovering 
the creative and intellectual value 
of play, remembering that the act 
of play is itself a learning experience 
and route to creation. We are seeing 
a reappreciation for playfulness 
and happy accidents as designers 
embrace naive experimentation 
in their practice. Bold and defiant 
designs of product, space, visual 
communication and fashion are 
injected with a sense of humour. 
The Memphis Group’s aesthetic  
is experiencing a renaissance, 
reinterpreted in alternative scales 
and applications. Monochrome 
patterns are juxtaposed with 
block brights in geometric and 
irregular configurations. 
Stereotypical spaces and product 
designs are adopting saturated 
colour palettes and abstract forms 
that challenge us to invent and 
imagine, to draw up our own 
narratives and lose ourselves 
in simple intuitive interaction.
Described as a ‘temple of 
wonder’, Camille Walala’s Now 
Gallery installation is a labyrinth 
of colour and pattern, encouraging 
visitors to “be more aware of their 
bodies, engage their minds and give 
themselves over to play”.
In honour of Centre Pompidou’s 
40th anniversary, surrealist 
designers GGSV have created a 
fantastical interactive playground. 
The Paris-based duo took 
inspiration from the likes of René 
Magritte, Ettore Sottsass and 
Gaetano Pesce to design Galerie 
Party, a garden of distorted forms  
at exaggerated scales, with prints 
and colours that bombard the 
senses. The multitude of playscape 
elements invites assembly and 
reconfiguration, suggesting 
multiple composition possibilities 
and highlighting the role of play 
in self-expression.
The pieces in avant-garde 
designer Henrik Vibskov’s spring/
summer 2018 collection are 
adorned with cartoonish motifs. 
Knit jacquards depict ambiguous 
caricatured creatures and facial 
features while a neutral peach 
palette is punctuated by flashes 
of bright primaries. 
In graphic design, illustration 
and packaging, clashing brights  
are applied in stripes, spots and 
abstract shapes that jigsaw across 
surfaces. Plasticised finishes and 
spot gloss varnishes are applied to 
flat graphics and figurative forms 
take a surrealist lilt. 
Pantone 3275 C
C90 m0 y52 k0
Pantone 7406 C
C0 m20 y100 k2
N E X T
MONTH
QUIT YOUR JOB IN 2018
Ditch that dead-end role 
and embrace exciting 
new opportunities.
Henrik Vibskov S/S 2018. Photography  b Victor Jones
Galerie Party by Studio GGSV

september 2017
IN CONVERSATION
january 2018
IN CONVERSATION

THE b SIdE
R i c a R d o  c a v o l o  ricardo is a spanish artist known for his vibrant use of colour 
and expressive symbolism. he has created large-scale murals all over the world, and 
worked for clients including Urban outfitters, Cirque du soleil, google and Nike. he also 
has his own line of clothing and accessories. www.ricardocavolo.com
 Words: ruth hamilton 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 51 -
mural artist Ricardo Cavolo discusses 
how the magic on the fringes of society 
inspires his vibrant, colourful work

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 52 -
the chance to get out from there and 
build my life on the A side.  
You’ve spoken about how humans 
translate colours into feelings. 
Are there any colours you use often, 
because of the mood they evoke? 
I like all the luminous and powerful 
colours, like red, yellow, cyan, 
orange, white… And lately I’m really 
into pink and purple. All those 
colours make me feel alive and full 
of energy. And that’s what I hope 
people feel when they see my art.
Has your love of colour seeped 
into how you choose to dress or 
decorate your home? 
Not really. Most of my clothing is 
denim or army clothing. I think I 
need that contrast. And the same 
for my house. If I’m working most of 
the day with bright colours, I need 
a balance, so I can keep on enjoying 
those powerful colours the next day.
Being authentic in your work is 
clearly important to you. Does this 
ever create problems with clients 
who have very specific briefs? 
I feel pretty lucky about this, because 
when clients come to me, it’s 
because they like my style and my 
way of doing things. So 99 per cent 
of the time, I just have to work as 
usual. When the other one per cent 
happens, I let the client know that 
I only work with my style.
You’re known for your large murals. 
Have you had any accidents getting 
them up on the walls? 
I have to say I never ever had 
any type of accident painting walls. 
I’m not scared about painting up 
there, but I’m really respectful 
with working in that situation, so 
I work comfortably but make sure 
that I’m paying attention, and 
nothing bad has happened so far 
(crossing my fingers!).
It’s taken Cavolo around 20 
years of pure hard graft to get him 
to where he is today: a point where 
he’s happy with his artistic style and 
where he is professionally. While 
everyone else seems be chasing 
instant success, he is a big proponent 
of putting in the hours, committing 
yourself and letting your style 
develop naturally. 
There’s balance to be had, 
though: as the artist revealed during 
a particularly moving talk at OFFF 
London, pushing himself too hard 
for too long nearly drove him to 
suicide at one point. 
We caught up with Cavolo 
after the event to find out about 
his unique talent with colour, 
the joy of finding magic in 
unexpected places, and how he stays 
professionally satisfied without 
harming his mental wellbeing.
Your work often features people 
who live, as you call it, ‘on the B side 
of life’. What do you mean by this, 
and why does it interest you?
The ‘A side of life’ is the official 
one: the normal, the regular, the 
standard, what we usually see 
with our own eyes. The ‘B side’ is 
the outsiders’ area, where you find 
people who don’t live that normal 
life, because they decide not to, or 
they are not able to because of so 
many social and economic reasons, 
or they don’t know how.
I love to find the magic in that 
B side, where people think there is 
not supposed to be magic. And the 
magical moments or situations there 
are much more beautiful than the 
normal or standard magic.
Would you say that you are part 
of this B group?
I can’t say that. I definitely live on the 
A side of life. When I was a kid I was 
living with gypsies, so I can say I 
know that B side very well. But I had 
S 
panish artist Ricardo 
Cavolo is known for 
his vibrant, joyful 
paintings, packed 
with symbolism 
and somehow 
unmistakably 
Spanish. He’s 
naturally drawn to 
social misfits and 
outsiders in his work, which has 
won him clients including Urban 
Outfitters, Glastonbury Festival, 
and Cirque du Soleil (the likes of 
Google and Nike haven’t been able 
to resist either). He now has his 
own clothing line, and his large-
scale murals can be found all over 
Europe, North America and the UK.
january 2018
IN CONVERSATION
below: an 
illustration of the 
movie Her, taken 
from cavolo’s 
new book, 101 
movies to Watch 
before You Die.

above: cavolo’s 
murals can be 
found all over 
the world. this 
one, depicting
the guardian of 
the sun, is in 
montreal.
left: the artist’s 
love of quirky 
individuals has 
attracted clients 
such as urban 
outfitters. this  
mural was 
commissioned 
for the fashion 
brand’s store  
in cologne.


You seem to move around a lot… 
Well, most of my life I’ve been living 
in Spain (in various different cities), 
but I have also lived in Brighton in 
England and in Milan. 
Where are you based now?
Right now I’m based in Barcelona, 
but probably in a couple of years  
I will try another country. That’s one  
of the best parts of this work. I am 
my own office.
Have you found your artistic 
style changing depending on 
where you’re living? It seems quite 
distinctively ‘Spanish’ – is it difficult 
to maintain this style when you’re 
in rainy England, for instance?
Not really. I must say the place 
where I’m living really doesn’t affect 
my work. My colours are always 
bright and clean, no matter where 
I’m living. Usually I don’t find 
inspiration in the places where I’m 
living; it comes more from books, 
museums, movies…
Your father was an artist, and you 
were born in his studio. Did he 
continue giving you advice when 
you became a professional painter? 
He is really respectful, so when I 
was done with university, he stopped 
giving me advice. He wanted me to 
fly free and choose my own way. 
So now he just comments on my 
work as someone who enjoys it, 
not as a teacher. 
You’ve just become a father yourself. 
Is art something you hope to pass 
on to your child?
I haven’t got a plan to pass the art 
thing on to my child, but my wife is 
an artist and I’m an artist, and we 
really love this life. I assume maybe 
this will helps to him to decide… or 
maybe not, who knows? I don’t really 
care, I just want him to be happy 
with his choices.
Tell us a little bit about your 
experience studying art. Is that 
where you found your particular 
style, or did that come later?
I was in art school and university 
as well. I was very well prepared 
regarding skills because my father 
had taught me previously, so I 
used that time to go deeper into 
the things I wanted to investigate, 
especially painting and drawing. 
I didn’t find my style there, but 
left: this mural for 
the city of moscow 
features cavolo’s 
signature vibrant 
colours and 
symbolism.
above right: 
a screenprint 
entitled 
Yeraz – created 
for online art 
gallery Gunter 
–depicts an 
armenian 
princess who 
represents “the 
surreal world of 
dreams”.
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 55 -
  ricardo cavolo 

january 2018
IN CONVERSATION

type of help. So you need to work 
really hard – too much – just to 
survive doing that. And that’s what 
happened to me. I had to work so, 
so hard for eight years that I spent 
all my energy.
How do you switch off now? 
I find the best activity to help me 
switch off is travelling. It helps a lot 
to clean my mind of work because 
I need to absorb everything in front 
of my eyes when I’m travelling. 
I learn a lot about the culture and 
life of the place, so I need all my 
senses focused on that. And that’s 
a relief, because there is no space 
for work in my head. 
I’ve been recently to Armenia. 
It’s an amazing country full of 
history and with a very strong 
culture, as well as probably the 
best food in the whole world. 
You must still work long hours here 
and there. How do you decide what 
to channel your energies into? 
Since experiencing my burnout 
and depression, I just choose what I 
really want to do, what I know will 
make me happy. It’s simple, but it 
really works. 
I had good training working on 
different styles. That’s learning.
Would you recommend studying 
art at school or university? 
Yes. Even if I’m not the biggest fan 
of  the education system, I think 
everything works, and if you spend 
a few years focused on a particular 
thing, you learn in different levels 
(skills, feelings, self-awareness). 
It is really useful and I totally 
recommend it.
You said at OFFF it took maybe 20 
years to get to where you wanted 
to be as an artist. Were there any 
points where you doubted this was 
what you should be doing? 
Never. Right after university I had 
a well-deserved rest. I was tired of 
painting and I needed some fresh 
air, so I worked as a light technician 
in theatres for two years. I never saw 
myself as an illustrator, or painter, 
or muralist. I just knew I would do 
something as an artist, but had no 
idea exactly what.
You also said that you love music, 
but you would never have a band, 
because you know music is not 
your ‘thing’. Do you think success is 
more about talent or hard work? 
A mix between them. I think if 
I work really hard on something, 
I will be able to create my life plan 
based on that. But if I am talented, 
it’s going to be much, much easier, 
and I will enjoy it much more.
You spoke about a particular low 
point, where you completely burned 
out. Why do you think you ended 
up getting to that point? 
It is pretty hard to become a 
professional artist, especially when 
you are poor and don’t have any 
01
FocUS oN HoW 
YoU’RE FEEliNG 
the first step in protecting 
your mental wellbeing is to 
pay attention to how you’re 
feeling, so you notice the 
warning signs before it’s too 
late. “I’m really conscious 
about my stress levels and my 
energy,” says Cavolo. “I take 
care of myself as I never did 
before. and I realise this is 
perfect for my creativity  
and energy when I come  
back to the studio.”
02
STRUcTURE 
YoUR WoRK daY 
When you’re self-employed 
and set your own hours, it’s 
a real danger that you never 
properly stop working. to 
avoid this, build structure 
into your day like you were 
working at an office. “I don’t 
work during the weekends, 
and I stop working every day 
about 7.30pm,” says Cavolo. 
“It’s just about having more 
space in my life to give over 
to family life and leisure.”
03
MaKE SURE YoU 
TaKE TiME oUT 
during that downtime, make 
sure you really switch off from 
work. “I love spending my free 
time playing video games, 
reading and watching movies 
and shows. But the best 
activity is travelling. I have 
a whole month in summer 
just for vacation.”
PROTECT yOuR 
mENTAl HEAlTH
after a breakdown, 
ricardo cavolo has 
learned to care for his 
mental wellbeing. He 
shares how to do so
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 57 -
left: a painting 
entitled adventure 
time. the strong, 
bright colours 
featuring heavily 
in cavolo’s designs 
make him feel 
energised. 
above: a personal 
commission that 
depicts Frida 
Kahlo. cavolo is 
drawn to those 
who don’t ‘fit’ in 
traditional society. 
  ricardo cavolo 
january 2018

industry issues
january 2018
how to 
succeed as a  
designer-maker
Ever dreamt of turning your hand to creating, and selling, 
your own products? Lisa Hassell reveals how success 
requires equal use of both head and heart...
01
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 58 -

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 59 -
january 2018
01-02 Heart 
& brain enamel  
pin badges 
by rockcakes, 
£12.50 on etsy.
02
 succeed as a designer-maker 

industry issues
january 2018
“I’d always had a burnIng desIre to have 
my own busIness – to have creatIve 
freedom and work for myself” 
S a r a h  M e r e d i t he
ven though the idea of earning a living 
through making and selling your own 
products might feel like a distant dream, 
dreams can come true. Whether it’s 
turning your designs into gift cards 
or learning how to make your own pin 
badges, the DIY approach to making and 
selling has long been a staple of savvy 
freelancers keen to diversify their 
practice, experiment with new ideas  
and make a little money on the side. 
And with the rise of platforms like Etsy 
and Not On The High Street, there’s never 
been a better time to turn your pixels into 
products – creatives can now set up an 
online store with minimum overheads.
With two million unique visitors per 
month, which doubles at Christmas, 
many sellers on Not On The High Street 
(NOTHS) say it’s worth the investment 
(£199 joining fee and 25% commission, 
plus VAT). The platform’s strict guidelines 
and tough application process mean that 
only the best of the best secure a spot on 
the site, assuring quality control and 
arguably less competition as a result. 
By contrast, US-based website Etsy 
competes on scale, with 30 million 
registered shoppers. It’s open to anyone, 
which helps if you do not have a track 
record of selling or if your products don’t 
fit in with the style of other, more selective 
websites. Listing an item for four months, 
or until it sells, costs just $0.20 (roughly 
13p), plus there’s a commission of 3.5% 
(plus VAT) on each purchase. Though 
competition is fierce and quality control  
is arguably non-existent, with relatively 
low set-up costs and commission rates, 
it is still the number one choice among 
the creative community. 
Taking The leap
An early adopter of Etsy, illustrator  
Sarah Meredith set up her online store 
under the pseudonym Rockcakes in 2008. 
After leaving her well-paid role as 
production manager at a leading London 
jewellery company, she relocated to 
Brighton to pursue a career making  
and selling her own products. 
“I’d always had a burning desire to  
have my own business – to have creative 
freedom and work for myself,” she says.  
“I wanted to make and sell the jewellery 
ideas that popped into my head. I love 
clothing as well as jewellery – patches 
bridge this gap and are also super-
accessible.” Allowing her to be a full-time 
mum and worker, Meredith only has praise 
for the flexibility Etsy has given her. “Etsy 
changed my life!” she grins. “Although it’s 
24/7, so it’s hard to switch off.”
Finest Imaginary founder Kim Lawler 
sells across multiple sites. “I try not to 
spread myself too thin with direct sales,  
so only sell directly via my own website, 
Etsy and Not On The High Street,” she 
says. “I have quite a number of stores who 
stock my items – they place wholesale 
orders with me – including Hannah 
Zakari, Shop at the Old Fire Station and 
Berylune, and I’m also super-lucky to be 
have been stocked at some major galleries.”
Investing in her own production 
materials and equipment to produce 
laser cutting in-house, Lawler always 
has materials in mind when she starts 

rockcakes
www.etsy.com/shop/rockcakes
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 61 -
03 a F**king 
medal, Handmade 
brooch, £12.50
04 pencil ring, 
Handmade silver 
ring, £141.50
05 mightier 
pen enamel pin 
badges, £7.80 each
06 Happy patch 
mega box, £15.75
03
06
05
04
 succeed as a designer-maker 

finest  imaginar y
 www.finestimaginary.com
 
07 the elements  
of palm springs 
necklaces (see 09, 
11) before they’re 
assembled.
08 Gold tooth 
earrings, £10 
09 palm springs 
pink mid-century 
House Necklace, £35
10 Flamingo pool 
Float brooch, £30
11 palm springs 
blue mid-century 
House Necklace, £35
10
09
11
07

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 63 -
apparel
For many pro illustrators and designers, 
securing a commission with a clothing label is 
among the most coveted jobs out there. But 
rather than wait for the phone to ring, why 
not make your own? At a basic level, applying 
your artwork to a plain black or white T-shirt is 
super-easy to do, and the buzz you’ll get from 
wearing your designs out in public will spur you 
on to experiment further. Artist-led brands 
such as Johnny Cupcakes and AnyForty had 
to start somewhere! Screenprinting assures 
longevity for your efforts, and is a skill that  
can be mastered through studio workshops 
such as those run by Print Club London 
 
(www.printclublondon.com/workshops).   
Jewellery
Enthusiasm for DIY-style accessories shows 
no signs of slowing down, and transforming 
your ideas into sellable necklaces, earrings, 
patches and pin badges can be done quickly. 
Popular materials include lightweight wood 
and perspex, which comes in a variety of bright 
colours. “My anatomical heart and brain pins 
are one of my bestsellers, and I made them as 
acrylic badges before I launched pins,” says 
Rockcakes’ Sarah Meredith, who recommends  
Yeah Laser (www.yeahlaser.com) for small runs. 
“All you need is your imagination and a little 
help from them,” she enthuses. 
ColleCTable obJeCTs
Purely decorative, collectable objects have 
exploded on Instagram and Pinterest in recent 
years, and designer-makers are jumping on the 
bandwagon. Ceramics in particular are having 
a moment. When working in this medium, 
keeping an eye on margins is crucial, and it’s 
wise to constantly review production methods 
to turn a profit. “If I were more into selling, 
I’d make moulds and cast a series of ceramic 
objects instead of making just one of each,” 
suggests illustrator Karin Hagen. “At first I 
had pretty low prices, but then I started to 
calculate what the hourly rate would be and   
I had to make some adjustments.”
prinTed goods
Small-run printed items such as cards, prints, 
notebooks and postcards are a firm favourite 
amongst illustrators and designers, and are a 
popular route into the designer-maker market; 
such products can often be turned around in 
less than a day. With a decent colour printer 
costing less than £250, printed goods are a 
relatively low-risk activity – but letterpressed 
or screenprinted materials command higher 
prices. Whether you choose to sell online or 
post samples to potential wholesalers, print 
is a safe way to test the waters before moving 
on to more ambitious projects.
four produCTs  
To sTarT selling
the best items to get your 
shop or stall started
 
Brighton-based designer and illustrator 
Abi Overland recognised the potential to 
create a sustainable income by applying 
her designs to ceramics, and launched her 
first fine bone china collection in 2015.  
“I loved the idea of creating works of art 
that were accessible to people in their 
everyday lives, and ceramics had always 
been an interest of mine,” she says. 
Taking a part-time job to secure a small 
loan for the business, she purchased her 
first load of stock, and to keep her carbon 
footprint low, opted to source a local 
manufacturer to bring her designs to life. 
“Each collection of fine bone china is 
produced, screenprinted and hand-
decorated in Stoke-on-Trent – I wanted to 
produce high quality products and support 
the local economy,” she explains. 
Manufacturing locally has not been 
without its downsides, however. “It means 
the cost of production is quite high. I’m 
an advocate of slow fashion, but it can 
be tough walking the line between being 
commercial with your designs but not so 
much so they go out of fashion quickly.”
where To sell
Selling her products on a variety of 
platforms, including NOTHS and 
designing, usually with pencil and 
paper. “I’ll then move to the computer 
where I vectorise the design and split its 
layers ready for the laser cutter. I have my 
own laser cutter, so it’s not unheard of for 
me to have an idea in the morning, and a 
finished product by the afternoon.”
Lawler usually starts off with small 
runs, around five of each product. “Back 
when I used to get my laser cutting done 
by another company, I’d go in at around 
20-30 pieces for new designs and cross my 
fingers they didn’t bomb,” she recalls.
With other products, such as pins and 
patches, Lawler says many manufacturers 
have MOQs (minimum order quantities), 
or tempting price breaks for higher 
quantities. “Buying in these larger amounts 
can be a bit risky, but if you’re prepared to 
hold on to the stock until it sells (or happy 
to have a clear out sale every now and 
again), then it can still work.”
Lawler has also started making laser-cut 
acrylic jewellery, which she chose to create 
for the ease of production. “Perspex is 
such a versatile material to work with,”  
she says. “I sometimes buy different 
colours, finishes and special types of 
perspex without an idea in mind, just 
because I just love how it looks.” 
08
“buyIng In large amounts can be rIsky, 
but If you’re prepared to hold onto 
stock untIl It sells, It can stIll work” 
K i M  L a w L e r
 succeed as a designer-maker 

industry issues
“onlIne, you have 
to be selectIve wIth 
the places you sell 
In order to not 
be too avaIlable” 
a b i  O v e r L a n d
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 64 -
Culture Label.com, alongside Etsy 
and her own website, Overland also has 
stockists in The Netherlands and Geneva, 
and sells at events and markets. “I find 
online, you have to be selective with the 
places you sell in order to not be too 
available, but still create opportunities 
for people to discover your products in the 
environment you want them to be seen.”
This is a sentiment shared by Dutch 
graphic designers Felix van Dam and 
Winneke de Groot, who founded We are 
out of office in 2013 while both were 
working at different design studios.  
“We love screenprinting and started to 
print batches of postcards for fun. We 
just had this urge to make things our way 
and we figured if we made small products 
we could also design the packaging,” says 
van Dam. Known for their bold, colourful 
graphics and geometric prints and quirky 
pin badges, the pair have become 
something of an Instagram sensation, 
amassing a following of 33,000 globally. 
“We produce quite a lot of products and 
almost everything in limited editions, 
so the stock moves fast,” says van Dam. 
“Instagram makes it really easy to capture 
all this quickly, and is easier than listing 
items on a store. People can see directly 
what we do and how we illustrate. It also 
works well for us because we make small 
and not-too-expensive products. A lot is 
within the ‘I could give this as a present’ 
range. Our work is also visual, it doesn’t 
need a lot of explanation, which is perfect 
for an image-led platform like Instagram.”
Selling exclusively through Etsy while 
their own website remains perpetually 
under construction, van Dam admits that 
the pressure of having a website vanished 
when their Etsy store quickly took off, 
enabling them to go full-time on their 
business within a year. “Etsy draws such  
a big audience, an audience we could never 
reach by ourselves. We quickly realised  
we wouldn’t be able to attract a fraction 
of the people Etsy had for us. We’ve built a 
much larger audience than we could have 
possibly hoped to reach through a website.” 
aT The markeT
Art markets have seen a resurgence in 
recent years, with the likes of East London 
Comic and Arts Festival (ELCAF) and 
London Illustration Fair providing a 
platform for independent makers to 
sell their wares to the masses.
With such a healthy online business, 
selling at art markets is secondary to We 
are out of office’s enterprise. “Fairs can be 
so much fun but they can also be terrible,” 
laughs van Dam. “In Holland, they are 
mostly outdoor and you can be at the 
mercy of bad weather. We’ve done ELCAF 
twice now and that is so much fun! The 
audience really understand what we’re 
doing and it’s refreshing to talk to people 
face to face. An experience like this is 
definitely better than selling online, 
but it can be exhausting.“
Lawler has a similar approach to 
markets. “Markets and pop-ups are great 
cash injectors, but let’s face it, if we did 
them every weekend we’d have no life and 
we’d be completely burnt out,” she says. 
“Having a steady stream of income online 
is way more manageable.” Etsy is her 
preferred online marketplace. “Etsy was 
the first place I ever sold anything, so it 
makes for a great testing ground for your 
products. Once you’re established and 
with a large product range, you’ll probably 
turn a decent profit through Etsy. Right 
now, Etsy and my own website count for 
the majority of the profit in my brand.” 
work wiTh ediTions 
People are usually willing to pay more for 
limited-edition products. The production 
costs aren’t as bad as you may think, and 
charging a higher price means more profit. 
“It is smart to work with editions, or even 
endless editions,” says Felix van Dam of 
We are out of office. A black cactus pin is 
one of his shop’s bestsellers. “You do the 
design once and multiply it. That’s what 
makes a pin a nice product to work with. 
We screenprint or risograph print the 
backing cards ourselves, and when the 
pins arrive from our supplier we spend 
a few hours putting pins on cards. We’ve 
sometimes made up to 1,000 new pins 
to sell in one evening, which in our eyes 
makes it quite a lucrative exercise.”
make larger quanTiTies
In some cases, producing larger quantities 
can be very cost efficient, particularly 
when working with screenprinting. “Make 
a lot, stash it somewhere and you can sell 
it for a long time,” advises van Dam. Setting 
up a screen can be a costly exercise, so 
where possible, printing in bulk makes 
sense. “Printing at digital printers is also a 
possibility, but screenprinting is much more 
attractive,” he says, so people are more 
likely to buy it. “Two years ago we bought 
a Risograph printer and it’s one of the best 
investments we ever made.”
know your maTerials
Adjusting your mindset into that of a 
product designer can be challenging at 
first, but it’s essential to have the materials 
available to you in mind when starting the 
design process, to understand the limits 
of what is possible. “I love the challenges 
involved with perspex,” reveals seller Kim 
Lawler, founder of Finest Imaginary. “It’s 
such a versatile material to work with and 
comes in different colours and finishes.  
I can’t recommend it enough.”
produCTion versus profiT
Keeping an eye on your margins is 
crucial, and it’s wise to constantly review 
production methods if you want to make a 
profit. Illustrator Karin Hagen admits she 
could make more money if she created 
moulds of her objects, in order to make 
multiples of the same product. Hagen 
specialises in playful ‘vases with faces’, mugs 
and planters featuring unusual characters. 
So popular are her ceramics that they often 
sell through Instagram before she has time 
to list them on her online store.
praCTiCal Tips 
for making
creativity and business 
skills can go together

abi  overland
     
www.abioverland.com  
      
12 Wonderland  
tea cup, £50
 
13 Wonderland 
side plate, £20
14 Wonderland 
Dinner plate, £23
12
13
14

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 66 -
15 colorful club 
scarf, £27.80
16 colorful 
screenprint of a 
still life including a 
pink bottle, £83.50
17 a sliced banana 
pin with extra part, 
£8.80
18 tray Fruit, €35 
on klevering.com
19 trays, round, 
€48.95 on 
klevering.com
we are out of office
www.etsy.com/shop/weareoutofoffice
15
16
17
18
19

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 67 -
faCe-To-faCe ConneCTion
Aardman senior designer Gavin Strange 
and his wife, local jewellery maker Jane 
Kenney, created their boutique online 
store shop STRANGE to champion craft 
and graft. Launching with a celebratory 
pop-up store in August 2016, their focus  
is on unique, hand-crafted artwork, 
furniture, homewares, prints and 
leatherwork, produced by them and  
10 very select ‘Strange’ friends. 
“With Jane being a jewellery designer 
and me being a graphic designer, it 
naturally meant we had different interests 
and inspirations, so the work we make and 
stock reflects this,” says Strange. “Quality 
was important – even though the artists 
themselves and the work they make is 
different, their craft and the quality of 
their work is on the same level.”
The Strange pair planned the pop-up  
as “a bit of an experiment” – a way for 
people to see the products for real, before 
launching online. “We didn’t know if 
anyone would visit, we didn’t have any 
expectations,” says Strange. “We had lots 
of visitors. Friends, family, people who had 
heard about the store online – but also 
total strangers who happened upon the 
space. It was a really nice experience to 
talk about what we were doing, explaining 
what the products were about and the 
story behind them.”
Illustrator Sarah Meredith also loves 
meeting her customers: “I love selling at 
fairs, I’ve met some of my best friends  
at craft fairs, be they other stall holders or 
customers,” she says. “People like to meet 
the maker, go home, ponder and order 
online. If somebody pauses at my stall for 
a second, chances are that I have greeted 
them and given them a business card 
– there’s still a potential sale there.” 
Her biggest challenge? Impatient 
customers. “The Amazon culture has 
definitely made people want things, like, 
yesterday. I was once threatened with legal 
action because a $7 pin badge had not 
made it across the Atlantic in 48 hours –  
it was ridiculous, but still got to me – 
complaints can be hard to shake off.”
priCing iT righT
Figuring out your prices is the hardest  
part of it all, admits van Dam, who  
advises against calculating prices based  
on hours spent: “The prices won’t make 
sense and things would become way too 
expensive to produce.” Instead he 
recommends researching the market to 
determine a fair price for your customers. 
“In the beginning we looked at other 
illustrators, how much they charged and 
talked to shop owners. After a while you’ll 
learn how to price your products fairly,  
but it takes practice.”
Lawler has an equation you can use  
to work out her wholesale and retail rates. 
“Your cost should be the price of all your 
materials, overheads and your time. 
eTsy
Etsy is easily the most popular of craft-driven 
retail sites, but with popularity comes stiff 
competition. “Etsy are great at promoting 
sellers via their social media, tagging you in 
posts if they feature you, and allowing you 
to share social links on your shop,” says Kim 
Lawler. Keeping on top of updates can be time-
consuming, but with 30 million active users, 
its global reach is a big draw. Etsy attracts 
an audience that most creatives could never 
reach by themselves. Not On The High Street 
is more exclusive, but costs £199 to join and 
its profit share is higher (25% vs 3.5% for Etsy).
insTagram
Whilst not strictly a platform for selling to 
customers directly, the potential reach and 
engagement offered by Instagram has long 
been harnessed by the craft community.  
“We directly notice a spike in sales when 
we post new items to Instagram – for us it 
functions a bit like a website,” reveals Felix 
van Dam, whose company We are out of office 
has thousands of followers on the platform. “A 
lot of shops who stock our products follow us 
and they can see instantly when we have new 
items to sell. Instagram makes it really easy to 
capture our artwork and share it quickly.”  
pop-up shops
Having a temporary physical space expands  
on the potential offered by art markets and can 
give you a real sense of who your customers 
are, and a more in-depth understanding on 
what sells. “Our pop-up was incredibly fruitful 
for us. Being able to speak to people face to 
face and wax lyrical about the products we 
sell is really important,” says Gavin Strange, 
co-founder of STRANGE. “Online selling is 
great, but being a human being is even better.” 
Renting a space with a friend or collaborator 
can help limit costs, and it’s easy to do it on a 
budget with a bit of imagination.
build your own websiTe
While selling via established platforms offers 
independent sellers an attractive proposition, 
building your own bespoke web shop with no 
listing fees or commission to pay is a worthy 
investment. With an array of templates and 
ecommerce plug-ins available, there is plenty 
to get to grips with, but for ease of use, Shopify 
comes highly recommended. “We just love 
the simplicity of Shopify,” enthuses Strange. 
“The fact it’s got inventory management is 
super-helpful, and because we’re starting 
small, it really helps having everything in one 
place so we know where we’re at.” Shopify 
also offers customisable web URLs as well 
as a beautiful selection of website themes.
four plaCes To
sell your wares
how to ensure your products 
find potential customers
 succeed as a designer-maker 
“In the begInnIng we looked at other 
Illustrators and talked to shop owners. 
learnIng to prIce faIrly takes practIce” 
F e L i x  v a n  d a M

Wholesale price is normally around two 
times your cost, and recommended retail 
price is between two and two-a-half times 
your wholesale price,” she says. “However, 
you might also want to look at market 
rates for similar items. Even if your cost 
price of a pin makes it work out that your 
RRP should be £9, when other sellers 
are selling theirs at £7, you’re unlikely 
to sell as many. Conversely, if you’ve 
got a product which you know could be 
retailing at way more than the equation 
comes out at, then don’t undercut yourself. 
Remember, if you’re selling on an online 
marketplace, you need to factor in all your 
fees, postage and packaging too.”
Unsurprisingly, the products that make 
the best profit are the ones that have a 
healthy margin, are simple to produce,  
and sell regularly, as Lawler reveals. 
“That’s not to say you shouldn’t produce 
products that don’t fit into these brackets, 
though. Interesting products that might 
not sell loads, or might not have the 
highest profit margin, are usually the ones 
that bring the customers to your store.” 
Meredith agrees, adding that these 
types of products often lead customers  
to the more commercial pieces. “I label  
my weird and interesting products ‘hook 
products’ as they catch your attention and 
reel you in but they aren’t necessarily what 
you’re going to end up buying.” 
For Meredith, who sells exclusively  
on Etsy, there are some disadvantages to 
using the site. “Platform changes and 
growth can be hard to keep up with. 
You’ve got to be all in to win on Etsy  
I think as it takes time, work and 
commitment to keep up with changes  
and with the competition.”
Relying too heavily on trends can  
also make or break a business, and it’s  
essential to have more than one income 
stream to protect yourself. Take the recent 
wave of pins, for instance. “When that 
started out, pin sales were booming,”  
says Lawler, “but now the market’s 
saturated, the sales have started flattening 
out a bit. It’s been fun and profitable to 
ride that wave, but it’s a great example of 
why diversification and making sure your 
business is nimble enough to move on 
quickly is super-important. I’ve seen a lot 
of my peers shut up shop, lose money and 
have to go back to a nine-to-five. That 
kinda thing can be really scary, it makes 
you wonder if you’ll be next.”
Lawler has also learnt from experience 
that you shouldn’t put all your eggs in one  
website. “I tend to sell the same stock on 
all websites, but I often have exclusives 
available on different ones. I like to make 
sure I’m turning profit in all my selling 
spots, and concentrate on the one I have 
ownership of – my website.”
finding balanCe
It’s vital to manage your own expectations 
when it comes to making a profit, at the 
beginning especially, and this is one of 
the main reasons why Overland continues 
to freelance. “Building up a reputation, 
client base and a following takes time,” 
she says. “There’s peaks and troughs 
and it’s a process of learning – in time 
it starts to become more stable. All my 
profits go straight back into the business 
in order to help it grow – you have to 
be prepared for that.”
Conversely, Strange says that anyone 
embarking on making their own products 
for the first time should try to forget about 
the pressure of making money altogether. 
“We’re creatives first and foremost, and 
learning to be a business second,” he says. 
“We didn’t get into this to make money, 
we got into it because we wanted to see 
our little thing out in the universe.  
Don’t do it to make money – do it to  
learn something new and have fun in the 
process, and then hopefully the money 
will come after that.”
“It is hard to change the way of 
thinking of the general public to support 
more small and local businesses if it 
means paying a little more,” says Lawler.  
“Slowly there’s a shift in people wanting to 
stop shopping on the high street and look 
to small businesses for products that are a 
bit more special, unique and high-quality 
in terms of design and manufacture.”
As Strange stresses, you are your USP. 
“Don’t get caught up with what anyone 
else is doing. Even if you are making 
identical things, the end result will be 
different because it’s your vision, your 
execution, your skills. Don’t waste time 
comparing yourself to others, use that 
time to move forwards!”
As sustainability becomes increasingly 
prevalent as a talking point, and shoppers 
wise up to the provenance of the products 
they buy, the craft community can work 
together to encourage people to shop 
locally and support small businesses 
creating more and more opportunities 
for small designers to flourish. 
n e X t
MOntH
make 2018 your besT year ever
Inspired to design your own products? 
Other unfulfilled goals on the list? Next 
issue is all about making them a reality
“we’re creatIves 
fIrst and foremost, 
and learnIng to be 
a busIness second” 
G a v i n  S t r a n G e
industry issues
january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 68 -

20 rockmount 
cushion, £40
21 rockmount 
tea towel, £10
22–24 selection  
of straNGe 
products, ranging 
from locked skulls 
patch (£8) to 
Greenland blue 18” 
cushion (£60) to  
box satchel (£155). 
see website for 
more item details 
 
25 rockmount 
Necklace, £120
25
strange
www.strangebristol.com
20
22-24
21

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 70 -
january 2018
5
   
  JUNIOR DESIGNER MANUAL 
TypESETTING 
TEchNIqUES
In the penultimate of our series focusing on tasks given to 
junior designers, we look at the minefield that is typesetting,  
and examine why rules are there to be broken
Words: Tom May
 T
ypesetting might sound like an antiquated 
term. But it is, quite simply, the art and 
science of arranging text on a page in  
an attractive and legible manner. It’s  
a phrase originally used to describe 
the arrangement of physical, metal type. But 
nowadays, it’s normally used to refer to the 
arrangement of digital type on screen, using 
software such as InDesign.    
“Traditional typesetting used to be quite   
a fixed mechanical process,” says Luke Tonge, 
senior creative at LIFE, an award-winning 
creative agency based in Birmingham. “So the 
variables were easier to control, but obviously 
much more time-consuming and complex.   
In our fluid digital times, thanks to computers, 
we type with total ease, so achieving 
consistency across countless devices and 
platforms is the new aim.” 
Modern typesetting, then, is all about the 
choices that can be controlled by the designer, 
including typefaces, sizes, placement and 
colour. And it should always take into account 
where the type will eventually live: be that 
outdoors, indoors, on a desktop or tablet 
computer, printed, or on a tiny watch screen. 
All these variables mean that the potential 
for bad typesetting is huge. “Software is a poor 
alternative to the kind of experience and 
eye that comes with years of studying and 
understanding type as a stand-alone craft,” 
Tonge points out. “So the onus is on designers 
today to ignore the default settings and pay 
even more attention to it.”
Early challEngEs
All this means that as a junior designer, your 
first forays into typesetting for a real client can 
be quite a challenge. Michelle Stocks, who was 
recently promoted from junior designer to 
designer at Nelson Bostock Unlimited, recalls 
her initial experiences. “It started off being very 
difficult to choose the right typefaces,” she 
recalls. “Then if a secondary typeface was 
needed, that would prove really hard to get 
right. Because when it’s even slightly not right, 
it’s very obvious. It was frustrating, because 
when I looked at beautiful typographic pieces, 
they made it look so easy. But what I had in my 
head wouldn’t come out right on the page.” 
Thankfully, though, she soon got the hang 
of it. “You start to get to know what can work 
and what doesn’t, and quite quickly I found   
 
I knew what I was doing,” she says. Ultimately, 
it was practice that helped her improve, as 
well as looking at a lot of different types of 
BAcK TO BASIcS
cOLOUR cORREcTION
IMAGE MANIpULATION
ARTWORKING FOR pRINT
DIGITAL ASSET cREATION
TypESETTING
this six-part series is an essential guide for junior designers. We give advice on topics entry-level creatives need to know about, from basic theory  
to practical tips. in part five, we look at the ins and outs of typesetting. Missed an issue? Catch up by purchasing back issues of CA – see page 74.
BRAND GUIDELINES

january 2018
  junior designer manual 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 71 -
pRO INSIGhT
hOW TO BREAK ThE RULES
ACCordING To lukE TongE, seNIor CreATIve AT LIFe, you hAve To 
LeArN The ruLes oF TypeseTTING beFore you CAN breAk TheM
Achieving 
consistency 
across countless 
devices is the 
new aim of 
typesetting
ThymE mEnus
“At LIFe, we recently 
undertook a ‘design refresh’ 
of the winter menu for 
Thyme, the restaurants 
found within the premier Inn 
hotel chain. since the type 
can be responsible for the 
success or failure of a menu, 
these required far fewer 
eye-popping type effects 
and instead a real technical 
attention to detail: they’re  
a typographic jigsaw puzzle. 
Thyme menu designs are 
modern and understated. 
They’re also understandably 
text heavy, so readability  
is vital. To this end, we 
use a mixture of clean 
sans families Tide sans 
for headers, and Gotham 
for the body copy.”
Improving your typesetting abilities 
is a process of learning the rules, 
then learning to break them.  
“you need to learn the accepted 
rules and basics,” says Luke Tonge. 
“understand hierarchy, learn about 
rhythm and visual flow, figure out 
the difference between readability 
and legibility, get your grammar, 
punctuation and consistency 
nailed. Then… forget the lot! 
Fall in love with abstract and 
expressive type, hand lettering  
and brush work, collage and 
experimental, barely legible type.” 
The point he’s making is that 
type can sometimes be a dry 
subject if all you do is follow the 
rules. “but it needn’t be, you just 
need to know how and when to 
break them,” stresses Tonge. 
“study typographic legends like 
david Carson, Neville brody and 
Jonathan barnbrook. explore the 
output of typographic outsiders 
such as James victore, sister 
Corita kent and Neasden Control 
Centre. Always ask yourself: ‘What 
does this collection of shapes 
emotionally convey – not just say?”
ultimately, being good at 
typesetting is indivisible from 
being good at design, he notes.  
“At its most distilled, graphic 
design is words and pictures, plus 
hopefully an idea. Type is the 
clothes words wear, which means 
typesetting is of huge importance 
when evaluating a designer’s work. 
“Typesetting is like writing,” he 
concludes. “you can spot a good bit 
of copy (and equally a stinker) at 
a glance; it is very difficult to hide 
poor typesetting. The proof of good 
typesetting usually means the 
typesetting isn’t noticeable, it feels 
natural and confident, and helps 
deliver a great piece of work.”

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 72 -
inspiration. “There are no real shortcuts: it 
just takes experience to get it right,” she says. 
Maya Walters, who has been working as an 
artworker at Hogarth Worldwide since 2015, 
recalls that one of the biggest challenges she 
faced early on was dealing with multiple client 
guidelines. “Having a large list of clients, each 
with a wide variety of fonts and typefaces, 
meant a steep learning curve,” she explains.   
“I needed to understand which rules were 
applied to each typeface in terms of font size, 
leading, tracking, horizontal scaling, and so 
on. In the first few months, even maybe the 
first year, I remember checking my notes, client 
guidelines and magazine tips many times a day 
while working on various projects. The more 
jobs I worked on, the more aware I became   
of the importance of typography and 
guidelines as part of my skill set.” 
And it wasn’t just her day-to-day work that 
helped improve her typesetting skills. “After 
this initial learning stage, working on freelance 
and personal projects was another great way 
to put all of these skills into practice,” Walters 
adds. “I continued to face new challenges, 
working with typesetting skills that were 
outside of my comfort zone.”
And that’s an important point, because 
typesetting isn’t something you ever completely 
master, but something you should strive to 
pizza kiTchEn
“At LIFe, we recently completed 
a fun campaign to launch 
Chicago Town’s pizza kitchen. 
Four key attributes or 
statements were created to  
be used across various 
touchpoints, each one visually 
interesting, with real 
personality. We worked with  
an illustrator to create some 
of the key words and then built 
up the type around them, riffing 
off the personality that each 
statement embodied. 
This kind of playful and 
extravagant type is in stark 
contrast to the much more 
rational and rigorous 
typesetting that has been going 
on recently for some of our 
restaurant clients. We utilised  
a combination of Memphis (the 
slab serif) and rbNo2.1a (the 
sans) in various weights. These 
were embellished with a variety 
of shadows, key lines and 
gradients to give them more 
visual punch and personality.”

january 2018
  junior designer manual 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 73 -
develop and improve throughout your career. 
Not doing so may adversely affect your career 
prospects, and Tonge stresses that it’s not 
always the juniors in a studio who have the 
worst typesetting habits.
TypEsETTing sins
“There’s a roll call of typesetting sins that 
designers of all ages can commit,” he grimaces. 
“The obvious ones I’ve spotted over the years 
include too much shouty CAPITALISATION, 
stretching type awkwardly to fit a space, and 
excessive line lengths. But probably the biggest 
mistake I see is around quantity of text. No one 
is going to read several paragraphs of text on a 
presentation slide, especially at 30 words per 
line in 8pt! Brevity is highly underrated.”
Avoiding such pitfalls and progressing your 
skills involves a combination of creative flair 
and technical craft, he adds. “It’s relatively easy 
to teach technical craft: this is often what 
college courses do, and certainly something 
juniors should be picking up from seniors and 
artworkers. But the more difficult aspect to 
teach is the expressive/intuitive part, which   
is evident when someone just ‘gets’ type and 
typesetting. Educating on this is more about 
exploring why certain approaches work, what’s 
been successful in other work, and so on, than 
instilling a specific formula.” 
FIvE TypESETTING TIpS
our pro AdvICe oN hoW To  
IMprove your TypeseTTING
1 
TAKE yOUR TIME
“Getting typesetting right is something 
that will largely come with time, says 
Michelle stocks of Nelson bostock 
unlimited. “so just keep practising, and 
don’t get put off when it doesn’t look good 
immediately. I recommend looking at a lot 
of inspiration too, because it helps you get 
an idea of what works well together.”
2 
KEEp STUDyING 
“First you need to learn the tools: font 
size, leading, tracking, horizontal and vertical 
scaling, paragraph styling, language settings 
and grid systems,” says Maya Walters of 
hogarth Worldwide. “Then you need to 
extend your knowledge: there’s always 
something new to learn. read a book on 
typography and set challenges for yourself  
to put your new skills into practice, such as 
working on a personal project.”
3 
READ BOOKS
For reading matter, Luke Tonge of LIFe 
suggests Type Matters! by Jim Williams and 
Thinking with Type by ellen Lupton. And if 
you really want to treat yourself, he adds, 
The visual history of Type by paul McNeil  
is “the best book on type this year”. 
4 
USE ONLINE RESOURcES 
“There are countless online resources  
to help you improve your skills too,” says 
Tonge. “They include ilovetypography.com, 
typographher.com, letterformarchive.org, 
typewolf.com and fontsinuse.com. plus, on 
Twitter there are heaps of amazing foundries, 
magazines, designers, publications and 
organisations to follow, to further immerse 
yourself in the world of type.”   
5 
cLIENTS cOME FIRST
“Above all, find out about the client’s 
needs when it comes to typesetting,” 
says Walters. “do they have guidelines and 
styles? If so, they should be made a prime 
consideration for the typography you create.”
It’s relatively 
easy to teach 
technical craft; 
the expressive  
and intuitive part 
is more difficult

BACK ISSUES
Never miss
aN issue!
Catch up on anything you’ve 
missed by downloading our 
digital back issues on iPad, 
Android and more...
Download Computer Arts for your iPad, iPhone or iPod Touch and enjoy streaming video and bonus image galleries.
A digital replica of CA is also available on Google Play and Zinio, as well as Kindle, Nook, Windows 8 and more.
PREFER TO READ ON ANDROiD, PC OR MAC?
GOT AN APPLE DEViCE?
www.bit.ly/CA-GooglePlay   
issuE 273 
DECEMbER 
   Self-promo special:  
  master social media,  
 and brand yourself
   Six ways to conquer  
 creative block
  How Ragged Edge  
 thrives with no ego
www.bit.ly/CA-iPad    www.bit.ly/CA-iPadus (US store) 
www.bit.ly/CA-Zinio 
issuE 271
OCTObER 2017 
Branding at its best: we reveal the 
winners of this year's Brand Impact 
Awards. Plus: we tackle diversity in 
design, and DixonBaxi explains why 
it pays to be creatively restless.
issuE 270
sEPT 2017 
Overcome six major hurdles that all 
design studios face. Plus: sharpen 
your colour-correcting skills, and 
watch our BIA 2017 judges debate 
hot topics in branding.
issuE 272
NOVEMbER 2017 
Discover the top 50 studios in this 
year's UK Studio Rankings, explore 
four different routes into freelance 
life and find out how to improve 
your artworking skills.
issuE 269
AuGusT 2017 
In our New Talent special, we reveal 
the best design graduates from 
across the UK. We also share advice 
on how to get your first design job, 
and go behind the scenes at Halo.

  projects 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 75 -
january 2018
SubScribe today for pro inSight and practical advice every month – See page 38
NEVER MISS AN ISSUE of coMpUtER ARtS
computer arts goes behind the scenes with world-leading 
designers as they reveal their working processes…
how to visualise data
Nadieh Bremer shares her Information 
Is Beautiful Award-winning project, 
which maps out the Netherlands’ Top 
2,000 annual song chart
coke x adobe x you
Ahead of the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, 
Coca-Cola is giving away its brand 
assets to designers worldwide. We go 
behind the scenes on this challenge
how to build a global reputation overnight
Just three years young, London studio Koto shot into 11th place in CA’s UK Studio Rankings this 
year. We explore how its heady mix of infectious energy and unbridled ambition helped it get ahead
wide horizons
How Jack Renwick Studio crafted 
a fresh identity for Wide Horizons 
– a charity that facilitates outdoor 
learning for inner-city schoolchildren
proJects
82
88
92
video 
insight
76

january 2018
VIDEO INSIGHT
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 76 -
HOW TO BUILD A GLOBAL 
REPUTATION OVERNIGHT
Just three years young, Koto shot into 11th place in ca’s 
uK studio rankings this year – and it’s all down to a heady 
mix of infectious energy and unbridled ambition
VIDEO INsIGHT
 R 
ebranding a global giant like 
Fanta, across all languages and 
territories, would be a major task 
for most large agencies. For Koto, 
it was one of the first jobs on the 
slate – and the studio rose to the challenge, 
putting it firmly on the radar of its peers. 
Koto was founded in 2015 by James Greenfield, 
Jowey roden (both formerly at Designstudio) 
and caroline matthews (former mD at rupert 
ray and airside, where she worked with 
Greenfield). “We realised there weren’t many 
people working at the intersection of brand and 
product,” explains Greenfield, who headed up 
the major airbnb rebrand while at Designstudio.
“We particularly serve the start-up scene, 
silicon valley, places where a lot of interesting 
things are happening from a business point of 
view. that’s been the basis of our growth.”
beside this practical reason for founding Koto, 
the trio also had an emotional one: “We wanted 
to create a family environment where people feel 
comfortable,” adds Greenfield. “branding can 
have an aggressive, male tendency at times. We 
wanted to create a buzz around ourselves, but in 
a way that everyone had a good time doing it.”
Here, Greenfield and recently hired creative 
director tim Williams – another Designstudio 
alumnus – discuss the studio’s rise to fame...
You burst onto the scene and built a reputation 
quite quickly. What’s the secret?
Tim Williams: there’s a real sense of energy, 
reflected in who we work with: young businesses 
with a lot of energy too. the effort everyone puts 
in is enormous, and we reflect that in our culture.
our success has happened quite organically; 
i don’t think there’s any particular secret. We 
do the best work possible, and work really 
closely with our clients to make sure everything 
is delivered to the highest possible standard. 
James Greenfield: anthony burrill said it better 
than i could: ‘Work Hard and be Nice to people’. 
but we also manage our social reputation, using 
 instagram to give people a sense of what it’s like 
to work here. When i’ve gone for jobs at other 
agencies, there’s been no sense of that. i saw the 
work, their about page, that was it. You had no 
sense of the cast of characters, or what it feels 
like. We wanted to be more open. 
How do you handle Koto’s social media?
JG: We don’t like marketing meetings. some 
agencies are guilty of ‘over meeting’, if that’s 
a word. if something feels like it might be 
good to share with the outside world at 
that moment in time, one of us gets our 
phones out. We don’t do a glut of content, 
or try to be overly strategic. the best social 
media people get engagement because they 
are showing something of their authentic selves. 
We don’t have new business teams, or social 
media marketing managers. You just don’t 
need them. if we can’t explain who we are 
as individuals on social media and as a team, 
then we’re probably not doing a very good job.
You say Koto’s values drive your daily 
behaviours, what do you mean by that?
JG: We came up with our values on the roof 
of the tate modern, when Koto was five or six 
people. We said: ‘What do you want to be?’ and 
45 minutes later ended up with three composite 
values [presented online as: ‘uncompromising 
positivity’; ‘Just cadence’, or the need for rhythm 
in the creative process; and ‘relentless Hustle’].
if we have that moment where the chips are 
down, or we’re up against it and someone’s 
come back with some really negative feedback, 
our values help us get us back up. Whether 
that’s about being optimistic, or realising that 
relentless hussle is required to get through it. 
With the old model of design, you got the brief 
and all the content, and then you were a conduit 
to communicate that to the world. those days 
are gone. We rarely get a brief. We rarely have all 
the information at the beginning. those values 
have to help us get younger staff, or those who 

january 2018
  koto 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 77 -
KOTO
Founded in 2015 by James Greenfield, Jowey 
Roden and Caroline Matthews, Koto has rapidly 
built its reputation on the global design scene, 
helped in no small part by Coca-Cola entrusting 
the young studio with a global rebrand of Fanta. 
www.studiokoto.co
Watch the videos on our Youtube channel: www.bit.ly/ca274-koto

JANUARY 2018
VIDEO INSIGHT
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 78 -
JAMEs GREENFIELD
Co-founder
TIM WILLIAMs
Creative director 
Having earned his stripes 
at Airside, ManvsMachine 
and DesignStudio, James co-
founded Koto in 2015. Fellow 
DesignStudio alumnus Tim 
joined in February 2017.
BUILD YOUR STUDIO’S REPUTATION
In our first video, co-founder James Greenfield 
(pictured) and creative director Tim Williams 
discuss Koto’s rise to fame, and how its company 
values help shape a dynamic studio culture.
WATCH THE VIDEO NOW AT  
www.bit.ly/ca274-koto
Left: Koto’s breakthrough 
project, the global Fanta 
rebrand, was based on 
a series of overlaid 
paper-cut shapes.
Below: the logo was 
translated into multiple 
languages, and the studio 
also created a diverse 
range of fruit illustrations 
to represent Fanta’s 
many flavours.
are stuck on something, to refind their love for 
what they’re doing, or get a breakthrough. 
TW: it’s not something you need to explain to 
everyone. they’re implicit. You don’t need to keep 
repeating them; they’re a reflection of who we are.
JG: Yeah, they’re not written on the walls. but 
we’re an optimistic brand, and we think it’s better 
to map those on our website than have a long, dry 
bit of text giving a potted history of the founders. 
agency websites are like tinder. clients are 
short of time, and want to work with someone. 
No one comes with unlimited time and money: 
the website should get them excited about 
working with us, but is never a replacement for 
meeting face-to-face. let’s have a coffee, talk 
about what you’re facing, and how we can help.
You talk about the ‘beginner’s mind’ as an 
important starting point – what is this?
JG: it’s about being open to stuff. as you 
go further through your career, you create  
more elastic responses to stuff. We’re used 
to that in our everyday lives: ‘i’ve seen this 
situation before, i’ve had this experience...’ 
and you shortcut to the answer. if we did that, 
we’d end up in a situation where a finance client 
always gets blue, and a corporate typeface, and 
a vision that’s about trust or safety. but if you 
use the beginner’s mind, it’s an open book.
TW: it’s about not jumping to conclusions.
JG: cynicism and scepticism are two traits 
that a lot of creatives hold. We hold our heroes 
and our tenets in creativity really high, and if 
people don’t understand those, they’re not in 
the club. they don’t ‘get’ it. For us, it’s about 
getting on the same level. everything we know 
about creating, the reference points we’ve pulled 
together throughout our life, don’t set us apart. 
our job is to get them excited in the power of 
design, to make a change in their business.
TW: also, a lot of the businesses we work with 
are quite complex. We are beginners, and our 
clients are the experts – we need to learn from 
them; immerse ourselves in their culture.
What advice would you give to fellow studios 
starting up to make a name for themselves?
JG: Hire people better than you. creatives often 
struggle with that, because they don’t want to be 
outshone. they’ve got their own vulnerabilities. 
Half the people at Koto, maybe more, are way 
better at design than i am – and that’s good.
also, when starting a studio, know when to 
let go. creatives are really bad for that: making 
sure the kitchen’s right, or the stationery is as 
you want it. You end up with creative inertia. 
if you want to get out of the blocks, you have 
to let go of some of it – otherwise you’ll end up 
in a bottleneck, where you’re the stopper. 

JANUARY 2018
  koto 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 79 -
KATEY-JEAN HARVEY
Client manager
Koto’s first ‘non-design’ hire, 
Katey joined the studio two 
years ago. A graphic design 
graduate, she worked as a 
freelance illustrator for four 
years before moving into 
account management to put 
her people skills to good use.
HOW TO KEEP CLIENTS HAPPY
Our second video sees client manager Katey- 
Jean Harvey – who handles  Koto’s Coca-Cola 
and Airbnb accounts – share how she keeps 
complex projects running like clockwork.
WATCH THE VIDEO NOW AT  
www.bit.ly/ca274-koto
Above and right: James 
Greenfield worked on 
the major rebrand of 
airbnb while executive 
creative director at 
Designstudio, and 
continues to work with 
the brand on a variety 
of projects at Koto.
1. Keep spinning plates of all sizes 
Koto’s global rebrand of coca-cola-
owned Fanta required a complex account 
management process that ranged from 
the main rebrand to a myriad of detail-
orientated, research-heavy smaller tasks, 
like what a logo looks like in thai or arabic, 
or on a tiny label versus a massive billboard.
“it’s very much a case of being a 
collaborator,” says Katey-Jean Harvey. “We 
speak constantly on Google Hangouts, and 
it’s like: ‘What can we do to help you get 
what you need?’ We know they’re moving 
at a million miles an hour behind the 
scenes, so we use our time difference to our 
advantage, and make sure they wake up 
and have files when they need them.”
2. Embrace the unpredictable 
“No two days are the same, which could 
be a problem for some people,” admits 
Harvey. “although some people quite 
like the regularity of a day-to-day job, 
i prefer the chaotic moments: juggling 
lots of different things at any given time 
is a really satisfying challenge.” 
“You’re essentially a translator, and 
a diplomat at times – for me, that’s the 
most rewarding part: seeing the chaotic 
messages come through, and translating 
them into design. that’s how i get my kicks.”
3. Become part of the client team
“With more stakeholders involved, you may 
have to go through a political minefield to 
get answers, which slows things down,” 
admits Harvey. “You need to know when to 
respect the timeline, when to ease off and 
ride the wave so it doesn’t stress you out.”
although many challenges between 
large and small clients are similar, she 
points out that the larger the client-side 
team you’re working with, the more time you 
need to invest in building relationships.
“obviously you’ve got the ceos and the 
people on a higher level, but make sure 
you make good contacts with people like 
producers, developers and designers too,” 
is her advice. “make yourself an extended 
part of their team on all levels.”
According to Katey-Jean Harvey, 
multinationals like Coca-Cola and 
Airbnb require a special touch
HOW TO MANAGE 
A HUGE CLIENT

january 2018
VIDEO INSIGHT
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 80 -
RAVI VAsAVAN 
AND JOE LING 
Designers
Ravi has been working 
in design for 12 years, 
freelancing at studios in 
both the UK and Australia 
– and started full-time at 
Koto last year. Joe started 
at the studio as an intern 
two years ago.
SUCCEED IN A FAST-PACED STUDIO
In our third video, designers Ravi Vasavan 
(pictured) and Joe Ling share how Koto’s 
infectious energy and shared passion helps 
deliver world-class work, while Ravi reveals what 
studios can do to support deaf designers like him.
WATCH THE VIDEO NOW AT  
www.bit.ly/ca274-koto
1. Discuss ideas in diverse ways
“personally, the most difficult challenge 
at work is communication,” admits ravi 
vasavan, who’s worked as a freelance 
designer at various studios in london, 
melbourne and sydney for over a decade.
“at Koto, it’s a loud environment. We love 
to throw ideas around, and it’s working out 
how i can stand up when everyone’s talking 
to get my views across as well.”
slack is a great tool for levelling the 
playing field, he reveals: “We throw so many 
ideas on there, and everyone can talk at the 
same time. people stick ideas on the wall, 
and then maybe one or two people are on 
their phones texting ideas onto the screens, 
so i can read what people are saying.”
2. Put reasonable adjustments in place 
Koto has recently supported vasavan in 
achieving access to Work funding from the 
uK government, which covers interpreters 
for key meetings, for instance. “it’s great for 
the monday morning catch-up before we 
kick off, and to help explain what other 
people are talking about,” he adds. 
3. Be prepared to go the extra mile
vasavan reveals that all his studio mates 
at Koto have made an attempt to learn sign 
language, to varying degrees of proficiency 
– something he describes as exceptional 
compared to some of the other agencies 
he’s worked for over the years.
“some of them only offered really 
basic support,” he admits. “maybe just as 
simple as suggesting i should just write 
things down.” ultimately, he adds, it’s about 
feeling involved – in the studio culture and 
social side, as well as the design process.
“it’s really nice to have people who’d 
like to sign with me, and it makes all 
the difference,” he adds. “in comparison 
to some other places i’ve worked, 
Koto is definitely one of the best.”
Deaf designer Ravi Vasavan 
reveals how Koto has helped 
him thrive in a busy studio
HOW TO sUPPORT  
DIsABLED sTAFF
Above: Koto’s rebrand of 
bridge theatre, london’s 
first new commercial 
theatre for 50 years. 
Below: the diagonal bridge 
symbol is called the ‘beam’, 
a theatre lighting term.

january 2018
  koto 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 81 -
Watch the videos on our Youtube channel: www.bit.ly/ca274-koto
ALICE WALKER
Director of verbal strategy
TOM MOLONEY
senior brand strategist
Tom and Alice both joined 
Koto this year, having 
cut their teeth at NB and 
The Clearing, respectively. 
They work with James on 
everything from creative 
strategy to brand voice.
GIVE STRATEGY A HUMAN TOUCH
In our fourth and final video, director of verbal 
strategy Alice Walker (pictured) and senior brand 
strategist Tom Moloney – both recent hires for 
Koto – reveal why the right client conversations 
can reveal all you need to formulate a strategy.
WATCH THE VIDEO NOW AT  
www.bit.ly/ca274-koto
Above: boiler 
company Hometree 
received a warm, 
fluid rebrand from 
Koto that contrasts 
the cold, corporate 
nature of its rivals.
Left: “Death 
democratisers” 
Farewill cuts the 
complex legal jargon 
out of will making, 
and Koto’s branding 
injects a human 
touch by mimicking 
handwriting.
1. Use the client’s experience
“We assume nothing,” begins alice Walker. 
“We are never going to know as much about 
a person’s business, or be as much of a 
expert in their industry, as they are.” 
“talk to them, spend time with them, 
listen to the way they articulate their 
business,” is her advice, and tom moloney 
agrees: “there’s a humility to it,” he adds. 
“it’s not like: ‘this is your strategy, get on 
with it.’ it’s much more democratic.” 
2. Talk it out naturally 
“We’re sat around the table, working it 
out together,” adds moloney. “sometimes 
it’s as simple as getting rid of all the fluff 
that people are saying, and just going, 
‘ah, underneath all this, you said this.’
“When developing messaging 
and strategic positioning, if it 
comes naturally from the founder then 
we can articulate it in their words,” 
adds Walker. “that, for me, is the real 
essence of the brand. We don’t just 
try and create snappy brand promises 
and clever phrases that aren’t workable. 
We take people’s words, and play them 
back to them.”
3. Always consider the end user
“We’re trying to build a platform for 
everyone else to work with,” moloney 
points out. “it’s about creating something 
you can actually hang an idea on, not just 
a tricksy bit of copywriting where everyone 
goes, ‘ooh, how do i bring that to life?’”
“the thing that you experience 
as a consumer isn’t the strategy,” he 
adds. “it’s how that’s actually been 
manifested in a product, a design, 
choice of colour or phrase.”
Tom Moloney and Alice Walker 
explain how Koto’s ‘beginner’s 
mind’ attitude works in practice
WHY sTRATEGY 
BENEFITs FROM  
AN OPEN MIND

01
january 2018
PROJECT DIARY
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 82 -
Coca-Cola is giving away all its brand assets to 
creatives around the world. We go behind the 
scenes on this design challenge
PROJECT diaRy
CREaTivE ChallEngE: 
COkE x adObE x yOu 

PROJECT FaCTFilE 
bRiEF: As a partner to the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo, Coca-Cola is bringing 
designers around the world together to participate in a design challenge. 
Working with Adobe, the company invited 15 creatives to contribute to 
the launch of the challenge at Adobe MAX 2017. Using Coca-Cola Red Disc, 
Spencerian Script Coca-Cola Logo, Contour Bottle icon and Dynamic Ribbon  
– plus their own imaginations – each was asked to create imagery. The 
work of these artists is being used to enthuse creatives everywhere, 
and encourage them to join the challenge.
ThE aRTiSTS: Vasjen Katro, Birgit Palma, Kouhei Nakama, Sha’an d’Anthes, 
Ion Lucin, Frankie Cihi, Guy Aroch, Max Muench, Jati Pratama, Olivia Odiwe, 
Kei Meguro, Mike Winkelmann, David Tshabalala, Karen Cantuq, Filip Hodas
PROJECT duRaTiOn: Six months
livE daTE: October 2017
JamES SOmmERvillE 
vice president of global design, The Coca-Cola Company
In 1986, James and a friend launched Attik from his 
grandmother’s attic bedroom in Huddersfield. It grew  
to become a global agency with over 250 staff. In 2013, 
he joined Coca-Cola to lead its design teams across global 
brands, where he has used his design thinking methodology 
to meet a range of design and business challenges.
03
02
january 2018
  coke x adobe x you 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 83 -
CamPaign inSPiRaTiOn
James Sommerville 
When i attended the adobe maX event in san 
Diego in 2016, i admired the scale and presence 
the company has with the global creative 
community. We discussed ideas around how we 
could collaborate, and connect with the design 
community using coca-cola’s cherished assets, 
and that led us to formulate this challenge.
coke x adobe x You is a pre-campaign 
exploratory design challenge. it’s an opportunity 
for coke, as a global brand, to take the pulse  
of the design community and see what creatives 
can do with our brand assets. the challenge 
looks towards the 2020 tokyo olympic Games, 
but at this stage we have not formulated our 
global campaign for tokyo 2020.
at adobe maX 2017 in las vegas, we invited 
the design community at large to visit the site 
www.cokexadobexyou.com to find out more 
about the challenge. the brief is simple, but 
the possibilities really are endless. We have 
restricted the elements to the coca-cola brand 
colour palette, the coca-cola assets, and what 
the designer thinks of when they think of coca-
cola, Japan and the olympics.
aRTiSTS TO inSPiRE and lEad
initially, we invited 15 creative influencers 
to participate, so that we would have their 
images at launch to inspire others. We hope 
their respective communities and channels will 
help the campaign reach a wider audience. in 
addition, coca-cola and our partner adobe will 
publicise the challenge to attract the attention 
of creatives all over the world. several creative 
press outlets have covered the challenge and 
we’ve had organic social media posts by creative 
influencers and global designers.
it was important to us to work with people 
using all the design disciplines, including 2D, 
3D, motion, illustration, photography and 
typography, in order to show the extent of this 
brief in terms of application. Kouhei Nakama 
uses motion graphics, vasjen Katro creates 
fabric graphics, birgit palma is a type designer, 
01-02 Japanese 
motion graphics 
supremo Kouhei 
Nakama has 
responded to  
the challenge with 
two videos, in which 
he projects the 
coca-cola brand 
assets onto moving 
human forms, 
creating new and 
inspiring patterns. 
03 a work in progress 
sketch by Karen 
cantuq as she plans 
out her entry.

04-06 the 
israeli-american 
fashion 
photographer  
Guy aroch has 
created as set of 
provocative and 
colourful photos 
for the challenge.
kOuhEi nakama 
visual art director
Design, art direction and motion graphics are all 
skills employed by Japanese creative Kouhei Nakama, 
for clients such as Louis Vuitton and Peugeot. His 
films explore colour, pattern, texture and motion, 
experimenting with forms that merge, change and 
evolve along with the narrative of the work.
www.kouheinakama.com
biRgiT Palma 
illustrator
Barcelona-based Birgit Palma is an illustrator whose 
projects also take in art direction, type design and 
identity work. Her style is inspired by avant-garde 
artwork, surrealism, op art and nature. Clients have 
included Desigual, Nike and Erste Group, and she has 
worked with studios such as Vault49 and Vasava.
www.birgitpalma.com
04
05
january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 84 -
PROJECT DIARY
and Guy aroch is a photographer, for example. 
each of the 15 creatives has worked with the 
same brief and assets, and it was important 
that they all worked with the same elements. 
the olympics brings the world together through 
sport, and we felt the design challenge would  
do the same thing through creativity.
over the decades, many artists ranging 
from andy Warhol, Norman rockwell and  
mr brainwash have embraced the coca-cola 
identity, and provided their unique perspective 
on our brand. today the tools may be different, 
but the passion remains, and all of our creative 
influencers have been excited to participate.  
this work will become a moment in time, and 
they will be part of that, and the work may one 
day live in our archives.
aside from the constraints of the simple brief, 
it was open for our 15 designers to take any 
approach. We wanted to explore what individuals 
can create with no firm direction from me or 
the coca-cola Design team. this is a design 
challenge, not a commercial campaign.
gOing FORwaRdS
Now the challenge is open to all creatives, all 
over the world. the assets provided include the 
coca-cola red Disc, spencerian script coca-
cola logo, contour bottle icon and Dynamic 
ribbon. the only colours to be used in the 
challenge are the coca-cola red, black and 
white. red is our precious colour and few brands 
come as quickly to mind as coca-cola when 
you think of red. While we hope to have many 
daily dESign 
after i discovered that the olympics 
are held over 16 days, i decided to 
create a different piece of artwork 
for each day of the event. every day 
is different and has its own unique 
qualities but also has similarities, 
so my approach was to translate all 
that into a series of different images. 
When you watch the final video 
you get an overall feeling of these 
differences, but you also see one 
element that doesn’t change, which is 
the circle and the coca-cola identity. 
i began the artwork in photoshop 
before moving to illustrator to create 
the illustrations and elements. each 
piece was compiled and merged in 
photoshop. For the video, i worked 
in after effects and exported the file 
using media encoder.
Full 
CiRClE
vasjen katro’s creation 
riffs on circles and 
repeated forms
06

january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 85 -
  coke x adobe x you 
at first glance, using red, white and a circle as required in 
the brief seemed quite simple, but there was a risk that 
my final artwork would end up looking quite similar to that 
of the other creatives doing the challenge. i focused on 
creating something simple that was also original.
in my first video, the camera zooms in to Japan’s flag. 
i wanted to create something that got people excited 
about the tokyo olympic games. by describing the 
athlete’s dynamic performances in the flag, i’m hoping 
viewers will get that feeling of excitement.
For the video where athletes are painted with the coke 
logo, i wanted to use 3D. You can’t see the whole logo in 
one frame, but it fills in across the sequence. the logo is 
invisible in the still, but it is visible in the movie and this 
serves to enhance the logo. 
First, i created 2D materials and textures in photoshop 
and illustrator. i then imported them into my 3D software, 
modified them and sorted the layout. after compositing 
the rendered footage in after effects, i edited it. then i 
compressed the files with media encoder and posted them.
the most difficult part of the challenge for me was 
generating the idea. i needed to come up with something 
original and sophisticated, something that people would 
instantly recognise. i spent a lot of time thinking about 
how the videos would work before i started producing 
the design. once i had finalised my idea, the production  
process went pretty smoothly.
zOOming in
Kouhei Nakama’s motion graphics pieces incorporate the forms of 
competing athletes, as well as synchronised dancing sequences 
reminiscent of the patterns seen in busby berkeley’s films.
motion graphics artist kouhei nakama explains how  
he created two stunning videos to inspire others 

january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 86 -
PROJECT DIARY
07 simplify is the 
message in ion 
lucin’s work for 
the challenge.
08-09 birgit 
palma and 
Frankie cihi as 
they work on their 
challenge entries.
vaSJEn kaTRO 
graphic and ui/ux designer
The multi-talented Vasjen Katro is an Albanian 
designer who works on websites, mobile apps and 
in advertising. When he’s not pursuing his mission 
to make a better web, he designs abstract posters 
daily for his Instagram project – Baugasm.
www.instagram.com/baugasm
“We wanted to explore 
what individuals can 
create with no firm 
direction from me or  
the Coca-Cola team”
PERFECT SymmETRy
illustrator birgit Palma on her geometric Olympic artwork
i was inspired by the shapes of the elements we were given, and 
decided to take the most important ones – the circle, the bottle of 
coca-cola and the asakusa Kannon – as symbols to communicate the 
characteristics of tokyo. those shapes were fascinating and i decided 
to use their symmetry as the basis of my artwork. i scribbled down some 
ideas, and when i had chosen one i started to compose the different 
elements and to sketch it out geometrically in illustrator. to give it 
more depth, i switched to photoshop and coloured in the composition, 
concentrating on the colour balance of the artwork and on the details 
at the intersections and triangular parts.
ShaPE ShiFTing
diverse styles across different mediums, it  is 
important to have a thread, and our coca-cola 
red is that thread.
the work of the 15 designers we invited 
to take part will be released on the website 
promoting the challenge, and we are adding 
submitted work to it on a daily basis. creatives 
are also sharing their imagery on various social 
channels with #cokexadobexyou.
From our perspective, the design challenge 
will explore many things, from emerging and 
undiscovered talent through to identifying new 
design themes, styles and trends. We think this 
approach is bold for a brand of our scale, but  
we are always looking to disrupt our process and 
surprise and delight our consumers with the 
endless possibilities of the coca-cola brand  
and the passion people have to collaborate.   
We also hope to publicise the work of designers 
and showcase their ability for others to connect 
with them via behance.
We are very pleased with the response we’ve 
had so far and can see that the designers and 
creatives are enjoying the challenge, which is 
very important for us. 
at coca-cola, we always seek to deliver our 
product as ‘the perfect serve’. this means the 
right glass, the correct number of ice cubes, 
the temperature, the setting, and even a slice 
of lemon and the iconic coke straw. We feel this 
type of design collaboration with many designers 
across the world reflects the design version of 
‘the perfect serve’ in that if you remove any of  
the elements, it can still be great but it won’t   
be quite the same. 

10-11 birgit palma’s 
finished work looks 
at the tokyo setting 
for the games in 
a different way, 
through the lens 
of coca-cola’s 
geometric forms. 
in her sketches, she 
explores occlusion 
and the use of 
positive and negative 
space, as well as 
experimenting with 
various additions.
12 Karen cantuq’s 
work-in-progress 
image for another 
of her contributions 
to the challenge, 
featuring a panda 
with elements of the 
coca-cola branding.
january 2018
  coke x adobe x you 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 87 -
10
09
11
12
08
07

january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 88 -
WORKSHOP
how to visualise 
complex data
How Nadieh Bremer mapped the Netherlands’ 
annual top 2,000 songs through data visualisation
workshop

january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 89 -
  visualise complex data 
musical inspiration
Nadieh Bremer
When you say ‘music in December’ to someone 
from the Netherlands, they’ll probably think of 
the top 2,000, a yearly chosen list of the best 
songs that is played between christmas and 
New Year’s eve. i’m one of the may many people 
who listens to it every year.  
For Data sketches, a year-long collaboration 
that i did with shirley Wu, i really wanted to 
dive into the top 2,000 data for the December 
instalment of the project. my goal was to 
visualise which decades were most popular 
in terms of the song release year.
MAPPING the dAtA
the top 2,000 website shares a file with the 
name, artist, and year of release for each song. 
However, i also wanted to know the highest 
rank each song ever reached in the weekly 
top 40. therefore, i wrote a small web scraper 
in r (www.r-project.org) that saved the artist’s 
name, song title and weekly position since 1965.
Next came the task of matching the artists 
and songs to those in the top 2,000 list. if only 
each song ever made had a unique iD. i went 
through a whole array of different techniques: 
such as exactly matching song and artist names, 
which connected 60 per cent of the songs. but 
i also performed partial, fuzzy, word swapped 
and manual matches. of course, not all songs 
have been singles or appeared in the top 40, but 
they can still appear in the top 2,000. in the end, 
i was pretty certain that i had found the top 40 
position (or ‘never in top 40’) correctly for over 
90 per cent of the songs.
deSIGN INSPIRAtION
months before, me and two fellow team 
members had created a sketch for an 
infographic about the top 2,000 in a workshop. 
i thought it would be interesting to use that 
sketch as the base, and design from there.
the sketch outlines the main idea: each song 
is visualised as a circle, and all 2,000 circles are 
clustered around their year of release along 
nadieh Bremer
Freelance data visualisation designer
Named ‘Rising Star’ in the Information is Beautiful 
Awards 2016, Nadieh’s projects include web-based 
interactive visualisations showing insights into 
complex data. Last year she spoke at conferences 
worldwide about the wonders of visualising data.   
www.visualcinnamon.com
NEXT MONTH
visualisinG 
Bowie
valentina d’efilippo 
continues our infographic 
workshop series

01 Nadieh bremer 
rejected her 
first attempt at 
mapping the data 
as she thought 
it didn’t look 
appealing. 
02 bremer marked 
the bigger circles 
of the top 10 
songs as records 
by adding a white 
circle on top of 
a red one.
03 this image is 
also an animated 
gif – scrolling 
shows information 
about each song.
01
03
02
january 2018
WORKSHOP
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 90 -
an axis that runs from the bottom left to the 
top right. each circle is sized according to the 
highest position in the top 40 and coloured 
according to its rank in the top 2,000. 
vISuAL COde
i started coding the visualisation in the browser 
using Javascript library d3.js. using d3’s force 
simulation, i was able to create ‘gravity’ along a 
horizontal axis that would depend on the year, 
creating the ‘clustered according to song release 
year’ shape from the sketch.  
in my first attempts, i followed the idea 
from the sketch exactly. once i had everything 
working and saw the result, i knew in an instant 
that it didn’t look appealing at all; a big, light 
grey mass of mostly similar-sized circles.
therefore, i switched the two scales. size 
would be defined by position in the top 2,000. 
this made more sense too, since the most 
popular songs would become the biggest. colour 
would represent the top 40 position, which 
makes sense because i was able to use the 
lightest grey as the ‘not in the top 40 / unknown’ 
colour. i found that the switch immediately 
provided a great visual improvement.
 to add a little life to the monochrome mass 
and provide context for the audience, i gave 
several songs – like the highest riser, newcomer, 
and so on – a red outline. i kept the visuals 
primarily black and white, inspired by vinyl 
records. However, with David bowie and prince 
having passed away that year, i felt it was right 
to mark all of their songs, in yellow and purple.
Finally, i decided to turn the top 10 songs  
into small vinyl records, placing a small red  
and white circle in the centre in order to make 
them stand out more.
tOO MuCh INFORMAtION
Happy with how the visuals looked, i used svG 
crowbar to save the svG from my browser to 
“I kept the 
visuals primarily 
black and white, 
inspired by  
vinyl records”

2017’s inFormation   
is BeautiFul awards
this year’s winners announced
Celebrating excellence in data visualation, 
infographics and information design, 
the awards have eight subject-based 
categories. See the web for the winners.
www.informationisbeautifulawards.com
04
05
04 a simple 
and multiple 
histogram of four 
editions in the 
past 18 years, 
overplotted 
by a smoothed 
density curve.
05 bremer chose 
to display the final 
infographic in grey, 
and also created 
an interactive  
version as well as 
a version in Dutch.
 
06-08 bremer’s 
past projects 
include olympic 
Feathers, marble 
butterflies and 
Words spoken 
in the lord of  
the rings.
08
07
06
january 2018
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 91 -
  visualise complex data 
continue in illustrator. i then rotated the 
entire graphic 25 degrees, mostly for a 
more interesting effect, before placing 
annotations around it.
i also wanted to touch on the fact that the 
distribution of the songs across the release  
year has been changing over the 18 years of  
the lifetime of the top 2,000. 
there was too much information for all  
 
18 years. therefore, i created four histograms 
in r (with the ggplot2 package) from different 
years to highlight the changing shape towards 
the ’90s and ’00s. since this was an added 
detail, i placed it below the main graphic.
those are all the elements that were 
combined to create the final top 2,000 
infographic. using r for the data preparation 
and histograms at the bottom and D3.js for 
the main visual element – the beeswarm plot 
– the results were combined with illustrator 
to produce what is on the final poster. 

january 2018
PROJECT diaRy
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 92 -
Wide Horizons:
Adventurous spirit
How Jack Renwick Studio crafted a fresh identity 
for a charity that facilitates outdoor learning for 
inner-city schoolchildren
proJeCt diAry

proJeCt FACtFiLe 
BrieF: To help Wide Horizons communicate what they do and 
the real impact they have on children more effectively. Bringing 
to life curriculum learning through adventure to help convince 
more teachers of the benefits of taking their students on an 
adventure learning experience.
studio: Jack Renwick Studio, www.jackrenwickstudio.com
tHe CLient: Wide Horizons, www.widehorizons.org.uk
proJeCt durAtion: Three months total (stretched over a year)
LAunCH dAte: Summer 2017
january 2018
  jack renwick studio for wide horizons 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 93 -
JACk renWiCk 
Creative director, Jack renwick studio
A multi-award-winning designer with a strong passion for ideas, 
Jack works closely with clients, getting to the heart of their problem 
and showing how creative thinking can be the way forward. Jack was 
previously creative director at The Partners and set up her own creative 
branding studio in 2012. Clients have included Amnesty International, 
British Heart Foundation, eBay, BBC, Royal Mail and Stella McCartney.
getting stArted
Jack Renwick 
Wide Horizons is an ‘adventure learning’ charity 
that is working to take the school curriculum 
outdoors and teach through adventure. the 
aim is to engage children and bring learning to 
life – the classroom simply isn’t effective for all 
children and it is proven that learning outdoors 
can help. We initially started working with the 
charity around two years ago with a simple 
brand refresh. eventually this led to a bigger 
conversation around the need for new brand 
assets. We wanted to help Wide Horizons as 
much as we could because it’s such a wonderful 
cause. over 35 per cent of children in london 
have never been to the countryside, and we 
wanted to help Wide Horizons make a difference 
to the educations of these children.
our brief was to help Wide Horizons 
communicate more effectively about what it 
does and show the impact it has on the children 
who take part in its adventure learning courses. 
the aim of this was to encourage more teachers 
to book courses and take their students on 
learning adventures.
early on, we were inspired by the name 
Wide Horizons and wanted to find ways of 
showing a bright future, and create something 
with a playful element, something which was 
interactive and fun that would get children to 
think differently about education.
tHe ApproACH
Tom Rogers
uncovering what Wide Horizons really stood for 
was key. although we began with some broad 
research into the offering and its competitors, 
it wasn’t until we sat down and talked to Wide 
Horizons that we understood the impact of what 
the team do, and what makes them special. 
the numbers are overwhelmingly positive  
– 80 per cent of children come out of the 
programme feeling like they’ve learned new 
things. this was eye-opening and inspiring, 
and we knew we had to bring to life the brand’s 
passion for education and adventure, and 
communicate it effectively. We had to make 
the charity stand out from adventure holiday 
01
02
01-02 Work in progress concepts demonstrating how 
classroom imagery could be used to show ‘adventure learning’. 

january 2018
PROJECT diaRy
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 94 -
We tried a variety of executions from photos 
to a more cartoony and fun style. the photos 
looked great but didn’t have the flexibility in 
application, and the livelier styles felt too 
young and didn’t communicate the extent of 
the curriculum that Wide Horizons teaches.
the illustrative line approach we settled 
on was simple, and offered plenty of freedom 
when putting the adventure scenes together, 
along with a level of maturity that kept the 
style appropriate for the full age range that 
would interact with the brand. Whether it was 
mathematics and mountains, biological bug 
hunts or building campfires and confidence,   
the illustrations had to work hard to show that 
with Wide Horizons, adventure and learning go 
together – hand in hand.
the palette of blues paralleled the name Wide 
Horizons with a feeling of the outdoors, fresh air 
and open sky. the orange was deliberately bright 
and uplifting, conjuring up an image of sunshine. 
and we needed bold, clear typography so we 
selected DiN round. it has a warm, friendly feel 
but is legible and solid. it’s complemented by 
a handwritten font called populaire to deliver 
notes in a more personal, conversational tone.
tHe verdiCt
Jack Renwick
the identity has been applied to everything from 
a social impact report launched at city Hall 
in london, to animations, posters, brochures, 
bedroom walls at the learning centres and mugs 
in staff rooms. We have created a kit containing 
illustrative assets that Wide Horizons can use 
to implement things as and when they have to. 
other applications, such as the environmental 
graphics in the Wide Horizons centre at 
bryntysilio, Wales, came out of the desire 
to bring the charity’s centres to life, turning 
the whole school trip into a fun, exciting and 
educational experience.
the general feeling throughout the team 
after this project is one of reward. We’ve been 
able to create something that helps a charity re-
engage with hard to reach children. the identity 
has been well received by staff, teachers and 
donors, who’ve said we really captured the spirit 
of adventure learning. Hopefully, it will help 
Wide Horizons reach its ambition of working with 
60,000 children each year by 2020. 
groups. to do so, we had to focus on education. 
adventure alone wouldn’t set Wide Horizons 
apart or convey the importance of its work. 
curriculum learning was the real difference, 
so our key theme was ‘taking the classroom 
outdoors’. From there, our instinct was to create 
a visual language that said ‘school’ very clearly, 
and then the outdoors.
tHe exeCution
Ash Watkins
the Wide Horizons team needed something that 
they could easily implement themselves, so the 
creation of a simple illustrated set of assets 
was key to keeping everything cost effective. 
We played around with a back-to-school kit, 
imagining all the things you would see and use 
in a classroom, and then taking them out into 
the wild to illustrate a world of adventure.
tom rogers 
design director, Jack renwick studio
Tom has worked in design, branding and digital for 10 years, and has  
a keen interest in how brand and digital should complement each other, 
both visually and tonally. Clients have included BleepBleeps, GROHE, 
Pizza Express, Soho House Group, Pure Sports Medicine and British 
Heart Foundation.
03 brand messaging expresses how 
Wide Horizons uses adventure to teach  
a variety of school subjects.
seeing tHe LigHt
tom rogers explains three key elements of the campaign
A broad audience
Wide Horizons work with children from two 
to 18, as well as teachers. careful choices 
across colour, typography, tone of voice 
and illustration were used to find the right 
balance between playfulness and maturity.
Education first
From learning about the life cycle of 
organisms to the kinetics of kayaking, 
Wide Horizons is grounded in education. 
this is what differentiates the charity 
from ‘adventure holiday’ competitors 
and what makes teachers want to book.
Stretching a budget
illustrating a kit of school objects that can 
be combined to make endless further 
illustrations across subjects from the 
curriculum and using them to augment 
existing photography removes the reliance 
on costly photo shoots whenever new 
collateral is needed.
pro insigHt
03

january 2018
  jack renwick studio for wide horizons 
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 95 -
proBLem soLved
sWApping  
skiLLs
Jack renwick explains how 
the charity and agency 
learned from each other
Having created a kit full of 
illustrations that the client 
could use, we suggested 
a skills swap weekend 
with them where we could 
demonstrate ways of using 
the imagery by installing 
illustrative scenes at the Wide 
Horizons centre in Wales.  
We put them up on the walls 
with fun facts dotted along 
the hallways and in bedrooms. 
During the same visit, our 
team were taken abseiling 
and canoeing in the valleys, 
experiencing the adventure 
and learning that Wide 
Horizons offers first-hand. 
AsH WAtkins 
designer, Jack renwick studio
Ash has been working in creative branding for four years. As 
well as pursuing simple, memorable identities, he has a passion 
for copywriting and how the voice of a brand can forge closer 
relationships with its audience. Clients include UCL, British 
Heart Foundation, The Investment Association and LIXIL.
04 children 
attending a Wide 
Horizons course 
can use the brand 
kit of parts to 
create their own 
adventure scenes.
05 any number  
of adventure and 
nature images  
can be created 
from the kit of 
illustrations 
developed for  
the project.
06 DiN round is 
complemented  
by the typeface 
populaire.
07 one of the 
objectives was  
to show that 
learning can  
be fun with   
Wide Horizons.
08 Jack renwick 
and ash Watkins 
plan where the 
graphics would 
work best at the 
Wide Horizons 
centre in Wales.
04
05
06
07
08

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 96 -
reading the fine print with Sara fanelli
The Association of Illustrators (AOI) is a not-for-profit trade organisation promoting 
contemporary illustration and maintaining industry standards. Established in 1973, the 
AOI works to increase the standing of illustration as a profession and improve commercial 
and ethical conditions, and support illustrators at every stage of their career. 
In part four of our AOI series, we discuss how to navigate legal issues
january 2018
illuStrator advice
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 96 -
a 
greements are very 
important to have in place 
before starting work on  
a commission. At the AOI, we 
supply a document called the 
AOI Acceptance of Commission 
form, which can (and should!)  
be used by illustrators when   
they don’t receive a contract 
from their client.   
This two-page document 
may seem unremarkable and 
brief, but is 100 per cent industry 
standard and legally binding. 
As much as we wish tricky 
situations didn’t happen, they 
often do, and it’s best to be 
backed up when those moments 
present themselves.
Long-standing member Sara 
Fanelli religiously uses the AOI 
form in her professional day-to-
day life. She tells us about her 
most recent legal experience... 
 
Sara Fanelli: After I have agreed 
on a fee with the client, I then 
send the AOI Acceptance of 
Commission form. I’ve always 
found this document to be very 
useful; it specifies all the terms of 
the licence and covers all sectors, 
plus it contains clauses outlining 
payment if the project gets 
cancelled and how artwork should 
be returned (which have protected 
me on more than a few occasions).
A few times, one of my clients 
has questioned the rights they 
thought they were acquiring, and 
I was very relieved to then show 
them the original email with my 
terms attached. Although usually 
this is enough, sometimes things 
don’t go as you expect.
Recently, I found that a client 
was using my work 10 years after 
the licence had expired. Luckily, 
I had sensed that they were 
not trustworthy at the time of 
the commission, so (unusually) 
I kept print outs of our email 
correspondence, my agreement 
with the clear terms of licence and 
the paid invoices. Even though I 
had all this, the client still refused 
to pay, so I had to take legal action.
The journey through the small 
claims court was disappointingly 
difficult, mostly because the 
court’s helpline refused to give any 
advice on the formal procedures 
and it was impossible to navigate 
the process without a lawyer.
Fortunately, I did win the 
case and managed to secure 
compensation, mostly because  
an excellent lawyer helped me 
and, as they were a friend, did 
not charge legal fees. I am almost 
certain that I would not have 
been able to win on my own.
Nevertheless, having written 
evidence and an agreement 
did greatly help to support my 
case, and in light of this recent 
experience, I will from now 
on request that my clients sign 
the form once they receive it.    
Want access to the AOI Acceptance 
of Commission form? Join the AOI 
today at www.theaoi.com
Sara Fanelli is a freelance 
designer and illustrator who 
divides her time between 
books, self-generated 
projects and commercial 
work. Her clients include 
The New Yorker, Penguin 
Books, Royal Mail and BBC, 
her work has been shown 
at the V&A and Tate Modern, 
and won two D&AD Pencils.

computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 97 -
MAKE 2018 YOUR 
BEST YEAR EVER
Why you should quit your job in 2018: creatives who have 
forged new paths share why they never looked back
INDUSTRY ISSUES
Plus: new projects, current trends and expert 
analysis from the global design scene
NEXT MONTH
ON SALE 9 jANUARY
New Year special: get inspired by the private sketchbooks 
and unseen work of five of the world’s top creatives
UNSEEN DIARIES

DESIGN ICON
computerarts.creativebloq.com
- 98 -
january 2018
I’m a graphic designer through and 
through. When someone asks me what 
I would do if I wasn’t a graphic designer, 
I say I’d be an unemployed graphic 
designer. It’s what interests me and 
it’s all I can, or want to, do. 
so it’ll be no surprise that my long 
lasting fascination is for poster design.  
i have a small collection. each one i have 
framed in my home represents some 
moment of some importance in my career.
the first poster i bought was by a.m. 
cassandre, the famous Dubonnet poster, 
i bought it in New York in the late 1990s.  
i was there because my partner David 
turner was president of Judges at the clio 
awards. We had a unique and fun night at 
the awards ceremony, when he presented 
me with an award for our work! it was a 
surreal moment, i can’t remember which 
project the awards were for, but i thought 
i should remember that moment. 
New York is a great place to buy the 
european posters i love. i’d hankered 
after the poster since i was a student at 
Kingston polytechnic, the poster is the 
double sheet version, not the first edition 
from 1932, which is smaller and extremely 
rare and therefore expensive, but i prefer 
the 1952 second edition because it’s twice 
the size of the first edition. it’s huge. You 
can’t beat the graphic impact of a massive 
poster! i have breakfast sitting under it 
every day, and i’ll never tire of it – every 
element of it is beautifully crafted and fully 
considered. of all my possessions, i’d grab 
this on the way out if my house caught fire. 
a few years ago, i was president of 
Design at the cannes lions and i met 
and judged the design category with the 
brilliant Japanese designer Yoshihiro Yagi. 
i think he’s a genius. He’s one of the most 
awarded designers in the world. He gave 
me some of his posters, which i have yet 
to frame. earlier this year i bumped into 
him, he said he’d kept a poster tube full 
of all the posters he’d recently designed 
especially to give to me, but in an office 
move he’d lost the tube with them all in. 
Damn, i hope he finds it! 
i’m always on the look out for posters. 
i have an art deco 1938 swiss Grand 
Poster boy
Bruce Duckworth – founder and joint 
creative director of Turner Duckworth 
– reflects on why he can’t resist a 
good poster, and how his collection  
shows a journey through his career.
prix poster, which is amazing, i love its 
bold simplicity. i’d been after it for over 
20 years, i think there are only a couple 
in existence. although that’s what the 
dealers say, then miraculously another  
one turns up – funny that!
my abram Games poster reminds me  
of sitting next to the great man himself 
at the launch of the original a smile in the 
mind – still my favourite book on graphic 
design. and the transatlantic subject 
matter appealed to me because of our 
studios in san Francisco and New York.
When i finished my stint as president 
of D&aD a few months ago, D&aD kindly 
presented me with a wonderful signed 
poster by sagmeister & Walsh as a gift.  
i can’t think of a better way to remind me 
of that very special year.
the limit to my poster habit is wall 
space. but i have plenty of space under 
beds and in cupboards to keep my passion 
going. my wife is a graphic designer, so i’m 
lucky that there is general approval for the 
way posters make our house look. 
Above: Bruce Duckworth’s Dubonnet poster reminds him of a moment in New York; his Sagmeister & Walsh 
poster was a gift from D&AD. Below: Abram Games’ piece serves as a nod to Turner Duckworth’s US studio.

Reading
T 0118 930 3003 
F 0118 932 3656 
E thealefactory@celloglas.co.uk 
 
www.celloglas.co.uk
Leicester
T 0116 263 1010 
F 0116 263 1111 
E leicesterfactory@celloglas.co.uk
Leeds
T 0113 271 1320 
F 0113 277 3936 
E leedshunslet@celloglas.co.uk
Celloglas is the UK’s leading specialist in decorative 
print finishing. Decorative print finishes can be used 
to deliver innovation and added value, increase user 
interaction, demonstrate brand category leadership, 
enhance sensory experience and even stimulate debate 
in social media circles.
To find out how our creative finishes can make your 
publication stand out on the shelf, call Steve Middleton 
on 0116 263 1010 for a free consultation.
Ask us about:
- Lamination
- Foil Blocking
- Varnishing
- High-Speed Coating
- Mirri
- Die Cutting
- Folder Make-Up
- Special Effects
- Embossing
Make print memorable

9000
9012

