
Computer Science, Why study it and
Best Jobs in computer science

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Computer Science
What is a science?
What is Computer Science?
What is Computer Engineering?
Concerns of Computer Scientists
Courses in Computer Science
Mathematics and Computer Science
Chapter 2: Important Fields of Computer Science
Definition of Algorithm
Complexity and Tractability
Artificial Intelligence
Networks
Databases and Database Systems
Security and All That It Implies
The Interaction of Humans and Computers
The Engineering of Software
The Theory of Computing
Chapter 3: What Jobs Are There For a Computer Science Graduate
Security Analyst
What Jobs For A Recent Graduate In Computer Science?
Conclusion

Introduction
A few words about the book, “Why Study Computer Science and Best Jobs in
Computer Science.”
This book contains essential information as you contemplate a career
involving computer science.
Before you start this book ask yourself these questions:
What do you know about computer science?
What do you know about the predicted job market for computer science
graduates?
What is the prerequisite for jobs in a degree in computer science?
This little book informs you about this as simply as possible.
It does this in a way that does not dazzle readers with jargon and acronyms.
It is written for the intelligent layperson, not full of geek-speak.
It is informative.
You will learn what computer science is, major fields within computer
science, employment using qualifications in computer science.

There are 3 chapters:
Ch1: Computer Science
Ch2: Important Fields of Computer Science
Ch3: What Jobs Are There For A Computer Science Graduate?
Each chapter will provide a stepping stone to further exploration if so
desired. 
Are you interested? Onto Chapter 1.

Chapter 1: Computer Science

What is a science?
A science is an organized activity in order to obtain knowledge that can
describe and make predictions about the natural world. Scientists are different
from engineers. Engineers design, build and maintain things for human
beings. However, most engineers need to study science before they can do
their jobs.

What is Computer Science?
Before we start, it is sensible to answer the question, "What is computer
science?" Computer science can be defined as the science of computers and
all aspects of computation. Computer science should not be confused with
computer engineering. It is fair to say that computer engineering is but one
branch of computer science. Computer science covers theory, algorithms,
computer and network architecture and programming languages.

What is Computer Engineering?
A computer engineer, often called a software engineer, develops, tests and
evaluates software for the working of computers. He or she is only concerned
with actual computers and not the applications of them in other areas. An area
in which they would be particularly involved would be the creation and
implementation of operating systems for computers.
Computer engineering is a field of computer science. It is very much
concerned with hardware and it is a blend of electrical engineering and
computer science.

Concerns of Computer Scientists
The predominant concerns of computer scientists are software and software
systems. Included in this are the theory behind these, the design of these, and
the development and subsequent application of them.
Computer science embraces a number of fascinating fields which include
artificial intelligence, networks, databases and database systems, security and
all that that implies, the interaction of humans and computers, the engineering
of software, the theory of computing and much more.

Courses in Computer Science
Most universities offer courses in computer science. All computer courses
should have an introduction to programming and computers and an
introduction to computer science, which will include quite a lot of
mathematics.
A course will continue with the design of software systems, discrete
structures which combine mathematics, logic and algorithms and data
structures which involve storage and programming which goes with this.
Further study will involve specialization in some of the fields mentioned
earlier with many courses demanding practical experience.
As with any subject, some universities are regarded as better than others in
the quality of their computer science programs. If you Google this, you will
find that MIT, Stanford and Carnegie Mellon are rated very highly but there
are universities with very good ratings in most regions and large countries.

Mathematics and Computer Science
If a person wants to study computer science, then in no other subject except
physics is a good understanding of mathematics as important. Mathematics
requirements for computer science will include calculus with analytic
geometry, matrices, statistical analysis and probability. In addition, during the
computer science course, students will often encounter analysis, differential
equations, Fourier series, operations research, linear algebra, discrete
mathematics and abstract algebra.
Failure to get a good grasp of mathematics will cripple any serious study of
computer science. A person who wishes to make a career in this field will be
greatly restricted if mathematics is missing. The son of a friend was an
excellent web designer but found mathematics and programming impossibly
difficult. A web page often needs to be connected to a database if there is a
shopping basket or a blog. Programming has to occur for this to happen.
This young man designed beautiful web pages but his lack of programming
expertise meant that others had to make the connections necessary for
interactivity.

Chapter 2: Important Fields of Computer Science
In this chapter, we will frequently use the term algorithm. Here is the
definition.

Definition of Algorithm
Algorithms are a finite sequence of well-defined steps that perform a
procedure, often to solve problems.
A very simple example would be an algorithm for the washing of hair. Here
is a possibility:
(a) Wet hair
(b) Apply shampoo
(c) Rinse hair
(d) Repeat steps (a), (b), (c) twice
(e) Stop
The algorithm has a finite number of instructions in a specific order that must
be followed. It is unlikely that any computer course would dwell on hair
washing but they would probably be very interested in the next example,
which is to find the largest element in a set of numbers {a1, a2, a3,.....,an}. The
algorithm for this is quite easy. However, the algorithms of computer science
are often a lot more challenging than this.
In the previous chapter some of the fascinating fields, which computer
science embraces were listed, among these were:

Complexity and Tractability
Algorithms have to produce the correct answer but, in addition, they must be
efficient. They must be time efficient. An algorithm which needs a billion
years to produce an answer is useless.
Computer scientists are often deeply concerned about the consumption of
resources by algorithms. These problems are referred to as space complexity
problems and concern the actual data structures.
Our consideration of algorithm efficiency will be with time complexity which
concerns itself with the nature of computations involved with an algorithm
and how many calculations, comparisons and other operations are involved in
its execution.
Computer scientists classify algorithms into categories of tractable and
intractable. Tractable algorithms are those which can be done in reasonable
time no matter how large the data set. Intractable algorithms can be done with
fairly small sets but rapidly become intractable as the data set gets larger.
The task of computer scientists is to find tractable algorithms for useful
subsets of data on which algorithms are intractable.
The field of complexity and tractability is very theoretical and is generally
language-independent.

Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence is the ability of a computer to show intelligent
behavior. Usually, this intelligence is only applied to one or two things.
Calculators are far superior to people at doing calculations but are unable to
do anything else apart from that.
A program that manages the traffic lights at a traffic intersection is
demonstrating artificial intelligence. However, it is only doing what it has
been programmed to do. There is no learning and subsequent adaptation from
what it had done previously done. If such development is desired, then the
computer in the traffic lights must be programmed to carry out this
development. If the traffic lights did learn then adapt they would be showing
machine learning which is the highest form of artificial intelligence.
Clearly, the computer, which was made by the giant computer company IBM,
named Deep Blue, which vanquished the world chess champion, Gary
Kasparov, demonstrated great artificial intelligence but only in the playing of
chess.
There was a database within Deep Blue that had countless millions of chess
moves so that if Kasparov or any other player executed a move Deep Blue
knew the counter move as the correct reaction to the move had been
programmed into it. There was no learning and adaptation by Deep Blue to
the moves of an opponent.
However, in more recent times computers have been programmed to learn
from their mistakes and adjust their behavior. It is an amazing fact that there

are now programs that are able to play all the Atari computer games.
These programs started off as complete beginners who were beaten by human
players all the time. Despite this, they learned very quickly and were soon
outplaying the best human players. This behavior is called machine learning.
Their success against humans depends on the game. However, there will
rapidly come a time when their superiority will be complete in all Atari
games.
The field of artificial intelligence is in great ferment at the moment with new
developments coming almost monthly. Artificial intelligence is being taught
at all the best computer science universities.
If someone wants to be at the cutting edge of artificial intelligence they will
need considerable mathematics. I put this in to reinforce the importance of a
good grasp of mathematics. Among the topics needed:
(1) Linear algebra
(2) Matrices.
(3) Vectors.
(4) Differential calculus.
(5) Numerical optimization.
(6) The exponential and logarithmic functions, their translations and their
graphs
(7) Serious probability and statistics: Bayes theorem, probability
distributions, especially the Gaussian and binomial distributions.

Networks
If you join computers together to talk with one another then you have a
network or computer network.
The Internet dominates our age. It is an open medium comprised of a vast,
global system of networked computers. The process by which computers
exchange data is called packet switching. Packet switching is governed by a
whole lot of rules called protocols. The study of this is regarded as very
important in most computer science courses.

Databases and Database Systems
A database is a structured set of data held in a computer that is accessible in
various ways. It is similar to but different from a spreadsheet, which is a
computer file where data is arranged in a table and can be manipulated and
used in calculations.
It is reasonable to ask, “Why not use a spreadsheet instead of a database?"
Databases are safer. As an example, the best-known spreadsheet Excel
performs all calculations in the computer's memory, this means that any data
which has not been saved could be lost in the event of a system crash. A
database writes any new data immediately to the hard drive. As a result,
databases are able to deal with far more data. It is possible for Excel to deal
with in excess of 65,000 rows of data, but even the fastest PC will be greatly
slowed by this.
Databases are an extremely important application of computers and the study
application and development of them is a feature of all computer science
courses.

Security and All That It Implies
Sadly there are people called hackers, who for a variety of reasons want to
get unauthorized access to the databases of others in order to use, disclose,
disrupt, modify, inspect, record or destroy the information in those databases.
Sometimes hackers are nothing more than clever pranksters. However, more
seriously, they could be agents of organized crime intent on obtaining access
to banks or to the private files of rich and wealthy people who they are then
able to hold at ransom. Hardly a day goes by without a revelation of the theft
of data in various ways, whether it be credit card data or intimate, revealing
photos.
Sometimes hackers are the employees of the security forces of countries who
wish to disrupt the societies they oppose or to affect the elections in those
countries. From the beginning of 2017, there have been claims that Russia
had tried to influence via hacking the elections in the USA and France.
The field of computer security has become extremely important. Central to
computer security is cryptography. Cryptography is vital to many aspects of
computer security. Cryptography applies algorithms to shuffle data in such a
way that only authorized eyes can see and use that data. The application of
such cryptography is called encryption.

The Interaction of Humans and Computers
Human computer interaction has the acronym HCI. HCI stands for human-
computer interaction. It is a study is concerned with every aspect of human-
centric interactive computer systems. A GUI (graphical user interface) is the
method by which a human interacts with a computer. However, HCI is far
more than just screens and menus that are more user-friendly.
HCI looks at the effects in the long-term that these systems will have on us.
HCI is a very broad subject that brings together different disciplines with
different worries concerning the development of computers. Computer
science is involved in every one of the human interface concerns. These
include not only screens and menus but such esoteric concepts as micro
chipping, holograms and virtual reality.

The Engineering of Software
This is basically computer engineering, discussed earlier. A good example is
provided by Google, which recently has pondered whether to abandon the
Android operating system, which predominantly uses the Java computing
language and replace it with the Fuchsia operating system which uses a
variety of programming languages including Dart and Flutter. The work of
computer engineers will be critical in making this decision.

The Theory of Computing
This is a huge field which includes the complexity and tractability considered
before but also (2) the study of computer languages and automata and (3)
recursion theory. (2) is probably easiest for the layperson to understand.
Some computer languages are better than others depending on the task
required. The Java language is very good for creating apps for the Android
operating system, VBA is really good for operations on the rows and columns
of spreadsheets, the R computing language is great for statistics and the
JavaScript language is very good for working with web pages.
(3) is more difficult to explain but provides a powerful means of performing
complex calculations.

Chapter 3: What Jobs Are There For a Computer
Science Graduate
Computer science provides more opportunities than any other field when it
comes to jobs. The types of jobs available come in a great variety and type. In
2015, there were 10 times as many jobs in computing advertised as there
were graduates in computer science. More than 600,000 jobs were advertised
while there were only 60,000 graduates in computer science.
It could be objected that many of these jobs were not entry-level positions
and there might be enough graduates to fill the entry-level positions. It is true
that there are positions which are necessarily filled only by those who are
experienced but there still many positions available for graduates with good
degrees.
In addition to the current plethora of openings, there is predicted to be
enormous growth in the numbers of positions which are available. In its last
year, the Obama administration predicted that by 2020, they would be 1.4
million positions available for computer science graduates to fill. At this time
the number of graduates in the USA would be only about one-third the
number necessary to fill these positions. With his America First policies,
President Trump has made the demand for American graduates in computer
science even greater.
At this moment, the starting salary for a computer science graduate is about
US$64,000. This is far in excess of the starting salaries for graduates in most
other fields.


Security Analyst
A position frequently advertised is that of security analyst. A security analyst
has to design and set up security measures to protect the computer systems,
computer networks and data which they contain from hackers and other
intruders.
It is vital that security analysts are up-to-date with hacking techniques. Some
of the things that they have to be very familiar with are: detection systems
often going by the acronym IDS/IPS, data loss prevention (DLP), malware,
ransomware, viruses, the protocols of the Internet (TCP/IP) and how they are
used, firewalls, the various operating systems (Windows, Apple, Android,
Linux,iOS etc), many programming languages including C, C++, Java, C#
JavaScript, PHP and others, the cloud, software as a service( SaaS) and many
other things.
As they rise in their profession, security analysts will need to work with
many other people, many of whom know what they want but are not IT
specialists. The security analyst will need to communicate with such people if
they are to be of any use. One of the qualifications that security analysts may
need to get is a certificate in ethical hacking.
Security analysts usually require one or more years of experience when they
are hired. Unless you have a deep interest in this topic, you are unlikely to
have what is required for that position as a computer science graduate.

Jobs For A Recent Graduate In Computer Science?
The question arises “What jobs can a beginning computer science graduate
reasonably expect to get?” In an article which is on the Internet, Rasmussen
University identified the following jobs:
(1) Software application developers whose responsibility is to analyze the
requirements of a user and develop software to satisfy them. In order to do
this they will have to work with other people, many of whom may not be
experts in computers. Later on, if they are promoted, they will have to
supervise the work of other programmers and technicians. The salary for
mid-career in this field is close to $90000
(2) IT support specialists are people who answer problems and questions
posed by users about hardware and software. The median salary for such a
position is better than $50,000.
(3) Computer systems analysts who are responsible for aligning the work of
IT with an organization. The job requires much consultation with others. The
median pay is a bit less than $90,000 per year.
(4) Web developers as the name implies are the designers and builders of
websites. They also maintain websites. It was pointed out earlier that a person
who wishes to make a career here must be an expert in all aspects of
computing and not just the design and production of good-looking websites.
The median salary is around $65,000 per year.
(5) Network administrators are the people that run computer networks
including the hardware and software as well as the actual network itself,
which joins the computers. The median salary is about $80,000 a year.
(6) Computer systems engineers have been discussed earlier in this book.
Their role often involves complex problems involving applications, networks,
and hardware. The median salary of such people is in excess of $85,000.

(7) Database administrators are concerned with the development and running
of databases. The median salary here is in excess of $80,000.
(8) Software quality assurance engineers have to track defects and bugs in
software then communicate these findings to those whose responsibility it is
to remedy these problems. The median salary for a software quality assurance
engineer is in excess of $85,000.
The need for people in all eight of these positions is expected to grow in the
next 10 years. For an interesting position it is hard to do better than be a
graduate in computer science!

Conclusion
Computer science and its applications are the foundations of modern
technology.
If you wish to understand computer science you must study it and as far as
possible get good qualifications in it.
This book has thoroughly covered why this is so important.
It has shown some of the great things that can be done with this technology.
It has demonstrated the tremendous opportunities for those with
qualifications in this science.
This book should have helped you make the decision to major in computer
science.
If you do, tomorrow will truly belong to you.
Good luck!

