

C O N C E P T S I N E N T E R P R I S E
R E S O U R C E
P L A N N I N G
Fourth Edition

       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

C O N C E P T S I N E N T E R P R I S E
R E S O U R C E
P L A N N I N G
Fourth Edition
Ellen F. Monk
University of Delaware
Bret J. Wagner
Western Michigan University
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

Concepts in Enterprise Resource Planning,
Fourth Edition
Ellen F. Monk and Bret J. Wagner
Editor-in-Chief: Joe Sabatino
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Charles McCormick, Jr.
Senior Product Manager: Kate Mason
Development Editor: Mary Pat Shaffer
Senior Marketing Communications Manager:
Libby Shipp
Marketing Coordinator: Eileen Corcoran
Design Direction, Production Management,
and Composition: PreMediaGlobal
Media Editor: Chris Valentine
Cover Credit:
Woman holding tablet: Howard Kingsnorth/
The Image Bank/Getty Images
Grain plant: Copyright: ©John Foxx/Stockbyte/
Thinkstock
Bag of grain and hands: Copyright: ©Brand
X Pictures/Thinkstock
Cutting the field with machinery, evening
harvest: Copyright: ©iStockphoto/Thinkstock
Grain (soy) pouring from machine into bin:
Copyright: ©iStockphoto/Thinkstock
Truck on bridge: Copyright:
©Hemera/Thinkstock
Girl Holding granola bar: ©iStockphoto.com/
Fine Collection
Manufacturing Coordinator: Julio Esperas
© 2013 Course Technology, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to
photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution,
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012934925
Student Edition
Instructor Edition
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-82039-8
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-82040-4
ISBN-10: 1-111-82039-2
ISBN-10: 1-111-82040-6
Course Technology
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Some of the product names and company names used in this book have
been used for identification purposes only and may be trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective manufacturers and sellers.
Any fictional data related to persons or companies or URLs used
throughout this book is intended for instructional purposes only. At the
time this book was printed, any such data was fictional and not belonging
to any real persons or companies.
Cases in this book that mention company, organization, or individual
person’s names were written using publicly available information to provide
a setting for student learning. They are not intended to provide commentary
on or evaluation of any party’s handling of the situation described.
Microsoft and the Office logo are either registered trademarks or
trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other
countries. Course Technology, a part of Cengage Learning, is an
independent entity from the Microsoft Corporation, and not affiliated
with Microsoft in any manner.
SAP is a registered trademark.
Apple I, iPhone, iPad, and iPod are registered trademarks of Apple Inc.
Course Technology, a part of Cengage Learning, reserves the right to
revise this publication and make changes from time to time in its
content without notice.
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office
at: www.cengage.com/global
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 16 15 14 13 12

In memory of our colleague Majdi Najm.
His support and friendship are sorely missed.


BRIEF CONTENTS
Preface
xv
Chapter 1
Business Functions and Business Processes
1
Chapter 2
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
19
Chapter 3
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process
49
Chapter 4
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems
77
Chapter 5
Accounting in ERP Systems
117
Chapter 6
Human Resources Processes with ERP
159
Chapter 7
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation
183
Chapter 8
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud
215
Glossary
243
Index
249


TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
xv
Chapter 1
Business Functions and Business Processes
1
Functional Areas and Business Processes
2
Functional Areas of Operation
2
Business Processes
3
Functional Areas and Business Processes of a Very Small Business
6
Marketing and Sales
6
Supply Chain Management
7
Accounting and Finance
7
Human Resources
8
Functional Area Information Systems
8
Marketing and Sales
9
Supply Chain Management
10
Accounting and Finance
12
Human Resources
13
Chapter Summary
16
Key Terms
16
Exercises
16
For Further Study and Research
17
Chapter 2
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
19
The Evolution of Information Systems
20
Computer Hardware and Software Development
21
Early Attempts to Share Resources
22
The Manufacturing Roots of ERP
22
Management’s Impetus to Adopt ERP
23
ERP Software Emerges: SAP and R/3
25
SAP Begins Developing Software Modules
26
SAP R/3
26
New Directions in ERP
27
PeopleSoft
27
Oracle
28
SAP ERP
28
SAP ERP Software Implementation
31
Features of SAP ERP
33
ERP for Midsized and Smaller Companies
34
Responses of the Software to the Changing Market
34
Choosing Consultants and Vendors
35
The Significance and Benefits of ERP Software and Systems
36

Questions About ERP
36
How Much Does an ERP System Cost?
36
Should Every Business Buy an ERP Package?
37
Is ERP Software Inflexible?
38
What Return Can a Company Expect from Its ERP Investment?
39
How Long Does It Take to See a Return on an ERP Investment?
39
Why Do Some Companies Have More Success with ERP Than Others?
40
The Continuing Evolution of ERP
41
Chapter Summary
44
Key Terms
44
Exercises
45
For Further Study and Research
45
Chapter 3
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process
49
Overview of Fitter Snacker
50
Problems with Fitter Snacker’s Sales Process
51
Sales Quotations and Orders
52
Order Filling
53
Accounting and Invoicing
55
Payment and Returns
55
Sales and Distribution in ERP
56
Presales Activities
56
Sales Order Processing
56
Inventory Sourcing
57
Delivery
57
Billing
57
Payment
57
A Standard Order in SAP ERP
58
Taking an Order in SAP ERP
58
Discount Pricing in SAP ERP
64
Integration of Sales and Accounting
65
Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
66
Core CRM Activities
67
SAP’s CRM Software
68
The Benefits of CRM
72
Chapter Summary
74
Key Terms
74
Exercises
75
For Further Study and Research
76
Chapter 4
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems
77
Production Overview
78
Fitter’s Manufacturing Process
79
Fitter’s Production Sequence
79
Fitter’s Production Problems
80
Communication Problems
80
Inventory Problems
80
Accounting and Purchasing Problems
81
Exercise 4.1
82
x
Table of Contents

The Production Planning Process
82
The SAP ERP Approach to Production Planning
83
Sales Forecasting
84
Exercise 4.2
85
Sales and Operations Planning
85
Sales and Operations Planning in SAP ERP
88
Disaggregating the Sales and Operations Plan in SAP ERP
93
Exercise 4.3
95
Demand Management
95
Exercise 4.4
97
Materials Requirements Planning (MRP)
97
Bill of Material
97
Lead Times and Lot Sizing
98
Exercise 4.5
101
Exercise 4.6
101
Materials Requirements Planning in SAP ERP
101
Detailed Scheduling
105
Providing Production Data to Accounting
107
Exercise 4.7
108
ERP and Suppliers
108
The Traditional Supply Chain
109
EDI and ERP
110
The Measures of Success
112
Exercise 4.8
112
Chapter Summary
114
Key Terms
114
Exercises
114
For Further Study and Research
115
Chapter 5
Accounting in ERP Systems
117
Accounting Activities
118
Using ERP for Accounting Information
121
Operational Decision-Making Problem: Credit Management
123
Industrial Credit Management
123
Fitter’s Credit Management Procedures
124
Credit Management in SAP ERP
124
Exercise 5.1
127
Product Profitability Analysis
127
Inconsistent Record Keeping
127
Inaccurate Inventory Costing Systems
128
Inventory Cost Accounting Background
128
ERP and Inventory Cost Accounting
129
Product Costing Example
130
Exercise 5.2
131
Product Cost Analysis in SAP ERP
131
Activity-Based Costing and ERP
132
Table of Contents
xi

Problems Consolidating Data from Subsidiaries
133
Currency Translation
134
Intercompany Transactions
135
Management Reporting with ERP Systems
136
Data Flows in ERP Systems
136
Document Flow for Customer Service
137
Built-In Management-Reporting and Analysis Tools
138
The Enron Collapse
139
Outcome of the Enron Scandal
140
Key Features of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
141
Implications of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act for ERP Systems
142
Archiving
143
User Authorizations
145
Tolerance Groups
146
Financial Transparency
147
Exercise 5.3
150
Trends in Financial Reporting—XBRL
150
Chapter Summary
151
Key Terms
152
Exercises
152
For Further Study and Research
157
Chapter 6
Human Resources Processes with ERP
159
Problems with Fitter’s Human Resources Processes
160
Recruiting Process
161
The Interviewing and Hiring Process
162
Human Resources Duties After Hiring
164
Human Resources with ERP Software
167
Advanced SAP ERP Human Resources Features
172
Time Management
172
Payroll Processing
173
Travel Management
173
Training and Development Coordination
175
Additional Human Resources Features of SAP ERP
177
Mobile Time Management
177
Management of Family and Medical Leave
177
Management of Domestic Partner Benefits
177
Administration of Long-Term Incentives
177
Personnel Cost Planning
178
Management and Payroll for Global Employees
178
Management by Objectives
178
Chapter Summary
180
Key Terms
180
Exercises
180
For Further Study and Research
181
xii
Table of Contents

Chapter 7
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation 183
Process Modeling
184
Flowcharting Process Models
184
Fitter Expense-Reporting Process
185
Exercise 7.1
187
Extensions of Process Mapping
187
Event Process Chain (EPC) Diagrams
189
Exercise 7.2
196
Process Improvement
197
Evaluating Process Improvement Prior to Implementation
198
ERP Workflow Tools
200
Implementing ERP Systems
203
ERP System Costs and Benefits
205
Implementation and Change Management
206
Implementation Tools
206
System Landscape Concept
210
Chapter Summary
211
Key Terms
211
Exercises
211
For Further Study and Research
214
Chapter 8
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud 215
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Technology
216
Business Intelligence/Business Analytics
219
In-Memory Computing
220
Mobile Computing
224
From Internet-Enabled to Cloud Computing
226
SAP and the Internet
226
NetWeaver
226
NetWeaver Tools and Capabilities
227
NetWeaver at Work for Fitter
228
Exercise 8.1
228
SaaS: Software as a Service
229
SAP Business ByDesign
229
Advantages of Using SaaS
230
Disadvantages of Using SaaS
231
Exercise 8.2
233
Option 1: Buying Computers and Software Rights for an ERP System
234
Option 2: Using an SaaS Provider to Deliver ERP Software
235
Calculate the NPV and Make a Recommendation
235
Chapter Summary
238
Key Terms
238
Exercises
238
For Further Study and Research
239
Glossary
243
Index
249
Table of Contents
xiii


PREFACE
This is a book about Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems; it is also about
how a business works and how information systems fit into business operations. More
specifically, it is about looking at the processes that make up a business enterprise
and seeing how ERP software can improve the performance of these business pro-
cesses. ERP software is complicated and expensive. Unless a company uses it to
become more efficient and effective in delivering goods and services to its customers,
an ERP system will only be a drain on company resources.
Our experience in teaching about ERP systems has revealed that undergraduate
business students do not always understand how businesses operate, and advanced
undergraduate students—and even many MBA students—do not truly grasp the pro-
blems inherent in unintegrated systems. These students also do not comprehend
business processes and how different functional areas must work together to achieve
company goals. As a result, many students do not understand how an information
system should help business managers make decisions.
Consequently, we set out to write a book that does the following:
•
Describes basic business functional areas and explains how they are related
•
Illustrates how unintegrated information systems fail to support business
functions and business processes that cut across functional area boundaries
•
Demonstrates how integrated information systems can help a company pros-
per by improving business processes and by providing business managers
with accurate, consistent, and current data
We have found that our focus on business processes has been well received.
The Approach of This Book
A key feature of our book is the use of the fictitious Fitter Snacker Company, a man-
ufacturer of nutritious snack bars, as an illustrative example throughout the book. We
show how Fitter Snacker’s somewhat primitive and unintegrated information systems
cause operational problems. We intentionally made the systems’ problems easy to
understand, so the student could readily comprehend them. Potential solutions for
solving integration problems are illustrated using SAP’s ERP software.
The fourth edition of Concepts in Enterprise Resource Planning reflects the
current state of the ERP software market and other areas of the information technol-
ogy market that affect ERP systems, while adding updated examples of how compa-
nies are using integrated systems to solve business problems and achieve greater
success. The book has eight chapters:
•
Chapter 1, “Business Functions and Business Processes,” explains the pur-
poses for, and information systems requirements of, main business functional
areas—Marketing and Sales, Supply Chain Management, Accounting and

Finance, and Human Resources. This chapter also describes how a business
process cuts across the activities within business functional areas and why
managers need to think about making business processes work.
•
Chapter 2, “The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems,”
provides a short history of business computing and the developments that led
to today’s ERP systems. Chapter 2 concludes with an overview of ERP issues
and an introduction to the SAP ERP software.
•
Chapter 3, “Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process,”
describes the Marketing and Sales functional area, and it highlights the pro-
blems that arise with unintegrated information systems. To make concepts easy
to understand, the Fitter Snacker running example is introduced. After
explaining Fitter Snacker’s problems with its unintegrated systems, we show
how an ERP system can help a company avoid these problems. Sample SAP ERP
screens are used to illustrate the concepts. Because using ERP can naturally
lead a company into ever-broadening systems’ integration, a discussion of
customer-relationship management (CRM) software concludes the chapter.
•
Chapter 4, “Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems,”
describes how ERP systems support Supply Chain Management—the coordi-
nated activities of all the organizations involved in converting raw materials
into consumer products on the retail shelf. As in Chapter 3, the problems
caused by Fitter Snacker’s unintegrated information system are explored,
followed by a discussion of how ERP software could help solve these problems.
•
Chapter 5, “Accounting in ERP Systems,” describes accounting processes and
how ERP systems support those processes. This chapter clearly distinguishes
between financial accounting (FI) and managerial accounting (CO) issues.
Included is an overview of the Enron collapse and the resulting Sarbanes-
Oxley Act along with the act’s impact on information systems, specifically
management controls and audit capabilities. XBRL—and its relationship to
ERP systems and financial reporting—is explored, along with the transition to
the IFRS accounting standards.
•
Chapter 6, “Human Resources Processes with ERP,” covers human resource
management. While the Human Resource software module is the least
integrated component of all ERP systems, it includes numerous processes
that are critical to a company’s success, including strategic issues like
succession planning.
•
Chapter 7, “Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation,”
first presents flowcharting basics, followed by the highly structured EPC process
model. Implementation issues conclude the chapter. We believe that process
improvement, not large-scale implementation, should be the focus in an intro-
ductory ERP course.
•
Chapter 8, “RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the
Cloud,” covers current technologies that are impacting ERP systems. In this
edition, the text covers radio frequency identification (RFID), business intel-
ligence (BI) and in-memory computing, mobile computing, and the cloud.
Because technology changes rapidly, this chapter provides an introduction to
these current topics, rather than an exhaustive treatment of the subjects, and
the instructor will likely want to provide current supplements.
xvi
Preface

How Can You Use This Book?
This fourth edition continues our goal of keeping the text at an introductory level.
The book can be used in a number of ways:
•
The book, or selected chapters, could be used for a three-week ERP treat-
ment in undergraduate Management Information Systems, Accounting
Information Systems, or Operations Management courses.
•
Similarly, the book or selected chapters could be used in MBA courses, such
as foundation Information Systems or Operations Management courses.
Although the concepts presented here are basic, the astute instructor can
build on them with more sophisticated material to challenge the advanced
MBA student. Many of the exercises in the book require research for their
solution, and the MBA student could do these in some depth.
•
The book could serve as an introductory text in a course devoted wholly to ERP.
It would provide the student with a basis in how ERP systems help companies to
integrate different business functions. The instructor might use Chapter 8 as
the starting point for teaching the higher-level strategic implications of ERP and
related topics. The instructor can pursue these and related topics using his or
her own resources, such as case studies and current articles.
•
Because of the focus on fundamental business issues and business processes,
the book can also be used in a sophomore-level Introduction to Business course.
Except for a computer literacy course, we assume no particular educational or
business background. Chapters 1 and 2 lay out most of the needed business and
computing groundwork, and the rest of the chapters build on that base.
Features of This Text
To bring ERP concepts to life (and down to earth) this book uses sales, manufactur-
ing, purchasing, human resources, and accounting examples for the Fitter Snacker
company. Thus, the student can see problems, not just at an abstract level, but within
the context of a company’s operations. We believe this approach makes business pro-
blems and the role ERP can play in solving them easier to understand.
The book’s exercises have the student analyze aspects of Fitter Snacker’s infor-
mation systems in various ways. The exercises vary in their difficulty; some can be
solved in a straightforward way, and others require some research. Not all exercises
need to be assigned. This gives the instructor flexibility in choosing which concepts to
emphasize and how to assess students’ knowledge. Some exercises explore Fitter
Snacker’s problems, and some ask the student to go beyond what is taught in the
book and to research a subject. A solution might require the student to generate a
spreadsheet, perform calculations, document higher-level reasoning, present the
results of research in writing, or participate in a debate.
The book includes an additional element designed to bring ERP concepts to life:
Another Look features, which are short, detailed case studies that focus on problems
faced by real-world companies.
We have illustrated ERP concepts and applications by showing how SAP ERP
would handle the problems discussed in the book. Screen shots of key SAP ERP tools
are shown throughout to illustrate ERP concepts. Many of the book’s exercises ask the
student to think about how a problem would be addressed using ERP software.
Preface
xvii

Instructor Materials
The following supplemental materials are available when this book is used in a class-
room setting. All of the teaching tools available with this book are provided to the
instructor on a single CD-ROM. Most can also be found online at www.course.com.
Instructor materials are password-protected.
•
Electronic Instructor’s Manual—The Instructor’s Manual assists in class prep-
aration by providing suggestions and strategies for teaching the text, chapter
outlines, technical notes, quick quizzes, discussion topics, and key terms.
•
Solutions—Answers to end-of-chapter questions and exercises are provided.
•
Sample syllabi—The sample syllabi and course outlines are provided as a
foundation to begin planning and organizing your course.
•
ExamView Test Bank—ExamView allows instructors to create and administer
printed, computer (LAN-based), and Internet exams. The Test Bank includes
hundreds of questions that correspond to the topics covered in this text,
enabling students to generate detailed study guides that include page refer-
ences for further review. The computer-based and Internet testing components
allow students to take exams at their computers, and also save the instructor
time by grading each exam automatically. The Test Bank is also available in
Blackboard and WebCT versions posted online at www.course.com.
•
PowerPoint Presentations—Microsoft PowerPoint slides for each chapter are
included as a teaching aid for classroom presentation, to make available to
students on the network for chapter review, or to be printed for classroom
distribution. Instructors can add their own slides for additional topics they
introduce to the class.
•
Distance learning—Course Technology is proud to present online test banks
in WebCT and Blackboard to provide the most complete and dynamic learn-
ing experience possible. Instructors are encouraged to make the most of the
course, both online and offline. For more information on how to access the
online test bank, contact your local Course Technology sales representative.
•
Figure files—Figure and table files from each chapter are provided for your
use in the classroom.
•
Hands-on SAP exercises—Exercises are available for member institutions
through the SAP University Alliance. These exercises use a database that was
built for the fictitious Fitter Snacker company.
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
Our thanks go out to our development editor, Mary Pat Shaffer, whose attention to detail
made much more work for us, but resulted in a much-improved text for this edition. We
are grateful for the support and guidance of the entire MIS team at Course Technology,
particularly Kate Mason, Senior Product Manager, and Aimee Poirier, MIS Product
Manager, for working with authors who frequently had problems meeting deadlines. We
would not have been able to continue on our journey to understand ERP systems without
the continued support of SAP America through its University Alliance program, especially
Heather Czech Matthews, John Baxter, Gale Corbitt, and Alex McLeod, Jr. And finally, we
thank our students, whose honesty and desire to learn have inspired us.
xviii
Preface

C H A P T E R1
BUSINESS FUNCTIONS AND
BUSINESS PROCESSES
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Name the main functional areas of operation used in business
•
Differentiate between a business process and a business function
•
Identify the kinds of data each main functional area produces
•
Identify the kinds of data each main functional area needs
•
Define integrated information systems, and explain why they are essential
in today’s globally competitive business environment
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are core software programs used by companies to
integrate and coordinate information in every area of the business. ERP (pronounced “E-R-P”)
programs help organizations manage company-wide business processes, using a common database
and shared management reporting tools. A business process is a collection of activities that takes
one or more kinds of input and creates an output, such as a report or forecast, that is of value to the
customer. ERP software supports the efficient operation of business processes by integrating tasks
related
to
sales,
marketing,
manufacturing,
logistics,
accounting,
and
staffing—throughout
a
business. In addition to this cross-functional integration, which is at the heart of an ERP system,
companies connect their ERP systems, using various methods, to coordinate business processes

with their customers and suppliers. In later chapters, you will learn how successful businesspeople
use ERP programs to improve how work is done within a company and between companies.
Chapter 1 provides a background for learning about ERP software.
FUNCTIONAL AREAS AND BUSINESS PROCESSES
To understand ERP, you must first understand how a business works. Let’s begin by
looking at a typical business’s areas of operation. These areas, called functional areas of
operation, are broad categories of business activities.
Functional Areas of Operation
Most companies have four main functional areas of operation: Marketing and Sales (M/S),
Supply Chain Management (SCM), Accounting and Finance (A/F), and Human Resources
(HR). Each area is composed of a variety of narrower business functions, which are
activities specific to that functional area of operation. Examples of the business functions
of each area are shown in Figure 1-1.
Functional
area of
operation
Marketing and
Sales
Supply Chain
Management
Accounting and
Finance
Human
Resources
Marketing a
product
Purchasing
goods and raw
materials
Financial
accounting of
payments from
customers and
to suppliers
Recruiting and
hiring
Taking sales
orders
Receiving
goods and raw
materials
Cost allocation
and control
Training
Customer
support
Transportation
and logistics
Planning and
budgeting
Payroll
Customer
relationship
management
Scheduling
production runs
Cash-flow
management
Benefits
Sales
forecasting
Manufacturing
goods
Government
compliance
Advertising
Plant
maintenance
Business
functions
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-1
Examples of functional areas of operation and their business functions
2
Chapter 1

Historically, businesses have had organizational structures that separated the
functional areas. Business schools have been similarly organized, so each functional area
has been taught as a separate course. In a company separating functional areas in this
way, Marketing and Sales might be completely isolated from Supply Chain Management,
even though the Marketing and Sales staff sell what the employees in Supply Chain
Management procure and produce. Thus, you might conclude that what happens in one
functional area is not closely related to what happens in others. As you will learn in this
chapter, however, functional areas are interdependent, each requiring data from the
others. The better a company can integrate the activities of each functional area, the
more successful it will be in today’s highly competitive environment. The Association to
Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB)—the accreditation board of university
business schools—is now promoting integration between functional areas of business for
higher education.
Integration also contributes to improvements in communication and workflow. Each
area’s information system depends on data from other functional areas. An information
system (IS) includes the people, procedures, software, and computers that store, organize,
analyze, and deliver information. This chapter illustrates the need for information sharing
between functional areas and the effects on the business if this information is not
integrated. In later sections, you will also see some examples of typical business processes
and how these processes routinely cross functional areas.
Business Processes
More managers are now thinking in terms of business processes rather than business
functions. Recall that a business process is a collection of activities that takes one or more
kinds of input and creates an output that is of value to the customer. The customer for a
business process may be a traditional external customer (the person who buys the finished
product), or it may be an internal customer (such as a colleague in another department).
For example, what is sold through Marketing and Sales is linked to what is procured and
produced by Supply Chain Management. This concept is illustrated in Figure 1-2.
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-2
Sample business processes related to the sale of a smartphone
3
Business Functions and Business Processes

Thinking in terms of business processes helps managers look at their organization
from the customer’s perspective. Consider the example illustrated in Figure 1-2 of a
customer who wants to purchase a new smartphone. The customer wants information
about the company’s products so she can select a smartphone and various high-tech
accessories for the phone. She wants to place her order quickly and easily, and perhaps
even arrange for financing through the company. She expects quick delivery of the correct
model of smartphone, and she wants 24-hour customer support for any problems. The
customer is not concerned about how the smartphone was marketed, how its components
were purchased, how it was built, or how the delivery truck will find the best route to her
house. The customer wants the satisfaction of having the latest in mobile phone
technology at a reasonable price.
Businesses must always consider the customer’s viewpoint in any transaction. What is
the difference between a business function and a business process from the customer’s
point of view? Suppose the customer’s mobile phone is damaged during shipment. Because
only one functional area is involved in accepting the return of the damaged item, receipt
of the return is a business function—specifically, it is part of the customer relationship
management function of Marketing and Sales. Because several functional areas are
involved in the repair and return of the mobile phone back to the customer, the handling
of the repair is a business process. Thus, in this example, the customer is dealing
with many of the company’s functional areas in the process of buying and obtaining
a smartphone.
A successful customer interaction is one in which the customer (either internal or
external) is not required to interact separately with each business function involved in the
process. If companies are not coordinating their business functions, a customer could
receive conflicting information and likely would quickly become dissatisfied. Successful
business managers view their business operations from the perspective of a satisfied
customer and strive to present one consistent (and positive) “face” to the customer.
For the mobile phone company to satisfy its customers, it must make sure its
functional areas of operation are integrated. Mobile phone technology changes rapidly,
and the devices the phone company sells change frequently. To provide customers with
accurate information, people performing the sales function must have up-to-date
information about the latest mobile phones available for sale; otherwise, a customer
might order a smartphone that the company’s manufacturing plant no longer produces.
People performing the manufacturing function need to receive the details of a customer’s
smartphone order quickly and accurately from the employee (or online ordering system)
performing the sales function, so the right phone can be packaged and shipped on time
to the customer. If the customer is financing the smartphone through the mobile phone
company, the employees performing the sales order function must gather information
about the customer and process it quickly, so financing can be approved in time to
support shipping the phone.
Sharing data effectively and efficiently between and within functional areas leads to
more efficient business processes. Information systems that are designed so functional
areas share data are called integrated information systems. Working through this textbook
will help you understand the benefits of integrated information systems and the problems
that can occur when information systems are not integrated. Research has shown that
integrated information systems can help managers better control their organizations.
With enhanced information flow, communication between parts of the company improves,
4
Chapter 1

productivity increases, and costs decrease. In effect, integrating the information systems
can make for a more effective overall organization—hence, more efficient business
processes. Figure 1-3 illustrates the process view of business operations.
Businesses take inputs (resources) in the form of material, people, and equipment,
and transform these inputs into goods and services for customers. Effectively managing
these inputs and business processes requires accurate and up-to-date information. For
example, the sales staff takes a customer’s order, and production employees schedule the
manufacturing of the product. Logistics employees schedule and carry out the delivery of
the product. If raw materials are needed to make the product, production prompts
purchasing staff to arrange for their purchase and delivery. Logistics will receive the raw
material, verify its receipt to accounting so the vendor can be paid, and deliver the goods
to production. Throughout, accounting keeps appropriate transaction records.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Integrated Information Systems
The world today is information driven. Getting the right information to the right person
can make a huge difference in terms of a company’s bottom line. But are some systems
just too complicated to be fully integrated? Although the financial services industry
spends more on information technology than any other industry ($500 billion worldwide
in 2009), many financial institutions do not have fully integrated information systems.
Why is this so? The reasons are many. Banks were the first organizations to adopt
information systems, so many of their systems are legacy (old) systems that would be
difficult and expensive to update. In addition, many banks have gone through multiple
phases of acquisition, which in itself results in duplicate information systems.
Government regulations on financial institutions have also brought about additional
(continued)
Customer order process
Sales
function
Accounting
function
Purchasing
function
Production
function
Logistics
function
Material order process
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-3
A process view of business operations
5
Business Functions and Business Processes

systems. And many financial organizations write their own proprietary systems for
market trading, thinking that gives them a leg up on their competition. Some of the
more sophisticated financial products, such as hedge funds and derivatives, are
generated via complex programs. In addition, a great deal of financial tracking is
performed on spreadsheets, which may not be connected to any integrated system.
The end result of these unintegrated systems is a lack of consistent data across
systems, which can lead to an inaccurate assessment of risk. Most financial systems
written today are honed for rapid trading, not for regulation or for tracking anomalies
that could lead to problems. Some IT experts claim that the global financial networks are
now unstable and that the fast quantitative trading programs in place could lead rapidly
to potentially disastrous outcomes.
Question:
1.
Do you think some of the problems associated with the financial crisis of 2008
could have been avoided if financial firms had more integrated information?
If so, how, or if not, why not?
FUNCTIONAL AREAS AND BUSINESS PROCESSES
OF A VERY SMALL BUSINESS
Next, we will look at the way business processes involve more than one functional area,
using a fictitious small business as an example—a coffee shop that you own. We will
examine the business processes of the coffee shop and see why coordination of the
functional areas helps achieve efficient and effective business processes. You will see the
role that information plays in this coordination and how integration of the information
system improves your business.
Even though just a few people can run a small coffee shop, the operation of the
business requires a number of processes. Coordinating the activities within different
functional areas requires accurate and timely information.
Marketing and Sales
Marketing and Sales (M/S) functions include developing products, determining pricing,
promoting products to customers, and taking customers’ orders. Marketing and Sales also
helps create a sales forecast to ensure the successful operation of the coffee shop.
For the most part, this is a cash business, but you still need to keep track of your
customers so you can send flyers or occasional thank-you notes to repeat customers. Thus,
your records must not only show the amount of sales, but also identify repeat customers.
Product development can be done informally in such a simple business; you gather
information about who buys which kind of coffee and note what customers say about each
product. You also analyze historical sales records to spot trends that are not obvious.
Deciding whether to sell a product also depends on how much it costs to produce the
product. For example, some customers might be asking for a fair-trade decaffeinated coffee
or a chai tea. To determine whether the new product could be profitably produced and
sold, you could analyze data from Supply Chain Management, including production
6
Chapter 1

information (such as the cost of purchasing an extra coffee machine to make the special
fair-trade decaffeinated brew) and materials management data (the cost of decaffeinated
coffee beans and chai tea).
This is a very small coffee shop, and you know most of your clientele. Therefore,
although you run a cash business, good repeat customers are allowed to run up a tab—up
to a point. Thus, your records must show how much each customer owes as well as his or
her available credit. It is very important that the data be available and accurate at the
time of a customer’s credit request. Since Accounting and Finance records must be
accessed as a part of the selling process, the accounting function has a critical role to play
in the sales process.
Supply Chain Management
The functions within Supply Chain Management (SCM) include developing production
plans, ordering raw materials from suppliers, receiving the raw material into the facility,
manufacturing products, maintaining facilities, and shipping products to customers. In our
coffee shop example, Supply Chain Management functions involve making the coffee
(manufacturing/production) and buying raw materials (purchasing). Production is planned
so that, as much as possible, coffee is available when needed, without excess that must be
disposed of. This planning requires sales forecasts from the Marketing and Sales functional
area. Sales forecasts are estimates of future product demand, which is the amount of a
product customers will want to buy. A forecast’s accuracy will be improved if it is based on
historical sales figures (for example, factors such as cold weather or local downtown social
events would impact the forecast for a given time period). Thus, forecasts from Marketing
and Sales play an important role in the production planning process.
Production plans are also used to develop requirements for raw materials (coffee
beans, tea bags, sweeteners, cream, and milk) and packaging (cups, stirrers, straws, plates,
and napkins). You must generate raw material and packaging orders from these
requirements. If the forecasts are accurate, you will not lose sales because of material
shortages, nor will you have excessive inventory that might spoil.
Supply Chain Management and Marketing and Sales must choose a recipe for each
beverage product sold, such as the quantity of coffee beans used to brew each pot of
coffee. The standard recipe is a key input for deciding how much to order of each raw
material, which is a purchasing function. Access to this recipe is also necessary for
keeping good manufacturing records, allowing managers within the Supply Chain
Management functional area (working with those in Accounting and Finance) to break
down the costs to a per-cup cost. Managers can then compare how much it actually costs
to make a cup of coffee, versus how much the recipe should have cost.
Accounting and Finance
Accounting and Finance (A/F) performs financial accounting to provide summaries of
operational data in managerial reports, and it is also responsible for tasks such as
controlling accounts, planning and budgeting, and cash-flow management. Accounting and
Finance functions include recording raw data about sales transactions, raw material
purchases, payroll, and receipt of cash from customers. Raw data are simply numbers
collected from sales, manufacturing, and other operations—without any manipulation,
7
Business Functions and Business Processes

calculation, or arrangement for presentation. Those data are then summarized in
meaningful ways to determine the profitability of the coffee shop and to support
decision making.
Note that data from Accounting and Finance are used by Marketing and Sales as well
as by Supply Chain Management. The sales records are an important component of the
sales forecast, which is used in making staffing decisions and in production planning. The
records from accounts receivable, which you use to determine whether to grant credit to a
particular customer, are also used to monitor the overall credit-granting policy of the
coffee shop. You need to be sure you have enough cash on hand to purchase raw materials,
as well as to finance the purchase of new equipment, such as an additional coffee machine
for the fair-trade decaffeinated coffee.
Human Resources
Even a simple business needs employees to support the Marketing and Sales and Supply
Chain Management functional areas, which means the business must recruit, train,
evaluate, and compensate employees. These are the functions of Human Resources (HR).
At the coffee shop, the number of employees needed and the timing of hiring depend
on the level of coffee and tea sales. Human Resources uses sales forecasts to plan
personnel needs. A part-time helper might be needed at forecasted peak hours or days, but
how much should a part-time helper be paid? That depends on prevailing job market
conditions and state laws, and it is Human Resources’ job to monitor those conditions.
Would increased sales justify hiring a part-time worker at the prevailing wage? Or,
should you think about acquiring more automated ways of making coffee, so a person
working alone could run the shop? Resolving these questions requires input from
Marketing and Sales, Supply Chain Management, and Accounting and Finance.
The coffee shop, while a relatively simple business, has many of the processes needed
in larger organizations, and these processes involve activities in more than one functional
area. In fact, it is impossible to discuss the processes in one functional area without
discussing the links to other functional areas—connections that invariably require the
sharing of data. Systems that are integrated using ERP software provide the data sharing
that is necessary between functional areas.
FUNCTIONAL AREA INFORMATION SYSTEMS
This section will describe potential inputs and outputs for each functional area of a
business (refer back to Figure 1-2 to review sample inputs and outputs related to the sale
of a smartphone). Note the kinds of data needed by each area and how people use the
data. Also note that the information systems maintain relationships between all functional
areas and processes.
8
Chapter 1

Marketing and Sales
As shown in Figure 1-4, the Marketing and Sales (M/S) area needs information from all other
functional areas to effectively complete the business activities for which it is responsible.
Customers communicate their orders to sales staff in person or by telephone, email,
fax, the Web, and so on. In the case of Web-based systems, customer and order data are
stored automatically in the information system; otherwise, data must be entered manually,
by typing data into a computer keyboard or point-of-sale system, or by using a bar-code
reader or similar device. Sales orders must be passed to Supply Chain Management for
planning purposes and to Accounting and Finance for billing. Sales order data are also
valuable for analyzing sales trends for business decision making. For example, Marketing
and Sales management might use a report showing the trend of a product’s sales to
evaluate marketing efforts and to determine strategies for the sales force.
Marketing and Sales also has a role in determining product prices, which requires an
understanding of the market competition and the costs of manufacturing the product.
Pricing might be determined based on a product’s unit cost, plus some percentage markup.
For example, if a product costs $5 per unit to make, and management wants a 40 percent
markup, the selling price must be $7 per unit. Where does the per-unit cost data come
from? Determining the cost of manufacturing a product requires information from
Accounting and Finance, which, in turn, relies on Supply Chain Management data.
People are a valuable asset to the firm, and Marketing and Sales needs to interact with
Human Resources to exchange information on hiring needs, legal requirements, and other
matters. For example, when Marketing and Sales has an opening for a junior salesperson,
Human Resources will do the advertising for the job vacancy. Human Resources might also
Customer
Sales orders
M/S
A/F
HR
Order status
Sales forecasts
and sales orders
Product
availability data
and order status
Cost/profit
analysis
Sales order
data
Hiring needs and
personnel information
Legal requirements
and job information
SCM
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-4
The Marketing and Sales functional area exchanges data with customers and with
the Human Resources, Accounting and Finance, and Supply Chain Management
functional areas
9
Business Functions and Business Processes

communicate information about expense reimbursement policies to salespeople whose
jobs require travel.
To summarize, inputs for Marketing and Sales could include the following:
•
Customer data
•
Order data
•
Sales trend data
•
Per-unit cost
•
Company travel expense policy
Outputs for Marketing and Sales could include the following:
•
Sales strategies
•
Product pricing
•
Employment needs
Supply Chain Management
Supply Chain Management (SCM) also needs information from the various functional
areas, as shown in Figure 1-5.
Manufacturing firms often develop production plans of varying length and detail, such as
short-range, medium-range, and long-range plans. Plans could be developed for expanding
manufacturing capacity (based on sales forecasts), hiring new workers, and paying extra
overtime for existing workers.
Production plans are based on information about product sales (actual and projected),
which comes from Marketing and Sales. The purchasing function bases its orders of raw
HR
Orders for raw
materials and
packaging
Production
plans, materials,
and inventory
Sales data and
manufacturing
cost analysis
Hiring needs and
personnel information
Raw materials
availability and
delivery
Sales forecasts
and sales
orders
Product
availability
data and
order status
Legal requirements
and job information
M/S
A/F
SCM
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-5
The Supply Chain Management functional area exchanges data with suppliers and
with the Human Resources, Marketing and Sales, and Accounting and Finance
functional areas
10
Chapter 1

materials on production plans, expected shipments, delivery lead times, and existing
inventory levels. With accurate data about required production levels, raw material and
packaging can be ordered as needed, and inventory levels can be kept low, saving money.
On the other hand, if data are inaccurate or not current, manufacturing may run out of
raw material or packaging; such a shortfall is called a stockout. Shortages of this type can
shut down production and cause the company to miss delivery dates. To avoid stockouts,
management might choose to carry extra raw material and packaging, known as safety
stock, which can result in an overinvestment in inventory. If certain time-sensitive goods
are held too long, they can spoil and will have to be destroyed rather than sold for profit.
The accuracy of the forecast determines the amount of safety stock required to reduce the
risk of a stockout to an acceptable level. The less accurate the forecast, the more safety
stock is required. Accurate forecasting and production planning can reduce the need for
extra inventory and manufacturing capacity. In addition, Supply Chain Management can
share its planning information with the company’s suppliers so they can plan their
operations more efficiently, which should allow the suppliers to reduce the price they
charge the company for their products.
Supply Chain Management records can provide the data needed by Accounting and
Finance to determine how much of each resource (materials, labor, supplies, and
overhead) was used to make completed products in inventory.
Supply Chain Management data can support the Marketing and Sales function by
providing information about what has been produced and shipped. For example, online
retailers such as Amazon provide detailed information on customer orders through their
Web sites, and some send automated emails to notify customers when their orders have
shipped. Shipping companies, such as UPS and FedEx, provide online shipment-tracking
information. By entering a tracking number, the customer can see each step of the shipping
process by noting where the package’s bar code was scanned. Domino’s Pizza allows
customers who order through their Web site to track the progress of their pizza order—
from preparation to baking to delivery. Thus, accurate and timely production information
supports the sales process and can increase customer satisfaction. In fact, Amazon ranked
number one in the Temkin Group’s 2011 survey of customer experience. Two of the three
survey components relate to business process: functional experience (how well the
customer was able to do what they wanted to do) and accessiblility experience (how easy it
was to interact with the company). Performing well in such a survey requires a smooth
integration of the Marketing and Sales and Supply Chain Management processes.
Supply Chain Management also interacts with Human Resources. For instance, Supply
Chain Management passes hiring information to Human Resources, and Human Resources
informs Supply Chain Management of the company’s layoff and recall policy, which might
pertain to workers in the plant.
To summarize, inputs for Supply Chain Management could include the following:
•
Product sales data
•
Production plans
•
Inventory levels
•
Layoff and recall company policy
Outputs for Supply Chain Management could include the following:
•
Raw material orders
•
Packaging orders
11
Business Functions and Business Processes

•
Resource expenditure data
•
Production and inventory reports
•
Hiring information
Accounting and Finance
Accounting and Finance (A/F) needs information from all the other functional areas to
complete its tasks accurately, as shown in Figure 1-6.
Accounting and Finance personnel record the company’s transactions in the books of
account (which often are computerized records). For example, they record accounts
receivable when sales are made and cash receipts when customers send in payments. In
addition, they record accounts payable when raw materials are purchased and cash
outflows when they pay for materials. Finally, Accounting and Finance personnel
summarize the transaction data to prepare reports about the company’s financial position
and profitability.
Employees in other functional areas provide data to Accounting and Finance:
Marketing and Sales provides sales data, Supply Chain Management provides production
and inventory data, and Human Resources provides payroll and benefit expense data. The
accuracy and timeliness of Accounting and Finance data depend on the accuracy and
timeliness of the data from the other functional areas.
Marketing and Sales personnel require data from Accounting and Finance to evaluate
customer credit. If an order will cause a customer to exceed his or her credit limit,
Marketing and Sales should see that the customer’s accounts receivable balance
Customer
Payments
HR
Invoices and
credit memos
Sales data and
manufacturing
cost analysis
Production plans;
materials and
inventory data
Cost/profit
analysis
Sales order
data
Hiring needs and
personnel information
Legal requirements
and job information;
payroll and benefit
expense data
M/S
A/F
SCM
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-6
The Accounting and Finance functional area exchanges data with customers and with
the Human Resources, Marketing and Sales, and Supply Chain Management
functional areas
12
Chapter 1

(the amount owed to the company) is too high and hold new orders until the customer’s
balance is lowered. If Accounting and Finance is slow to record sales, the accounts
receivable balances will be inaccurate, and Marketing and Sales might approve credit for
customers who have already exceeded their credit limits and who might never pay off
their accounts. If Accounting and Finance does not record customers’ payments promptly,
the company could deny credit to customers who actually owe less than their credit limit,
potentially damaging the company’s relationship with those customers.
To summarize, inputs for Accounting and Finance could include the following:
•
Payments from customers
•
Accounts receivable data
•
Accounts payable data
•
Sales data
•
Production and inventory data
•
Payroll and expense data
Outputs for Accounting and Finance could include the following:
•
Payments to suppliers
•
Financial reports
•
Customer credit data
Human Resources
Like the other functional areas, Human Resources (HR) needs information from the other
departments to efficiently complete its business activities, as shown in Figure 1-7.
HR
Hiring needs and
personnel information
Legal requirements
and job information
Hiring needs
and personnel
information
Hiring needs
and personnel
information
Legal requirements
and job information
Payroll and
benefit expense data;
legal requirements and
job information
M/S
A/F
SCM
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 1-7
The Human Resources functional area exchanges data with the Accounting and
Finance, Marketing and Sales, and Supply Chain Management functional areas
13
Business Functions and Business Processes

Tasks related to employee hiring, benefits, training, and government compliance are
all the responsibilities of a human resources department. Human Resources staff need
accurate forecasts of personnel needs from all functional units. In addition, Human
Resources needs to know what skills are required to perform a particular job and how
much the company can afford to pay employees. These data also come from all
functional units.
State and federal laws require companies to observe many governmental regulations
in recruiting, training, compensating, promoting, and terminating employees—and these
regulations must be observed company-wide. Usually, it is also Human Resources’
responsibility to ensure that employees receive training in a timely manner and that they
get certified (and recertified) in key skills, such as materials handling and equipment
operation. Human Resources must also disburse wages, salaries, raises, and bonuses. For
these and other reasons, corporate Human Resources needs timely and accurate data from
other areas.
Human Resources must create accurate and timely data and reports for management
use. For example, Human Resources should maintain a database of skills required to do
particular jobs as well as the prevailing pay rate for each position. When the company
evaluates employees’ performance and compensation, analysis of these data can help to
prevent the loss of valued employees because of low pay.
To summarize, inputs for Human Resources could include the following:
•
Personnel forecasts
•
Skills data
Outputs for Human Resources could include the following:
•
Regulation compliance
•
Employee training and certification
•
Skills database
•
Employee evaluation and compensation
As shown in Figure 1-4 through Figure 1-7, a significant amount of data is maintained
by and shared among the different functional areas. The timeliness and accuracy of these
data are critical to each area’s success and to the company’s ability to make a profit and
generate future growth. ERP software allows all the functional areas to share a common
database so accurate, real-time information is available. In Chapter 2, we will trace the
evolution of data management systems that led to ERP.
14
Chapter 1

A N O T H E R
L O O K
Integrated Information Systems
Large organizations dealing with hundreds or thousands of suppliers have a difficult task
in keeping information flowing to the right person at the right time. At one point,
Lockheed Martin Aeronautics, with $13.2 billion in sales (2010) and over 29,000
employees, was running 75 legacy systems, some dating from the 1970s. To stay efficient
while keeping customers happy and taking on more aircraft orders, the company
decided to implement an Enterprise Resource Planning system.
Lockheed Martin’s final system allows suppliers to handle more of their own
transactions by accessing the new ERP system through an existing secure Web portal.
For example, using the portal, a supplier can now track each step of an order. In
addition, the supplier can see the production trends at Lockheed Martin, and plan its
own production to satisfy Lockheed Martin’s needs—in effect, anticipating orders.
Through this integration of many systems into one large ERP system, Lockheed Martin
was able to cut costs and connect suppliers worldwide into its system, enabling the
company to become more efficient.
In another industry, Tumi, Inc., the luggage and travel products company, was
running several legacy systems that were written “in-house,” meaning they were
programmed by company staff. The different systems covered processes such as taking
an order, running the warehouse, and completing financial statements. None of the
systems were linked; therefore, passing information from one system to another was a slow
and cumbersome process. Tumi could not fill its orders on time, had excess inventory in
the warehouse, and was frequently unable to meet customers’ shipping deadlines. To
address these issues—and to better support the company’s expansion plans—Tumi made
a conscious effort to make information technology a business driver, and the company
brought in an ERP system to integrate the business functions.
With the new integrated ERP system, Tumi has been able to expand its business,
decrease inventory by 30 percent, cut its warehouse space by 38 percent, and increase
sales by 25 percent. Tumi’s management believes that one of the company’s primary
strengths lies in its integrated systems. Manufacturing is now quick to react when
demand increases, and forecasting is more accurate.
Question:
1.
Using the Internet, research how many suppliers are typically used for
manufacturing large commercial aircraft. List 10 such suppliers and what they
do. How would an integrated ERP system, such as the one at Lockheed Martin,
help manage all those suppliers?
15
Business Functions and Business Processes

Chapter Summary
•
Companies that make and sell products have business processes that involve four main
functional areas: Marketing and Sales (M/S), Supply Chain Management (SCM),
Accounting and Finance (A/F), and Human Resources (HR). These areas of operation
perform the following functions:
•
Marketing and Sales develops products, sets product prices, promotes products
through advertising and marketing, takes customer orders, supports customers, and
creates sales forecasts.
•
Supply Chain Management develops production plans, orders raw materials from
suppliers, receives the raw material into the facility, manufactures products, maintains
facilities, and ships products to customers.
•
Accounting and Finance performs financial accounting to provide summaries of
operational data in managerial reports, and also is responsible for tasks such as
controlling accounts, planning and budgeting, and cash-flow management.
•
Human Resources recruits, hires, trains, and compensates employees, ensures
compliance with government regulations, and oversees the evaluation of employees.
•
Each functional area is served by an information system. Information systems capture,
process, and store data to provide information needed for decision making.
•
Employees working in one functional area often need data from other functional areas. Ideally,
functional area information systems are integrated, so shared data are accurate and timely.
•
Today, business managers try to think in terms of business processes that integrate the
functional areas, thus promoting efficiency and competitiveness. An important aspect
of this integration is the need to share information between functional areas, and with
business partners. ERP software provides this capability by means of a single common
database.
Key Terms
Accounting and Finance (A/F)
business function
business process
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
functional areas of operation
Human Resources (HR)
information system (IS)
integrated information system
Marketing and Sales (M/S)
raw data
safety stock
sales forecast
stockout
Supply Chain Management (SCM)
Exercises
1.
Distinguish between a business function and a business process. Describe how a business
process cuts across functional lines in an organization. How might a manager organize
his or her staff in terms of business processes rather than functional departments? What
benefits would there be with this type of organization? What challenges would it pose?
16
Chapter 1

2.
How could a university organize its business education around business processes rather
than business functions? What would be the benefits to students?
3.
Assume your uncle raises bees for honey on his farm. You help him package the honey
and sell it on the Internet. Reproduce Figure 1-1 for this small business example. Add a
one-sentence description for each function as it relates to selling this artisan honey online.
4.
Go to the Amazon Web site (http://www.amazon.com), and step through the process of
buying an item without actually purchasing the item. Based on this experience, describe the
flows of information between Marketing and Sales, Accounting and Finance, and Supply
Chain Management at Amazon. How easy is it to buy that item?
5.
Using the Internet, research your state’s regulations for employing teenagers—such as
minimum age of employment. Do the same for a neighboring state. Are the two state
regulations the same? Why would it be important for Human Resources to communicate
this information to a hiring department?
6.
Think of the last time you bought a high-tech electronic item. How does the process of
buying that item cut across the store’s various functional lines? What information from
your receipt would need to be available to the business functions? Which business
functions would need that information? How could your receipt help in the process of
returning that item?
7.
Assume you own and run a small ice cream shop located on the grounds of a private pool.
You want to maximize sales and decide that allowing customers to buy on credit could be a
big driver of sales since most people come to the pool without cash. What information do
you need to keep track of to make sure a given customer doesn’t go over their $20 credit
limit. What problems might occur?
For Further Study and Research
Amrani, Radouane E., Frantz Rowe, and Bénédicte Geffroy-Maronnat. “The Effects of Enterprise
Resource Planning Implementation Strategy on Cross-Functionality.” Information Systems
Journal 16, no. 1 (January 2006): 79.
Aurand, Timothy W., Carol DeMoranville, and Geoffrey L. Gordon. “Cross-Functional Business
Programs: Critical Design and Development Considerations.” Mid-American Journal of
Business 16, no. 2 (Fall 2001): 21–30.
Economist. “Silo But Deadly.” December 5, 2009. http://www.economist.com/node/15016132.
Hannon, David. “Lockheed Martin Aeronautics Revolutionizes Its Supply Chain.”
InsiderPROFILES 2, no. 2 (April 2011). http://insiderprofiles.wispubs.com/article.aspx?
iArticleId=5706.
Hannon, David. “How TUMI, Inc. Cut Inventory by 30% and Increased Sales by 25%.”
InsiderPROFILES 2, no. 1 (January 2011). http://insiderprofiles.wispubs.com/article.aspx?
iArticleId=5600.
Temkin Group. “2011 Temkin Experience Ratings.” March 29, 2011. http://www.temkingroup.
com/news/2011-temkin-experience-ratings.
17
Business Functions and Business Processes


C H A P T E R2
THE DEVELOPMENT OF
ENTERPRISE RESOURCE
PLANNING SYSTEMS
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Identify the factors that led to the development of Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) systems
•
Describe the distinguishing modular characteristics of ERP software
•
Discuss the pros and cons of implementing an ERP system
•
Summarize ongoing developments in ERP
I N T R O D U C T I O N
In today’s competitive business environment, companies try to provide customers with goods and
services faster and less expensively than their competition. How do they do that? Often, the key is
an efficient, integrated information system. Increasing the efficiency of information systems results in
more efficient management of business processes. When companies have efficient business
processes, they can be more competitive in the marketplace.
An Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system can help a company integrate its operations by
serving as a company-wide computing environment that includes a shared database—delivering
consistent data across all business functions in real time. (The term real time refers to data and
processes that are always current).

This chapter will help you to understand how and why ERP systems came into being and what
the future might hold for business information systems. The chapter follows this sequence:
•
Review of the evolution of information systems and related causes for the recent
development of ERP systems
•
Discussion of the few ERP software vendors that dominate the market; the current industry
leader, German software maker SAP AG’s industry-leading software product, SAP ERP, is
discussed as an example of an ERP system.
•
Review of the factors influencing a company’s decision to purchase an ERP system
•
Description of ERP’s benefits
•
Overview of frequently asked questions related to ERP systems
•
Discussion of the future of ERP software, including the emphasis being placed on mobile
applications and accessibility of data
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Until recently, most companies had unintegrated information systems that supported only
the activities of individual business functional areas. Thus, a company would have a
marketing information system, a production information system, and so on—each with its
own hardware, software, and methods of processing data and information. Information
systems configured in this way are known as a silos because each department has its
own stack, or silo, of information that is unconnected to the next silo; silos are also known
as stovepipes.
Such unintegrated systems might work well within each individual functional area,
but to be competitive, a company must share data among all the functional areas. When a
company’s information systems are not integrated, costly inefficiencies can result. For
example, suppose two functional areas have separate, unintegrated information systems.
To share data, a clerk in one functional area needs to print out data from another
area and then enter the data into her area’s information system. Not only does this data
input take twice the time, it also significantly increases the chance for data entry errors.
Alternatively, this process might be automated by having one information system write
data to a file to be read by another information system. This would reduce the probability
of errors, but it could only be done periodically (usually overnight or on a weekend) to
minimize the disruption to normal business transactions. Because of the time lag in
updating the system, the transferred data would rarely be up to date. In addition, data
can be defined differently in different data systems; for instance, products might be
20
Chapter 2

referred to by different part numbers in different systems. This variance can create
further problems in timely and accurate information sharing between functional areas.
It seems obvious today that a business should have integrated software to manage all
functional areas. An integrated ERP system, however, is an incredibly complex hardware
and software system that was not feasible until the 1990s. Current ERP systems evolved
as a result of three things: (1) the advancement of the hardware and software technology
(computing power, memory, and communications) needed to support the system, (2) the
development of a vision of integrated information systems, and (3) the reengineering of
companies to shift from a functional focus to a business-process focus.
Computer Hardware and Software Development
Computer hardware and software developed rapidly in the 1960s and 1970s. The first
practical business computers were the mainframe computers of the 1960s. Although these
computers began to change the way business was conducted, they were not powerful
enough to provide integrated, real-time data for business decision making. Over time,
computers got faster, smaller, and cheaper—leading to today’s proliferation of mobile
devices. The rapid development of computer hardware capabilities has been accurately
described by Moore’s Law. In 1965, Intel employee Gordon Moore observed that the
number of transistors that could be built into a computer chip doubled every 24 months.
This meant that in the 1960s and 1970s the capabilities of computer hardware were
doubling every 24 months, and this trend has continued, as shown in Figure 2-1.
100,000,000
1,000,000,000
10,000,000
Number of Transistors
1,000,000
100,000
10,000
1,000
Intel Processors
Year
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
4004
8080
8086
80286
80386
80486
Pentium
Pentium II
Pentium 4
Itanium 2
Core i7
Source Line: “The Evolution of a Revolution,” ftp://download.intel.com/pressroom/kits/Intel
ProcessorHistory.pdf,” Intel.
FIGURE 2-1
The actual increase in transistors on a chip approximates Moore’s Law
21
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

During this time, computer software was also advancing to take advantage of the
increasing capabilities of computer hardware. In the 1970s, relational database software
was developed, providing businesses with the ability to store, retrieve, and analyze
large volumes of data. Spreadsheet software, a fundamental business tool today, became
popular in the 1980s. With spreadsheets, managers could perform complex business
analyses without having to rely on a computer programmer to develop custom
programs.
The computer hardware and software developments of the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s
paved the way for the development of ERP systems.
Early Attempts to Share Resources
As PCs gained popularity in business in the 1980s, it became clear that users needed a
way to share peripheral equipment (such as printers and hard disks, which were fairly
expensive in the early 1980s) and, more importantly, data. At that point, important
business information was being stored on individual PCs, but there was no easy way to
share the information electronically.
By the mid-1980s, telecommunications developments allowed users to share data and
peripherals on local networks. Usually, these networks were groups of computers
connected to one another within a single physical location. This meant that workers could
download data from a central computer to their desktop PCs and work with the data at
their desks.
This central computer–local computer arrangement is now called a client-server
architecture. Servers (central computers) became more powerful and less expensive
and provided scalability. Scalability means that the capacity of a piece of equipment
can be increased by adding new hardware. In the case of a client-server network, the
ability to add servers makes the network scalable—thus extending the life of the
hardware investment. Scalability is a characteristic of client-server networks, but
usually not of mainframe-based systems.
By the end of the 1980s, much of the hardware and software needed to support the
development of ERP systems was in place: fast computers, networked access, and
advanced database technology. Recall from Chapter 1 that ERP programs help
organizations manage company-wide business processes using a common database, which
holds a very large amount of data. The software that holds that data in an organized
fashion, and that allows for the easy retrieval of data, is the database management system
(DBMS). By the mid-1980s, the DBMS required to manage the development of complex
ERP software existed. The final element required for the development of ERP software was
understanding and acceptance from the business community. Many businesspeople did
not yet recognize the benefits of integrated information systems nor were they willing to
commit the resources to develop ERP software.
The Manufacturing Roots of ERP
The concept of an integrated information system took shape on the factory floor.
Manufacturing software advanced during the 1960s and 1970s, evolving from simple
22
Chapter 2

inventory-tracking systems to material requirements planning (MRP) software. MRP is
a production-scheduling methodology that determines the timing and quantity of
production runs and purchase-order releases to meet a master production schedule.
MRP software allowed a plant manager to plan production and raw materials
requirements by working backward from the sales forecast, the prediction of future
sales. The plant manager first looked at Marketing and Sales’ forecast of customer
demand, then looked at the production schedule needed to meet that demand,
calculated the raw materials needed to meet the required production levels, and finally,
projected the cost of those raw materials. For a company with many products, raw
materials, and shared production resources, this kind of projection was impossible
without a computer to keep track of various inputs.
The basic functions of MRP could be handled by mainframe computers; however, the
advent of electronic data interchange (EDI)—the direct computer-to-computer exchange
of standard business documents—allowed companies to handle the purchasing process
electronically, avoiding the cost and delays resulting from paper purchase order and
invoice systems. The functional area now known as Supply Chain Management (SCM)
began with the sharing of long-range production schedules between manufacturers and
their suppliers.
Management’s Impetus to Adopt ERP
The hard economic times of the late 1980s and early 1990s caused many companies to
downsize and reorganize. These company overhauls were one stimulus for ERP
development. Companies needed to find some way to avoid the following kind of situation
(which they had tolerated for a long time):
Imagine you are the CEO of Mountaineering, Inc., an outdoor outfitter catering to the
young and trendy sportsperson. Mountaineering, Inc. is profitable and keeping pace
with the competition, but the company’s information systems are unintegrated and
inefficient (as are the systems of your competitors). The Marketing and Sales
Department creates a time-consuming and unwieldy paper trail when negotiating and
closing sales with retailers. To schedule factory production, however, the manager of
the Manufacturing Department needs accurate, timely information about actual and
projected sales orders from the Marketing and Sales manager. Without such
information, the Manufacturing manager must make a guess about which products
to produce—and how many—in order to keep goods moving through the production
line. Sometimes a guess overestimates demand, and sometimes it underestimates
demand.
Overproduction of a certain product might mean your company is stuck with a
product for which there is a diminishing market due to style changes or changes in
seasonal demand. When your company stores product—such as hiking boots—as it
waits for a buyer, you incur warehouse expense. On the other hand,
underproduction of a certain style of boot might result in product not being ready
for a promised delivery date, leading to unhappy customers and, possibly, canceled
orders. If you try to catch up on orders, you’ll have to pay factory workers overtime
or resort to the extra expense of rapid-delivery shipments.
23
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Eventually, the management of large companies decided they could no longer afford
the type of inefficiencies illustrated by the Mountaineering example—inefficiencies caused
by the functional model of business organization. This model had deep roots in U.S.
business, starting with the General Motors organizational model developed by Alfred P.
Sloan in the 1930s. The functional business model shown in Figure 2-2 illustrates the
concept of silos of information, which limit the exchange of information between the lower
operating levels. Instead, the exchange of information between operating groups is handled
by top management, which might not be knowledgeable about an individual functional
area.
The functional model was very useful for decades, and it was successful in the
United States where there was limited competition and where flexibility and rapid
decision making were not requirements for success. In the quickly changing markets
of the 1990s, however, the functional model led to top-heavy and overstaffed
organizations incapable of reacting quickly to change. The time was right to view a
business as a set of cross-functional processes, as illustrated in Figure 2-3. In this
organizational model, the functional business model, with its separate silos of
information, is gone. Now information flows between the operating groups without top
management’s involvement.
In a process-oriented company, the flow of information and management activity is
“horizontal” across functions, in line with the flow of materials and products. This
Top management
Marketing
Sales
Manufacturing
Logistics
Finance and Accounting
Information ﬂow
Information ﬂow
Information ﬂow
Information ﬂow
Information ﬂow
Material and product ﬂow
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 2-2
Information and material flows in a functional business model
24
Chapter 2

horizontal flow promotes flexibility and rapid decision making. Michael Hammer’s 1993
landmark book, Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution,
stimulated managers to see the importance of managing business processes. Books like
Hammer’s, along with the difficult economic times of the late 1980s, led to a climate in
which managers began to view ERP software as a solution to business problems.
In recent years, further impetus for adopting ERP systems has come from companies’
efforts to be in compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, a federal law passed in
response to the accounting fraud discovered at large companies such as Enron and
WorldCom, among others. The law, which is covered in more detail in Chapter 5, requires
companies to substantiate internal controls on all information.
In the next section, you will learn about the development of the first ERP software.
SAP was the first company to develop software for ERP systems and is the current market
leader in ERP software sales. As of 2011, SAP has over 109,000 customers, 53,000
employees, and sales of $12.5 billion annually.
ERP SOFTWARE EMERGES: SAP AND R/3
In 1972, five former IBM systems analysts in Mannheim, Germany—Dietmar Hopp, Claus
Wellenreuther, Hasso Plattner, Klaus Tschira, and Hans-Werner Hector—formed
Systemanalyse und Programmentwicklung (Systems Analysis and Program
Development), or SAP—pronounced “S-A-P”. Later, the acronym was changed to Systeme,
Anwendungen und Produkte in der Datenverarbeitung (Systems, Applications and
Top management
Finance and
Accounting
Accounts
Receivable
Marketing and Sales
Procurement
Manufacturing
Logistics
Suppliers
Customers
Information ﬂow
Supplies
Conversion
Accounts
Payable
Material and product ﬂow
Storage and
shipping
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 2-3
Information and material flows in a process business model
25
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Products in Data Processing.) The computer industry of the time was quite different from
that of today. IBM controlled the computer market with its 360 mainframe computer,
which had only 512K of main memory. In this mainframe computer environment, the SAP
founders recognized that all companies developing computer software faced the same
basic business problems, and each developed unique, but similar, solutions for their needs
in payroll processing, accounting, materials management, and other functional areas of
business. SAP’s goal was to develop a standard software product that could be configured
to meet the needs of each company. According to founder Dietmar Hopp, SAP’s concept
from the beginning was to set standards in information technology. In addition, the
founders wanted data available in real time, and they wanted users to work on a computer
screen rather than with voluminous printed output. These goals were lofty and forward-
looking for 1972, and it took almost 20 years to achieve them.
SAP Begins Developing Software Modules
Before leaving IBM, Plattner and Hopp had worked on an order-processing system for the
German chemical company ICI. The order-processing system was so successful that ICI
managers also wanted a materials and logistics management system—a system for
handling the purchase, receiving, and storage of materials—that could be integrated into
the new order-processing system. In the course of their work for ICI, Plattner and Hopp
had already developed the idea of modular software development. Software modules are
individual programs that can be purchased, installed, and run separately, but all of the
modules extract data from a common database.
In the course of their work together, Plattner and Hopp began to consider the idea of
leaving IBM to form their own company so they would be free to pursue their own
approach to software development. They also asked Claus Wellenreuther, an expert in
financial accounting who had just left IBM, to join them, and on April 1, 1972, SAP was
founded. At the time Plattner, Hopp, and Wellenreuther established the company, they
could not even afford to purchase their own computer. Their first contract, with ICI, to
develop the follow-on materials and logistics management system, included access to ICI’s
mainframe computer at night—a practice they repeated with other clients until they
acquired their first computer in 1980. At ICI, the SAP founders developed their first
software package, variously called System R, System RF (for real-time financial
accounting), and R/1.
To keep up with the ongoing development of mainframe computer technology, in 1978
SAP began developing a more integrated version of its software products, called the R/2
system. In 1982, after four years of development, SAP released its R/2 mainframe ERP
software package.
Sales grew rapidly in the 1980s, and SAP extended its software’s capabilities and
expanded into international markets. This was no small task, because the software had to be
able to accommodate different languages, currencies, accounting practices, and tax laws.
By 1988, SAP had established subsidiaries in numerous foreign countries, launched a
joint venture with consulting company Arthur Andersen, and sold its 1,000th system. SAP
also became SAP AG, a publicly traded company.
SAP R/3
In 1988, SAP realized the potential of client-server hardware architecture and began
development of its R/3 system to take advantage of client-server technology. The first
26
Chapter 2

version of SAP R/3 was released in 1992. Each subsequent release of the SAP R/3 software
contained new features and capabilities. The client-server architecture used by SAP
allowed R/3 to run on a variety of computer platforms, including UNIX and Windows NT.
The SAP R/3 system was also designed using an open architecture approach. In open
architecture, third-party software companies are encouraged to develop add-on software
products that can be integrated with existing software. The open architecture also makes
it easy for companies to integrate their hardware products, such as bar-code scanners,
personal digital assistants (PDAs), cell phones, and global information systems with the
SAP system.
New Directions in ERP
In the late 1990s, the year 2000, or Y2K, problem motivated many companies to move to
ERP systems. As it became clear that the date turnover from December 31, 1999, to
January 1, 2000, could wreak havoc on some information systems, companies searched for
ways to consolidate data, and ERP systems provided one solution.
The Y2K problem originated from programming shortcuts made by programmers in
the preceding decades. With memory and storage space a small fraction of what it is today,
early programmers developed software that used as few computer resources as possible.
To save memory, programmers in the 1970s and 1980s typically wrote programs that only
used two digits to identify a year. For example, if an invoice was posted on October 29,
1975, the programmer could just store the date as 10/29/75, rather than 10/29/1975. While
this may not seem like a big storage savings, for companies with millions of transactions
that needed to be stored and manipulated, it added up. These programmers never
imagined that software written in the 1970s would still be running major companies and
financial institutions in 1999. These old systems were known as legacy systems. Many
companies were faced with a choice: pay programmers millions of dollars to correct the
Y2K problem in their old, already outdated software—or invest in an ERP system that
would not only solve the Y2K problem, but potentially provide better management of
their business processes as well. Thus, the Y2K problem led to a dramatic increase in
business for ERP vendors in the late 1990s. However, the rapid growth of the 1990s was
followed by an ERP slump starting in 1999. By 1999, many companies were in the final
stages of either an ERP implementation or modification of their existing software. Many
companies that had not yet decided to move to a Y2K-compliant ERP system waited until
after the new millennium to upgrade their information systems.
By 2000, SAP AG had 22,000 employees in 50 countries and 10 million users at
30,000 installations around the world. By that time, SAP also had competition in the ERP
market, namely from Oracle and PeopleSoft.
PeopleSoft
PeopleSoft was founded by David Duffield, a former IBM employee who, like SAP’s
founders, faced opposition to his ideas from IBM management. PeopleSoft started out
offering software for human resources and payroll accounting, and it achieved
considerable success, even with companies that already were using SAP for accounting
and production. In fact, PeopleSoft’s success caused SAP to make significant modifications
to its Human Resources module. In 2003, PeopleSoft strengthened its offerings in the
supply chain area with its acquisition of ERP software vendor JD Edwards. Then, in late
2004, Oracle succeeded in its bid to take over PeopleSoft. Today, PeopleSoft, under
27
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Oracle, is a popular software choice for managing human resources and financial activities
at universities. Currently Oracle offers PeopleSoft’s ERP solution under the PeopleSoft
Enterprise Applications name; it offers JD Edwards ERP solutions as JD Edwards
EnterpriseOne and JD Edwards World.
Oracle
Oracle is now SAP’s biggest competitor. Oracle began in 1977 as Software Development
Laboratories (SDL). Its founders, Larry Ellison, Bob Miner, and Ed Oates, won a contract
from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to develop a system, called Oracle, to manage
large volumes of data and extract information quickly. Although the Oracle project was
canceled before a successful product was developed, the three founders of SDL saw the
commercial potential of a relational database system. In 1979, SDL became Relational
Software, Inc., and released its first commercial database product. The company changed
its name again, to Oracle, and in 1986 released the client-server Oracle relational
database. The company continued to improve its database product, and in 1988 released
Oracle Financials, a set of financial applications. The financial applications suite of
modules included Oracle Financials, Oracle Supply Chain Management, Oracle
Manufacturing, Oracle Project Systems, Oracle Human Resources, and Oracle Market
Management. Oracle Financials was the foundation for what would become Oracle’s ERP
product.
Much of Oracle’s recent growth in ERP applications has been through acquisition. In
addition to PeopleSoft and JD Edwards, in 2005 Oracle acquired Siebel, a major customer
relationship management (CRM) software company. (CRM is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 3.) In 2010, Oracle completed its acquisition of Sun Microsystems, a major
manufacturer of computer hardware and software that developed the Java software
development platform. According to Oracle CEO Larry Ellison, with this latest acquisition,
“Oracle will be the only company that can engineer an integrated system—applications to
disk—where all the pieces fit and work together so customers do not have to do it
themselves. Our customers benefit as their systems integration costs go down while
system performance, reliability, and security go up.”
In 2010, in an effort to consolidate its customer base on a single software platform,
Oracle released Fusion Applications, which is a software suite designed to give its
PeopleSoft, JD Edwards, and Siebel customers a modular and flexible upgrade path to a
single Oracle ERP solution.
The concepts of an Enterprise Resource Planning system are similar for the large ERP
vendors, such as SAP and Oracle, and for the many smaller vendors of ERP software.
Because of SAP’s leadership in the ERP industry, this textbook focuses primarily on SAP’s
ERP software products as an example of an Enterprise Resource Planning system. Keep in
mind that most other ERP software vendors provide similar functionality, with some
having strengths in certain areas.
SAP ERP
SAP ERP software (previous versions were known as R/3, and later, mySAP ERP) has
changed over the years, owing to product evolution—and for marketing purposes. The
latest versions of ERP systems by SAP and other companies allow all business areas to
access the same database, as shown in Figure 2-4, eliminating redundant data and
communications lags.
28
Chapter 2

Perhaps most importantly, an ERP system allows data to be entered once, and then used
throughout the organization. In information systems, errors most frequently occur where
human beings interact with the system. ERP systems ensure that data are entered only once,
where they are most likely to be accurate. For example, with access to real-time stock data, a
salesperson taking an order can confirm the availability of the desired material. When the
salesperson enters the sales order into the system, the order data are immediately available to
Supply Chain Management, so Manufacturing can update production plans, and Materials
Management can plan the delivery of the order. If the sales order data are entered correctly
by the salesperson, then Supply Chain Management personnel are working with the same,
correct data. The same sales data are also available to Accounting for invoice preparation.
Earlier in this chapter, you learned how software modules work. Figure 2-5 shows the
major functional modules in the current SAP ERP system, also known as SAP ECC 6.0
(Enterprise Central Component 6.0), and depicts how the modules provide integration.
The basic functions of each of the modules are as follows:
•
The Sales and Distribution (SD) module records sales orders and scheduled
deliveries. Information about the customer (pricing, address and shipping
instructions, billing details, and so on) is maintained and accessed from this
module.
•
The Materials Management (MM) module manages the acquisition of raw
materials from suppliers (purchasing) and the subsequent handling of raw
materials inventory, from storage to work-in-progress goods to shipping of
finished goods to the customer.
•
The Production Planning (PP) module maintains production information.
Here production is planned and scheduled, and actual production activities are
recorded.
Human
Resources
Marketing
and Sales
Accounting
and Finance
Supply Chain
Management
Central data
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 2-4
Data flow within an integrated information system
29
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

•
The Quality Management (QM) module plans and records quality control
activities, such as product inspections and material certifications.
•
The Plant Maintenance (PM) module manages maintenance resources and
planning for preventive maintenance of plant machinery in order to minimize
equipment breakdowns.
•
The Asset Management (AM) module helps the company manage fixed-asset
purchases (plant and machinery) and related depreciation.
•
The Human Resources (HR) module facilitates employee recruiting, hiring,
and training. This module also includes payroll and benefits.
•
The Project System (PS) module facilitates the planning for and control over
new research and development (R&D), construction, and marketing projects.
This module allows for costs to be collected against a project, and it is frequently
used to manage the implementation of the SAP ERP system. PS manages build-
to-order items, which are low-volume, highly complex products such as ships
and aircrafts.
Two financial modules, Financial Accounting (FI) and Controlling (CO), are shown in
Figure 2-5 as encompassing the modules described above. That is because nearly every
activity in the company has an impact on the financial position of the company:
FI
Financial
Accounting
CO
Controlling
Workﬂow
PP
Production
Planning
SD
Sales &
Distribution
MM
Materials
Management
QM
Quality
Management
PM
Plant
Maintenance
HR
Human
Resources
AM
Asset
Management
WF
PS
Project
System
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 2-5
Modules within the SAP ERP integrated information systems environment
30
Chapter 2

•
The Financial Accounting (FI) module records transactions in the general
ledger accounts. This module generates financial statements for external
reporting purposes.
•
The Controlling (CO) module serves internal management purposes,
assigning manufacturing costs to products and to cost centers so the
profitability of the company’s activities can be analyzed. The CO module
supports managerial decision making.
The Workflow (WF) module is not a module that automates a specific business
function. Rather, it is a set of tools that can be used to automate any of the activities in
SAP ERP. It can perform task-flow analysis and prompt employees (by email) if they need
to take action. The Workflow module works well for business processes that are not daily
activities but that occur frequently enough to be worth the effort to implement the
workflow module—such as preparing customer invoices.
In summary, ERP integrates business functional areas with one another. Before
ERP, each functional area operated independently, using its own information systems
and methods for recording transactions. ERP software also makes management
reporting and decision making faster and more uniform throughout an organization. In
addition, ERP promotes thinking about corporate goals, as opposed to focusing only on
the goals of a single department or functional area. When top management is queried
on the reasons for implementing ERP systems, the overriding answer is control. With
the capability to see integrated data on their entire company’s operation, managers
use ERP systems for the control they provide, allowing managers to set corporate goals
correctly.
SAP ERP Software Implementation
A truly integrated information system requires integrating all functional areas, but for
various reasons, not all companies that adopt SAP software use all of the SAP ERP
modules. For example, a company without factories wouldn’t select the manufacturing-
related modules. Another company might consider its Human Resources Department’s
operations to be so separate from its other operations that it would decide not integrate
its Human Resources functional area. And another company might believe that its
internally developed production and logistics software gives it a competitive advantage.
So it might implement the SAP ERP Financial Accounting and Human Resources
modules, and then integrate its internally developed production and logistics system into
the SAP ERP system.
Generally, a company’s level of data integration is highest when the company uses
one vendor to supply all its ERP modules. When a company uses modules from
different vendors, additional software must be created to get the modules to work
together. Frequently, companies integrate different systems using batch data transfer
processes that are performed periodically. In those cases, however, the company no
longer has accurate data available in real time across the enterprise. Thus, a company
must be sure the decision to use multiple vendors—or to maintain a legacy system—is
based on sound business analysis, not on a resistance to change. Software upgrades of
nonintegrated systems are made more problematic because further work must be
done to get software from different vendors to interact. SAP’s NetWeaver development
platform (discussed in Chapter 8) eases the integration of SAP ERP with other
software products.
31
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Any large software implementation is challenging—and ERP systems are no
exception. There are countless examples of large implementations failing, and it is easy
to understand why. Many different departments are involved, as are the many users of the
system, programmers, systems analysts, and other personnel. Without top management
commitment, large projects are doomed to fail. More implementation issues are discussed
in Chapter 7.
After a company chooses its major modules, it must make an incredible number of
decisions on how to configure the system. These configuration options allow the company
to customize the modules it has chosen to fit its needs. For example, in the Financial
Accounting (FI) module, a business might need to define limits on the dollar value of
business transactions that certain employees can process. This is an important
consideration in minimizing the risk of fraud and abuse, and is just one example of the
many decisions facing a company at the start of a major ERP implementation.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Tolerance Groups
In configuring the SAP system, a company can define tolerance groups, which are
specific ranges that define transaction limits. An example of a tolerance group is shown
in Figure 2-6. As part of the configuration process, a company can define any number
of tolerance groups with a range of limits, and can then assign employees to these
tolerance groups.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 2-6
A customization example: tolerance groups to set transaction limits
(continued)
32
Chapter 2

While SAP has defined the tolerance group methodology as its method for placing
limits on an employee, configuration allows a company the flexibility to further tailor
this methodology for other uses. Assume a sporting goods company places an order in
January for 1,000 life jackets. The company receives only 995 in the shipment from the
manufacturer, which arrives in March. This delivery, although it is short five life jackets,
is close enough to the original order that it is accepted as complete. The difference of
the five life jackets represents the tolerance. By defining the tolerance group to accept a
variance of a small percentage of the shipment, the company has determined that it is
not worth pursuing the five extra life jackets. Tolerance could indicate a shortage, as in
this example, or an overabundance in an order. Thus, an order of 1,005 life jackets
would also be within the tolerance. Tolerance groups should be defined and documented,
in part to deal with fraud issues. The sporting goods company should know the reason
for a short order: is it because the order is within the tolerance range, or is it because
a worker on the loading dock stole five life jackets?
Question:
1.
Can you think of other areas within a company that would need to have some
limits set on variances or payments? Why would it be beneficial to set those
tolerance groups?
Features of SAP ERP
Not only was SAP ERP the first software to deliver real-time ERP integration, it has other
features worthy of note. Its most significant characteristics are its suitability for large
companies, high cost, automation of data updates, and applicability of best practices—all
of which are described below.
The original SAP ERP system targeted very large companies. Prior to the development
of ERP systems, it was assumed that these giants could never have integrated systems
because of the sheer amount of computing power required to integrate them. Increased
computing speeds, however, meant that large companies in a variety of industries,
including manufacturing, gas and oil, airlines, and consulting, could have integrated
information systems.
Acquiring an SAP ERP software system is very expensive. In addition to the cost of the
software, many companies find they must buy new hardware to accommodate such
powerful programs. For a Fortune 500 company, software, hardware, and consulting
costs can easily exceed $100 million. Large companies can also spend $50 million to
$100 million when it is time to upgrade to a newer version of their ERP software. Full
implementation of all modules can take years. In fact, most companies view ERP
implementations as an ongoing process, not a one-off project. As implementations are
completed in one area of a company, other areas may begin an implementation or upgrade
a previous implementation.
The modular design of SAP ERP is based on business processes, such as sales order
handling, materials requirement handling, and employee recruiting. When data are
entered into the system, data in all related files in the central database are automatically
updated. No further human input is required to make the changes.
Before the development of SAP ERP, companies often sought vendors to write software to
fit their business processes. As SAP accumulated experience developing information systems,
33
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

however, the company began to develop models of how certain industries’ business processes
should be managed. Thus, SAP ERP’s design incorporates best practices for a wide variety of
processes. A best practice is the best, most efficient way of handling a certain business
process. If a company’s business practices do not follow one of the best practices incorporated
in the SAP ERP design, then the business must redesign its practices so it can use the
software. Although some customization is possible during implementation, many companies
find they must still change some of the ways they work to fit the software.
ERP FOR MIDSIZED AND SMALLER COMPANIES
By 1998, most of the Fortune 500 companies had already installed ERP systems, so ERP
vendors refocused their marketing efforts on midsized companies (those with fewer than
1,000 employees). Small and midsized companies represented a ripe, profitable market.
For example, in 2001, small and midsized companies in the United States increased their
IT expenditure by more than 4 percent over the previous year. To appeal to this new
market, SAP developed SAP Business All-in-One, a single package containing specific,
preconfigured bundles of SAP ERP tailored for particular industries, such as automotive,
banking, chemicals, and oil and gas. Because it is tailored to specific industries, SAP
Business All-in-One can be installed more quickly than the standard ERP product.
To address the needs of smaller companies, such as those with less than 500
employees, SAP purchased the ERP system of Israeli-based TopManage Financial Systems in
2002, and renamed this package SAP Business One. The capabilities of SAP Business One
have increased over the years through both internal development at SAP and the
acquisition of other software companies such as iLytix Systems AS, which added new
reporting capabilities to SAP Business One. In July 2011, SAP announced that SAP Business
One would be available in a new subscription-based, hosted offering through SAP partners.
In addition, SAP has developed its BusinessByDesign product, which is an ERP
product hosted by SAP and accessed through a Web browser. It is an example of the
software-as-a-service (SaaS) approach that eliminates the need for a company to buy and
maintain the software and hardware to run an ERP application. SaaS does not eliminate
the need to configure the software to manage a company’s processes or the need to train
users of the system, but it does reduce the need for IT support staff to operate the ERP
system. SaaS is discussed more fully in Chapter 8.
SAP and Oracle have significant competition for small-business customers from a
number of smaller ERP software companies such as Sage Business Solutions, Exact, Infor,
and Epicor. In 2000, software giant Microsoft acquired Great Plains, a provider of ERP
software, as an entry into the small-business ERP market. Microsoft currently has five ERP
products offered under the Microsoft Dynamics label.
Responses of the Software to the Changing Market
In the mid-1990s, many companies complained about the difficulty of implementing the
SAP R/3 system. SAP faced a canceled implementation by Dell Computers, a lengthy
implementation at Owens Corning, and a lawsuit by the now-defunct FoxMeyer drug
company. Cadbury experienced a well-publicized surplus of chocolate bars at the end of
2005, due, in part, to a troubled SAP ERP implementation. In response to these and other
implementation challenges, SAP developed the Accelerated SAP (ASAP) implementation
34
Chapter 2

methodology, a framework for implementing systems, to ease the implementation process.
SAP has continued developing implementation methodology; the latest version, Solution
Manager, is designed to greatly speed the implementation process.
SAP continues to extend the capabilities of SAP ERP with additional, separate
products that run on separate hardware and that extract data from the SAP ERP
system. In many cases, these products provide more flexible and powerful versions of
tools available in the SAP ERP system. SAP’s Business Warehouse (BW) product is an
example of one such solution. Customers needing more capability and flexibility to
analyze data beyond the standard tools and reports in the SD, PP, and FI modules can
add Business Warehouse (BW). The BW software runs on a separate server and lets the
user define unique reporting and analysis methods and integrate information from
other systems.
The tools used to analyze data in the BW system are known as business intelligence (BI).
As an example of the use of the business intelligence that can be gained through using
SAP’s Business Warehouse module, SAP has recently announced its in-memory data
analysis tool, SAP HANA (High-performance ANalytical Appliance), a technology which
will likely revolutionize Business Intelligence. Rather than storing data on hard disk drives,
SAP’s HANA system stores data in memory for dramatically quicker access. SAP HANA
will allow companies to analyze business operations and large volumes of transactional and
analytical data in real time.
The SAP ERP system provides some tools to manage customer interactions and
analyze the success of promotional campaigns, but SAP also sells a separate application
called Customer Relationship Management (CRM), which has extended customer service
capabilities. SAP’s CRM product is designed to compete with CRM systems from
competitors, such as Oracle’s Siebel CRM application.
SAP addressed the issue of Internet-based data exchange with its NetWeaver
integration platform, which provides a unified means to connect SAP systems to other
systems and to the Internet.
Like all technology, ERP software and related products are constantly changing. Thus,
the challenge for a company is not only to evaluate an ERP vendor’s current product
offerings, but also to assess its development strategies and product plans.
CHOOSING CONSULTANTS AND VENDORS
Because ERP software packages are so large and complex, one person cannot fully
understand a single ERP system; it is also impossible for an individual to adequately
compare various systems. So, before choosing a software vendor, most companies study
their needs and then hire an external team of software consultants to help choose the
right software vendor(s) and the best approach to implementing ERP. Working as a team
with the customer, the consultants apply their expertise to selecting an ERP vendor
(or vendors) that will best meet their customer’s needs.
After recommending a vendor, the consultants will typically recommend the software
modules best suited to the company’s operations, along with the configurations within
those modules that are most appropriate. This preplanning should involve not only the
consultants and a company’s IT department, but the management of all functional
business areas as well.
35
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

THE SIGNIFICANCE AND BENEFITS OF ERP
SOFTWARE AND SYSTEMS
The significance of ERP lies in its many benefits. Recall that integrated information
systems can lead to more efficient business processes that cost less than those in
unintegrated systems. In addition, ERP systems offer the following benefits:
•
ERP allows easier global integration. Barriers of currency exchange rates,
language, and culture can be bridged automatically, so data can be integrated
across international borders.
•
ERP integrates people and data while eliminating the need to update and
repair many separate computer systems. For example, at one point, Boeing
had 450 data systems that fed data into its production process; the company
now has a single system for recording production data.
•
ERP allows management to actually manage operations, not just monitor
them. For example, without ERP, getting an answer to “How are we doing?”
requires getting data from each business unit and then analyzing that data for
a comprehensive, integrated picture. The ERP system already has all the
data, allowing the manager to focus on improving processes. This focus
enhances management of the company as a whole, and makes the
organization more adaptable when change is required.
An ERP system can dramatically reduce costs and improve operational efficiency. For
example, EZ-FLO International, Inc., a family-run plumbing products manufacturer and
distributor, had been experiencing double-digit growth and needed a scalable business
platform to support its global growth. The company selected SAP Business All-in-One
customized for wholesale distribution. As a result of the integrated process capabilities,
EZ-FLO has been able to greatly improve its inventory management processes and has
eliminated its annual inventory count, which used to take 100 employees two days to complete.
In addition, the company has reduced manufacturing lead times in its domestic plants by two
weeks. These process improvements led to improved customer service, and a 20 percent
increase in the number of new customers—with a 12 percent growth in sales per customer.
Welch Foods, Inc., is the processing and marketing subsidiary of the National Grape
Cooperative, an organization of 1,200 U.S. and Canadian grape growers. In 2004, Welch’s
decided to implement Oracle’s E-Business Suite to make better decisions regarding product
mix, production, and marketing. For Welch’s, a key advantage of the ERP system is that it
provides a “single source of truth” on production costs and on customer and product
profitability, allowing Welch’s management team to make better business decisions.
QUESTIONS ABOUT ERP
How Much Does an ERP System Cost?
The total cost of an ERP system implementation includes several factors, including the
following:
•
The scale of the ERP software, which corresponds to the size of the company
it serves
•
The need for new hardware capable of running complex ERP software
•
Consultants’ and analysts’ fees
36
Chapter 2

•
Length of time required for implementation (which causes disruption of business)
•
Training (which costs both time and money)
A large company, one with well over 1,000 employees, will likely spend $100 million
to $500 million for an ERP system with operations involving multiple countries,
currencies, languages, and tax laws. Such an installation might cost as much as $30
million in software license fees, $200 million in consulting fees, additional millions to
purchase new hardware, and even more millions to train managers and employees—and
full implementation of the new system could take four to six years.
A midsized company (one with fewer than 1,000 employees) might spend $10 million
to $20 million in total implementation costs and have its ERP system up and running in
about two years.
A smaller company, one with less than $50 million in annual revenue, could expect to
pay about $300,000 for an ERP implementation, and one with revenue of $100–250 million
could spend around $1.4 million. For these smaller companies, implementations usually
take about 10 months.
Should Every Business Buy an ERP Package?
ERP packages imply, by their design, a certain way of doing business, and they require
users to follow that way of doing business. For a particular business, some of its
operations—or certain segments of its operations—might not be a good match with the
constraints inherent in ERP. Therefore, it is imperative for a business to analyze its own
business strategy, organization, culture, and operation before choosing an ERP approach.
A 1998 article in the Harvard Business Review provides examples that show the
value of planning before trying to implement an ERP system: “Applied Materials gave up
on its system when it found itself overwhelmed by the organization changes involved. Dow
Chemical spent seven years and close to half a billion dollars implementing a mainframe-
based enterprise system; now it has decided to start over again on a client-server version.”
In another example, Kmart in 2002 wrote off $130 million because of a failed ERP supply
chain project. At the time, Kmart was not happy with its existing supply chain software,
and it attempted to implement another product too quickly.
For years, the giant U.S. retailer Walmart chose not to purchase an ERP system, but
rather to write all its software in-house. Walmart’s philosophy was that the global strategic
business process should drive the technology. The company’s IT personnel were
encouraged to consider the merchandising aspect of a process first and foremost, and then
let the technology follow. However, in 2007, Walmart changed its course and decided to
implement SAP Financials. The CIO of Walmart is reported to have said that
implementing SAP’s financial package would enable the company to grow in many
countries, including China.
ERP systems are popping up in some unlikely industries. The government of Singapore is
implementing an ERP project that will link 20 different healthcare providers together under
one system, which is estimated to be 20 percent more efficient and will eliminate a
tremendous amount of duplicate information. Along with the normal modules that an ERP
system contains, such as financials and human resource management, this enterprise
healthcare system will include electronic medical records and clinical management modules.
Sometimes, a company is not ready for ERP. In many cases, ERP implementation
difficulties arise when management does not fully understand its current business
processes and cannot make implementation decisions in a timely manner. An advantage of
37
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

an ERP system is that it can reduce costs by streamlining business processes. If a company
is not prepared to change its business processes to make them more efficient, then it will
find itself with a large bill for software and consulting fees, with no improvement in
organizational performance.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Sustainability and ERP
ERP systems are helping companies track their energy consumption. SAP and Walmart
are not only teaming up for the implementation of the retail giant’s financial software,
but they are also promoting a unified front on sustainability—focusing on reducing
pollution while increasing profits—through the use of ERP software. Many SAP
customers have cut energy usage; for example, 7-Eleven reduced its cooling energy usage
by 12 percent, Dannon cut its fuel costs by 22 percent with better management of its
transportation system, and Kendall-Jackson wine makers cut their lighting bill by
40 percent—all through the use of enhanced information from their ERP system.
Companies can use the software to track and report on their energy consumption;
however, in order to make changes, a company must determine the baseline of its energy
consumption. For instance, Walmart was surprised to find that only 8 percent of its carbon
footprint was under the direct control of the company, the remaining 92 percent was in the
company’s supply chain. Since 85 percent of Walmart’s suppliers run SAP, Walmart saw an
opportunity to encourage energy savings on the part of the companies that supply the
Walmart stores. SAP sustainability software application allows Walmart and its suppliers to
track their energy usage, emissions, and consumption of other natural resources.
Question:
1.
How important is sustainability to a company’s bottom line? How about it
its image?
Is ERP Software Inflexible?
Although many people claim that ERP systems (especially the SAP ERP system) are
rigid, SAP ERP does offer numerous configuration options that help businesses customize
the software to fit their unique needs. In addition, programmers can write specific
routines for special applications in SAP’s internal programming language, called
Advanced Business Application Programming (ABAP). The integration platform,
NetWeaver, offers further flexibility in adding both SAP and non-SAP components to a
company’s IT infrastructure. Companies need to be careful about how much custom
programming they include in their implementations, or they could find they have simply
re-created their existing information systems in a new software package instead of
gaining the benefits of improved, integrated business processes. In its implementation of
PeopleSoft, FedEx Corporation installed the systems for Financial and Human Resources
functions with little or no modification.
Once an ERP system is in place, trying to reconfigure it while retaining data integrity
is expensive and time consuming. That is why thorough pre-implementation planning is so
38
Chapter 2

important. It is much easier to customize an ERP program during system configuration,
before any data have been stored.
What Return Can a Company Expect from Its ERP Investment?
The financial benefits provided by an ERP system can be difficult to calculate because
sometimes ERP increases revenue and decreases expenses in ways that are difficult to
measure. In addition, some changes take place over such a long period of time that they are
difficult to track. Finally, the old information system may not be able to provide good data on
the performance of the company before the ERP implementation, making comparison difficult.
Still, the return on an ERP investment can be measured and interpreted in many ways:
•
Because ERP eliminates redundant effort and duplicated data, it can
generate savings in operations expense. And because an ERP system can
help a company produce goods and services more quickly, more sales can be
generated every month.
•
In some instances, a company that does not implement an ERP system might
be forced out of business by competitors that have an ERP system—how do
you calculate the monetary advantage of remaining in business?
•
A smoothly running ERP system can save a company’s personnel, suppliers,
distributors, and customers much frustration—a benefit that is real, but
difficult to quantify.
•
Because both cost savings and increased revenue occur over many years, it is
difficult to put an exact dollar figure to the amount accrued from the original
ERP investment.
•
Because ERP implementations take time, there may be other business factors
affecting the company’s costs and profitability, making it difficult to isolate
the impact of the ERP system alone.
•
ERP systems provide real-time data, allowing companies to improve external
customer communications, which can improve customer relationships and
increase sales.
How Long Does It Take to See a Return on an ERP Investment?
A return on investment (ROI) is an assessment of an investment project’s value, calculated by
dividing the value of the project’s benefits by the project’s costs. An ERP system’s ROI can be
difficult to calculate because of the many intangible costs and benefits previously mentioned.
Some companies do not even try to make the calculation, on the grounds that the package is
as necessary as having electricity (which is not justified as an investment project). Companies
that do make the ROI calculation have seen widely varying results. Some ERP consulting
firms refuse to do ERP implementations unless their client company performs an ROI.
Peerstone Research reported on over 200 companies using SAP or Oracle ERP systems and
found that 38 percent of survey respondents do not perform formal ROI evaluations.
In the Peerstone Research study, 63 percent of companies that did perform the
calculation reported a positive ROI for ERP. Manufacturing firms are more likely to see a
positive ROI than government or educational organizations. However, most companies
reported that nonfinancial goals were the primary motivation for their ERP installations.
Seventy-one percent of those companies surveyed said that the goal behind the ERP
installation was improved management vision. Although Nestlé USA had problems with its
ERP implementation, it estimated a cost savings of $325 million, after spending six years
and over $200 million on the implementation.
39
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Toro, a wholesale lawnmower manufacturer, spent $25 million and four years to
implement an ERP system. At first, ROI was difficult for Toro to quantify. Then, the
emergence of an expanded customer base of national retailers, such as Sears and Home
Depot, made it easier to quantify benefits. With this larger pool of customers, Toro’s ERP
system allowed it to save $10 million in inventory costs annually—the result of better
production, warehousing, and distribution methods.
A recent survey of small and midsized companies showed that only 48 percent
always do an ROI evaluation, and only 25 percent always repeat the calculation after
implementation. These small and midsized business owners feel they just need an ERP to
support their business, even if the ROI calculation is not performed.
Why Do Some Companies Have More Success with ERP Than Others?
Early ERP implementation reports indicated that only a small percentage of
companies experienced a smooth rollout of their new ERP systems and immediately
began receiving the benefits they anticipated. However, it is important to put such
reports into perspective. All kinds of software implementations can suffer from delays,
cost overruns, and performance problems—not just ERP projects. Such delays have
been a major problem for the IS industry since the early days of business computing.
Nevertheless, it is worth thinking specifically about why ERP installation problems
can occur.
You can find numerous cases of implementation woes in the news. W. L. Gore, the
maker of GoreTex fabric, had problems implementing its PeopleSoft system for personnel,
payroll, and benefits. The manufacturer sued PeopleSoft, Deloitte & Touche LLP, and
Deloitte Consulting for incompetence. W. L. Gore blamed the consultants for not
understanding the system and leaving its Personnel department in a mess. PeopleSoft
consultants were brought in to resolve the problems after implementation, but the fix cost
W. L. Gore additional hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Hershey Foods (now The Hershey Company) had a rough rollout of its ERP system in
1999, due to its use of what experts call the “Big Bang” approach to implementation, in
which huge pieces of the system are implemented all at once. Companies rarely use this
approach because it is so risky. Hershey’s order-processing and shipping departments had
glitches that were being fixed as late as September. Because of that, Hershey lost a large
share of the Halloween candy market that year.
Usually, a bumpy rollout and low ROI are caused by people problems and misguided
expectations, not computer malfunctions:
•
Some executives blindly hope that new software will cure fundamental
business problems that are not curable by any software. The root of a
problem may lie in flawed core business processes. Unless the company
changes its business processes, it will just be computerizing an ineffective
way of doing business.
•
Some executives and IT managers don’t take enough time for a proper
analysis during the planning and implementation phase.
•
Some executives and IT managers skimp on employee education and training.
•
Some companies do not place the ownership or accountability for the
implementation project on the personnel who will operate the system. This
lack of ownership can lead to a situation in which the implementation
becomes an IT project rather than a company-wide project.
40
Chapter 2

•
Unless a large project such as an ERP installation is promoted from the top
down, it is doomed to fail; top executives must be behind a project 100
percent if it is going to be successful.
•
A recent academic study attempting to identify the critical success factors of
ERP implementations showed that a good project manager was critical and
central to success of a project. In addition, training was crucial—along with a
project champion, that is, someone who might not be in the CEO role but
who brings enthusiasm and leadership to a project.
•
ERP implementation brings a tremendous amount of change for users of the
system. Managers need to effectively manage that change in order to ensure a
smooth implementation.
Many ERP implementation experts emphasize the importance of proper education
and training for both employees and managers. Most people will naturally resist changing
the way they do their jobs. Many analysts have noted that active top management
support is crucial for successful acceptance and implementation of such company-wide
changes.
Some companies willingly part with funds for software and new hardware, but they do
not properly budget for employee training. ERP software is complex and can be
intimidating at first. This fact alone supports the case for adequate training. Gartner
Research recommends allocating 17 percent of a project’s budget to training. Those
companies spending less than 13 percent on training are three times more likely to have
problems with their ERP implementations. The cost includes training employees on how to
use the software to do their job, employees’ nonproductive downtime during training,
and—very importantly—educating employees about how the data they control affect the
entire business operation.
Nestlé learned many lessons from its implementation of an ERP system. Its six-year,
$210 million project was initially headed for failure because Nestlé didn’t include on the
implementation team any employees from the operating groups affected. Employees left
the company, morale was down, and help desk calls were up. After three years, the ERP
implementation was temporarily stopped. Nestlé USA’s vice president and CIO at that
time, Jeri Dunn, learned that major software implementation projects are not really about
the software, rather they are about change management. “When you move to SAP, you are
changing the way people work…. You are challenging their principles, their beliefs, and
the way they have done things for many, many years,” said Dunn. After addressing the
initial problems, Nestlé ultimately reaped benefits from its ERP installation.
For many companies, it takes years before they can take full advantage of the wide
variety of capabilities of their ERP systems. Most ERP installations do generate returns,
and news coverage now focuses on how companies gain value from their existing systems
or are upgrading and adding functionality to their existing ERP systems. Del Monte Foods
needed to meet Walmart’s and Target’s requirements for package tracking using radio
frequency identification devices (RFIDs), so approximately a year after its ERP system
installation, the company tied its RFID applications into its existing SAP platform and is
working to make its supply chain more efficient.
The Continuing Evolution of ERP
Understanding the social and business implications of new technologies is not easy.
Howard H. Aiken, the pioneering computer engineer behind the first large-scale digital
41
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

computer, the Harvard Mark I, predicted in 1947 that only six electronic digital
computers would be needed to satisfy the computing needs of the entire United States.
Hewlett-Packard passed up the opportunity to market the computer created by Steve
Wozniak that became the Apple I. And Microsoft founder Bill Gates did not appreciate
the importance of the Internet until 1995, by which time Netscape controlled the bulk of
the Internet browser market. (Gates, however, did dramatically reshape Microsoft around
an Internet strategy by the late 1990s. Its Internet Explorer browser is now more
commonly used than any other.) Thus, even people who are most knowledgeable about a
new technology do not always fully understand its capabilities or how it will change
business and society.
ERP systems have been in common use only since the mid-1990s. As this young
technology continues to mature, ERP vendors are working to solve the adaptability
problems that plague customers. The growth in the computing power of mobile devices
such as smartphones and tablets will create more opportunities for ERP companies to
develop applications that provide customers with instantaneous data while improving
their efficiency.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
ERP Allows for Bakery Chain Expansion
Au Bon Pain, the bakery and café chain based in Boston, operates 200 outlets in the
United States and Asia. Over the last three years, Health magazine has named Au Bon
Pain one of America’s top five healthiest fast-food restaurant chains. The company had
an interest in expanding, and Tim Oliveri, the company’s chief financial officer, wanted
Au Bon Pain to be able to react to market changes more rapidly while also reducing its costs.
The company’s existing legacy information systems were holding it back, but the company’s
decision to implement an SAP ERP system is now helping it achieve these goals.
The new ERP system replaced disparate systems, some of which were in paper
format. This integrated enterprise system brings the storefront to the back office through
a number of different module implementations. With the single system, the company is
able to reduce its financial reporting cycle from weeks to days, and the system allows
better management of Au Bon Pain’s workforce through a Web-based portal. In addition,
the new system facilitates greater compliance with financial regulations and better sales
management, along with the electronic purchasing of all raw materials.
One impetus for installing this ERP system was for management to be able to digest
information on market conditions, and react quickly to open new stores or renovate
existing stores. For example, cafés in New York City have recently undergone major
renovations, resulting in double-digit sales increases. More cafes are planned to
open soon.
Question:
1.
Assume you own and run a small local coffee shop. You do all your ordering of
ingredients for your coffee shop by hand—using pencil, paper, mail, and
telephone. All your sales are recorded by hand in a book, and transcribed for
filing of small-business taxes. How could a small ERP system help your
business become more efficient? What would an ERP system allow you to do?
42
Chapter 2

A N O T H E R
L O O K
Buyer Beware: Check that Contract
The history of the ERP software industry is fraught with failed implementations. One of the
latest lawsuits is by Montclair State University in New Jersey, which is suing Oracle for a
failed implementation. Originally, the school contracted with Oracle (PeopleSoft) to buy an
ERP package for $4.3 million, with an additional $15.75 million for the implementation.
The following year, after some delays, Oracle sought an additional $8 million to complete the
project. Montclair University refused the additional fee, and Oracle left the project. Now
Montclair is estimating that it will take it a further $20 million to complete the
implementation.
Experts agree that lawsuits such as these are not productive; no one really wins. It is
essential that customers pay close inspection to the legal contract drawn up between
themselves and the software vendor. ERP software is extremely complex, and it is often
difficult to ask the right questions when negotiating the contracts. Most importantly, the
customer should understand its own business processes and be able to relay them to the
software vendor. The customer must also accept that their business processes will need
to change to fit the software. To top it off, the pricing of many ERP packages is very
complex, with a variety of different licensing models to choose from. The bottom line is:
Understand the contract you are signing.
Question:
1.
Research the topic of ERP contracts on the Internet. How could ERP vendors
make it easier for customers to understand their licensing models? What
could customers do to ensure a contract contains all possible eventualities?
43
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Chapter Summary
•
Several developments in business and technology allowed ERP systems to evolve to their
current form:
•
The speed and power of computing hardware increased exponentially, while cost and
size decreased.
•
Early client-server architecture provided the conceptual framework for multiple users
sharing common data.
•
Increasingly sophisticated software facilitated integration, especially in two areas:
Accounting and Finance and material requirements planning.
•
As businesses grew in size, and the business environment became more complex and
competitive, business managers began to demand more efficient and competitive
information systems.
•
SAP AG produced a complex, modular ERP program called R/3. The software could
integrate a company’s entire business by using a common database that linked all
operations, allowing real-time data sharing and streamlined operations.
•
SAP R/3, now called SAP ERP, is modular software offering modules for Sales and
Distribution, Materials Management, Production Planning, Quality Management, and
other areas.
•
ERP software is expensive to purchase and time consuming to implement, and it
requires significant employee training—but the payoffs can be spectacular. For some
companies, however, the ROI may not be immediate or even calculable.
•
Experts anticipate that ERP’s future focus will be on applications for mobile devices
and providing instant access to large volumes of data.
Key Terms
Advanced Business Application
Programming (ABAP)
Asset Management (AM) module
best practice
client-server architecture
Controlling (CO) module
database management system (DBMS)
electronic data interchange (EDI)
Financial Accounting (FI) module
Human Resources (HR) module
legacy system
material requirements planning (MRP)
Materials Management (MM) module
module
open architecture
Plant Maintenance (PM) module
Production Planning (PP) module
Project System (PS) module
Quality Management (QM) module
R/3
return on investment (ROI)
Sales and Distribution (SD) module
SAP ERP
Scalability
silo
tolerance group
Workflow (WF) module
44
Chapter 2

Exercises
1.
Moore’s Law is said to be more of a trend, rather than a representation of the actual
number of transistors on a silicon chip. What is the current status of Moore’s Law? If it is
not exactly holding true, what does this mean for the future of the computing industry?
2.
What are the main characteristics of an ERP system? What are some newly developed
features of ERP systems?
3.
Imagine that your uncle owns and operates a construction company. The company owns a
number of very expensive pieces of machinery, such as backhoes, for building houses and
apartment buildings. Up until now, your aunt has “taken care of the books” by keeping
financial records by hand. However, business is picking up, and she has gotten far behind
in filing taxes, paying bills, and so on. Write a persuasive essay to your uncle about why he
needs an ERP system and how it would help with not only the burden of billing, payroll, and
filing taxes, but also with keeping track of the company’s expensive machinery. Use the
Internet for research.
4.
Much has been written in the news media about ERP systems, both in print and online.
Using library resources or the Internet, report on one company’s positive experience with
implementing an ERP system, and on another company’s disappointing experience.
5.
Some of examples shown in this chapter are from a traditional ERP system, SAP. Consider
some smaller ERP systems. Look on the Internet at Business One by SAP, and an
additional smaller system, such as Pronto software or Exact software. Compare two of the
systems, and list the similarities between the module-type offerings. Are there any clear
differences between them?
6.
Visit CIO magazine’s Web site, www.cio.com, and conduct a search on ERP. Based on the
search results, choose an example of an ERP implementation, and write a memo to your
instructor describing the implementation. Discuss ways in which you think the company
adopting the ERP system could have improved its implementation.
7.
[Challenge Exercise] From your university’s electronic library, obtain a copy of the article,
“Management Based Critical Success Factors in the Implementation of Enterprise Resource
Planning Systems,” by Joseph Bradley (International Journal of Accounting Information
Systems, Volume 9, no. 3, pages 175-200, September 2008). Write a three-page paper on
the findings of this study concerning factors critical to the success of an ERP
implementation. Choose five factors you think are most important, and focus your writing on
those five.
For Further Study and Research
Allesch, Adolf. “Thriving or Surviving? How to Take Your SAP NetWeaver Pulse.” insiderProfiles
3, no. 3 (Summer 2007). http://insiderprofiles.wispubs.com/article.aspx?iArticleId=4672.
Au Bon Pain. “Au Bon Pain Launches Cafe Remodel Program as Part of National Expansion
Strategy; Transforms New York City Cafes.” PR Newswire, June 8, 2011. www.aubonpain.
com/releases/Au%20Bon%20Pain%20Launches%20Cafe%20Remodel%20Program.pdf.
Barlas, Demir. “Wal-Mart’s Confused SAP Strategy.” IT Knowledge Exchange, May 27 2008.
http://itknowledgeexchange.techtarget.com/sap-watch/wal-marts-confused-sap-strategy.
45
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Blau, John. “SAP Arrives at Home Depot.” InfoWorld, June 1, 2005. www.infoworld.com/article/
05/06/01/HNsaphomedepot_1.html?SUPPLY%20CHAIN%20MANAGEMENT.
Blau, John. “Whirlpool Whirls into Web Services.” InfoWorld, May 23, 2006. www.infoworld.com/
article/06/05/23/78591_HNwhirlpoolwebservices_1.html?WEB%20SERVICES%
20DEVELOPMENT.
Bradley, Joseph. “Management-Based Critical Success Factors in the Implementation of
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems.” International Journal of Accounting Information
Systems 9, no. 3 (September 2008): 175–200.
Burleson, Donald. “Four Factors that Shape the Cost of ERP.” TechRepublic, August 16, 2001.
http://search.techrepublic.com.com/index.php?q=Four+factors+that+shape+the+cost+of+
ERP&t=11&go=Search.
Business Wire. “U.S. Small and Midsize Business IT Spending Continues to Bounce Back from
Recession’s Low Point, According to IDC.” June 1, 2011. www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20110601005379/en/U.S.-Small-Midsize-Business-Spending-Continues-Bounce.
Chemical Week. “Connecting the Chemical Industry.” September 25, 2002.
Davenport, Thomas H. “Putting the Enterprise into the Enterprise System.” Harvard Business
Review, (July–August 1998): 121–31.
Dignan, Larry. “Oracle Officially Launches its Fusion Apps.” CNET, September 20, 2010.
http://news.cnet.com/8301-1001_3-20016932-92.html.
Few, Stephen. “The Information Cannot Speak for Itself.” IntelligentEnterprise.com, July 10,
2004. www.intelligententerprise.com/showArticle.jhtml;jsessionid=0VWVEUEXBJOASQS
NDLPCKH0CJUNN2JVN?articleID=22102226.
Foroohar, Rana. “Software Savior?” Newsweek, January 29, 2007. www.thedailybeast.com/
newsweek/2007/01/28/software-savior.html.
Forbes. “SAP Sees Orders From Mid-Sized Businesses Climbing to 45% From 30% by 2010.”
April 13, 2007. www.forbes.com/afxnewslimited/feeds/afx/2007/04/13/afx3609185.html.
Greenbaum, Joshua. “The Ecosystem Advantage: It’s Not Nice to Fool Mother Nature.”
insiderProfiles 3, no. 3 (Summer 2007). http://insiderprofiles.wispubs.com/article.aspx?
iArticleId=4680.
Hammer, Michael, and James Champy. Reengineering the Corporation. New York: Harper
Business, 1993.
Hamerman, Paul, and R. Wang. “ERP: Still a Challenge After All These Years.”
InformationWeek, July 11, 2005. www.informationweek.com/showArticle.jhtml?
articleID=165600651.
Henschen, Doug. “Wal-Mart, SAP Set Sights on Sustainability.” InformationWeek, January 12,
2010. www.informationweek.com/news/global-cio/roi/222301155.
Ho, Victoria. “One ERP for S’pore Non-Profit Healthcare.” ZDNet Asia, November 29, 2007.
www.pulsesync.com/news/MediaCoverage/ZDNet%20IngoT%20Coverage_30112007.pdf.
Kanaracus, Chris. “SAP Business One Gets New Hosted, Subscription Model.” InfoWorld, July
5, 2011. www.infoworld.com/d/applications/sap-business-one-gets-new-hosted-subscription-
model-102
Kanaracus, Chris. “SAP’s HANA In-Memory Analytics Engine Now Available.” Computerworld,
June 20, 2011. www.computerworld.com/s/article/9217779/SAP_s_HANA_in_memory_
analytics_engine_now_available.
Kirkpatrick, David. “The E-Ware War.” Fortune, December 7, 1998, 102–112.
Kumar, Kuldeep, and Jos van Hillegersberg. “ERP Experiences and Evolution.” Communications
of the ACM 43, no. 4 (April 2000): 23–26.
46
Chapter 2

MacDonald, Elizabeth. “W. L. Gore Alleges PeopleSoft, Deloitte Botched a Costly Software
Installation.” Wall Street Journal, November 2, 1999.
McCue, Andy. “Too Much Candy: IT Glitch Costs Cadbury.” BusinessWeek, June 8, 2006.
www.businessweek.com/globalbiz/content/jun2006/gb20060608_252289.htm?chan=search.
Meissner, Gerd. SAP: Inside the Secret Software Power. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Montgomery, Nigel. “European Retailers Divided Over ERP Versus Best of Breed.” Tech
Update, April 18, 2003. http://techupdate.zdnet.com/techupdate/stories/main/0%2C14179%
2C2913405%2C00.html.
Nadeau, Michael. “5 Keys to McKesson’s Rapid BI Transformation.” SAP NetWeaver Magazine 1,
2005. www.sap.com/belux/platform/netweaver/pdf/CS_NW_Magazine_McKesson.pdf.
Nelson, Emily, and Evan Ramstad. “Hershey’s Biggest Dud Is Its New Computer System.”
Wall Street Journal, November 4, 1999.
Nolan, Sean. “By the Numbers: November 2003.” Baseline.com, November 1, 2003.
www.baselinemag.com/article2/0,1540,1374440,00.asp.
Oracle. “Oracle Customer Snapshot, Welch Foods Inc.” 2010. www.oracle.com/us/corporate/
customers/welch-foods-demantra-snapshot-150658.pdf.
Oracle. “Press Release: Oracle Completes Acquisition of Sun.” January 27, 2010. www.oracle.
com/us/corporate/press/044428.
Oracle, “Press Release: Oracle Buys Sun.” April 20, 2009. www.oracle.com/us/corporate/press/
018363.
Osterland, Andrew. “Blaming ERP.” CFO.com, January 1, 2000. www.cfo.com/article.cfm/
2987370.
Peerstone Research. “ERP ROI: Myth and Reality.” InformationWeek, March 29, 2004.
www.informationweek.com/reports/showReport.jhtml;jsessionid=5WZPDA3FLJXX0QSN
DLQSKHSCJUNN2JVN?articleID=18600087&_requestid=16698.
PeopleSoft. “PeopleSoft Case Studies.” 2002. www.peoplesoft-hp.com/tools/successstories/%
5Bfiles%5D/Enterprise/Automotive/Toyota%20Motor%20Manufacturing%20NA%20Drives%
20Real-Time%20Productivity%20with%20PeopleSoft%208%20HRMS%20and%
20Enterprise%20Portal.pdf.
Preston, Rob, “Down to Business: No One Wins an ERP Lawsuit.” InformationWeek, June 3,
2011. www.informationweek.com/news/global-cio/interviews/229900060?queryText=erp.
Richard, Kenneth J. “When It Comes to Enterprise Software, It’s the Contract Stupid.”
InformationWeek, March 26, 2011. www.informationweek.com/news/global-cio/interviews/
229400394?pgno=1.
SAP AG. “SAP 2011 Curriculum Congress: Run Better with SAP University Alliances.” March 11,
2011. www.sdn.sap.com/irj/uac/index?rid=/webcontent/uuid/30262b82-87d8-2d10-fa86-
86ca8a9751dc.
SAP AG. “EZ-Flo International: Growing Family-Run Business Goes Global With SAP® Software.”
2008.
SAP AG. “Retail Café Chain Au Bon Pain Takes Fresh Approach with SAP.” September 19,
2006. www.sap.com/corporate-en/press.epx?pressid=6747.
SAP AG. “Welcome to the 24th Annual SAP Annual General Meeting of Shareholders.” May 25,
2011. www.sap.com/corporate-en/investors/governance/meetings/pdf/2011-05-25-
ShareholderMeeting-e-presentation.pdf.
Schneider, Polly. “Human Touch Sorely Needed in ERP.” CIO, March 2, 1999. www.cnn.com/
TECH/computing/9903/02/erpeople.ent.idg/index.html.
47
The Development of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems

Slater, Derek. “How to Choose the Right ERP Software Package.” CNN, February 16, 1999.
www.cnn.com/TECH/computing/9902/16/erppkg.ent.idg/index.html.
Sliwa, Carol. “IT Difficulties Help Take Kmart Down.” Computerworld, January 28, 2002.
www.computerworld.com/s/article/67749/IT_difficulties_help_take_Kmart_down.
Stein, Tom. “Making ERP Add Up.” InformationWeek, May 24, 1999. www.informationweek.com/
735/erp.htm.
Steinert-Threlkeld, Tom. “Home Depot Hopes SAP Can Help Boost Sales.” Baseline, May 18,
2005. www.baselinemag.com/article2/0,1397,1817341,00.asp.
Sullivan, Laurie. “ERPzilla.” InformationWeek, July 11, 2005. www.informationweek.com/story/
showArticle.jhtml?articleID=165700832.
van Everdingen, Yvonne, Jos van Hillegersberg, and Eric Waarts. “ERP Adoption by European
Midsize Companies.” Communications of the ACM 43, no. 4 (April 2000): 27–31.
Wailgum, Thomas. “SMB ERP Projects: Don’t Forget the ROI.” CIO, April 01, 2009. www.cio.
com/article/487794/SMB_ERP_Projects_Don_t_Forget_the_ROI, cio.com.
Wailgum, Thomas. “University ERP: Big Mess on Campus.” CIO, May 1, 2005. www.cio.com/
article/107706/University_ERP_Big_Mess_on_Campus.
Westervelt, Robert. “U.S. Software Sales Boost SAP earnings, Says CEO.” SearchSAP.com,
April 22, 2004. http://searchsap.techtarget.com/originalContent/0,289142,
sid21_gci961032,00.html.
Wheatley, Malcolm. “ERP Training Stinks.” CIO, June 1, 2000. www.cio.com/article/148900/
ERP_Training_Stinks.
White, Joseph B., Don Clark, and Silvia Ascarelli. “Program of Pain.” Wall Street Journal,
March 14, 1997.
Whiting, Rick. “At SAP, R/3 Is a Distant Memory.” InformationWeek, July 24, 2006.
www.informationweek.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=190900725.
Whiting, Rick. “Home Depot Looks to SAP As It Modernizes.” InformationWeek, May 23, 2005.
www.informationweek.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=163106241.
Worthen, Ben. “Extreme ERP Makeover: How to Determine If a Single-Instance ERP
Implementation Is Right for You.” CIO, November 15, 2003. www.cio.com/article/31964/
How_to_Determine_If_a_Single_Instance_ERP_Implementation_is_Right_for_You.
Worthen, Ben. “Nestlé’s Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Odyssey.” CIO, May 15, 2002.
www.cio.com/article/31066/Nestle_s_Enterprise_Resource_Planning_ERP_Odyssey.
48
Chapter 2

C H A P T E R3
MARKETING INFORMATION
SYSTEMS AND THE SALES
ORDER PROCESS
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the unintegrated sales processes of the fictitious Fitter Snacker
company
•
Explain why unintegrated Marketing and Sales information systems lead
to company-wide inefficiency, higher costs, lost profits, and customer
dissatisfaction
•
Discuss sales and distribution in the SAP ERP system, and explain how
integrated data sharing increases company-wide efficiency
•
Describe how SAP ERP processes a standard sales order
•
Describe the benefits of customer relationship management (CRM)
software
I N T R O D U C T I O N
In this chapter, you will begin learning about the operations of Fitter Snacker (FS), a fictitious
company that makes healthy snack bars. As you will see, the company’s current information systems
are not integrated, which causes problems in all of the functional areas. Throughout the remainder of
this book, we will use Fitter Snacker to illustrate information systems concepts in general and ERP
concepts in particular.

As with many companies, Marketing and Sales is the focal point of many of Fitter’s activities.
Why? Because Marketing and Sales is responsible for selling the company’s product, and those
sales are the company’s only source of revenue. That means marketing personnel often guide the
company’s key strategies and tactics by making decisions regarding such critical questions as:
•
What products should we produce?
•
How much of each product should we produce?
•
How can we best promote and advertise our products?
•
How should we distribute our products for maximum customer satisfaction?
•
What price should we charge for our products?
On a day-to-day basis, Marketing and Sales is involved in generating key transaction data
(including data for recording sales), creating customers’ invoices, and allocating credit to customers.
As you learned in previous chapters, the availability of a common database is one of the advantages
of having an integrated information system, because the data in the system are consistent across the
different modules. Integration can lead to problems, however. If the data are not correct, the error will
carry over into all modules.
As noted above, Fitter’s Marketing and Sales information systems are currently not well
integrated with the company’s other information systems. Because of this, company-wide use of
transaction data is inefficient, as you will see later in this chapter. You will also learn how Fitter’s
Marketing and Sales information systems could be improved by using ERP software. We begin by
looking at an overview of the company’s operations.
OVERVIEW OF FITTER SNACKER
Fitter Snacker manufactures and sells two types of nutritious snack bars: NRG-A and
NRG-B. The NRG-A bar touts “advanced energy,” and NRG-B boasts “body-building
proteins.” Each bar contains a mix of the following ingredients:
•
Dry base mixture: oats, wheat germ, protein powder, and spices
50
Chapter 3

•
Wet base mixture: honey and canola oil
•
Vitamins and minerals
Each type of bar contains additional unique ingredients: NRG-A contains carob chips
and raisins, and NRG-B contains hazelnuts and dates.
Fitter’s sales force is organized into two groups: the Wholesale Division and the Direct
Sales Division. The Wholesale Division sells to intermediaries that distribute the bars to
small shops, vending machine operators, and health food stores. The Direct Sales Division
sells directly to large grocery stores, sporting goods stores, and other large chain stores.
The two divisions operate separately from one another, in effect breaking the Marketing
and Sales functional area into two pieces. Each division has an organizational structure
that interacts with Fitter’s other functional areas, such as Accounting and Finance and
Supply Chain Management.
The two sales divisions differ primarily in terms of order volume and pricing terms.
The Direct Sales Division offers customers volume discounts to encourage larger sales
orders, which are more efficient to process. The Wholesale Division charges customers
a lower fixed price because the orders are usually large. Each order—regardless of size—
generates costs related to the paperwork, shipping, and handling of the order. Thus, an
order of 500 cases of snack bars incurs the same handling costs as an order of 10 cases.
However, the large order might generate $5,000 in profit, while the small order might
generate only $100. Both divisions send their customers invoices requesting the total
balance within 30 days and offering a 2 percent discount if the customer pays within
10 days (2–10/net 30).
In addition to selling snack bars under the Fitter Snacker brand name, the company
also packages the bars in store-brand wrappers for some chain stores.
PROBLEMS WITH FITTER SNACKER’S SALES PROCESS
Many of Fitter’s sales orders have some sort of problem, such as incorrect pricing,
excessive calls to the customer for information, order-processing delays, missed delivery
dates, and so on. These problems occur because Fitter has three separate information
systems: the sales order system, the warehouse system, and the accounting system.
Information from each system is shared either electronically through periodic file
transfers (sales order system to accounting system) or manually by paper printout (credit
status from the Accounting Department to sales clerks). The high number of manual
transactions creates many opportunities for data entry errors. Further, not all the
information stored in the three systems is available in real time, resulting in incorrect
prices and credit information.
In each sales division, Fitter has four salespeople who work on the road, plus two
clerks who work in the sales office. Salespeople work on commission and have some
leeway in offering customers “discretionary discounts” to make a sale. The entire sales
process involves a series of steps that require coordination between Sales, Warehouse,
Accounting, and Receiving, as shown in Figure 3-1. (Notice that Production is not directly
involved in the sales process because Fitter plans production using a make-to-stock
strategy, with product shipped to customers from warehouse inventory rather than being
manufactured for specific orders.)
51
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

Sales
Fitter Snacker’s
sales process
Price
quote
Sales
order
Pick,
pack, and
ship
Invoice
Payment
Returns
Accounting
Receiving
Warehouse
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 3-1
The sales process at Fitter Snacker
Sales Quotations and Orders
Giving a customer a price quotation and then taking the customer’s order should be
a straightforward process, but at Fitter it is not. For a new customer, the sales process
begins with a sales call, which might be over the telephone or in person. At the end of the
sales call, the salesperson prepares a handwritten quotation on a form that generates two
copies. The original quotation goes to the customer, and the middle copy is first faxed and
then mailed to the sales office; the salesperson keeps the bottom copy for his or her
records. On the quotation form is a toll-free number that the customer can call to place an
order.
A number of problems can occur with this process, including the following:
•
The salesperson might make an error in the sales quotation. For example,
a salesperson in the Direct Sales Division might offer both a quantity
discount and a discretionary discount. If the salesperson is not careful, the
two discounts combined might be so deep that the company makes little or
no profit on the order.
•
Salespeople fax a copy of their sales quotations to the sales office, but
sometimes a customer calls to place an order before the fax is transmitted.
52
Chapter 3

In such cases, the sales clerk has no knowledge of the terms of the sale
(which are outlined on the quotation) and must ask the customer to repeat
the information. On the other hand, even if the quotation has been faxed, the
data might not have been entered into the customer database, so the
customer might still need to repeat the order information. This situation can
also lead to a duplicate order.
•
The fax received by the sales office is a copy of a handwritten form, and
might not be legible.
When customers place an order, they usually inquire about the delivery date. To get a
shipping date, the sales clerk must contact the warehouse supervisor and ask whether the
customer’s order can be immediately shipped from inventory, or whether shipping will
be delayed until a future production run is delivered to the warehouse. However, because
the warehouse supervisor is generally too busy to get an updated inventory count, total all
the orders waiting to be filled, and find out how many other orders are in process in the
sales office, she can only estimate the shipping date.
Once the sales clerk has the warehouse supervisor’s estimated shipping date, she
determines the shipping method and how long delivery will take. Next, the clerk checks the
customer’s credit status. For new customers, the clerk fills out a paper credit-check form
that includes basic customer data and the amount of the order. The form goes to
Accounting, where accountants perform the credit check and then return the credit-check
form showing the customer’s credit limit. If the order is from an existing customer, the clerk
checks a paper report from Accounting that shows the customer’s current balance, credit
limit, and available balance. However, because the report is generated weekly, it might not
reflect a customer’s most recent payments or orders. If a customer’s available credit is less
than the amount of the current order, assuming there are no other orders outstanding,
the clerk calls the customer to determine what action the customer wants to take
(reduce the amount of the order, prepay, or dispute the amount of credit granted).
Once the order details have been finalized, the sales clerk enters the order into the
order-entry system. The computer program performs four important tasks. First, it stores
the customer’s order data, which are used later to analyze sales performance at the
division level. Second, it prints out a packing list and shipping labels for the warehouse to
use to pick, pack, and ship the customer’s order. Third, it produces a data file of all
current transactions for the Accounting Department to use for preparing invoices (this
file is also used for financial, tax, and managerial accounting, which is discussed in
Chapter 5). And fourth, the data file is copied to a USB key each evening for uploading
into the company’s PC-based accounting system.
Order Filling
Fitter’s process for filling an order is no more efficient than its sales order process. Packing
lists and shipping labels are printed in the sales department twice a day—at noon and at
the end of the day. These are carried by hand to the warehouse, where they are manually
sorted into small orders and large orders.
The Production Department produces and wraps the snack bars and packs them in
display boxes, 24 bars to a box. The display boxes have promotional printing and are
designed to serve as a display case. Fitter packs 12 display boxes together to form a standard
shipping case. The warehouse stores both individual display boxes and shipping cases,
organized by label type (Fitter brand and store brand), so depending on the inventory levels
53
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

in the warehouse, Production personnel might transfer individual display boxes directly to
the warehouse, or they might first pack the display boxes into shipping cases.
For small orders (less than a full shipping case), the order picker goes to the
warehouse with a handcart and pulls the number of display boxes listed on the packing
list. If there are not enough individual display boxes in the warehouse to fill the order, the
picker might break open a shipping case to get the required number of display boxes. If he
does this, he is supposed to advise the warehouse supervisor so she can update the
inventory records—but sometimes this step is overlooked.
The picker then brings the display boxes back to the small-order packing area, where
they are packed into a labeled box—with the packing list enclosed—and prepared for
shipping by a small package shipper.
For large orders (one or more shipping cases), the picker uses a forklift to move the
appropriate number of shipping cases to the large-order packing area. Workers label them
for shipping, load them on a pallet, and attach them to the pallet with shrink-wrap plastic
for protection. These pallets are shipped either by one of Fitter’s two delivery trucks or by
a less-than-truckload (LTL) common carrier.
Fitter uses a PC database program to manage inventory levels in the warehouse. The
program adjusts inventory level figures on a daily basis, using data from production records
(showing what has been added to the warehouse), packing lists (showing what has been
shipped from the warehouse), and any additional sources of data (such as shipping cases
that have been opened to pull display boxes). Each month the warehouse staff conducts a
physical inventory count to compare the actual inventory on hand with what the inventory
records in the database show. Fitter’s monthly inventory counts show that inventory records
are more than 95 percent accurate. Although 95 percent accuracy may not sound too bad,
having 5 percent errors means that Fitter regularly has problems filling orders.
Because snack bars are somewhat perishable, Fitter keeps inventory levels fairly low.
Inventory levels change rapidly during the day, and Fitter’s current system does not
provide a good method for checking inventory availability. As a result, a picker might go to
the shelves to pick an order and discover that there are not enough snack bars to fill the
order. In this case, there are several possible outcomes:
•
There might be more of that type of bar in the production area—ready to be
transferred to the warehouse—in which case the picker could wait until the
inventory is received into the warehouse to finish picking the order.
•
For an important customer that purchases store-branded snack bars, production
might change the wrappers and display box labels currently on the production
line to the customer’s brand to produce enough bars to complete the order.
•
In other situations, the customer may be willing to take a partial shipment
consisting of whatever is on hand, with the rest shipped when it becomes
available—which is known as a backorder.
•
Or, the customer might prefer to take the goods on hand, cancel the balance
of the order, and place a new order later.
•
If the customer’s company has enough inventory on hand, the customer may
prefer to wait until the whole order can be shipped, thus saving on delivery
charges.
To determine what to do in this situation, the order picker might have conversations
with the warehouse supervisor, production supervisor, and sales clerks. Whatever the final
decision, the warehouse supervisor has to contact the sales clerk so she can notify the
54
Chapter 3

customer (which does not always happen when things are busy) and the Accounting
Department so they can change the invoice.
Accounting and Invoicing
Invoicing the customer is problematic as well. First, the data from the current order-entry
system is only loaded into the accounting system at the end of each day, so the
Accounting Department does not have information on new sales orders until the following
day. In addition, clerks must manually make adjustments in both the order-entry system
and the accounting system for partial shipments and for any other changes that have
occurred during the order-fulfillment process. Many times these corrections are not made
in both systems, causing discrepancies that must be corrected at the end of the month, at
which point it is more difficult for the parties involved to remember what happened.
Delayed order corrections also sometimes result in late or inaccurate invoices. If the
completed invoice is waiting to be mailed when the warehouse notifies Accounting of a
partial shipment, then a new invoice must be prepared. In any case, an invoice is
eventually sent to the customer, separate from the shipment.
Payment and Returns
Fitter’s procedure for processing payments often yields frustrating results for customers.
Almost all customers pay the invoice within 10 days to receive the 2 percent discount. If any
errors have occurred in the sales or order-fulfillment process—from the original quotation to
entering the order into the sales order program to filling the order in the warehouse—the
customer will receive an incorrect invoice. Even though Fitter provides customers with two
invoice copies, many customers do not return a copy of the invoice with their payment, as
instructed. Errors sometimes result in the incorrect customer’s account being credited.
Fitter’s returns processing is also flawed. Because Fitter’s snack bars contain no
preservatives, they have a relatively short shelf life. Thus, the company has a policy of
crediting customer accounts for returned snack bars that have exceeded their “sell by”
date (this is a generous policy, because it is impossible to know who—Fitter or the
customer—is responsible for the bars not selling before they expire). Fitter also gives
credit for damaged or defective cases returned by customers. Customers are supposed to
call Fitter to get a returned material authorization (RMA) number to simplify the crediting
process. When cases are returned to Fitter, the Receiving Department completes a
handwritten returned material sheet, listing the returning customer’s name, the materials
returned, and the RMA number. However, many customers do not call for the RMA
number, or fail to include it with their returned material, which makes it more difficult for
the Accounting Department to credit the appropriate account. Poor penmanship on the
returned material sheet also creates problems for Accounting.
When an account becomes past due, Fitter sends a dunning letter, which is the term
for a letter notifying a customer that their account is past due and requesting payment if
payment has not already been sent. As the account gets more delinquent, the dunning
letters usually get more direct and threatening. If a customer’s account has not been
properly credited, however, the customer may receive a dunning letter in error, or may
receive a call about exceeding their credit limit after placing a new order. Such situations
damage goodwill with both new and repeat customers.
In the following sections, you will learn how an ERP system could improve the sales
process for Fitter Snacker.
55
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

SALES AND DISTRIBUTION IN ERP
An ERP system can improve a company’s sales order process in several ways. Because an ERP
system uses a common database, it can minimize data entry errors and provide accurate
information in real time to all users. An ERP system can also track all transaction data (such
as invoices, packing lists, RMA numbers, and payments) involved in the sales order process.
We will look at how one ERP system, SAP ERP—in particular, its Sales and Distribution
module—manages the sales order process. (Other ERP software handles the process in a
similar fashion.) In SAP ERP, important transactions and events are assigned a number for
record-keeping purposes. The electronic evidence of a transaction in SAP ERP is called a
“document.”
The SAP ERP Sales and Distribution module treats the sales order process as a cycle
of events. SAP ERP defines up to six events for any sale:
•
Presales activities
•
Sales order processing
•
Inventory sourcing
•
Delivery
•
Billing
•
Payment
Presales Activities
The first step in the SAP ERP sales and distribution process is presales activities. At this
phase, customers can get pricing information about the company’s products, either
through an inquiry or a sales quotation. The difference between an inquiry and a
quotation is that a quotation is a written, binding document; the seller guarantees the
buyer that, for some specified period of time, he can buy the product at the quoted price.
An inquiry is simply a statement of prices, with no guarantee implied. In either case, the
event is recorded in the central database.
Presales activities also include marketing activities such as tracking customer
contacts—including sales calls, visits, and mailings. A company can maintain customer
data in the ERP system and generate mailing lists based on specific customer
characteristics, which enhances targeted marketing efforts.
Sales Order Processing
In the SAP ERP system, sales order processing is the series of activities that must take place to
record a sales order. The sales order can start from a quotation or inquiry generated in the
presales step. Any information that was collected from the customer to support the quotation
(contact name, address, phone number) is immediately included in the sales order.
Critical sales order processing steps include recording the items to be purchased,
determining the selling price, and recording the order quantities. Users can define
various pricing alternatives in the SAP ERP system. For example, a company can use
product-specific pricing, such as establishing quantity discounts for a particular item,
or it can define discounts that depend on both the product and a particular customer.
Configuring a complex pricing scheme requires a significant amount of programming
work, but once the system is in place, it will automatically calculate the correct
price for each customer, eliminating many of the problems that Fitter currently
experiences.
56
Chapter 3

During sales order processing, the SAP ERP system checks the accounts receivable
tables in the SAP ERP database to confirm the customer’s available credit. SAP ERP adds
the value of the order to the customer’s credit balance, and then compares the result to
the customer’s credit limit (also available in the database). If the customer has sufficient
credit available, the order is completed. If not, the SAP ERP system prompts sales
personnel to reject the order, call the customer to check on recent payments, or contact
Accounting to discuss any extenuating circumstances.
Inventory Sourcing
When recording an order, the SAP ERP system checks the company’s inventory records
and the production planning records to see whether the requested material is available
and can be delivered on the date the customer desires. This available-to-promise (ATP)
check includes the expected shipping time, taking into account weekends and holidays.
In the SAP ERP system, availability is automatically checked, and the system can
recommend an increase in planned production if a shortfall is expected. SAP also keeps a
record of all open orders, so even if product for a particular order is still in the warehouse,
the system will not allow it to be sold to another customer.
Delivery
In the SAP ERP system, creating a delivery means releasing the documents that the
warehouse uses to pick, pack, and ship orders—rather than the traditional definition of
transferring goods. The process allows deliveries to be created so the warehouse and
shipping activities are carried out efficiently (for example, combining similar orders for
picking, or grouping orders based on shipping method and destination).
Once the system has created the documents for picking, packing, and shipping, the
documents are transferred to the Materials Management module, where the warehouse
activities of picking, packing, and shipping are carried out.
Billing
Next, the SAP ERP system creates an invoice by copying the sales order data into the
invoice document. Accounting can print this document and mail it, fax it, or transmit it
electronically to the customer. Accounting records are also updated at this point. To
record the sale, SAP ERP debits (increases) accounts receivable and credits sales, thus
updating the accounting records automatically.
Payment
When the customer sends in a payment, this payment must be recorded in the SAP
system. If the payment is made electronically, it can be automatically processed by the
SAP ERP system, which records the payment as an electronic sales order document,
debits the cash account, and credits (reduces) the customer’s account balance. If the
customer sends a check, a clerk must manually enter the payment information, at which
point the system updates all information related to the sale. The timely recording of this
transaction has an effect on the timeliness and accuracy of any subsequent credit checks
for the customer. With its current systems, Fitter has had a problem with getting accurate
credit checks, frequently blocking orders for customers that are within their credit limit,
while granting credit to other companies beyond what is advisable.
57
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

A STANDARD ORDER IN SAP ERP
Now we will examine how Fitter’s sales order process would work with an SAP ERP system in
place. You will learn how this ERP system can make Fitter’s sales order process more accurate
and efficient. Notice that ERP allows business processes to cut across functional area lines.
Taking an Order in SAP ERP
Figure 3-2 shows an order-entry screen in SAP ERP’s Enterprise Central Component
6.0 system. The important fields in this screen are summarized in Figure 3-3.
Material and
Order Quantity:
What the
customer
is ordering
Req. deliv. date:
The date when
the customer
would like to
receive the order
PO Number: The
number assigned
by the customer
to this sales order
Sold-To Party:
Where the
customer’s
identification
number is
entered
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-2
SAP ERP order-entry screen
Data entry field
Explanation
Sold-To Party
PO Number
The number assigned by the customer to the sales transaction; this is different
from the sales order number assigned by the seller (using SAP ERP) to the sales
transaction.  In a paper process, the purchase order number is usually a
sequential number preprinted on the purchase order form
Req. deliv. date
Material
Identification number assigned to customer
The delivery date for the order requested by the customer; the SAP ERP system
will evaluate the ability to meet this date and suggest alternatives, if necessary
The identification number assigned in the SAP ERP system to the item requested
by the customer
Order Quantity
The number of units of the material the customer is requesting
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 3-3
Data entry fields in the order-entry screen
58
Chapter 3

In SAP ERP, a sales order clerk must enter code numbers for customers’ names and
the product sold, rather than using customer and product item names. Because more than
one customer might have the same name, a unique number is assigned by the company to
each customer in the database. This number acts as the primary identifier for the
customer. The same logic applies to distinguishing one inventory item from another. In
database terminology, such codes are called key fields. For most data entry fields, the SAP
ERP system determines whether an entry is valid. Figure 3-4 shows how SAP ERP lists the
system’s 34 predefined sales order document types. The sales order clerk can choose the
correct type from among these.
SaTy: Sales Document
Type
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-4
Some of the sales order document types predefined in SAP ERP
While it might sound as if a sales order clerk must remember a lot of code numbers to
use the SAP ERP system, this is not the case. For instance, when a sales order clerk has to
find a customer in the SAP ERP system, he or she can click in the Sold-To Party field to
display a search icon and then click the search icon to open the search window shown in
Figure 3-5.
59
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

Clicking in the
Sold-To Party
field produces
a search icon
Clicking the
search icon
calls up a
search window
with numerous
options
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-5
Search screen for customers
Using the different tabs in this search window, the clerk can search for a customer
using different criteria (for example, part of the customer’s address, such as the city) to
narrow the list produced by the search. Conducting a search using the criteria of
Distribution Channel (specifying direct distribution) and Division (specifying snack bar
sales division) produces a list of customers (shown in Figure 3-6) from which the clerk can
pick the correct customer.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-6
Results of customer search
60
Chapter 3

In the SAP ERP system, a range of information is stored about each customer in
multiple tables. These data are referred to as customer master data. Master data are data
that remain fairly stable, such as customer name and address. Master data are maintained
in the central database, and are available to all SAP ERP modules, including SD (Sales and
Distribution), FI (Financial), and CO (Controlling).
Information about materials is in tables—collectively called material master data—
which are used by the MM (Materials Management) and PP (Production Planning) modules
in addition to the Sales and Distribution module.
The SAP ERP system allows a company to define various ways to group its customers
and salespeople. These groupings are called organizational structures. One important
organizational structure for Fitter Snacker is the Distribution Channel. With SAP ERP, the
Distribution Channel allows the user to define different ways for materials to be sold and
distributed to the customer. The Distribution Channel structure also allows for different
types of relationships with different customers, and it lets the company specify aspects of
the relationship, such as pricing, delivery method, and minimum order quantities.
Defining a Wholesale Distribution Channel and a Direct Sales Distribution Channel for
Fitter would help to ensure that customers’ orders are correctly priced. Figure 3-7 shows a
completed sales order screen for an order from West Hills Athletic Club for 10 cases of
NRG-A bars and 10 cases of NRG-B bars.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-7
Order screen with complete data
61
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

West Hills’s purchase order (PO) number for this sales transaction is WH83128. This is a
unique number provided by the customer (West Hills) that allows it to track orders with its
suppliers. If the customer has a question about an order, it will likely reference that PO number
in its inquiry. Because the SAP ERP system records the customer’s PO number, a Fitter
employee can look up the status of the order using the customer’s PO number. Alternatively,
the order can be located using the sales order number that SAP assigns to this transaction.
Notice also that the order screen shows the name of the customer (West Hills Athletic
Club) and the names of the products (NRG-A and NRG-B), even though they were not entered
directly during the order process. How did they get on the screen at this point? Once the
company or product code is entered, the clerk can easily request the SAP ERP system to search
the database and access all the information needed to complete the order. Thus, the SAP ERP
system simplifies the data entry tasks, reducing data entry time and the possibility of error.
When the SAP ERP system is instructed to save a sales order, it performs inventory
sourcing—that is, it carries out checks to ensure that the customer’s sales order can be
delivered on the requested delivery date. Remember that previously when a customer wanted
to know when an order could be delivered, the sales clerk had to make a series of phone calls.
In the SAP ERP system, this process is handled automatically. The system performs a check on
both inventory and production, and it takes into account the time required for shipping. When
the requested delivery date cannot be met, the SAP ERP system automatically proposes
alternatives to the sales order clerk. For example, Figure 3-8 shows what the sales order clerk
will see if only five cases of NRG-A bars will be available by the requested delivery date. The
SAP ERP system provides the sales order clerk with three alternatives:
1.
Reduce the order quantity of NRG-A cases to five, which can be delivered by
the requested delivery date.
2.
Delay shipment of the NRG-A bars for three days, when 10 cases will be available.
3.
Ship five cases by the requested delivery date, and ship five cases at the later date.
Three options
proposed
by SAP ERP
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-8
Order proposals
62
Chapter 3

The best situation would be that the company could meet the customer’s request, but
when that is not possible, the integrated SAP ERP system can provide the clerk with
accurate information about the ability to meet the customer’s requirements. With Fitter’s
unintegrated systems, it could take days for the customer to find out that its requested
delivery date could not be met.
When a sales order is saved, the SAP ERP system assigns a document number to the
sales order transaction. In the SAP ERP system, a document is an electronic record of a
business transaction, and a document number is created for each business transaction.
When the sales order is ready to be processed by the warehouse, a delivery document will
be created with its own unique document number, which the system will link to the sales
order document. Finally, when the bill (invoice) is prepared for the customer, the bill’s
unique number (called the invoice number) will be created and linked to all the other
numbers associated with the sales order.
The SAP ERP system has a mechanism for keeping track of the document numbers
associated with each sales order so employees can track the status of an order while it is
in process or research it after shipping. The linked set of document numbers related to
a sales order, also known as the audit trail, is called the document flow in SAP ERP.
Figure 3-9 shows the document flow for a completed order.
Accounting
document
90000002 is
linked to
sales order 5
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-9
The Document Flow tool, which links sales order documents
If an order includes partial shipments, partial payments, and returned material credits,
the document flow can become quite complex. Without an integrated information system,
the audit trail can be hard to establish, especially if many paper documents are involved.
With an integrated system such as SAP ERP, document numbers are all linked together
electronically. Not only does the document flow show all documents related to a sales order,
but the user can look at the details of each document simply by double-clicking a line in the
document flow. For example, if West Hills Athletic Club chose to take delivery of five cases
of NRG-A bars on its requested delivery date and five cases when they became available, a
sales order clerk can easily check on the status of the five delayed cases using document
flow. He or she can search the SAP system to find the original sales order by a number of
methods (open orders for West Hills, the PO number that West Hills used, the sales order
63
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

number assigned by the SAP ERP system, and so on) and then review the delivery
document for the delayed cases. As another example, a customer may have a question about
an invoice it has received. The clerk can search the SAP ERP system for the invoice, and
the document flow will show all activity that led to the invoice. With an unintegrated
information system, researching the invoice would require checking more than one
information system and perhaps searching paper records as well.
Discount Pricing in SAP ERP
When a company installs an ERP system, it can configure it for a number of pricing
strategies. For example, various kinds of discounts can be allowed (based on item number
or for all items, based on unit price or total order value, with or without shipping charges
and taxes, by individual customer, by a class of customer, and so on). As a safeguard, the
system can enforce limits on the size of discounts to keep salespeople from offering
unprofitable or unapproved discounts.
Suppose a salesperson wants to give a certain customer a 10 percent discretionary
discount on NRG-A bars. But is the salesperson allowed to discount those bars? Is that
discount appropriate for that customer? If so, will the discount be so deep that the sale
will be unprofitable for Fitter? An ERP system automatically answers these questions.
Pricing, the process of determining how much to charge a particular customer, can be
very complex. To accommodate the various ways that companies offer price discounts,
SAP has developed a control mechanism it calls the condition technique. While detailed
discussion of the condition technique is beyond the scope of this text, Figure 3-10 shows
how a discount is automatically applied in the SAP ERP system.
Net price for
order, including
discounts
Base price is
$240/case
The production
cost of the 10
cases is $1,992
Discount is
10 percent
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-10
Pricing conditions for sales order
64
Chapter 3

The screen shows the price that Fitter is offering to West Hills Athletic Club for
10 cases of NRG-A bars. The base price is $240/case, and West Hills is being given a
10 percent discount automatically.
The screen in Figure 3-11 shows that the SAP ERP system has been configured to give
West Hills Athletic Club a 5 percent discount for ordering over $1,000 worth of a
particular type of snack bar, and a 10 percent discount if the order for a particular type of
snack bar is over $1,500 in value.
If a line in the
order is over
$1,000, the
discount is
5 percent
If a line in the
order is over
$1,500, the
discount is
10 percent
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-11
West Hills Athletic Club price discount
If you look again at Figure 3-10, you can see the SAP ERP system automatically applied
the 10 percent discount (since the total amount of the order was over $1,500), so the net
price for 10 cases of NRG-A bars is $2,160. Figure 3-10 also shows that Fitter will still make
a profit on this order, because the cost to produce 10 cases of NRG-A bars is $1,992.
Integration of Sales and Accounting
In Fitter’s old system, sales records were not integrated with the company’s accounting
records, so Accounting often did not have the most up-to-date information. By contrast,
ERP systems integrate Accounting with all business processes, so when a sales order is
recorded, the related accounting data are updated automatically.
In the document flow shown in Figure 3-9, Accounting document 90000002 is part of
the sales order process. The clerk can select this line, and then click the Display
document button to get the accounting detail shown in Figure 3-12.
65
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

Accounting
document
90000002,
accessible
from the
document
flow screen
Accounts
affected by
the sales
order
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-12
Accounting detail for the West Hills sales order
This document shows that, as a result of this sales order, West Hills Athletic Club has
paid Fitter $4,815. The Sales Revenue account (account number 600000) records sales
revenue of $5,350 dollars, which is broken down into the revenue for the NRG-A bars
($2,400) and the revenue for the NRG-B bars ($2,950). These amounts represent the list
prices of the snack bars on the order. The 10 percent discount is applied to the NRG-A
bars ($240) and NRG-B bars ($295) dollars and is recorded in the Sales Discount account
(account number 610000). Because the accounting documents are created automatically
with the sales order, the Accounting Department is using the same data as the Sales
Department, which results in up-to-date and accurate information. If Marketing needs a
report on the size of discounts currently being offered, the system can easily generate a
report of that data, and it will be up to date and accurate as well.
Now that you have looked at how an ERP system can help a company’s sales order
process, we will examine how data obtained during that process might be further used to
help Fitter build long-term business relationships with its customers and improve business
performance.
CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT (CRM)
Companies without a good connection between their workers and their customers run
the risk of losing business. Take Fitter Snacker, for example. Say a salesperson calls on a good
customer, Health Express. The salesperson offers Health Express deep discounts for buying a
certain number of NRG bars. At the same time, the Marketing Department is running a sale
66
Chapter 3

on NRG bars. Marketing sends Health Express a flyer advertising the discounted price, which
is less than what the salesperson just offered in person. Meanwhile, the vice president of Fitter
plays golf with the CEO of Health Express and offers yet another discount. The connection or
relationship with the customer is confused because the customer is receiving inconsistent
information. Customer relationship management (CRM) software can help companies
streamline their interactions with customers to ensure a consistent message.
An ERP system offers a company an added benefit beyond systems integration:
vast and complete quantities of data available for analysis. By adding other software tools
to its ERP system, a company can extend the capabilities of the system, thus increasing
its value. Many ERP vendors—and non-ERP software companies—provide CRM software.
In 2011, the CRM software market was worth $12 billion and was forecasted to grow to
$25 billion by 2018. SAP was the market leader in CRM software in 2011 with 21 percent
of the CRM market, but SAP has been facing significant challenges from growing interest
in on-demand CRM solutions provided by companies such as Salesforce.com. (With
on-demand CRM, the software and computer equipment reside with the CRM provider;
it is not installed in-house.) In 2006, SAP responded to competition from on-demand
providers with CRM OnDemand. This product was essentially a hosted version of its CRM
software with a few minor changes. In 2011, SAP introduced Sales OnDemand, based on
its BusinessByDesign platform, which is a CRM product with a focus on sales.
With the goal of providing “a single face to the customer,” the basic principle behind
CRM is that any employee in contact with the customer should have access to all
information about the company’s past interactions with the customer. In a traditional sales
organization, information might only be available to one individual, who might not share it
with the organization. If that individual leaves the company, the information is lost.
Core CRM Activities
In general, CRM software supports the following activities and tools:
•
One-to-one marketing—Once a customer is categorized, for example, based
on the products they buy and the volume in which they buy those products,
the company can tailor products, promotions, and pricing accordingly.
Customers can be offered products related to what they are now buying
(cross-selling), or the company could choose to promote higher-margin
products in the same lines (up-selling) to those customers.
•
Sales force automation (SFA)—Using the CRM software, occurrences of
customer contacts are logged in the company’s database. The SFA feature
of CRM software can automatically route certain customers who contact the
company to a particular sales representative. Companies can also use SFA
tools to forecast customer needs, based on the customer’s history and
transactions, and to alert sales representatives accordingly. Sometimes this
software is called “lead management software” because a transaction can be
tracked from the initial lead to post-sale follow-up.
•
Sales campaign management—This software feature lets a company
organize a marketing campaign and compile its results automatically.
•
Marketing encyclopedias—This feature serves as a database of promotional
literature about products. The material can be routed to sales representatives
or customers as needed.
67
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

•
Call center automation—When customers call a company to get assistance
with a company’s products, representatives can query a knowledge
management database containing information about the product. Some
knowledge management software accepts queries in natural language. If the
company must develop a new solution in response to a unique customer
query, that information can be added to the knowledge base, which thus
becomes “smarter.”
SAP’s CRM Software
A number of tools that provide CRM functionality exist within the SAP ERP system.
For example, to make sure that information about sales contacts is available
throughout the organization, the SAP ERP system provides a contact management
tool, shown in Figure 3-13. This tool is essentially a database of personal contact
information.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-13
SAP ERP contact manager
Another CRM tool in the SAP ERP system is the sales activity manager; an example
shown in Figure 3-14 shows what the company wants to accomplish with a particular
sales call. This tool supports a strategic and organized approach to sales activity
68
Chapter 3

planning, and most importantly, it can help make sure that follow-up activities are
accomplished.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 3-14
SAP ERP sales activity manager
While the CRM tools in the SAP ERP system, if employed properly, can help manage
customer relationships, firms embracing the CRM concept often employ a separate CRM
system that communicates with the ERP system. An advantage of this approach is that
the planning and analysis performed in the CRM system do not interfere with the
performance of the ERP system, which primarily processes large volumes of business
transactions.
Figure 3-15 shows how SAP CRM relates to the SAP ERP system as well as SAP’s
Business Warehouse (BW) and Advanced Planner and Optimizer (APO) modules. The SAP
CRM system communicates with the SAP ERP, BW, and APO systems in developing and
executing its plans, thereby allowing SAP CRM to not only facilitate a company’s
interactions with its customers, but to also enable the company to analyze the customer
data and best serve the customer.
69
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

SAP
CRM
system
SAP
ERP
system
Business
Warehouse
module
(BW)
Advanced
Planner & Optimizer
module
(APO)
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 3-15
SAP CRM system landscape
As described previously, the SAP ERP system processes business transactions and
provides much of the raw data for CRM. SAP’s Business Warehouse (BW) is a flexible
system for the reporting and analysis of transactional data that makes use of data mining
techniques. Data mining is the statistical and logical analysis of large sets of transaction
data, looking for patterns that can aid decision making and improve customer sales and
service. By analyzing sales transactions using data mining, firms can discover trends and
patterns to use in planning marketing activities.
The Advanced Planner and Optimizer (APO) is a component of SAP’s Supply Chain
Management (SCM) system that supports efficient planning of the supply chain. APO’s
role in the CRM process is to provide higher levels of customer support through its
global available-to-promise (ATP) capabilities. In the standard SAP ERP system, the ATP
70
Chapter 3

capabilities function on a location-by-location basis. If the product or material a
customer wants is not available in the location that usually serves the customer, then
the sales order clerk can check for the material in other facilities, but this must be done
on a facility-by-facility basis. With global ATP, the system automatically checks all
facilities and determines the most cost-efficient facility to use to meet the customer’s
request.
SAP’s approach to CRM is to provide a set of tools to manage the three basic task
areas, or jobs, related to customers: marketing, sales, and service. These task areas
contribute to the cultivation of the customer relationship. This cultivation goes
through four phases, as defined by SAP: prospecting, acquiring, servicing, and
retaining.
In prospecting, a potential new customer (or potential new business opportunity with an
existing customer) is evaluated, and development activities (emails, sales calls, mailings, etc.)
are planned to develop the prospective business. Marketing tasks predominate in this phase.
In acquiring, salespeople develop business prospects into customers. Marketing is still
the critical task, but the sales tasks (processing inquiries, quotes, and eventually sales
orders) become increasingly important in this phase.
Once sales are established with the customer, the business becomes one of servicing
the account. In the servicing phase, sales tasks are still important, but service tasks
(including technical support, warranty work, product returns, fixing quality problems, and
complaint handling) are critical to maintaining customer satisfaction.
The rate at which prospects become customers is quite low; thus, a critical part of the
process is retaining customers. It is much easier to retain a good customer than to find
a new one, so the focus of the retaining phase is making sure that current customers are
satisfied by timely delivery of quality products and services at a fair price. Sales and
service tasks are still critical, but marketing tasks are again important in terms of
anticipating changes in customers’ requirements.
In SAP CRM, the customer development cycle (prospecting, acquiring, servicing,
and retaining) is supported by contact channels, the methods the company uses to
communicate with its customers. An interaction center provides contact through a variety
of media (phone, fax, and email). Mobile technologies and the Internet are providing an
increasingly large percentage of customer contacts. For example, the Contact Channels
might aid a customer service agent on the telephone and prompt her to ask the customer
various questions relating to the account.
Another set of tools in SAP CRM is Marketing and Campaign Management.
Companies invest significant sums of money in marketing campaigns, which are
promotional activities that publicize the product and the company. Successful planning,
execution, and evaluation are critical to gain maximum effect from these efforts.
Figure 3-16 shows how SAP CRM supports marketing and campaign management. The
top half of this diagram represents planning activities, while the bottom half represents
execution and evaluation activities. These activities are supported by most CRM
software products.
71
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

Target group creation
• Modeling
• Segment creation
• Selection
BW
Campaign analysis
• Success
measurement
• Third-party data
• Profiles
Phone    Web    Mobile    Email
Campaign execution
activity management
Marketing and campaign
 planning
• Planning
• Budgeting
• Monitoring
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 3-16
Marketing and campaign planning
Marketing and campaign planning includes task scheduling, resource allocation, and
budgeting. These planning tasks are executed in conjunction with target group creation
tasks, which use data from the SAP ERP system (perhaps using SAP BW) to categorize the
company’s customers, offering them more individual product and service promotions.
Campaign Execution Activity Management is a set of tools within SAP CRM to help
manage the execution of the marketing campaign, which can include handling sales calls,
mailings, personalized emails, and Web-based promotional activities directed to the
targeted group of customers. These activities can be monitored throughout the campaign
to make sure they are completed. For example, the status of a planned customer phone
call will remain open until the call is completed.
The campaign analysis tool in SAP CRM allows the company to evaluate the success
of the campaign so it can incorporate improvements in the next marketing campaign.
Marketing employees can use a number of measures to determine the success of the
campaign, including tracking lead generation and response rates. Staff can use SAP BW
tools, by running queries, to support this analysis.
The Benefits of CRM
CRM software can provide companies with the following benefits:
•
Lower costs—CRM can lead to operational efficiencies, such as better
response times in call center operations and better use of sales force time,
which lower costs.
•
Higher revenue—Segmenting customers leads to better selling opportunities
and revenue increases.
•
Improved strategy and performance measurement—Installing and operating
an ERP system requires management and staff to think of the company as a
72
Chapter 3

whole. This attitude carries over into CRM work. With a CRM system in
place, management can think about different performance measures; for
example, should salespeople be rewarded for exceeding sales quotas, and
marketing people rewarded for finding new customers—or, should both
receive rewards that are based on some measure of customer satisfaction?
The former approach, typical in days before CRM and ERP, can lead to
unintegrated functional thinking. The latter approach—now feasible with
CRM and ERP—can lead all personnel to think in terms of a company-wide
effort to satisfy customers.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
CRM and Social Media
Customer relationship management tools now also include social media channels that
consist of not only the more prominent ones—such as Facebook and Twitter—but also
blogs, wikis, YouTube, and other purpose-built Web sites. For example, Salesforce.com, a
company that provides CRM software via the Internet, has a product that searches for
specific products and brands being mentioned on social networks—important
information for companies either selling those brands or competing with those brands.
Companies interested in making the most of these new CRM tools need a dedicated
group of personnel to manage these new channels, which must be connected with other
CRM channels. Social media channels cannot stand alone, and they cannot replace the
other more traditional marketing channels.
The rise in popularity of social media means that companies must find ways to
address these new avenues of communication with their customers. A company needs to
make the most of any chance to connect with its customers, but these new opportunities
can be challenging. Any response to a Facebook post or a tweet must be immediate;
customers expect no less. Customer expectations have risen for response time; however,
investments in the social media CRM processes and procedures are lagging. In addition,
companies have yet to calculate the return on investment for investments in social
media CRM tools.
Gartner research has shown that 30 percent of major businesses will implement
some sort of social media with CRM over the next two years in order to improve
customer service. Both SAP and Salesforce.com have social media tools embedded in
their CRM software. Salesforce.com recently announced a new product called Data.com,
which populates CRM with social media contact information, in effect, making every
address for every contact up to date. They also have a new component of their CRM
called Chatter, which is a Twitter-type system for rapid internal company
communications.
Question:
1.
Companies are losing their grip on maintaining their own public relations
because of social media and the Internet. What challenges face companies
with the advent of these new avenues of communication?
73
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

Chapter Summary
•
Fitter Snacker’s unintegrated information systems are at the root of an inefficient and
costly sales order process. Because information is not shared in real time, customers are
often asked to repeat initial sales order information. As an order is processed, errors in
pricing, credit checks, and invoicing frequently occur, presenting a poor company image to
customers. Integrated ERP software would help Fitter avoid errors by storing all customer
data in a central database that is shared in real time by all company employees.
•
An ERP system such as SAP ERP treats a sale as a sequence of related functions,
including taking orders, setting prices, checking product availability, checking the
customer’s credit line, arranging for delivery, billing the customer, and collecting payment.
In SAP ERP, all these transactions, or documents, are electronically linked, so tracking an
order’s status (partial shipments, returns, partial payments, and so forth) is easily
accomplished.
•
Installing an ERP system means making various configuration decisions, which reflect
management’s view of how transactions should be recorded and later used for
decision making. For example, the system can be configured to limit selling price
discounts, thus avoiding unprofitable pricing.
•
An ERP system’s central database contains tables of master data—relatively
permanent data about customers, suppliers, material, and inventory—as well as
transaction data tables, which store relatively temporary data such as sales orders and
invoices.
•
Customer relationship management (CRM) systems build on the organizational value
ERP provides; specifically, they increase the flexibility of the company’s common
database regarding customer service. Various kinds of CRM software are available,
some from ERP vendors (including SAP) and some from third-party software
companies. CRM software can lead to operational savings, but most companies buy it
because they believe that creating better customer relationships will result in higher
revenue. Uses of CRM have evolved since the software was initially launched; what
began as a customer contact repository has extended its capabilities to include
sophisticated business intelligence. CRM can be installed in-house or on-demand.
Key Terms
audit trail
condition technique
customer master data
customer relationship management (CRM)
software
data mining
delivery
document flow
material master data
on-demand CRM
organizational structure
74
Chapter 3

Exercises
1. Assume you are Fitter Snacker’s new marketing manager, hired to clean up some of the
company’s problems, as outlined in the beginning of this chapter. You just started this job,
and you are getting to know your sales team and the company’s processes. Describe all
the problems you observe about the way Fitter’s sales force currently takes and fills an
order. Now convince upper management of the need to improve the existing system and
put an ERP system in place.
2. If Fitter installs an ERP system, how could they reorganize their sales division to be more
efficient? Be specific about how you would rearrange divisions, or consolidate them.
3. Fitter’s current sales order accounting processes involves recording sales in each division
and then periodically sending certain sales data to Accounting for invoicing and financial
reporting. Complete sales order data are retained in each sales division for business
analysis purposes.
Assume that different divisions of the Yummy Foods Company buy NRG-A and NRG-B
bars from each of Fitter’s sales divisions. To complicate matters, some divisions of Yummy
buy store-brand bars from Fitter. (Yummy owns convenience store outlets.) Fitter
management has asked for an analysis of the Yummy Foods account. They want to
determine if there are opportunities to expand the company’s relationship with Yummy;
however, they want to assess the profitability of the relationship before proceeding. The
management team wants to see what products each division sells to Yummy, how much is
sold, and on what terms. Assume that in Fitter’s current system, all the required data are
available only at the sales division level. What steps will be needed to pull this company-
wide analysis together? (Review how each division sells its products.) Do you think a sales
division manager will be enthusiastic about sharing all data with his or her counterpart in
the other division? Do you think there might be some reluctance? Why?
4. Continuing the Yummy Foods example, now assume that Fitter has an SAP ERP system
installed. Each sales division records sales in the same way. Sales records exist in real
time and are kept in the company’s common database. What steps will be needed to pull
this company-wide analysis together? Do you expect that the divisions will meet the new
system with enthusiasm or reluctance?
5. Assume you are a new summer intern at Fitter Snacker, working directly under the CIO.
Your first job is to write a memo describing the poor information flow between three
functional areas in the company: Marketing and Sales, Accounting and Finance, and
Supply Chain Management. Focus on the lack of information flow to and from Marketing
and Sales, in particular.
6. How does an ERP system like SAP simplify looking up customer numbers, setting a
delivery date, and charging a unique price to a given customer? Include a discussion of
master data.
7. What is document flow? Why is it important for auditors of a company?
8. A CIO of a major pharmaceutical company once stated that the reason the corporation
used ERP systems could be summed up in one word: control. How does an ERP system
give management control?
9. How can a business better serve its customers using the APO tool in SAP ERP?
75
Marketing Information Systems and the Sales Order Process

10. Assume you are the marketing manager for a large pet food company, such as Iams. You
need to launch a new marketing campaign. What social media channels would you use for
this campaign? How can CRM help your new strategy?
For Further Study and Research
Beal, Barney. “SAP Takes Another Shot at CRM On-Demand.” SearchCRM.com, March 2,
2011. http://searchcrm.techtarget.com/news/2240032955/SAP-takes-another-shot-at-CRM-
on-demand.
Cafasso, Rosemary. “CRM Buyers Say Goodbye to Cloud CRM/On-Premises Debate.”
SearchCRM.com, August 23, 2011. http://searchcrm.techtarget.com/news/2240063219/
CRM-buyers-say-goodbye-to-cloud-CRM-on-premise-debate.
Diana, Alison. “Social CRM Rush Projected for Enterprises.” InformationWeek, March 4, 2011.
www.informationweek.com/news/software/productivity_apps/229300370.
Hildreth, Sue. “Measuring the ROI of Social CRM No Easy Task.” SearchCRM.com, May 3,
2010. http://searchcrm.techtarget.com/news/2240018288/Measuring-the-ROI-of-social-CRM-
no-easy-task.
Kontzer, Tony. “Better Late Than Never? SAP Spices Up On-Demand CRM.” Information Week,
February 6, 2006. www.informationweek.com/news/178601884.
Information Age. “Salesforce.com – The Facebook of Business?” September 5, 2011.
www.information-age.com/channels/business-applications/company-analysis/1652743/
salesforcecom-the-facebook-of-business.thtml.
Levine, Barry. “Salesforce Conference Pushes ‘Social Enterprise’.” destinationCRM.com,
August 26, 2011. www.destinationcrm.com/Articles/Web-Exclusives/Viewpoints/Six-Myths-
of-Social-Media-77185.aspx.
Lopez, Maribel. “Mobile Strategy: It’s Not About the Gadgets.” Information Week, August 30,
2011. www.informationweek.com/thebrainyard/news/mobile/231500273.
Mittal, Saurabh. “Six Myths of Social Media: Understanding the Evolving Customer Service
Landscape.” destinationCRM.com, August 19, 2011. www.destinationcrm.com/articles/Web-
Exclusives/Viewpoints/Six-Myths-of-Social-Media-77185.aspx.
Pombriant, Denis. “When Will CRM Join the Analytics Revolution?” SearchCRM.com, February
3, 2011. http://searchcrm.techtarget.com/news/2240031716/When-will-CRM-join-the-
analytics-revolution.
Rosenbaum, David. “Now You See (Some of) It.” CFO Magazine, July 15, 2011. www.cfo.com/
article.cfm/14586485.
Wagner, William, and Zubey, Michael. Customer Relationship Management, 1st edition. Boston:
Cengage Learning, 2007.
Weiss, Todd R. “Social CRM for the Enterprise: How Analytics Can Move You to Greater
Success.” CIO, July 06, 2011. www.cio.com/article/685754.
76
Chapter 3

C H A P T E R4
PRODUCTION AND SUPPLY
CHAIN MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the steps in the production planning process of a high-volume
manufacturer, such as Fitter Snacker
•
Describe Fitter Snacker’s production and materials management
problems
•
Explain how a structured supply chain management planning process
enhances efficiency and decision making
•
Understand how production planning data in an ERP system can be
shared with suppliers to increase supply chain efficiency
I N T R O D U C T I O N
In Chapter 2, you learned that Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) has its roots in materials
requirements planning (MRP) processes and software. Materials requirements planning, and the
extension of that process to partners in the supply chain, are important parts of today’s ERP
systems. In fact, effective supply chain management is critical to the success of companies such as
Fitter Snacker. In this chapter, we will first examine how Fitter manages its production activities, and
then we will explore some supply chain management functions in an ERP system. We will also we
will look at the broader concept of supply chain management.

In Chapter 3, we looked at Fitter’s sales order process, and we assumed that Fitter had enough
snack bars in its warehouse to fill a typical order. Like most unintegrated manufacturing operations,
however, Fitter often has problems scheduling production. Consequently, sometimes its warehouse
is not adequately stocked, and customer orders cannot be filled in a timely fashion—leading to
customer dissatisfaction and lost sales. In this chapter, you will explore Fitter’s supply chain
management problems and learn how ERP can help solve them.
PRODUCTION OVERVIEW
To efficiently meet customer demand, Fitter must develop an estimate of customer
demand, and then develop a production schedule to meet that forecasted demand.
Developing a production plan is a complicated task, but the end result answers two simple
questions:
•
How many of each type of snack bar should we produce, and when?
•
What quantities of raw materials should we order so we can meet that level of
production, and when should they be ordered?
Developing a good production plan is just the first step: Fitter must also be able to
execute the plan and make adjustments when customer demand does not meet the
forecast. An ERP system is a good tool for developing and executing production plans
because it integrates the functions of production planning, purchasing, materials
management/warehousing, quality management, sales, and accounting. To support even
better supply chain management, companies can connect ERP systems to supplier and
customer information systems as well.
In this chapter, we will use spreadsheet examples to illustrate the logic that Fitter
should be using to plan and schedule production of its NRG bars. First, we will look at
Fitter’s current production process, as well as some of the associated problems that are
due to Fitter’s unintegrated systems. We will use spreadsheets to further explore the
planning and scheduling logic required at each stage of the production planning process,
and then we will examine the SAP ERP screens that implement this logic in an ERP
environment. Throughout the chapter, you will develop a deeper understanding of why
using an integrated information system is superior to using unintegrated systems.
The goal of production planning is to schedule production economically so a company
can ship goods to its customers by the promised delivery dates in the most cost-efficient
manner. There are three general approaches to production:
•
Make-to-stock—Items are made for inventory (the “stock”) in anticipation of
sales orders; most consumer products (for example, cameras, canned corn,
and books) are made this way.
•
Make-to-order—Items are produced to fill specific customer orders;
companies usually take this approach when producing items that are too
expensive to keep in stock or items that are made or configured to customer
78
Chapter 4

specifications. Examples of make-to-order items are airplanes and large
industrial equipment.
•
Assemble-to-order—Items are produced using a combination of make-to-
stock and make-to-order processes; the final product is assembled for a
specific order from a selection of make-to-stock components. Personal
computers are a typical assemble-to-order product.
Fitter’s Manufacturing Process
Fitter uses make-to-stock production techniques to produce its snack bars. The
manufacturing process is illustrated in Figure 4-1.
Raw material
warehouse
Finished goods
warehouse
Mixer
Mixer
Mixer
Mixer
Snack bar production line
Form
Bake
Pack
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-1
Fitter’s manufacturing process
The snack bar production line can produce 200 bars per minute—or 12,000 bars per
hour. Each bar weighs 4 ounces, which means the line produces 48,000 ounces (or 3,000
pounds) of bars per hour. The entire production line operates on one shift a day. The next
section describes Fitter’s production process in more detail.
Fitter’s Production Sequence
Raw materials are taken from the warehouse to one of four mixers. Each mixer mixes
dough in 500-pound batches. Mixing a batch of dough requires 15 minutes of mixing time,
plus another 15 minutes to unload, clean, and load the mixer for the next batch of dough;
therefore, each mixer can produce two 500-pound batches of dough per hour. That means
the four mixers can produce a total of 4,000 pounds of dough per hour—more than the
production line can process. Because only three mixers need to be operating at a time to
produce 3,000 pounds of snack bars per hour, a mixer breakdown will not shut down the
production line.
After mixing, the dough is dumped into a hopper (bin) at the beginning of the snack
bar production line. A forming mechanism molds the dough into bars, which will weigh
4 ounces each. Next, an automated process takes the formed bars on a conveyor belt
through an oven that bakes the bars for 30 minutes. When the bars emerge from the oven,
they are individually packaged in a foil wrapper, and each group of 24 bars is packaged
into a display box. At the end of the snack bar line, display boxes are stacked on pallets
(for larger orders the display boxes are first packed into shipping boxes, which are then
stacked on the pallets).
79
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Switching the production line from one type of snack bar to the other takes 30 minutes—
for cleaning the equipment and changing the wrappers, display boxes, and shipping cases.
Each night, a second shift of employees cleans all the equipment thoroughly and sets it up
for the next day’s production. Thus, changing production from NRG-A on one day to NRG-B
the next day can be done at the end of the day without a loss of capacity. (Capacity is the
maximum amount of bars that can be produced.) On the other hand, producing two products
in one day results in a half-hour loss of capacity during the changeover.
Fitter’s Production Problems
Fitter has no problems making snack bars, but it does have problems deciding how many
bars to make and when to make them. The manufacturing process at Fitter suffers from a
number of problems, ranging from communication breakdowns and inventory issues to
accounting inconsistencies, mainly stemming from the unintegrated nature of its
information systems.
Communication Problems
Communication breakdowns are an inherent problem in most companies, and they are
magnified in a company with an unintegrated information system. For example, at Fitter,
Marketing and Sales personnel do a poor job of sharing information with Production
personnel. Marketing and Sales frequently excludes Production from meetings, neglects to
consult Production when planning sales promotions, and often fails to even alert
Production of planned promotions. Marketing and Sales also typically forgets to notify
Production when it takes an exceptionally large order.
When Production must meet an unexpected increase in demand, several things
happen. First, warehouse inventories are depleted. To compensate, Production must
schedule overtime labor, which results in higher production costs for products. Second,
because some materials (such as ingredients, wrappers, and display boxes) are custom
products purchased from a single vendor, a sudden increase in sales demand can cause
shortages or even a stockout of these materials. Getting these materials to Fitter’s plant
might require expedited shipping, further increasing the cost of production. Finally,
unexpected spikes in demand result in high levels of frustration for Production staff.
Production personnel are evaluated on their performance—how successful they are at
controlling costs, keeping manufacturing lines running, maintaining quality control, and
operating safely. If they cannot keep production costs down, Production staff receive poor
evaluations. Managers are especially frustrated when an instant need for overtime follows a
period of low demand. With advance notice of a product promotion by Marketing and
Sales, Production could use slack periods to build up inventory in anticipation of the
increase in sales.
Inventory Problems
As noted earlier, Fitter’s week-to-week and day-to-day production planning is not linked in
a systematic way to expected sales levels. When deciding how much to produce, the
production manager applies rules developed through experience. Her primary indicator is
the difference between the normal amount of finished goods inventory that should be
stocked and the actual inventory levels of finished goods in the warehouse. Thus, if NRG-A
or NRG-B inventory levels seem low, the production manager schedules more bars for
production. However, she does not want too many bars in inventory because they have a
80
Chapter 4

limited shelf life. Her judgment is also influenced by the information she hears informally
from people in Marketing and Sales about expected sales levels.
The production manager’s inventory data are maintained in an Access database. Data
records are not updated in real time and do not flag inventory that has been sold but not
yet shipped. (Such inventory is not available for sale, of course, but employees cannot
determine this by looking at the database; thus, workers do not know the level of
inventory that is available to ship at any given moment). This is problematic if the
Wholesale Division generates unusually large orders or high volumes of orders. For
example, two large Wholesale Division orders arriving at the same time can deplete the
entire available inventory of NRG-A bars. If Production is manufacturing NRG-B bars at
that time, it must halt production of those bars so it can fill the orders for NRG-A. This
means delaying production of NRG-B bars and losing production capacity due to the
unplanned production changeover.
The production manager lacks a systematic method not only for meeting anticipated
sales demand, but also for adjusting production to reflect actual sales. Marketing and Sales
does not share actual sales data with the Production Department, partly because this
information is hard to gather on a timely basis and partly because of a lack of trust
between the Sales and Production departments (as a result of prior negative experiences).
If Production had access to sales forecasts and real-time sales order information, the
manager could make timely adjustments to production, if needed. These adjustments
would allow inventory levels to come much closer to what is actually needed.
Accounting and Purchasing Problems
Production and Accounting do not have a good way to calculate the day-to-day costs of
Fitter’s production. Manufacturing costs are based on the number of bars produced each
day, a number that is measured at the end of the snack bar production line. For the
purpose of figuring manufacturing costs, Fitter uses standard costs, which are the normal
costs of manufacturing a product; standard costs are calculated from historical data,
factoring in any changes in manufacturing that have occurred since the collection of the
historical data. For each batch of bars it produces, Fitter can estimate direct costs
(materials and labor) and indirect costs (factory overhead). The number of batches
produced is multiplied by the standard cost of a batch, and the resulting amount is
charged to manufacturing costs.
Most manufacturing companies use standard costs in some way, but the method
requires that standards be adjusted periodically to conform with actual costs. (These
adjustments will be discussed in Chapter 5.) Fitter’s actual raw material and labor costs
often deviate from the standard costs, in part, because Fitter is not good at controlling raw
materials purchases. The production manager cannot give the purchasing manager a good
production forecast, so the purchasing manager works on two tracks: First, she tries to
keep raw materials inventories high to avoid stockouts. Second, if she is offered good bulk-
quantity discounts on raw materials such as oats, she will buy in bulk, especially for items
that have long lead times for delivery. These purchasing practices make it difficult both to
forecast the volume of raw materials that will be on hand and to calculate an average cost
of the materials purchased for profitability planning. Fitter also has trouble accurately
forecasting the average cost of labor for a batch of bars because of the frequent need for
overtime labor.
81
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Thus, Production and Accounting must periodically compare standard costs with
actual costs and then adjust the accounts for the inevitable differences, which is always a
tedious and unpleasant job. The comparison should be done at each monthly closing, but
Fitter often puts it off until the closing at the end of each quarter, when its financial
backers require legitimate financial statements. The necessary adjustments are often quite
large, depending on production volumes and costs during the quarter.
Exercise 4.1
a.
A convenience store chain offers to buy a very large amount of its store brand
health bars (the NRG-B bars with a customized wrapper). The chain wants a
lower-than-normal price because the proposed order is quadruple the size of its
regular order. The marketing manager asks managers from Production,
Purchasing, and Accounting whether the terms of the proposed deal will be
profitable. Will the managers in these areas be able to provide a reliable answer
on short notice?
b.
The production manager notes that current warehouse inventory levels are
fairly high, so the production line does not need to be run for a full eight
hours each day during the coming week. For several reasons, however, she
plans to run the line for eight hours a day anyway. If the line shuts down
workers would still need to be paid during the idle time and overhead costs
would continue to be incurred as well. Running the line full time decreases
the average cost of bars actually produced (indirect costs can be spread over
more bars). In addition, some warehoused raw materials will spoil if they
are not used soon. Is the production manager’s reasoning logical? Why, or
why not?
THE PRODUCTION PLANNING PROCESS
In this section, you will examine a systematic process for developing a production plan
that takes advantage of an ERP system. Spreadsheet calculations are presented to explain
and illustrate the key steps, and the corresponding screens in the SAP ERP system follow
the spreadsheet data.
Production planners are employees who interact with the inventory system and the
sales forecast to determine how much to produce. Planners follow three important
principles:
•
Using a sales forecast, and taking into account current inventory levels,
create an aggregate (combined) production plan for all products. Aggregate
production plans help to simplify the planning process in two ways: First,
plans are made for groups of related products rather than for individual
products. Second, the time increment used in aggregate planning is
frequently a month or a quarter, while the production plans that will actually
be executed operate on a daily or weekly basis. Aggregate plans should
consider the available capacity in the facility.
•
Break down the aggregate plan into more specific production plans for
individual products and then into smaller time intervals.
•
Use the production plan to determine raw material requirements.
82
Chapter 4

Production planners aggregate products into product groups to reduce the number of
variables they must consider when developing a production plan. Developing production
groups can be complicated. For example, cereal manufacturers can group together
different package sizes, or they might group together product brands (such as kids’
cereals, health cereals, and so on). A consumer products company may group by product
type (e.g., shampoo, laundry detergent, and disposable diapers). The aggregate production
plan for Fitter will combine the only two products, NRG-A and NRG-B bars, into one
group to illustrate the process. The plan will be developed using a monthly time
increment. Ultimately, the monthly production plan will be disaggregated to determine
weekly raw materials orders and daily production schedules.
The SAP ERP Approach to Production Planning
The SAP ERP approach to the production planning process is shown in Figure 4-2. Refer to
this figure throughout this discussion to track the stages in the production planning process.
Sales forecasting
Sales and operations planning
Demand management
Detailed
scheduling
Production
MRP
Purchasing
Starting inventory
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-2
The SAP ERP production planning process
The information at each stage of the production process flows through the following
steps, which are explained in detail in the upcoming sections:
•
Sales forecasting is the process of predicting future demand for a company’s
products.
•
Sales and operations planning (SOP) is the process of determining what the
company will produce. In the diagram, the Sales forecasting and Starting
83
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

inventory levels are inputs to this process. At first glance, it might seem that
a company should just make products to match forecasted sales, but
developing the production plan is often more complicated than that because
capacity must be considered. Many products have seasonal demand, and to
meet demand during peak periods, production planners must decide whether
to build up inventory levels before the peak demand, increase capacity
during the peak period, subcontract production, or use some combination of
these approaches.
•
In the Demand management step, the production plan is broken down into
smaller time units, such as weekly or even daily production figures, to meet
demand for individual products.
•
The Materials requirements planning (MRP) process determines the amount
and timing of raw material orders. This process answers the questions:
“What raw materials should we be ordering so we can meet a particular level
of production?” and “When should we order these materials?”
•
In the Purchasing step, the quantity and timing information from the MRP
process is used to create raw materials purchase orders, which are
transmitted to qualified suppliers.
•
The Detailed scheduling process uses the production plans developed during
the demand management step as an input for a production schedule. The
detailed scheduling method used depends on the manufacturing
environment. For Fitter, the detailed production schedule will determine
when the production line will switch between the NRG-A and NRG-B bars.
•
The Production process uses the detailed schedule to manage daily
operations, answering the questions: “What should we be producing?” and
“What staffing do we need to produce those products?”
Let’s take a more detailed look at each of these steps in the production process.
Sales Forecasting
Currently, Fitter Snacker has no formal way of developing a sales forecast and sharing it
with Production. SAP’s ERP system would allow it to take an integrated approach to sales
forecasting. Whenever a sale is recorded in SAP’s ERP Sales and Distribution (SD) module,
the quantity sold is recorded as a consumption value for that material. These consumption
values can be updated on a weekly or monthly basis, as desired. If more detail is needed,
the Logistics Information system that is part of SAP ERP can record sales with more detail
(for example, by region or sales office), or data can be stored in the separate Business
Warehouse (BW) system for more detailed analysis. With an integrated information
system, accurate historical sales data are available for forecasting.
A range of forecasting techniques can be used to predict consumer demand. One
simple forecasting technique is to use a prior period’s sales and then adjust those figures
for current conditions. To make a forecast for Fitter, we can use the previous year’s
sales data in combination with information on this year’s marketing initiatives to predict
future sales. Look at the forecasts that were created for January through June, shown
in Figure 4-3.
84
Chapter 4

Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
June
Previous year (cases)
5734
5823
5884
6134
6587
6735
Promotion sales (cases)
300
300
Previous year base (cases)
5734
5823
5884
6134
6287
6435
Growth:
3.0%
172
175
177
184
189
193
Base projection (cases)
5906
5998
6061
6318
6476
6628
Promotion (cases)
500
Sales forecast (cases)
5906
5998
6061
6318
6476
7128
Sales forecasting
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-3
Fitter’s sales forecast for January through June
The sales data in Figure 4-3 are for shipping cases, which contain 12 display boxes
with 24 bars each, for a total of 288 bars. Note in Figure 4-3 that the forecast starts with
the previous year’s sales levels, to reflect Fitter’s seasonal sales fluctuations (sales are
higher in the summer when more people are active). Also note that there was a special
marketing promotion last year. The estimated impact of this promotion was an increase in
sales of 300 cases for May and June. To get accurate base figures for last year’s sales, this
promotional increase must be subtracted from the previous year’s sales numbers.
Fitter’s Marketing and Sales Department anticipates a 3 percent growth in sales over
last year, based on current trends and on research reported in trade publications. In
addition, Fitter will be launching a special marketing promotion at the end of May to
increase sales at the beginning of the summer season. As shown in Figure 4-3, Fitter
marketing experts think the promotion will result in a sales increase of 500 cases for June.
Exercise 4.2
Following the format of the spreadsheet in Figure 4-3, develop a spreadsheet to forecast
Fitter’s sales for July through December. Calculate the base projection using the previous
year’s values (shown in Figure 4-4), and factor in the 3 percent estimated growth rate.
Assume that the special marketing promotion last year resulted in an increase in sales of
200 cases for July, and that a special marketing promotion this year will result in an
increase in sales for July of 400 cases.
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Previous year
6702
6327
6215
6007
5954
5813
Sales volume
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-4
Fitter’s sales for last year, July through December
Sales and Operations Planning
Sales and operations planning (SOP) is the next step in the production planning process.
The input to this step is the sales forecast provided by Marketing and Sales. The output is
a production plan designed to balance demand with production capacity. The production
plan becomes the input to the next step, demand management. The goal is to develop a
production plan that meets demand without exceeding capacity and that maintains
85
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

“reasonable” inventory levels (neither too high nor two low). This process requires
judgment and experience.
A sales and operations plan is developed from a sales forecast, and it determines how
Manufacturing can efficiently produce enough goods to meet projected sales. In Fitter’s
case, there is no way to make this determination, because Fitter does not produce a
formal estimate of sales. If Fitter had an ERP system, the calculation would be done as
described here.
We know that Fitter can produce 200 bars per minute, so we can estimate the
production capacity required by the sales forecast. Figure 4-5 shows Fitter’s sales and
operations plan for the first six months of the year.
Sales and operations planning
Dec.
Jan.
Feb.
March
April
May
June
1)  Sales forecast
5906
5998
6061
6318
6476
7128
2)  Production plan
5906
5998
6061
6318
6650
6950
3)  Inventory
100
100
100
100
100
274
96
4)  Working days
21
20
23
21
21
22
5)  Capacity (shipping cases)
6999
6666
7666
6999
6999
7333
6)  Utilization
84%
90%
79%
90%
95%
95%
7)  NRG-A (cases)
70.0%
4134
4199
4243
4423
4655
4865
8)  NRG-B (cases)
30.0%
1772
1799
1818
1895
1995
2085
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-5
Fitter’s sales and operations plan for January through June
The first line in Figure 4-5 is the sales forecast, which is the output of the sales
forecasting process shown in Figure 4-3. The next line is the production plan, which the
production planner develops—in a trial-and-error fashion—by observing the effect of
different production quantities on the lines in the spreadsheet that calculate inventory
levels and capacity utilization (the amount of plant capacity that is being consumed).
The third line, inventory, calculates what the inventory should be based on the
previous periods inventory, sales forecast, and production plan. The plan in this example
assumes an inventory of 100 cases as of the end of December. Adding production of 5,906
cases to this inventory and subtracting the forecast sales of 5,906 cases will leave an
inventory of 100 cases at the end of January, if things go according to plan. The
production planner has developed a plan that maintains a minimum planned inventory of
approximately 100 cases. This inventory, called safety stock, is planned so if sales demand
exceeds the forecast by no more than 100 cases, sales can be met without altering the
production plan. Notice that in May, the production plan is greater than the May sales
forecast and the inventory is 274. Why? Because the planner wants to build up inventory
to handle the increased demand in June, which results from the normal seasonal increase
in snack bar sales and additional demand from the planned promotional activities.
The fourth line shows the number of working days in a given month, an input based
on the company calendar. Using the number of working days in a month, the available
capacity each month is calculated in terms of the number of shipping cases:
•
200 bars per minute × 60 minutes per hour × 8 hours per day = 96,000
bars per day
•
96,000 bars per day ÷ 24 bars per box ÷ 12 boxes per case = 333.3 cases
per day
86
Chapter 4

•
Multiplying the number of working days in a month times the production
capacity of 333.3 shipping cases per day gives you the monthly capacity in
shipping cases, which is shown in line 5.
With the available capacity (assuming no overtime) now expressed in terms of
shipping cases, it is possible to determine the capacity utilization for each month by
dividing the production plan amount (line 2) by the available capacity (line 5). The result
is expressed as the utilization percentage (line 6). This capacity calculation shows whether
Fitter has the capacity necessary to meet the production plan. While higher levels of
capacity utilization mean that Fitter is producing more with its production resources, this
percentage must be kept below 100 percent to allow for production losses due to product
changeovers, equipment breakdowns, and other unexpected production problems. The
sales and operations plan in Figure 4-5 shows that Fitter’s highest level of capacity
utilization is 95 percent in May and June.
The last step in sales and operations planning is to disaggregate the plan, that is, to
break it down into plans for individual products. Lines 7 and 8 in Figure 4-5 disaggregate
the planned production shown in line 2, based on the breakdown of 70 percent NRG-A and
30 percent NRG-B snack bars. This 70/30 breakdown was established using previous sales
data for these products. The monthly production quantities in lines 7 and 8 are the output
of the sales and operations planning process, and they are the primary input to the
demand management process.
Suppose that Fitter is regularly able to achieve production levels at 90 percent of
capacity. If the sales forecast requires more than 90 percent capacity, Fitter management
can choose from among the following alternatives to develop a production plan:
•
Fitter might choose not to meet all the forecasted sales demand, or it might
reduce promotional activities to decrease sales.
•
To increase capacity, Fitter might plan to use overtime production. Doing
that, however, would increase labor cost per unit.
•
Inventory levels could be built up in earlier months, when sales levels are
lower, to reduce the capacity requirements in later months. Doing that,
however, would increase inventory holding costs and increase the risk that
NRG bars held in inventory might pass their expiration date before being sold
by retailers.
•
To find the right balance, management might try a hybrid approach to the
capacity problem: reduce sales promotions slightly, increase production in
earlier months, and plan for some overtime production.
The monthly production quantities (in lines 7 and 8 of Figure 4-5) create some
inventory in May to meet June’s sales; in addition, some overtime production is likely in
May and June because capacity utilization is over 90 percent.
This example illustrates the value of an integrated system: it provides a tool for
incorporating data from Marketing and Sales and Manufacturing and for evaluating
different plans. Whereas Marketing and Sales may want to increase sales, the company
might not increase its profits if overtime costs or inventory holding costs are too high. This
sort of planning is difficult to do without an integrated information system, even for small
companies like Fitter. Having an integrated information system helps managers of all
functional areas meet corporate profit goals.
87
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Sales and Operations Planning in SAP ERP
In SAP ERP, the sales forecast can incorporate historical sales data from the Sales and
Distribution (SD) module, or the forecast can be created using input from plans developed
in the Controlling (CO) module. In the CO module, profit goals for the company can be
set, which can then be used to estimate the sales levels needed to meet the profit goals.
Figure 4-6 shows the sales and operations planning screen from the SAP ERP system. The
title of this screen is “Create Rough-Cut Plan.” Rough-cut planning is a common term in
manufacturing for aggregate planning. As described above, rough-cut plans are
disaggregated to generate detailed production schedules.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-6
Sales and operations planning screen in SAP ERP
The sales forecast is entered in the first row (Sales) of the rough-cut plan. Data can be
entered manually by the user, a sales forecast can be transferred from a profitability
analysis performed in the CO module, or the user can perform a forecast in this screen,
calling up historical sales data from the SAP ERP system. The second row, Production,
represents the production that is planned to meet the sales forecast. Production figures
can also be entered manually, or the SAP system can generate values that meet sales
goals. The third row shows inventory as the Stock level. The gray shading of that row
indicates it is a calculated result. The fourth row allows for the entry of a Target stock
88
Chapter 4

level. If the user enters a value in this row, then SAP ERP will propose production levels to
meet the Target stock level. Once the Target stock level is entered, the system will
calculate the number of days’ worth of supply, so the fifth row (Days’ supply) is a
calculated result. The sixth row lets the user specify a target stock level in terms of the
number of days of demand it would cover, known as Target days’ supply. The SAP
system uses the factory calendar, which specifies company holidays and planned
shutdowns, to determine the number of working days in a month when calculating the
Target days’ supply.
If the sales plan (the first line in Figure 4-6) is to be developed using forecasting tools,
the SAP ERP system can provide the planner with historical sales values based on sales
data stored in the system. Without an integrated system such as SAP, the planner would
likely have to request sales figures from the Sales Department, and he or she might not be
sure how accurate the data were. Figure 4-7 shows how the SAP ERP system displays
historical sales figures.
Field where planner can
“correct” the sales value 
Sales provided
from SD module 
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-7
Historical sales figures in SAP
In addition to providing the historical sales values from the Sales and Distribution
module, this screen allows the planner to “correct” the sales values. For example, sales
may have been low in the past due to unusual weather conditions, or the planner might
know that sales would have been higher if the company was able to meet all the demand.
The sales figures used for forecasting should represent the best estimate of what demand
was in the past, not necessarily what the actual sales were.
The SAP ERP system can automatically graph these data to help the planner
determine if there are any unusual patterns in the historical sales values that require
investigation. The planner can correct these values as well, to adjust sales values that were
unusually high or low, or to back out (or subtract) the effects of previous sales promotions.
After the sales forecast is made, it can be adjusted to incorporate increased sales from
89
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

planned sales promotions. Once the historical data are acceptable, the user can select one
of the SAP ERP tools shown in Figure 4-8 to prepare the forecast.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-8
Forecasting model options in SAP ERP
This screen allows the user to specify a number of forecasting parameters, including
whether the model should allow for trends and seasonal variations. Once the SAP ERP
system generates a forecast, the planner can view the results graphically, as shown in
Figure 4-9. While the SAP ERP system also provides the standard statistical measures of
forecast accuracy, human judgment is frequently the best determinant of whether the
forecast results make sense.
90
Chapter 4

Historical sales values
“Corrected” value
Forecasted sales
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-9
Forecasting results presented graphically in SAP ERP
Another feature of the SAP ERP sales and operations planning process is the
integration of rough-cut capacity planning. A sample screen is shown in Figure 4-10.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-10
Sales and operation plan with rough-cut capacity calculation in SAP ERP
91
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Rough-cut capacity planning applies simple capacity-estimating techniques (like
those shown in the spreadsheet example in Figure 4-5) to the production plan to see if
the production plan is feasible. Frequently, rough-cut capacity planning techniques are
applied to critical resources—those machines or production lines where capacity is
usually limited. For a company with a simple manufacturing process, these estimates
can be very precise. For more complex manufacturing processes, these estimates will
not be completely accurate, but they will ensure that the production plans are at least
reasonable. Managers can use SAP ERP’s more sophisticated planning tools at the detailed
scheduling level, when the plans that are developed will actually be converted into
manufacturing decisions.
While an integrated ERP system like SAP can provide sophisticated tools to support
the sales and operations planning process, the plan will only be successful if the
interested parties are committed to the process. If Marketing and Sales and
Manufacturing cannot agree on sales forecasts, promotions, and production plans, then
the company will find it is overstocking some items, running out of others, and spending
a lot of money on overtime production and expedited shipping. Successful sales and
operations planning depend on developing a culture of cooperation between Marketing
and Sales and Manufacturing; that requires continuous support, encouragement, and
enforcement from top management. As you will learn in Chapter 7, changing a
company’s culture is usually a much more difficult challenge than the technical
challenge of installing new hardware and software.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Sales and Operations Planning for Blood Banks
Sales and operations planning (SOP) is typically used in for-profit manufacturing
organizations; however a recent article in the Journal of Blood Services Management
suggests there could be significant advantages to applying sales and operations planning
concepts to the blood-banking process. The supply chain necessary to supply blood is
significant and complex. For example, the nonprofit America’s Blood Centers is a
network of more than 600 donor centers supplying over 3,500 hospitals and healthcare
facilities in North America.
In the article “Benefits to Blood Banks of a Sales and Operations Planning
Process,” authors Donald A. Keal and Phil Hebert make the argument that sales and
operations planning concepts are applicable to blood-banking systems. The key reason,
they argue, is that sales and operations planning is a process “that links high-level
strategic plans to day-to-day operations.” Through the use of sales and operations
planning, managers can better manage change by proactively addressing potential
problems and opportunities.
One of the unique features of blood banking is that there are customers at both ends
of the supply chain. Blood donors are the suppliers but are also customers for the
donation centers. While there are still a significant number of blood plasma centers that
pay for donations, most blood donation is unpaid. On the distribution end, while hospital
patients are the recipients of donated blood, the healthcare provider is the blood bank’s
customer.
(continued)
92
Chapter 4

The authors provide an example of how sales and operations planning could
impact the supply and demand of a particular blood product, single-donor platelets
(SDPs). As with any business, a blood center must quickly identify variations in
forecasted supply and demand and take action to lessen the potential negative effects
of those variations. For instance, if the demand for SDPs at a blood center falls below
projections, “the excess SDPs may be exported if they have sufficient shelf life
remaining, or donors may be rescheduled to reduce supply. If SDP demand spikes,
recruitment and collections may have to work overtime to recruit more donors.”
Blood banks may not be for-profit companies, but they cannot operate at a loss
either. The authors note that an advantage of a sales and operations planning process is
that it requires performance measurement. By using measurements, such as RONA
(return on net assets), a blood center can help blood centers avoid situations in which
“the cost per unit (CPU) collected is higher than the sales cost of a unit to the health
care provider or what an imported unit would cost.”
One of the major challenges to applying the sales and operations planning process to
blood banks is data accuracy. The authors note that it is not uncommon to have data
inconsistencies between the blood management system and the financial system.
Without accurate and consistent data, the results of the sales and operations planning
process would not be valid.
Question:
1.
Write a memo to the director of a blood donation center in your geographic
area recommending the implementation of the sales and operations planning
process to their blood banking system. Explain the benefits of such a system,
and make sure that you identify and address arguments that might be made
against your proposal. Specifically address the issue of performance measures
in a nonprofit environment.
Disaggregating the Sales and Operations Plan in SAP ERP
As mentioned previously, companies typically develop sales and operations plans for
product groups. Product groups are especially important for companies that have
hundreds of products, because developing unique plans for hundreds of individual
products is extremely time consuming. Furthermore, it would be hard to develop that
many different plans in a coordinated fashion while also taking in consideration
production capacity. Fitter’s product group is very simple; 70 percent of the group consists
of NRG-A bars, and 30 percent consists of NRG-B bars.
Figure 4-11 shows how product groups are defined in the SAP ERP system. The
system allows any number of products to be assigned to a product group. Product groups
can have other product groups as members, as well, so complicated aggregations can be
defined.
93
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

NRG group consists of
70% NRG‐A bars and
30% NRG‐B bars
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-11
Product group structure in SAP ERP
When the sales and operations plan is disaggregated, the production plan quantities
specified for the group are transferred to the individual products that make up the group,
according to the percentages defined in the product group structure.
The results of the disaggregation process can be seen in the Stock/Requirements List
screen shown in Figure 4-12.
Anticipated demand for
NRG‐A bars from sales
and operations plan 
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-12
Stock/Requirements List for NRG-A bars after disaggregation
94
Chapter 4

The Stock/Requirements List screen displays the inventory level for an individual
product, including all planned additions and reductions. In Figure 4-10, the production
plan for November is 6,377. Seventy percent of 6,377 is 4,464, which is shown in
Figure 4-12 as an independent requirement (IndReq). The independent requirements are
the output of the disaggregation of the sales and operations plan, and they are used in
master production scheduling to determine the schedule for finished product production.
Exercise 4.3
Using the Fitter sales forecast for July through December that you created in Exercise 4.2,
develop a spreadsheet for sales and operations planning for those same months. Use the
format of the spreadsheet shown in Figure 4-5. The number of working days for each
month is shown in Figure 4-13.
days
20
23
21
21
21
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-13
The number of working days at Fitter, July through December
For your production plan, try to keep the capacity utilization at 95 percent or less. To
disaggregate the plan for the group into plans for NRG-A and NRG-B bars, use 70 percent
of sales for NRG-A bars and 30 percent for NRG-B bars.
Demand Management
The demand management step of the production planning process links the sales and
operations planning process with the detailed scheduling and materials requirements
planning processes. The output of the demand management process is the master
production schedule (MPS), which is the production plan for all finished goods. For Fitter,
the master production schedule is an input in the detailed scheduling process, which
determines which bars the company should make and when it should make them. The
master production schedule is also an input to the materials requirements planning
process, which determines what raw materials to order to support the production
schedule.
The demand management process splits Fitter’s monthly production planning
values into finer time periods. Figure 4-14 shows January’s production plan by week and
by day.
95
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

 
 
1/3–1/7
Jan 3
Jan 4
Jan 5
Jan 6
Jan 7
1/10–1/14
1/17–1/21
1/24–1/28
2/1–2/4
1037
444
21
21
21
21
21
197
84
197
84
197
84
197
84
197
84
984
422
984
422
984
422
984
422
1/31
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-14
Fitter’s production plan for January: The first five weeks of production are followed by
a day-by-day disaggregation of Week 1
Fitter will use the weekly plan (which is derived from the sales and operation plan in
Figure 4-5) for purchasing materials management. Daily plans will be used for the product(s)
that are to be produced on the snack bar line. To get the results shown in Figure 4-14, the
following calculations were performed:
•
For the weekly plan, the MPS plan for NRG-A bars in Week 1 was calculated
as: (4,134 cases in January [the monthly demand from Figure 4-5] ÷ 21
working days in month of January) × 5 working days in Week 1 = 984.3
cases per week.
This figure was rounded to 984 cases in Figure 4-14.
•
Because Week 5 consists of the last day in January and the first four days in
February, the MPS for NRG-A bars in Week 5 was calculated as:
•
(4,134 cases in January [monthly demand] ÷ 21 working days in month
of January) × 1 working day in Week 5 = 196.9 cases
•
(4,198 cases in February [monthly demand] ÷ 20 working days in month
of February) × 4 working days in Week 5 = 839.6 cases
•
Week 5 Total = 196.9 + 839.6 = 1,036.5 cases
In Figure 4-14, the master production schedule (MPS) cases for Week 5 were rounded to
1,037 for the NRG-A bars.
In Figure 4-14, the daily production plan values for NRG-A and NRG-B bars were
calculated by taking the monthly production plan value and dividing it by the number of
working days in the month.
96
Chapter 4

Notice that the demand management process involves no user input. Input is from the
sales and operations planning step. The SAP ERP software also uses information from the
factory calendar (working days in week and month) to calculate the MPS.
Fitter does not currently do this sort of planning because it has no way to formally
share sales forecast data between Marketing and Production. The company cannot relate
its possible sales to its capacity and to the time available to make the product. Thus, Fitter
cannot produce an accurate master production schedule.
The MPS is an input to the detailed scheduling and materials requirements planning
processes. Materials requirements planning (MRP) is discussed next, followed by a
discussion of detailed scheduling.
Exercise 4.4
Develop a weekly production plan for August, like the one for January shown in Figure 4-14.
For the weekly sales periods, the last week will include two days in September. The factory
calendar information is shown in Figure 4-15.
8/1–8/5
4
20
8/8–8/12
5
20
8/15–8/19
5
20
8/22–8/26
5
20
8/29–8/31
3
20
9/1–9/2
2
23
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-15
Fitter’s factory calendar for August
Materials Requirements Planning (MRP)
Materials requirements planning (MRP) is the process that determines the quantity and
timing of the production or purchase of subassemblies and raw materials required to
support the master production schedule. The materials requirements planning process
answers the questions, “What quantities of raw materials should we order so we can meet
that level of production?” and “When should these materials be ordered?” In this section,
you will see how Fitter could accurately plan its raw materials purchases if it had an
ERP system.
In Fitter’s case, all product components (ingredients, snack bar wrappers, and display
boxes) are purchased, so the company could use the materials requirements planning
process to determine the timing and quantities for purchase orders. To understand
materials requirements planning, you must understand the bill of material, the material’s
lead time, and the material’s lot sizing, which we will discuss in the following sections.
Bill of Material
The bill of material (BOM) is a list of the materials (including quantities) needed to make
a product. The BOM for a 500-pound batch of the NRG-A or NRG-B bars is shown in
Figure 4-16.
97
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Oats (lb.)
Wheat germ (lb.)
Cinnamon (lb.)
Nutmeg (lb.)
Cloves (lb.)
Honey (gal.)
Canola oil (gal.)
Vit./min. powder (lb.)
Carob chips (lb.)
Raisins (lb.)
Protein powder (lb.)
Hazelnuts (lb.)
Dates (lb.)
Ingredient
NRG-A
NRG-B
Quantity
300
50
5
2
1
10
7
5
50
50
250
50
5
2
1
10
7
5
50
30
70
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-16
The bill of material (BOM) for Fitter’s NRG bars
The BOM for Fitter’s NRG bars is fairly simple because all ingredients are mixed
together to form the dough; there are no intermediary steps. Many other products,
however, are produced by joining component parts into subassemblies that are then joined
to form the finished product. It is obviously more complicated to calculate the raw
material requirements for products with more complex BOMs.
Lead Times and Lot Sizing
The BOM can be used to calculate how much of each raw material is required to produce
a finished product. Determining the timing and quantity of purchase orders, however,
requires information on lead times and lot sizing.
For example, if a manufacturer orders a make-to-stock item, the lead time is the
cumulative time required for the supplier to receive and process the order, take the
material out of stock, package it, load it on a truck, and deliver it to the manufacturer. The
manufacturer might also include the time required to receive the material into its
warehouse (unloading the truck, inspecting the goods, and moving the goods into a storage
location).
Lot sizing refers to the process of determining production quantities (for raw
materials produced in-house) and order quantities (for purchased items). In Fitter’s case,
many raw materials can only be ordered from a supplier in certain bulk quantities. For
example, because Fitter uses large quantities of oats, the most cost-effective way to
purchase oats is in bulk hopper-truck quantities, which means that the material must be
ordered in 44,000-pound quantities. Wheat germ, however, is used in smaller quantities,
and to avoid having wheat germ become stale, Fitter orders it in 2,000-pound bulk
containers. Protein powder is packaged in 50-pound bags that are loaded 25 to a pallet, so
the most cost-effective way to order protein powder is by the pallet load (1,250 pounds).
Let’s look at the materials requirements planning process using oats, which have a
two-week lead time and must be ordered in hopper-truck quantities (multiples of 44,000
pounds). To determine when and how many pounds of oats should be ordered, we will
98
Chapter 4

start with the weekly master production schedule for NRG-A and NRG-B bars, and then we
will complete the following steps:
1.
Convert the quantities of NRG bars from cases to 500-pound batches.
2.
Multiply the number of batches by the pounds-per-batch quantities (which
are given in the BOM) to get the gross requirements for each raw material.
3.
Subtract the existing raw material inventory and purchase orders that have
already been placed from the gross requirements, to determine the net
requirements.
4.
Plan orders in multiples of the 44,000-pound lot size, allowing for the two-
week lead time required for oats, to meet the net requirements in Step 3.
These calculations are summarized in Figure 4-17. This view of the data is frequently
called an MRP record, which is the standard way of viewing the MRP process on paper.
Oats     Lead time = 2 weeks
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
MPS
NRG-A
984
984
984
984
1037
(cases)
NRG-B
422
422
422
422
444
MPS
NRG-A
142
142
142
142
149
(500 lb. batches)
NRG-B
61
61
61
61
64
Gross requirements (lb)
57,850
57,850
57,850
57,850
60,700
Scheduled receipts
44,000
44,000
Planned receipts
88,000
44,000
44,000
On hand
29,650
15,800
1,950
32,100
18,250
1,550
Planned orders
88,000
44,000
44,000
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-17
The MRP record for oats in NRG bars, Weeks 1 through 5
The first two rows of the MRP record are the MPS that was the output from the
demand management step (shown in Figure 4-14). These NRG production quantities are
shown in terms of shipping cases. The first step is to convert the MPS from shipping cases
to 500-pound batches. Each shipping case weighs 72 pounds (not including packaging), so
to convert shipping cases to 500-pound batches, multiply the number of shipping cases by
72 pounds per case, and then divide by 500 pounds per batch. Thus, producing 984
shipping cases of NRG-A bars in Week 1 of the year will require 142 batches, as shown in
the third row of Figure 4-17.
The next row in Figure 4-17 is Gross requirements. The Gross requirements figures
are calculated by multiplying the MPS quantity (in production batches) by the pounds of
oats needed for a batch of snack bars. Fitter uses 300 pounds of oats per batch of NRG-A
bar and 250 pounds of oats per batch of NRG-B bar. This information is derived from the
BOM (Figure 4-16). Therefore, for Week 1, Fitter needs:
•
NRG-A: 142 batches × 300 lb. per batch = 42,600 lb. oats
•
NRG-B: 61 batches × 250 lb. per batch = 15,250 lb. oats
•
Total = 57,850 lb. oats
The next row in Figure 4-17 is Scheduled receipts. This row shows the expected
timing of orders of materials that have already been placed, meaning that the supplier has
99
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

been given the purchase order and is in the process of fulfilling it. There is a two-week
lead time for oats, so for oats to be available in Week 1 and Week 2 of the year, oats orders
must be placed in the last two weeks of the previous year.
The next row, Planned receipts, shows when planned orders will arrive. The Planned
receipts row is directly related to the Planned orders row at the bottom of the record.
A planned order is one that has not been placed with the supplier but will need to be
placed to prevent Production from running out of materials. Because there is a two-week
lead time for oat orders, the quantities in the planned orders row will be available for
production in two weeks, which is indicated by an entry in the Planned receipts row.
The arrows in Figure 4-17 show the relationship between planned orders and planned
receipts. For example, the materials requirements planning calculation suggests that an
order for 88,000 pounds of oats should be placed in Week 1 so it will arrive in Week 3. To
say it differently: the planned order for 88,000 pounds of oats in Week 1 will not be
available for use until Week 3, which is shown by the planned receipt of 88,000 pounds in
Week 3. There is only one order, but it shows up in two places on the MRP record.
The next row in Figure 4-17 is the On hand row. The first number in this row
(29,650) is the inventory of oats on hand at the beginning of Week 1. The On hand
number in the Week 1 column (15,800) is a projection of the inventory that will be on
hand at the end of Week 1 (and therefore at the beginning of Week 2)—accounting for the
beginning inventory, gross requirements, and planned and scheduled receipts. In the case
of Week 1, the initial inventory of 29,650 pounds, plus the 44,000 pounds of scheduled
receipts, minus the 57,850 gross requirement, leaves 15,800 pounds of oats available at
the start of Week 2.
The last row is the Planned orders row. This is the quantity that the MRP calculation
recommends ordering, and it is the output from the MRP process that purchasing uses to
determine what to order to produce the product, and when to order it.
Many times, a planner will need to intervene to tell the system to adjust the planned
order. For example, notice that the on-hand quantity of oats in Week 2 is only 1,950
pounds. In the best case scenario, assume the line is producing the NRG-B bar (as that bar
uses less oats). At 250 pounds per batch, 1,950 pounds of oats would be enough oats for
7 full batches. The production line can produce 6 batches an hour, so 7 batches of dough
would only support the production line for 70 minutes. If the scheduled order does not
arrive early enough on the first day of Week 2, the production line could be shut down.
When the purchase order scheduled to arrive in Week 1 was ready to be placed (two
weeks prior to the beginning of Week 1), the planner should have evaluated that order,
considering the low inventory level projected for the beginning of Week 2. The planner
might have decided to place an order for two hopper-truck loads of oats, instead of the
planned order for one load. Or he could have ensured that the scheduled receipt shown in
Week 2 would actually be delivered at the end of Week 1.
Planning factors such as lead times are just estimates, so planners must evaluate the
planned orders suggested by the materials requirements planning calculation before
allowing the program to automatically turn them into purchase orders.
100
Chapter 4

Notice once again the need for software to help with this kind of calculation. Of
course, a human being can do these computations, but with many products and
constituent materials, the calculations become very tedious and prone to error. Even for
a small company such as Fitter, doing the calculations with reasonable speed and
accuracy requires software help. Notice also the information needed to do the MRP
calculation: starting with a sales forecast, the software works down to the master
production schedule and then to a schedule of required raw materials.
Exercise 4.5
Develop an MRP record, similar to the one in Figure 4-17, for wheat germ for the five
weeks of January. Wheat germ must be ordered in bulk-container quantities, so the
planned orders must be in multiples of 2,000 pounds. Use a lead time of one week and an
initial on-hand inventory of 3,184 pounds; assume that an order of 8,000 pounds is
scheduled for receipt during Week 1. Are there any weeks when you, as a planner, would
consider placing an order above or below the minimum required? Why? (Assume that
there are no problems with storage capacity or shelf life.)
Exercise 4.6
Fitter’s purchasing policy has been to carry high levels of inventory to avoid stockouts.
Why can inventory levels be lower with an integrated ERP system and MRP-based
purchasing? If you had to calculate the financial advantage of this change, how would you
do it?
Materials Requirements Planning in SAP ERP
The MRP list in SAP ERP looks very much like a Stock/Requirements List, which you saw
in Figure 4-12 (for NRG-A bars). The MRP list shows the results of the MRP calculations,
while the Stock/Requirements List shows those results plus any changes that have
occurred since the MRP list was generated (planned orders converted to purchase orders
or production orders, material receipts, and so on). Because the materials requirements
planning calculations are time consuming to process for a company producing hundreds of
products using thousands of parts, the materials requirements planning process is usually
only repeated every few days—or perhaps weekly. The Stock/Requirements List, however,
allows the users of the system to see what is happening (and what will happen) with a
material in real time.
Compare the data shown in the MRP record in Figure 4-17 with the MRP list for oats
in Figure 4-18 and the Stock/Requirements List in Figure 4-19.
101
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-18
The MRP List screen in SAP ERP
The MRP list in the third column of Figure 4-18 shows purchase orders (POItem),
planned orders (PldOrd), and dependent requirements (DepReq). Dependent requirements
represent the demand for oats created by the planned orders for snack bars—the demand
for oats depends on the production plans for snack bars. The materials requirements
planning process creates planned orders to meet these dependent requirements. The
planned orders are recommendations by the system to create orders (in this case,
purchase orders) for oats.
102
Chapter 4

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-19
The Stock/Requirements List screen in SAP ERP
The Stock/Requirements List shown in Figure 4-19 shows purchase orders (POitem),
planned orders (PldOrd), and dependent requirements (DepReq), but it also shows
purchase requisitions (PurRqs). When a planner decides that it is time for a planned order
to become a purchase order, the planned order is converted to a purchase requisition,
which is a request to Purchasing to create a purchase order. The planner can convert a
planned order to a purchase requisition from the Stock/Requirements List screen by
double-clicking the planned order line. This action calls up the Additional Data for MRP
Element window, shown in Figure 4-20.
103
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Planned order release
and receipt dates
Option to convert
planned order to
purchase requisition
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-20
Conversion of a planned order to a purchase requisition
From this window, the planner can create a purchase requisition or review the
planned order and make changes before creating the requisition. SAP ERP also provides
the ability to mass-process planned orders by converting groups of planned orders to
purchase orders simultaneously. The materials requirements planning process can also be
configured to automatically create purchase requisitions; for example, all planned orders
created within one week of the MRP calculation could be automatically converted to
purchase requisitions.
Once a purchase requisition is created, an employee in the Purchasing department
must turn it into a purchase order. One of the important steps in creating a purchase
order is choosing the best vendor to supply the material. An integrated information system
such as SAP can facilitate this process. Figure 4-21 shows the Source Overview screen,
which provides access to information that can help the Purchasing employee select
the vendor.
Options to evaluate
vendors
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-21
Source Overview screen for supplier selection
From this screen, the Purchasing employee can view information about each vendor,
simulate the price (the SAP system estimates the price from each vendor, which might
include quantity discounts and transportation costs), and look at the vendor evaluation—
the company’s rating of the vendor. The SAP ERP system can be configured to rate
vendors based on a number of performance criteria, including quality of goods provided
104
Chapter 4

and on-time delivery. The evaluation scores for each vendor are updated automatically as
materials are received. The integrated information system allows Purchasing to make the
best decision on a vendor based on relevant, up-to-date information.
Once the Purchasing employee decides which vendor to use, the purchase order is
transmitted to the vendor. The SAP ERP system can print out a paper order that can be
mailed to the vendor. More likely, however, the system will be configured to either fax the
order to the vendor, transmit it electronically through EDI (electronic data interchange),
or send it via email.
Detailed Scheduling
Finally, let’s examine the last portion of the production process, detailed scheduling. The
aggregate production plan for product groups developed in sales and operations planning is
disaggregated to individual products in finer time increments through the demand
management process. In detailed scheduling, a detailed plan of what is to be produced
needs to be developed, considering machine capacity and available labor. Detailed
scheduling is complex and will not be presented here in spreadsheet form, but we will
discuss the important concepts and issues.
A key decision in detailed production scheduling is determining how long the
production runs for each product should be. Longer production runs mean that fewer
machine setups are required, reducing production costs and increasing the effective
capacity of the equipment. On the other hand, shorter production runs can be used to
lower the inventory levels for finished products. Thus, the production run length requires
a balance between setup costs and holding costs to minimize total costs to the company.
Because the capacity of the Fitter production mixers is much greater than that of the
snack bar production line, scheduling mixer production is not an issue. Because the dough
must be mixed before the snack bar production line can start, employees who run the
mixers at Fitter begin working 30 minutes before the employees who run the production
line. During that time, four batches of dough can be mixed so they are ready when the
production line starts. With a bit of a head start and a detailed schedule for the production
line, it is a simple matter for the personnel operating the mixers to keep ahead of the
production line. Thus, the key step for Fitter is to develop a detailed production schedule
for the snack bar production line.
The manufacturing process that Fitter uses is known as repetitive manufacturing.
Repetitive manufacturing environments typically have production lines that are switched
from one product to another similar product. Most packaged consumer goods are produced
in repetitive manufacturing environments. In repetitive manufacturing, production lines
are scheduled for a period of time, rather than for a specific number of items, although it
is possible to estimate the number of items that will be produced over a period of time.
For Fitter, the production schedule for a week might be to produce NRG-A bars from
Monday morning until the end of day Wednesday, then change over to NRG-B bars for all
of Thursday until Friday at noon, when the production line will be switched back to
NRG-A bars. Given this schedule, it is possible to estimate the number of bars that will be
produced. Figure 4-22 shows the repetitive manufacturing planning screen in the SAP
ERP system.
105
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-22
Repetitive manufacturing planning table in SAP ERP
This screen allows the planner to view capacity, production schedule length, and
quantity produced in one screen. Between November 1 and November 8, NRG-A bars are
being produced for 3½ days, and NRG-B bars are being produced for 4½ days. The fourth
line of the bottom screen shows that a total of 1,050 cases of NRG-A snack bars will be
produced from November 1 through November 4 (300 + 300 + 300 + 150 = 1,050), and
then production will change over to NRG-B bars from November 4 through November 8
(this screen assumes production shifts continue through the weekend).
The top section of the screen shows the production line capacity requirements for the plan
in the bottom section of the screen. The plan shown will require 90.090% of the available
capacity of 8 hours per day for all days except November 4, when the capacity requirement will
be 96.153%. The second line in the top section of the screen (Required-Repetitive Bakeline)
shows the number of hours of capacity used by the plan (rounded to the nearest hour) while
the third line (Available-Repetitive Bakeline) shows the planned capacity of the baking line.
In some companies, responsibility for inventory costs belongs to a Materials
Management group, and capacity utilization performance is the responsibility of a
Production group. Generally, the Materials Management group wants short production
runs to keep inventory levels down, while the Production group wants long production
runs to keep capacity utilization high. In these circumstances, the decision regarding
production run length can become a source of organizational bickering, instead of a
decision that minimizes total costs for the benefit of the company.
This conflict points out another advantage of production planning in an ERP system.
Because the goal of the company is to maximize profit, the duration of production runs
should be decided by evaluating the cost of equipment setup and holding inventory. An
integrated information system simplifies this analysis by automatically collecting
106
Chapter 4

accounting information that allows managers to better evaluate schedule trade-offs in
terms of costs to the company.
Providing Production Data to Accounting
In Chapter 1, you learned that for a company to be successful functional areas must share
data. Accounting needs to know what Manufacturing has produced and what resources
were used in producing those products, to determine which products, if any, are producing
a profit—and then provide information for management to determine how to increase
profits. In manufacturing plants, ERP systems do not directly connect with production
machines. For example, in Fitter’s case, SAP ERP could not directly read the number of
bars that came off the packing segment of the snack bar line. The data must be gathered in
some way and then entered into SAP ERP for inventory accounting purposes.
Data can be entered into SAP ERP through a PC on the shop floor, scanned using bar-
code or RFID technology (discussed in more detail in Chapter 8), or entered using a mobile
device. SAP ERP is an open-architecture system, meaning that it can work with automated
data-collection tools marketed by third-party hardware and software companies.
In an integrated ERP system, the accounting impact of a material transaction can be
recorded automatically. For example, when a shipment of oats arrives at the Fitter plant,
someone in the Receiving Department must verify the material and the quantity and quality
of the shipment before it is accepted. Once Fitter accepts the shipment, Receiving must notify
the SAP ERP system of the arrival and acceptance of the material. This communication is
done by completing a goods receipt transaction, which is shown in Figure 4-23.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 4-23
Goods Receipt screen in SAP ERP
107
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

The Receiving department must match the goods receipt with the purchase order that
initiated it, to make sure the exact materials ordered have been received, so Accounting can
pay the vendor. It is possible for the quantity of material entered in the goods receipt to differ
from the quantity specified on the purchase order. Depending on the configuration settings,
the SAP ERP system might block entry of the receipt if the discrepancy is too large. If the
discrepancy is small, then the receipt may be allowed, with the difference posted to the
correct variance account, which allows the transaction to be processed but maintains a
record for management to review, to see if there is a consistent problem with a vendor over
shipping or “shorting” an order (consistently shipping less than was ordered).
When the receipt is successfully recorded, the SAP ERP system immediately records
the increase in inventory levels for the material. On the Accounting side of the system,
this causes the value of the inventory shown in the general ledger account to automatically
increase as well. This is an important feature of an integrated information system: the
goods receipt is recorded once, but the information is immediately available to both
Manufacturing and Accounting—and the information is consistent. An integrated
information system also has the ability to adjust for changes in material costs. If the cost
of the material changes frequently, the system can be configured to reevaluate the value of
all the inventory of the material that the company has.
For example, suppose Fitter has 10,000 pounds of cinnamon that it bought at $3 per
pound. The company would value its inventory of cinnamon at $30,000. Then suppose the
price of cinnamon rises to $4 per pound, and Fitter purchases 1,000 pounds of cinnamon
at the higher price. What is the value of the 11,000 pounds of cinnamon that Fitter now
owns? The SAP ERP system can be configured to use a moving average formula to
reevaluate the inventory based on the current market prices. Depending on the exact
nature of the formula, the cinnamon would be valued at somewhere between the $3 per
pound previously assumed and the $4 per pound that was just paid. The system can
perform this calculation automatically each time material is received.
Using an ERP system to record data does not necessarily make the shop-floor
accounting data more accurate. The ERP system allows employees to enter data in real
time, but the system requires employees to follow the process. If employees can take
material out of inventory without recording the transaction, then the real-time information
in the ERP system is worthless. Technologies such as bar-code scanners and RFID tags can
help in this process, but accurate data require both a capable information system and
properly trained and motivated employees. However, when done accurately, capturing
data for manufacturing and inventory purposes on the shop floor means that it is captured
at the same time for accounting and inventory management purposes—eliminating any
need to reconcile Accounting and Manufacturing records.
Exercise 4.7
Briefly describe how the implementation of SAP ERP might change the relationship
between Production and Warehousing at Fitter.
ERP AND SUPPLIERS
Fitter is part of a supply chain that starts with farmers growing oats and wheat and ends
with a customer buying an NRG bar from a retail store. Previously, companies used
competitive bidding to achieve low prices from suppliers, which frequently led to an
108
Chapter 4

adversarial relationship between suppliers and their customers. In recent years, more
companies have begun to realize that they are part of a supply chain, and if the supply
chain is more efficient, all participants in the chain can benefit. Collaboration can
frequently achieve more than competition, and ERP systems can play a key role in
collaborative planning.
Working with suppliers in a collaborative fashion requires trust among all parties. A
company opens its records to its suppliers, and suppliers can read certain company data
because of common data formats. Working with suppliers in this way cuts down on
paperwork and response times. Reductions in paperwork, savings in time, and other
efficiency improvements translate into cost savings for the company and the suppliers.
ERP lets companies and suppliers share information (sales, inventory, production plans,
and so on) in real time throughout the supply chain. This allows all parties to eliminate
from the supply chain costs that do not add value to the product (such as inventory,
overtime, changeovers, and spoilage), while simultaneously improving customer service.
The Traditional Supply Chain
The term supply chain describes all the activities that occur between the growing or mining
of raw materials and the appearance of finished products on the store shelf. The supply
chain for Fitter’s NRG bars starts with farmers growing oats and wheat, and it ends with
a customer buying a bar from a retail store. In a traditional supply chain, information is
passed through the supply chain reactively, as participants change their product orders—
as illustrated in Figure 4-24.
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 4-24
Supply chain—from raw materials to customer
For example, a retailer sees an increase in the sales of Fitter’s bars and orders a larger
quantity of bars from the wholesaler. If a number of retailers increase their orders, the
wholesaler will increase its orders from Fitter. When Fitter gets larger orders from
wholesalers, it must increase production to meet the increased demand. To increase
production, Fitter will order more raw materials from suppliers.
Because of the time lags inherent in a traditional supply chain, it might take weeks—
or even months—for information about Fitter’s increased need for raw materials to reach
Fitter’s suppliers. Raw material suppliers might require time to increase their production
to meet Fitter’s larger orders, resulting in temporary shortages for the supplier. And
unusual events such as the “Oprah effect” (where a product is endorsed by a famous name
109
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

and causes a huge upsurge in demand) can also result in shortages. For example, the
Amazon Kindle quickly sold out after the famous talk-show host Oprah Winfrey claimed it
was one of her favorite items.
By contrast, if the participants in the supply chain are part of an integrated process,
information about the increased customer demand can be passed quickly through the
supply chain, so each link in the chain can react quickly to the change.
EDI and ERP
The development of supply chain strategies does not necessarily require an ERP system.
Before ERP systems were available, companies could be linked with customers and
suppliers through electronic data interchange (EDI) systems. Recall from Chapter 2 that
EDI is the computer-to-computer exchange of standard business documents (such as
purchase orders) between two companies. A well-developed ERP system, however, can
facilitate supply chain management because the needed production planning and
purchasing systems are already in place. In addition, the integration of accounting data in
the ERP system (described in the next chapter) allows management to evaluate changes in
the market and make decisions about how those changes should affect the production
plan. With an ERP system, sharing production plans along the supply chain can occur in
real time. Using the Internet can make this communication even faster and cheaper than
using private EDI networks.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Complexities of Supply Chain Management
Over the last few decades, a number of industry trends have focused on making supply
chains more efficient and effective. The first of these started in the 1980s when
techniques developed at the Toyota Motor Company, now commonly referred to as lean
manufacturing, started to be accepted and copied by companies around the world. The
main idea embodied in lean manufacturing—or the Toyota Production System (TPS)—is
that waste must be eliminated. While that seems obvious, the TPS identified inventory
resulting from “overproduction” as waste. Much of industrial practice, especially in the
United States, was focused on the idea that efficiency should be measured by having
each machine produce to its maximum capacity. The TPS approach was that a company
should produce exactly what is required when it is required. The TPS emphasized “pull”
systems, where customer demand triggers production, rather than “push” systems,
where planning methods like MRP are frequently used to push material through the
supply chain to the customer in anticipation of demand.
A second important trend has been a decrease in vertical integration of companies.
Vertical integration means the extent to which a company produces the components
and assemblies used in the products it manufactures. In the auto industry, vertical
integration reached its peak with Henry Ford and the River Rouge manufacturing
complex, where iron ore was deposited at one end of the facility and finished cars rolled
out the other. In the 1920s and 1930s, Ford owned iron ore mines and ore freighters,
rubber plantations, and a host of businesses and industries that supplied its automobile
assembly plants. The goal was to achieve high quality and low costs. Today, efficiency
(continued)
110
Chapter 4

and technology has driven many manufacturers to reduce their level of vertical
integration. According to Steve Rodgers, president of AMPA, the Canadian Auto Parts
Manufacturers’ Association, “65 to 75 percent of the overall component cost of a car
comes from outside suppliers.” The auto manufacturers now focus on overall design of
the vehicle and allow the suppliers to develop the expertise in the braking systems,
interiors, and so on, which are then plugged into the designs.
A third trend is supply base rationalization, an effort to determine the “appropriate”
number of suppliers a company should have. Many large firms have thousands of
suppliers. However, the rationalization concept says that better supplier relationships
can be developed when there are fewer suppliers to manage, and costs will be reduced
when a smaller number of suppliers have higher production volumes. In 2008, Ford’s
Senior Vice President of Global Purchasing announced that Ford would be reducing its
supply base from over 2,000 suppliers to 700 to 800 over a period of years.
These trends—lean manufacturing, reduced vertical integration, and supply base
rationalization—have been implemented by manufacturers in a number of industries
over the past 30 years and have resulted in higher efficiencies and reduced cost. But
these savings have not come without a cost: increased exposure to disruption. This
increased risk was highlighted by the earthquake and tsunami in Japan on March 14,
2011. In addition to the tragic loss of human life and destruction of property, the
disaster forced many global companies to severely reduce or shut down production.
Japanese-based companies such as Toyota were obviously affected, but the integrated
nature of global supply chains meant that the effect of the earthquake rippled
throughout the world. For example, the three largest shipbuilders in the world are
located in Korea and are dependent on Japanese steel, and the Japanese steel industry
was significantly impacted by the Fukushima nuclear power plant disaster, which was
triggered by the tsunami that followed the earthquake. (The explosions, fire, and core
meltdowns at the power plant made it the worst nuclear disaster since the 1986
Chernobyl explosion.)
Toyota, which has led many of these supply chain trends, is now planning to lead
the way in reducing supply chain risk. In September 2011, they announced plans to
create a robust supply chain that would recover within two weeks in the event of
another massive disruption. This plan consists of three fundamental steps. First, Toyota
intends to push for further standardization of parts across Japanese automakers so they
can share common components, which could, in turn, be manufactured in several
locations. The second element in the plan is the development of technology that would
provide more options for parts that require unique materials or components that are
only available from one source. Finally, Toyota plans to make each region in the world
independent in its parts procurement so that a disaster in Japan would not affect
production overseas.
Supply chains have always been complex, but now in addition to speed and
efficiency, flexibility and risk reduction must be considered priorities.
Question:
1.
What are other potential causes of supply chain disruption? How can ERP
systems help minimize the impact when disruptions occur?
111
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

The Measures of Success
Performance measurements (sometimes referred to as metrics) have been developed to
show the effects of better supply chain management. One measure is called the cash-to-
cash cycle time. This term refers to the time between paying for raw materials and
collecting cash from the customer. In one study, the cash-to-cash cycle time for
companies with efficient supply chain management processes was a month, whereas the
cycle averaged 100 days for those companies without effective supply chain management.
Another metric is total supply chain management costs. These costs include the cost
of buying and handling inventory, processing orders, and supporting a company’s
information systems. In one study, companies with efficient supply chain management
processes incurred costs equal to 5 percent of sales. By contrast, companies without
supply chain management incurred costs of up to 12 percent of sales.
Other metrics have been developed to measure what is happening between a company
and its suppliers. For example, Staples, the office-supply company, measures three facets
of the relationship. Initial fill rate is the percentage of an order that the supplier provided
in the first shipment. Another metric is initial order lead time, which is the time needed
for the supplier to fill the order. Finally, Staples measures on-time performance. This
measurement tracks how often the supplier met agreed-upon delivery dates.
Improvements in metrics such as these lead to improvements in overall supply chain
cost measurements.
Exercise 4.8
Assume a manufacturer of residential lawn and garden equipment is considering investing
in hardware and software that will improve linkages with suppliers. Management expects
to save 5 percent of sales by tightening up the supply chain in the first year, 3 percent
in the second year, and 1 percent in the third year. The company’s annual sales are
$1 billion. The company’s chief financial officer insists that the investment must pay for
itself in cost savings in three years. To meet this requirement, how much should the chief
information officer be allowed to spend on improving the supply chain? Explain your
answer.
112
Chapter 4

A N O T H E R
L O O K
Supply Chain Going Green
The retail giant Walmart is trying to compel its suppliers to “go green” as part of its
efforts to build a more environmentally sustainable global supply chain. As it did with
promoting EDI and RFIDs in the early stages of those technologies, Walmart is leading
the curve with its sustainability efforts. In 2008, Walmart’s CEO, Lee Scott, told a large
gathering in China, “A company that cheats on overtime and on the age of its labor, that
dumps its scraps and chemicals into our rivers, that does not pay its taxes or honor its
contracts—will ultimately cheat on the quality of its products. And cheating on the
quality of products is the same as cheating on customers. We will not tolerate that at
Walmart.”
As part of this initiative, Walmart will survey its 100,000 global suppliers and
ultimately create a “sustainability product index,” which will allow the company to
evaluate suppliers on their sustainability efforts. Suppliers anxious to keep Walmart as a
customer will be motivated to improve their rating on the sustainability index. Some
experts think Walmart can change the business climate on sustainability. According to
Harvard Professor Rosabeth Moss Kanter, Walmart’s determination to use its
considerable influence to raise the standards for environmental sustainability “shows
that a single company using its unique clout can accelerate public action to reduce
greenhouse gases and reverse climate change.”
Walmart’s new initiative translates into a new burden on suppliers. By some
estimates, the company’s efforts to improve sustainability could increase the cost of
products by 1–3 percent, due, in part, to new requirements that suppliers label products
with a green index. However, these costs may be offset if the suppliers, as part of their
efforts to reduce their impact on the environment, can also improve their supply chain
efficiency.
Question:
1.
Do you think consumers will be willing to pay increased prices to ensure their
products are sustainably produced and packaged? Would you be willing to pay
the extra cost? How much extra?
113
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems

Chapter Summary
•
An ERP system can improve the efficiency of production and purchasing processes.
Efficiency begins with Marketing and Sales sharing a sales forecast. A production plan is
created based on that forecast and shared with Purchasing so raw materials can be
ordered properly.
•
Companies can do production planning without an ERP system, but an ERP system that
contains materials requirements planning capabilities allow a company to link Production to
Purchasing and Accounting. This data sharing increases a company’s overall efficiency.
•
Companies are building on their ERP systems and integrated systems philosophy to
practice supply chain management, a strategy by which a company looks at itself as part of
a larger process that includes customers and suppliers. Using information more efficiently
along the entire chain can result in significant cost savings. Because of the complexity of
the global supply chain, developing a planning system that effectively coordinates
information technology and people and that can help a company manage uncertainty is a
considerable challenge.
Key Terms
bill of material (BOM)
capacity
cash-to-cash cycle time
initial fill rate
initial order lead time
lead time
lot sizing
master production schedule (MPS)
metrics
MRP record
on-time performance
repetitive manufacturing
rough-cut planning
standard costs
supply chain
vertical integration
Exercises
1. In which industries is supply chain management important? In which industries is it not?
Why, or why not?
2. Recall from Chapter 1 that a business process cuts across functional lines. When a
customer orders a product, such as a custom-built car, the Supply Chain Management
function must interact with other functional areas in a company to complete this order.
List the functional areas involved in this process. What information must pass between
those areas and Supply Chain Management to fill the customer’s needs?
3. Create a two-column list, and in the first column, list Fitter’s flawed supply chain
management process. In the second column, list the ways in which an ERP system could
alleviate some of these problems.
4. Metrics are used to measure improvements in supply chain management. What are the
benefits of tracking metrics? How often should they be calculated and recorded? Does it
depend on the industry? Does it depend on the competitive environment? Why?
114
Chapter 4

5. What are potential sources of risk in Fitter’s supply chain? How should Fitter prepare to
minimize these risks. Research this topic on the Internet, and use examples to support your
reasoning.
6. Compare customer relationship management and supply chain management. How are they
similar? How are they different? In which functional areas do they have the most impact? In
answering, consider the kinds of technologies used in each.
For Further Study and Research
Beal, Vangie. “SAP to Acquire Right Hemisphere for 3-D Visualization Software.”
enterpriseappstoday.com. September 8, 2011.
Kim, Chang-Ran. “Toyota Aims for Quake-Proof Supply Chain.” Reuters, September 6, 2011.
Goetz, Michael. “Suppliers Make Cars, Not Automakers.” Sympatico.ca. March 4, 2011.
http://autos.sympatico.ca/features/8233/group-project-suppliers-make-cars-not-automakers.
Keal, Donald, and Phil Hebert. “Benefits to Blood Banks of a Sales and Operations Planning
Process.” Journal of Blood Services Management 50, (December 2010): 2785–2787.
Lee, Don, and David Pierson. “Earthquake Damage to a Japanese Silicon Wafer Production
Plant Illustrates the Manufacturing Troubles that Can Ensue When Companies Reduce
Their Network of Suppliers.” Los Angeles Times, April 06, 2011.
Overby, Stephanie. “Supply Chain Management to the Rescue.” CIO, March 16, 2010.
www.cio.com/article/580113/Supply_Chain_Management_to_the_Rescue.
Shuldiner, Herb. “Ford Cutting Deep into Supply Base.” Ward’s AutoWorld, December 1, 2008.
Wallgum, Thomas, “Why the Oprah Effect Can Take Down the Best Supply Chains.” CIO,
September 10, 2009. www.cio.com/article/501830/Why_the_Oprah_Effect_Can_Take_
Down_the_Best_Supply_Chains.
Wallgum, Thomas. “Wal-Mart Orders Suppliers to Go Green and Some See Red.” CIO, July 20,
2009. www.cio.com/article/497559/Wal_Mart_Orders_Suppliers_to_Go_Green_and_
Some_ee_Red.
Wallgum, Thomas. “Wal-Mart’s Green Strategy: Supply Chain Makeover Targets Chinese
Manufacturers.” CIO, Octboer 24, 2008. www.cio.com/article/456625/Wal_Mart_s_Green_
Strategy_Supply_Chain_Makeover_Targets_Chinese_Manufacturers?page=1
&taxonomyId=3015.
115
Production and Supply Chain Management Information Systems


C H A P T E R5
ACCOUNTING IN ERP
SYSTEMS
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Describe the differences between financial and managerial accounting
•
Identify and describe problems associated with accounting and financial
reporting in unintegrated information systems
•
Explain how ERP systems can help solve accounting and financial
reporting problems that occur in an unintegrated system
•
Understand how the Enron scandal and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
have affected accounting information systems
•
Outline the accounting and management-reporting benefits that accrue
from having an ERP system
•
Explain the importance of Extensible Business Reporting Language
(XBRL) in financial reporting
I N T R O D U C T I O N
In previous chapters, you learned about functional area activities, both generally and specifically: In
Chapter 1, you read an overview of functional area activities; in Chapter 3, you learned about
Marketing and Sales activities; and in Chapter 4, you learned about Supply Chain Management. In
this chapter, you will learn about the activities in another functional area, Accounting and Finance.
You will see how Accounting and Finance is tightly integrated with all the other functional areas and
how Accounting activities aid in decision making.

ACCOUNTING ACTIVITIES
Accounting activities can generally be classified as either financial accounting or
managerial accounting. An additional area of accounting, tax accounting, is beyond the
scope of this text. Because tax accounting is chiefly the external reporting of a business’s
activities to the Internal Revenue Service, data gathered for financial accounting serves as
the basis for tax accounting.
Financial accounting consists of documenting all the transactions of a company that
have an impact on the financial state of the organization and then using those documented
transactions to create reports for investors and external parties and agencies. These reports,
typically called financial statements, must follow the prescribed rules and guidelines of
various agencies, such as the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
Common financial statements include balance sheets and income statements. The
balance sheet is a summary of account balances such as cash held; amounts owed to the
company by customers; the cost of raw materials and finished-goods inventories; the value of
fixed assets such as buildings; amounts owed to vendors, banks, and other creditors; and
amounts that the investors have invested in the company. A balance sheet provides an
overview of a company’s financial health at a point in time, a key consideration for a
company’s creditors and investors. Figure 5-1 shows a sample balance sheet for Fitter Snacker.
Fitter Snacker Balance Sheet
December 31, 2011
(in thousands of dollars)
Land
$26,116
Total assets
$6,400
Liabilities
$10,000
Inventories
$6,231
Plant and equipment
$1,142
Cash
$4,715
Accounts receivable
$9,025
Assets
$5,003
0
0
0
,
2
$
la
ti
p
a
c 
d
e
t
u
b
irt
n
o
C
6
1
7
,
7
$
s
g
nin
r
a
e
 
d
e
nia
t
e
R
6
1
7
,
9
$
y
tiu
q
e
 ’s
r
e
d
l
o
h
k
c
o
t
s la
t
o
T
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity
$26,116
Total liabilities
Stockholders’ Equity
Accounts payable
$16,400
Notes payable
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 5-1
Sample balance sheet for Fitter
118
Chapter 5

The income statement, or profit and loss (P&L) statement, shows the company’s
revenue and expenses and the profit or loss for a period of time (typically a quarter or a
year). Profitability is important to creditors and investors. It is also important information
for managers in charge of day-to-day operations. In general, a manager views profits as
indicators of success and losses as indicators of problems to be solved. Figure 5-2 shows a
sample income statement for Fitter.
Fitter Snacker Income Statement
For the year ended December 31, 2011
(in thousands of dollars)
 
1
9
6
,
5
2
$
e
s
n
e
p
x
e
 
d
l
o
s s
d
o
o
g
 f
o
 t
s
o
C
1
5
2
,
4
$
e
s
n
e
p
x
e
 
e
vit
a
rt
sini
m
d
a 
d
n
a ,la
r
e
n
e
g
 ,
g
nille
S
2
6
9
$
e
s
n
e
p
x
e
 t
n
e
m
p
o
le
v
e
d
 
d
n
a 
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
R
Total revenue
$36,002
Expenses
Sales revenue
Revenue
Pretax income
$4,577
Income tax expense
$1,144
Net income
$3,433
Total expenses
$31,425
Interest expense
$36,002
$521
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 5-2
Sample income statement for Fitter
Typically, companies prepare financial statements quarterly, sometimes more
frequently. To prepare these statements, a company must “close its books,” which means
that balances for temporary or nominal accounts (such as revenue, expense, gain, and
loss) are transferred to the retained earnings account. The closed nominal accounts will
have a zero balance from which to start accumulating revenue and expenses in the next
reporting period. Closing entries are made to transfer the balances and establish zero
balances for the nominal accounts. To do this, employees must check the accounts to
ensure they are accurate and up to date. If a company’s information systems routinely
generate accurate and timely data, closing the books can go smoothly. If not, “adjusting”
entries must be made, in which case, closing the books can be a very time-consuming
chore with inaccurate results.
119
Accounting in ERP Systems

One advantage of an integrated information system is that it simplifies the process of
closing the books and preparing financial statements. Accounting staff do not need to
assemble data from different systems because all of the required data are contained in a
centralized system. Figure 5-3 shows how Fitter’s balance sheet and P&L statement would
look in the SAP ERP system.
Balance Sheet
P&L statement
Comparison of
current year to
previous year
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-3
Balance sheet and income statement for Fitter in SAP ERP system
In an ERP system, the balance sheet and P&L statement are database reports that can
be quickly generated at any time, and because the data to prepare the reports are read
from the database tables, these reports are always up to date. Another feature of the ERP
balance sheet and P&L statement is the ability to quickly display data at different levels of
detail, as shown in Figure 5-4. In addition, an ERP system allows the user to create
financial statement variants, which are financial statements in other formats, prepared to
suit the needs of different users.
120
Chapter 5

Ability to expand
level of detail
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-4
Balance sheet and income statement in SAP ERP, with several asset categories
expanded to show more detail
Managerial accounting deals with determining the costs and profitability of a
company’s activities. While the high-level information that appears in a company’s
balance sheet and income statement shows whether a firm is making an overall profit,
the goal of managerial accounting is to provide managers with detailed information for
making informed decisions, creating budgets, determining the profitability of a particular
product, sales region, or marketing campaign, and so on. Managerial accounting produces
information that managers use to control a company’s day-to-day activities and to develop
long-term plans for operations, marketing, personnel needs, repayment of debt, and other
management issues. Because managerial accounting provides reports and analyses for
internal use, companies can be flexible in how they configure their managerial accounting
systems.
Using ERP for Accounting Information
Recall from Chapter 1, that in the past, most companies had separate functional
information systems: a marketing information system, a manufacturing information
system, and so on—each with its own way of gathering data and its own file system for
recording data. Since the 1960s, legions of accountants, analysts, and programmers have
tried, often unsuccessfully, to make unintegrated systems work, as prior chapters
illustrate. Companies built these unintegrated systems primarily to handle the needs of the
individual functional areas, and secondarily to provide data to Accounting so that
121
Accounting in ERP Systems

Accounting could “keep the books,” that is, maintain records of all financial transactions.
Data sharing, however, usually did not occur in real time, so Accounting’s data were often
out of date. Further, because the shared data were often not the only information that
Accounting needed to prepare reports for management, accountants and functional area
clerks usually had to spend considerable time doing additional research to create those
reports.
An ERP system, with its centralized database, avoids these problems. For example,
suppose finished goods are transferred from the assembly line to the warehouse. An
employee in the warehouse can easily record the transaction, using a terminal or a bar-
code scanner. In SAP ERP, the Materials Management module would see the transfer event
as an increase in finished goods inventory available for shipment; the Accounting module
would see the event as an increase in the monetary value of the finished goods inventory.
With ERP, everyone uses the same database to record operating data. This database is
then used to generate management reports, produce financial statements, and create
budgets.
In accounting, a company’s accounts are kept in a record called the general ledger. In
the SAP ERP system, input to the general ledger occurs simultaneously with the business
transaction in the specific module. Many SAP ERP modules cause transaction data to be
entered into the general ledger, including:
•
Sales and Distribution (SD)—The SD module records a sale and then creates
an accounts receivable entry (a general ledger document that indicates a
customer owes money for the goods received by the customer).
•
Materials Management (MM)—The MM module controls purchasing and
records inventory changes. The receipt of goods from a purchase order
creates an accounts payable entry in the general ledger, which indicates the
company has an obligation to pay for goods it has received. Whenever
material moves into or out of inventory (purchased materials arrive from the
vendor, raw materials are taken out of inventory to support production, or
finished goods go from production to inventory), general ledger accounts are
affected.
•
Financial Accounting (FI)—The FI module manages the accounts receivable
and accounts payable items created in the SD and MM modules, respectively.
The FI module is also where the general ledger accounts are closed at the
end of a fiscal period (quarter or year), and it is used to generate financial
statements.
•
Controlling (CO)—The CO module tracks the costs associated with
producing products. To make a profit, a company must have an accurate
picture of its product costs so it can make correct decisions about product
pricing and promotions, as well as capital investments.
•
Human Resources (HR)—The HR module manages the recruiting, hiring,
compensation, termination, and severance of employees; the HR module also
manages benefits and generates the payroll.
•
Asset Management (AM)—The AM module manages fixed-asset purchases
(plant and machinery) and the related depreciation.
122
Chapter 5

OPERATIONAL DECISION-MAKING PROBLEM:
CREDIT MANAGEMENT
Out-of-date or inaccurate accounting data that result from unintegrated information
systems can cause problems when a company is making operational decisions, as
illustrated by the discussion of Fitter’s credit management challenges in Chapter 3. In this
section, we will look at industrial credit granting in general, and then we will examine the
problems with Fitter’s credit-granting procedures in more detail.
Industrial Credit Management
Companies routinely sell to customers on credit; however, good financial management
requires that only so much credit be extended to a customer. At some point, the customer
must pay off some of the debt to justify the faith the seller has shown (and so the seller
can turn the accounts receivables into cash). Credit management requires a balance
between granting sufficient credit to support sales and ensuring the company does not lose
too much money by granting credit to customers who end up defaulting on their credit
obligations.
In practice, sellers manage this relationship by setting a limit on how much money a
customer can owe at any one time, and then monitoring that limit as new orders come in and
payments are received. For example, the seller might tell a buyer that her credit limit is
$10,000, which means that the most she can owe the seller is $10,000. If the buyer reaches
that amount, the seller will accept no further sales orders until she pays off some of her debt.
When making a sale on credit, the seller makes an entry on the books to increase the
accounts receivable and sales balances. Thus, when the buyer’s accounts receivable balance
on the seller’s books reaches $10,000, the buyer must make some payment.
Continuing the example, assume the buyer calls the seller to order $3,000’s worth of
goods. If the buyer’s accounts receivable balance is already $8,000, the seller should not
accept the $3,000 order because it would bring the accounts receivable balance to
$11,000, which exceeds the buyer’s credit limit. Instead of refusing the order, the seller’s
sales representative might suggest that the buyer reduce the size of the order, or ask her
to send in a payment before processing the order, thus reducing the buyer’s debt. Clearly,
to make this system work, a sales representative needs to have access to up-to-date
accounts receivable balances for all customers.
If Accounting keeps the books up to date and can provide the current accounts
receivable balance to Marketing and Sales when needed, then credit limits can be properly
managed. Marketing and Sales can compare the customer’s credit limit to an accurate
balance-owed amount (plus the order’s value) to make a decision. However, in an
unintegrated system, Accounting may not immediately record sales and/or payment
receipts as they occur. In that case, accounts receivable balances will not be current.
Furthermore, the sales representative may be working from an out-of-date credit-balance
printout. If the printout does not reflect recent payments, a customer may be improperly
denied credit. The customer would probably challenge the denial, which would trigger a
request for updated information in Accounting. The delay entailed in that research could
reduce customer satisfaction, and performing the research would consume valuable
employee time.
123
Accounting in ERP Systems

These problems should not arise with an integrated information system. When a sale
is made, the system immediately increases the customer’s accounts receivable balance.
When the company receives and records a payment, the accounts receivable balance is
immediately decreased. Because the underlying database is available to Accounting and
Marketing and Sales, sales representatives have access to up-to-date customer balance
information. Thus, sales representatives do not need to make a request to Accounting for
the customer’s accounts receivable balance.
With that background, we can now consider how Fitter handles credit management,
using unintegrated systems.
Fitter’s Credit Management Procedures
As described in Chapter 3, when a new order comes in to Fitter, a sales clerk refers to a
weekly printout of a customer’s current balance and credit limit to see if credit should be
granted. Assuming the customer’s order would not present credit-limit problems, the sales
clerk enters the sale in the sales order entry system, which is a stand-alone computer
program. Sales data are transferred to Accounting by transferring files at the end of each
day. An accounting clerk uses the data transferred from the sales system to prepare
customer invoices.
Accounting must make adjustments for any partial shipments before creating an
invoice. The accuracy of the adjustment process depends on whether the warehouse
transmits order changes to Accounting in a timely fashion. After creating the invoice,
Accounting makes the standard revenue-recognition accounting entries: a debit to
accounts receivable and a credit to sales for the amount billed.
Accounting clerks also process customer payments. Clerks receive and manually
handle checks. They enter data in the accounting program, increasing the cash balance
and decreasing the accounts receivable balance. These data are later used to make
updates to individual customer accounts, reducing the amount that customers owe to
Fitter. If time permits, accounts are posted (and the bank deposit is made) on the day
payment is received; otherwise, the entries are done as soon as possible the next day.
Thus, there can be a delay between the time Fitter receives a check from a customer and
the actual reduction of the customer’s accounts receivable balance, which can lead to
mistakes in credit management.
Now let’s look at how SAP ERP could improve Fitter’s credit management process.
Credit Management in SAP ERP
The SAP ERP system allows a company to set a credit limit for each customer. A company
can configure any number of credit-check options in the SAP ERP system, including when
to check a customer’s credit (for instance, at order creation, at creation of the delivery
document, or at the goods issue) and who to notify when an order would cause a customer
to exceed its credit limit (for instance, the sales clerk or credit management personnel).
Figure 5-5 shows a dynamic credit check with Reaction C selected.
Reaction C means that if the order being saved will cause the customer to exceed its
credit limit, the system will issue a warning indicating the amount by which the order
exceeds the credit limit. Because the system is issuing a warning, the order can be saved,
but it will be blocked from further processing until the credit problem is cleared.
124
Chapter 5

Frequently, companies do not configure the system to provide warnings to sales order
clerks because they are not equipped to correct the problem and because the credit
problem is an issue between the selling firm’s Accounts Receivable Department and the
customer’s Accounts Payable Department. Rather, a person in the credit management
function regularly reviews all blocked sales orders and resolves the credit problem directly
with the customer.
Figure 5-5 also shows that the credit check is dynamic and has a two-month horizon.
This means that only the next two months of sales orders will be used in calculating the
credit check. Customers may place orders for a long-range schedule, but only those that
will be shipped in the near term are usually considered in the credit check.
Two-month
credit check
horizon
Dynamic credit
check with
Reaction C
selected
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-5
Credit management configuration
Figure 5-6 shows the credit-checking process in Figure 5-5 applied to a specific
customer, Health Express. Health Express has a credit limit of $1,000 and currently has
used $590 of this limit. If Health Express places an order for snack bars that totals more
than $410, the order will be blocked.
125
Accounting in ERP Systems

Credit limit
Amount of
credit used
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-6
Credit management for Health Express
Figure 5-7 shows the SAP ERP screen where blocked sales orders are listed. Most
companies have an employee who is responsible for reviewing blocked sales orders
(perhaps every two hours) and taking corrective action. The advantage of using SAP ERP
to manage credit is that the process is automated and the data are available in real time.
The user can double-click the sales order to see company information, such as contacts, or
to see payment history.
Options to release,
reassign, reject, or
forward a blocked
sales order
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-7
Blocked sales order
With Fitter’s current system, the sales order clerk must manually check credit. If the
clerk fails to do this, then a customer who is a bad risk may receive more credit. However,
even when the clerk does perform the manual credit check, the credit decision can
frequently be made in error, since the data are not current. With the SAP ERP system, the
check is automatic, the data are up to date, and it is a simple matter to review blocked
sales orders.
126
Chapter 5

Exercise 5.1
1.
Create a document that describes Fitter’s current credit management
procedure. Write this document so it could be used to train a new employee
in the credit management process.
2.
Create a revised version of your document to reflect the process
improvements that would result if Fitter were performing credit checks using
an integrated information system.
PRODUCT PROFITABILITY ANALYSIS
Business managers use accounting data to perform profitability analyses of a company and
its products. When data are inaccurate or incomplete, the analyses are flawed. There are
three main reasons for inaccurate or incomplete data: inconsistent record keeping,
inaccurate inventory costing systems, and problems consolidating data from subsidiaries.
The following sections will look at each of these causes, using Fitter as an example.
Inconsistent Record Keeping
Each of Fitter’s sales divisions maintains its own records and tracks sales data differently.
The Direct Sales Division’s sales order form includes a code for the appropriate sales
region (Northeast, Southeast, and so on). The Wholesale Division’s sales order form
includes a code for the state. Suppose that a Fitter executive asks for a report that
summarizes monthly sales dollars for all Mid-Atlantic states (i.e., some states from Fitter’s
Northeast sales region and some states from its Southeast region) for each month of the
previous year. Neither division’s records are set up to easily answer that question. Rather,
a Fitter accountant would need to go to the source sales documents for the Direct Sales
Division and, by looking at the shipping address, determine whether the sale was to a
company in a Mid-Atlantic state. If so, the accountant would need to manually add the
relevant information for this sale to an electronic spreadsheet. For the Wholesale Division,
the accountant could run sales summary reports for each state in the Mid-Atlantic region
by month and add this data manually to the spreadsheet report. Once all the data was
gathered, it could be formatted to create the desired reports.
Now, suppose Fitter’s management wants to evaluate the efficiency of Production’s
operations. Production uses paper records, so, again, data must be taken from the paper
records and entered into a spreadsheet. As often happens, those paper records might be
inaccurate or missing, making the validity of the final report questionable and the creation
of the report time consuming.
There are many variations on this theme. Conceivably, a company’s divisions could
maintain the same data about a function, but if each division’s system was created at a
different time, each might a different file system. Often, to answer a question about overall
company performance, at least one set of data must be rekeyed into a spreadsheet
(or some other middleware program) for the merged analysis. While it is possible to get an
answer, doing so takes much more time with unintegrated systems.
With an ERP system, this sort of effort is minimized or eliminated because both
divisions record and store their data in the same way, in the same database. Ideally, the
company’s processes would be changed to fit the best practices of the software when it is
installed. As part of the system configuration process, the managers of each division would
127
Accounting in ERP Systems

agree on how data would be collected and stored. Then, questions regarding company
performance could be answered in a few minutes by any accountant (or manager or
salesperson, for that matter) who understands how to execute a query in the database
language or how to use built-in management reporting tools.
Inaccurate Inventory Costing Systems
Correctly calculating inventory costs is one of the most important and challenging accounting
tasks in any manufacturing company. Managers need to know how much it costs to make
individual products, so they can identify which products are profitable and which are not.
In the next section, we will first review the fundamentals of inventory cost accounting.
Then, we will explore how an ERP system can improve the accuracy of inventory cost
accounting. Finally, we will discuss the rationale behind activity-based costing as a method
to further improve the accuracy of inventory cost accounting.
Inventory Cost Accounting Background
A manufactured item’s cost has three elements: (1) the cost of raw materials, (2) the cost
of labor employed directly in the production of the item, and (3) all other costs, which are
typically called overhead. Manufacturing overhead costs include factory utilities, general
factory labor (such as custodians or security guards), factory managers’ salaries, storage,
insurance, and other manufacturing-related costs.
Materials and labor are often called direct costs because the constituent amounts of
each in a finished product can be estimated fairly accurately. On the other hand, the
overhead items are indirect costs, which are difficult to associate with a specific product
or a batch of specific products. In other words, the direct cause-and-effect relationship
between an overhead cost (such as the cost of heat and light) and making a particular
product (NRG-A bars) is difficult to establish.
Nevertheless, overhead costs are part of making products, so companies must have
some way to allocate these indirect costs to the products they make. A common method is
to use total machine hours, on the assumption that overhead is incurred to run the
machines that make the products. With this approach, overhead costs for a certain time
period are added up and then divided by the expected total machine hours for that time
period to get an overhead per machine hour rate. This value is then used to allocate
overhead costs to products. Suppose Fitter used this approach and calculated its overhead
rate at $1,000 per machine hour. If Fitter can make 10,000 bars in an hour, then each bar
would be allocated $0.10 of overhead ($1,000 ÷ 10,000). Overhead can also be allocated to
a product using direct labor hours or material costs. A company makes the decision on
how to allocate overhead costs based on what makes the most sense in its production
environment.
Companies such as Fitter that produce goods for inventory typically record the cost of
manufacturing during a period using a standard cost. As explained in Chapter 4, standard
costs for a product are established by studying historical direct and indirect cost patterns
in a company and taking into account the effects of current manufacturing changes. At the
end of an accounting period, if actual costs differ from standard costs, adjustments to the
accounts must be made to show the actual cost of inventory owned on the balance sheet
and the cost of inventory sold on the income statement.
For example, Fitter might determine that each NRG-A bar should cost $0.75 to
make—that is, the cost of raw materials, labor, and overhead should equal $0.75 per bar,
128
Chapter 5

given the budgeted number of units. That amount would be Fitter’s standard cost for a bar.
Assume that during a given month, Fitter makes 1 million NRG-A bars. Using the standard
cost, it would increase its balance sheet inventory account by $750,000. Also, assume that
the company sells 800,000 bars in the month. In the income statement, the cost of the
sales would be shown as $600,000 (800,000 × $0.75). The inventory account would be
reduced by $600,000, because the company no longer has those units to sell.
If actual costs in the month equaled standard costs, no balance sheet or income
statement adjustments would be needed. Actual costs never exactly equal expected costs,
however, so adjustments are almost always needed. The differences between actual costs
and standard costs are called cost variances. Note that cost variances can arise with both
direct and indirect costs. These variances are calculated by comparing actual expenses for
material, labor, utilities, rent, and so on, with predicted standard costs.
If the company keeps records for the various elements separately, compiling variance
adjustments can be difficult. If products are made by assembling parts that are made at
different manufacturing sites, and the sites use different information systems, the
adjustments may be very imprecise.
ERP and Inventory Cost Accounting
Many companies with unintegrated accounting systems analyze their cost variances
infrequently because of the difficulty of doing so. As a result, these companies often do not
know how much it actually costs to produce a unit of a product. As the following example
illustrates, knowing precisely how much production costs can be very important.
Suppose Fitter has an opportunity to sell 300,000 NRG-A bars to a new customer. This
is a huge order for Fitter. The customer wants a price of $0.90 per bar. Fitter’s standard
cost per bar is currently $0.75—based on information that is two months old. Fitter knows
that the costs to manufacture snack bars have been increasing significantly in the past few
months. Fitter does not want to sell at a loss per unit, but it also does not want to lose a
large order or a potentially good long-term customer. Because of the difficulty of compiling
all the data to calculate cost variances, Fitter only analyzes cost variances quarterly, and
new data will not be available for another month. Should Fitter accept the large order?
If Fitter had an ERP system, employees throughout the company would have recorded
costs in the company-wide database as they occurred. The methods for allocating costs to
products and for computing variances would have been built into the system when it was
configured. Thus, the system could compute variances automatically when needed. This
would simplify the process of adjusting accounts, and Fitter’s management would always
have accurate, up-to-date information on cost variances. Fitter could make an informed
decision on whether it could profitably sell snack bars for $0.90 each. Furthermore, with a
properly operating sales and operations planning process, Fitter could determine whether
it has the capacity to complete the order on time, as well. If overtime would be required to
complete the order, then analysts could use the planning capabilities of the ERP system
to evaluate costs using overtime production.
ERP system configurations allow analysts to track costs using many bases—by job, by
work area, or by production activity. This means that unit costs can be computed using
different overhead allocation bases, allowing an analyst to play “what if” with product
profitability decisions. In an unintegrated system, doing such multifaceted tracking would
be time consuming and difficult.
129
Accounting in ERP Systems

Product Costing Example
Suppose Fitter wants to update standard costs for its NRG-A bars. By analyzing the
company’s recent indirect costs related to the products produced, Fitter’s cost accountants
have calculated new overhead rates. Because the material costs are much larger than
direct labor costs at Fitter, the company has decided to apply production overhead as a
percentage of direct material costs. The new rate for production overhead is 100 percent
of direct material costs.
Figure 5-8 shows the product cost analysis for the NRG-A bar. The cost analysis is
based on seven cases of bars, which is the amount of bars that can be produced by a 500-
pound batch of dough. The recipe for a 500-pound batch of NRG-A bars was shown in
Figure 4-16 in Chapter 4. This information is repeated in the cost analysis of Figure 5-8,
along with the per-unit cost of each of these materials.
Oats
Wheat germ
Cinnamon
Nutmeg
Cloves
Honey
Canola
Vit./min. powder
Carob chips
Raisins
Total direct material cost
Production overhead cost
(100% of Total direct material)
Direct labor
Ingredient
Unit of
measure
NRG-A
lb
lb
lb
lb
lb
gal
gal
lb
lb
lb
300
50
5
2
1
10
7
5
NRG-A Bar Product Cost Analysis (7 cases)
Cost per unit
of measure
Direct
material
cost
Cost of goods manufactured
(COGM)
Sales and administrative costs
(30% of COGM)
Cost of goods sold (COGS)
COGM per case
COGS per case
50
2
10
5
50
50
$0.20
$0.30
$3.00
$4.50
$5.50
$6.40
$1.70
$18.45
$2.10
$3.20
$60.00
$15.00
$15.00
$9.00
$5.50
$64.00
$11.90
$92.25
$105.00
$160.00
$537.65
$537.65
54.50
1,129.80
338.94
1,468.74
$161.40
$209.82
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 5-8
Product cost analysis for NRG-A bar
For example, the per-pound cost of oats is $0.20. Multiplying the quantity of materials
by the unit cost gives the direct material cost for that ingredient item; therefore, the total
direct material cost of oats is $60.00 (300 × $0.20). Summing the results for all of the
130
Chapter 5

ingredients gives a total direct material cost of $537.65 for a 500-pound batch. Applying
the production overhead rate of 100 percent to this direct material cost gives a production
overhead cost equal to the direct material cost, or $537.65. As shown in the Figure 5-8,
the direct labor cost to mix the dough and bake the snack bars is $54.50. It is important to
note that the labor cost is only about 10 percent of the direct material cost, which is why
Fitter has chosen to apply production overhead costs based on direct material only.
The sum of direct materials, production overhead, and direct labor is the cost of goods
manufactured (COGM). Currently, Fitter uses a rate of 30 percent of the cost of goods
manufactured to estimate the sales and administrative costs. Adding the sales and
administrative costs to the COGM gives the cost of goods sold (COGS). Because the COGM
and COGS were estimated based on the BOM (recipe) from Chapter 4 that produces seven
cases of snack bars, the figures must be divided by seven to give the COGM and COGS on
a per-case basis. Figure 5-8 shows that these are $161.40 and $209.82, respectively.
The product cost analysis allows you to determine whether selling 300,000 NRG-A bars
to a new customer for a price of $0.90 per bar would earn a profit for Fitter. Given that there
are 24 bars in a box and 12 boxes in a case, the current cost for an NRG-A bar is:
$209:82=case
ð24 bars=boxÞð12 boxes=caseÞ ¼ $0:73=bar
Based on this calculation, you can see that Fitter can sell the bars at $0.90 and make a
profit of $0.17 per bar.
Exercise 5.2
Estimate the COGM and COGS on a per-case basis for the NRG-B bar using the production
information in Figure 4-16 and the following product costs:
Protein powder (lb.)
$4.40
Hazelnuts (lb.)
$1.64
Dates (lb.)
$3.55
Use the same direct labor costs and overhead percentages shown in the NRG-A bar
product cost analysis in Figure 5-8.
Product Cost Analysis in SAP ERP
A large company may produce thousands of complicated products, and the task of gathering
the information required to develop product costs can be a major challenge. An advantage of
an integrated information system such as SAP ERP is that timely, accurate information is
available in the information system. The key pieces of information for a cost analysis are the
direct material costs and the direct labor costs. In SAP ERP, the direct material costs are
determined from the bill of material (BOM), which is managed in the Production Planning
(PP) module. Direct labor costs are determined from the product routing, which documents
the machines and work centers used in the production of a product—along with equipment
set-up time, production rates, and labor requirements. The BOM and routing information,
combined with other data maintained in the Production Planning module, allows the SAP
131
Accounting in ERP Systems

ERP system to determine the quantities of direct material and direct labor used in a product.
These production data, combined with material cost information stored in the Financial
Accounting module, provide the basis for a product cost analysis.
In the SAP ERP system, a product cost is based on a product cost variant. In SAP
ERP, the term variant is used to mean a version of a plan or analysis. A product cost
variant is basically the procedure for developing a product cost analysis; many variants
can be created for different planning requirements. Once a product cost variant is
developed, it only takes seconds for the SAP ERP system to gather the required
information to create a product cost estimate. Figure 5-9 shows the result of a product
costs analysis in the SAP ERP system. This screen not only provides the cost analysis, but
it also allows the user to explore the details about how cost analysis was calculated.
Product cost
results
(COGM and
COGS)
Materials
used in
product cost
calculation
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-9
Product cost analysis result in SAP ERP
The SAP ERP product cost tool greatly reduces the time required to develop cost
estimates, and it increases their accuracy because it gets its data directly from system
modules, where the data are real time.
Activity-Based Costing and ERP
A trend in inventory cost accounting is toward activity-based costing. In activity-based
costing, overhead costs are assigned to products based on the manufacturing activities that
gave rise to the costs. Accountants identify activities associated with overhead cost
generation, and they keep records on the costs and on the activities. The activities
are viewed as causes (drivers) of the overhead costs. This view treats overhead costs as
more direct than traditional cost-accounting methods have treated them. In an attempt to
assign costs more precisely to individual products, activity-based costing tries to avoid
132
Chapter 5

rough allocation procedures. Although not all overhead costs can be linked to products by
their activities, many can be. Activity-based costing is often used when competition is stiff,
overhead costs are high, and products are diverse. A company using activity-based costing
can determine which products have the highest profit margin, information that is crucial
for making strategic decisions on product lines.
Consider this example from Fitter’s operations. Suppose that storage of raw materials
is considered an activity. Also assume that storage activities differ between NRG-A and
NRG-B bars because the ingredients are different, and that some of these storage activities
are more labor-intensive than others. In an ERP system, Fitter would track the various
storage activities (how often they occur) and the cost of each. When determining the
profitability of each kind of bar, Fitter cost accountants calculate storage costs based on
the number of storage activities required by each type of bar. This costing is more precise
than computing an average storage cost based on total storage costs and machine hours,
and then allocating that amount to each kind of bar. Conceivably, if the activities differ
enough from one bar to the next, one could be significantly more or less profitable than
the other. This fact would be revealed by the activity-based costing approach, but not by
traditional cost-accounting approaches. An information system that supports activity-
based costing allows managers to see that difference.
Activity-based costing requires more bookkeeping than traditional costing methods
because a company must do activity-based costing in addition to traditional costing, and
because activity-based costing requires a company to keep track of instances of activities,
not just the costs. For many companies, the cost and effort required to implement activity-
based costing is justified by the value of the information yielded. Companies often use
activity-based costing for strategic purposes, while using traditional costing for
bookkeeping and taxes. Having an integrated information system allows a company to do
both kinds of accounting much more easily. One study of companies with and without
ERP revealed that: (1) ERP companies had nearly twice as many cost-allocation bases to
use in management decision making, and (2) the ERP companies’ managers rated their
cost-accounting system much higher. ERP companies also have more faith in the numbers
from their accounting systems.
A survey of management accountants revealed some interesting findings in regard to
how they perceived their ERP systems. Researchers conducting this survey solicited
responses from approximately 500 members of the IMA, the association for accountants
and financial professionals in business. ERP systems were looked at by accounting
managers as being better than not having ERP systems in the areas of having the attributes
of a “single, comprehensive database, providing data on a real-time basis, and making
relevant information available to operations management.” In addition, ERP systems were
found to help in resolving conflicts in goals, standardizing basic processes, and controlling
product costs. ERP systems in the accounting field also help shorten the time for making
decisions and improve that decision making. On the negative side, the respondents
thought the ERP systems were overly complex and took too long to implement.
Problems Consolidating Data from Subsidiaries
Some companies have special operations that make closing their books at the end of an
accounting period a challenge. Companies that have subsidiaries or branches face such a
challenge, and most large companies have more than one legal entity. Because a
company’s executive team must understand the big picture in terms of overall operations
133
Accounting in ERP Systems

and profitability, account balances for each entity must be compiled and forwarded to the
home office so consolidated financial statements and reports for the company as a whole
can be generated.
You might think this would be merely an arithmetic problem: add up cash for all the
entities, accounts receivables for all the entities, and so on through the accounts. The job,
however, is more difficult than that. Problems can arise due to a variety of issues,
including the following: Accounts stated in another country’s currency must be converted
to U.S. dollars (in the case of a U.S. parent company), and transactions between a
company and its subsidiaries must be eliminated from the accounts.
Currency Translation
The following scenario illustrates the problems of currency translation, which is the
process of converting account balances expressed in one currency into balances expressed
in another currency. Assume one euro is worth $1.25 (US), and a company’s European
subsidiary reports cash of 1 million euros at the end of the year. When the European
subsidiary’s balances are consolidated with those of the U.S. parent company at the end of
the year, $1,250,000 will be recorded. The same sort of translation would be done for all
the European subsidiary’s accounts. A complicating factor is that exchange rates fluctuate
daily; however, an ERP system can be configured to access daily exchange rates and
translate daily transactions automatically.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
The current reporting standard for financial statements in the United States is U.S.
GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles), created by the Financial Accounting
Standards Board. Governing bodies, such as the SEC, require companies trading on U.S.
stock exchanges to report their finances using the U.S. GAAP reporting standard.
However, in an effort to achieve a worldwide standard in accounting, by 2016 publicly
traded U.S. companies are likely to be required to report their financial statements
under a set of standards called the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),
which are a set of international accounting standards issued by the International
Accounting Standards Board (IASB). A single set of reporting standards is important to
U.S. investors because many large companies in the United States, such as Intel, Coca-
Cola, and McDonalds, generate more than one-half of their income from outside the
United States. In addition, many investors are now investing in companies worldwide
and are interested in comparing financial statements across countries. More foreign
companies are also merging with those in other countries, which provides another
incentive for countries worldwide to move to a common reporting standard.
Previously, foreign companies trading on U.S. stock exchanges were required by the
SEC to report their finances in U.S. GAAP or to provide a translation between IFRS and
U.S. GAAP; the SEC now allows those companies to report only using IFRS. Recently,
the FASB and the IASB have been working on making the two standards, IFRS and U.S.
GAAP, closer. This work is known as convergence, because it involves eliminating
(continued)
134
Chapter 5

differences between the two standards, thereby enabling companies to easily transition
to IFRS.
An ERP system can help companies adopt IFRS because the financial modules of
ERP systems are capable of reporting on multiple standards. Many companies will be
reporting their financials under IFRS and at the same time reporting for local tax
purposes under a different standard (in this case U.S. GAAP). ERP systems can handle
the parallel requirements for filing financial records.
Question:
1.
Using the Internet, find an article describing a U.S. company’s transition from
U.S. GAAP to IFRS. How can an ERP system help ease the transition for
organizations?
Intercompany Transactions
Transactions that occur between a parent company and one of its subsidiaries (or between
different subsidiaries), known as intercompany transactions, must be eliminated from the
books of the parent company because the transaction does not represent any transfer of
funds into or out of the company.
As an example, suppose that Acme Inc. owns Bennett Manufacturing, and Bennett
sells raw materials to Acme for $1 million. Acme then uses the materials to make its
product. Bennett’s sale to Acme is Acme’s cost of sales. From the point of view of an
outsider, money has merely passed from one part of the consolidated company to another.
A company cannot make a profit by selling to itself.
Companies often do business with their subsidiaries, and for such companies,
intercompany transactions occur frequently. Keeping track of those transactions and
making the adjustments can be a challenge for accountants.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Spreadsheets: A Poor Substitute
Many users of information technology feel comfortable using spreadsheets such as Excel
to do large data analysis and reporting projects. And, as Nick Gomersall (a specialist in
ERP and accounting systems at The GL Company) notes, it is easy to form a link
between a company’s ERP system and a personal computer through which an end user
can download ERP transaction data into a spreadsheet. These spreadsheets are often
used for data analysis and reporting instead of the built-in reporting functionality of the
ERP system or its Business Intelligence (BI) tools because these reporting tools are new
and sometimes challenging to learn. These “rogue” spreadsheets can create considerable
risk for a company in terms of lack of consistency, reliability, and control. For instance,
a study by the accounting firm KPMG, found that when spreadsheets contained more
(continued)
135
Accounting in ERP Systems

than 200 lines, the probability of an error was almost 100 percent. As a result, decisions
based on these spreadsheets are likely to be flawed. In addition, financial spreadsheets
on laptops taken outside the company create a risk for loss of sensitive data.
Gomersall advocates that companies use “accounting intelligence” applications,
which use real-time processing rather than batch processing to pull data from ERP
systems and which include built-in reporting templates that can be used to gain insight
into the corporate earnings. However, these applications are not always available, or
fully utilized, and many companies are not aware of the extent of “rogue” spreadsheet
use. According to an analyst with Gartner Research, most companies’ IT organizations
do not provide technical support for Excel, and are often “unaware of the extent to
which sophisticated and complex spreadsheets are being used within the enterprise.
Unless explicitly directed by a compliance officer to exert more control over spreadsheet
usage, most IT managers avoid intruding too deeply into the area of user-developed
applications.”
Most CFOs (chief financial officers) are unaware of the extent to which spreadsheets
and manual data analysis are involved in closing a company’s books. In fact, the area of
closing the books and reconciliation are two tangible areas where Accounting can
improve its timing and accuracy by taking full advantage of the capabilities of a
company’s ERP system.
Question:
1.
Make a list of the pros and cons of using spreadsheets for financial analysis
within a corporation. Alternatively, form two teams in the classroom and
debate the pros and cons.
MANAGEMENT REPORTING WITH ERP SYSTEMS
The integrated nature of an ERP system and the use of a common database and built-in
management reporting provide numerous benefits. Although the reporting of accounting
information is a common Accounting function, it is often very challenging for companies
to generate the right reports for the right situation. Without an ERP system, the job of
tracking all the data required for a financial report is a monumental undertaking. With an
ERP system, a vast amount of information is available for reporting purposes; however,
often it is years after an ERP implementation before a company figures out which reports
are the most critical for decision making. In this section, we will examine some
management-reporting and analysis tools available with ERP systems.
Data Flows in ERP Systems
As you have seen in earlier chapters, with an ERP system, all transactions in all functional
areas of a company are posted in a centralized database. It is worth reemphasizing that
the database is the company’s “books.” There is no separate set of books for Marketing
and Sales or Production or Purchasing.
Thus, even though it is common usage to refer to “data flows” in an ERP system, it is
actually a misnomer. Data do not flow from one ERP module to another because they are
all in one place—the database. Each area views the same records. It might be better to
136
Chapter 5

speak of “data access” than of “data flows” when talking about how these areas use the
common database.
Document Flow for Customer Service
As you learned in Chapter 3, each transaction that is posted in SAP ERP gets its own
unique document number that allows quick access to the data. If you need to look up a
transaction in SAP ERP, you do so by referencing the document number, which acts as an
index to the appropriate database table entries.
In SAP ERP, document numbers for related transactions are associated in the
database. This provides an electronic audit trail for analysts trying to determine the status
of an order. The best example of this concept is the linkage of document numbers for a
sales order. Figure 5-10 illustrates the document flow concept for a sales transaction.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-10
Document flow of a sales transaction in SAP ERP
The linked events shown in Figure 5-10 progress as follows:
1.
When the order was placed, sales order document 120 was created.
2.
The system recorded the delivery, which is the transfer of the order’s
requirements to the Materials Management module; the delivery is denoted
by document 80000060.
3.
The picking request, which is the document that tells warehouse personnel
which items make up the order, was created and given document number
20120108.
4.
The goods were removed from inventory on the same day, an event recorded
by document number 4900000171.
137
Accounting in ERP Systems

5.
After the goods were issued, an invoice was generated so the customer would
be billed; the invoice was given document number 90000048.
6.
At the same time, the accounting entries for the sale were generated. The
posting document number is 90000000.
The Document Flow screen can be used to drill down to see the details of any one of
these events. The term drill down refers to the ability to view the details behind a summary
of information. For example, the user can double-click the order number (120) and see the
details of the order—products ordered, quantity, customer name, and so on. From that
display, the user can double-click the product numbers or the customer number for more
details on the products or customer. To see the debits and credits in the accounting entry,
the user can double-click the accounting document to see the scheduled entries.
Users can access the document flow from any SAP screen that is used in the sales
order process. If a customer were to call and ask about the status of an order, the sales
representative could access the document flow and see whether the goods had been
shipped. If the customer called with questions about an invoice, the representative could
use the document flow to access the documents related to that invoice, such as the
original sales order or the picking request. This sort of research can be done quickly with
SAP ERP. With unintegrated systems, establishing the audit trail and researching source
documents can be very difficult and time consuming.
Built-In Management-Reporting and Analysis Tools
Accounting records are maintained in the common database of an ERP system. The
advantage of using a database is that accounting employees can query the records to
produce standard reports as well as answer ad hoc questions. An ad hoc question is one
that is spontaneous. For example, a Fitter manager might walk into an analyst’s office and
ask for a sales report for the third quarter—by division and by product. Traditional
accounting packages are not optimized to set up and execute queries against accounting
records, but database packages are. When the records are kept in a database they can be
queried because of the built-in database language.
Thus, an analyst at Fitter who wants to identify the 10 largest orders placed by Health
Express in the past year could execute a query in SAP ERP to show the answer. In
principle, this query could directly access the transaction records to get the answer, which
would mean that analysts running queries would be accessing the records at the same time
as current transactions are being recorded. This competition for resources can slow down
processing in even a large database system, such as those used by ERP packages.
Early on, SAP addressed the need to minimize the demands on the database system
from queries on the transaction records by providing special reporting capabilities within
the ERP system in the form of database tables that store aggregated data. For example, a
table could store sales data summarized by customer on a weekly or monthly basis. Using
data from these special tables reduces the demands on the database because less data
needs to be pulled from the database; the data comes from special database tables created
for reporting, not from the tables used to process sales transactions. For example, SAP
ERP provides the Sales Information System (SIS) tool for analyzing sales data and the
Logistics Information System (LIS) tool for analyzing production and logistics (shipping)
questions. Both the SIS and the LIS come embedded with SAP ERP and use special
summary tables to improve reporting efficiency.
138
Chapter 5

As mentioned in Chapter 2, SAP and other manufacturers improved the ability to
analyze data without reducing system performance by creating Business Warehouse (BW)
products. A BW system is a completely separate information system that extracts data from
the ERP system. With BW, users have the ability to create reports and perform analyses in a
system that does not compete for system resources with transaction processes. However,
current BW systems do require aggregation of data, a process that is complicated and time
consuming. In addition, data aggregation creates limits on what data can be analyzed.
A new era of data analysis is dawning with the introduction of in-memory computing.
With in-memory computing, aggregation of the data is not required, eliminating the
time-consuming process that limits analyses. With in-memory computing, detailed records
(rather than aggregated data) are maintained in a separate system so the ERP system
performance is not affected, and because the system works on the detailed data records,
there is no limit on the types of analyses that can be performed. Chapter 8 provides more
detail on in-memory computing.
As the previous sections illustrate, an ERP system is a key component in creating
management reports. Managerial accounting reports help the company’s managers
understand how the company is making money—what products are profitable, where costs
may need to be reduced, and so on. Financial accounting reports are used to inform
external parties—shareholders and government agencies—how well the company is doing
financially. The importance of accurate accounting reports cannot be overstated, as you
will see in the next section.
THE ENRON COLLAPSE
On October 16, 2001, Enron Corporation, then one of the world’s largest electricity and
natural gas traders, reported a $618 million third-quarter loss and disclosed a $1.2 billion
reduction in shareholder equity, related in part to transactions between the company and
several partnerships run by its chief financial officer (CFO), Andrew Fastow. Until that
time, Enron had been a rapidly growing firm that was revolutionizing the energy trading
business and making millionaires out of its investors. CEO Jeffrey Skilling, who resigned
on August 14, 2001, for personal reasons, had helped transform the company from a
natural gas pipeline company to a global marketer and trader of energy. Along the way,
the company had encouraged its employees to invest large portions of their 401K
retirement savings accounts in Enron stock by matching employee contributions.
On October 17, the day after Enron reported its tremendous third-quarter loss, the
SEC—which is dedicated to protecting investors and maintaining the integrity of the
securities markets—sent a letter to Enron asking for information about the loss. Enron’s
high-flying business practices immediately began unraveling. On October 22, 2001, Enron
announced that the SEC was conducting an inquiry into a possible conflict of interest
related to the company’s dealings with the partnerships run by CFO Fastow. Shares of
Enron sank more than 20 percent on the news. Two days later, Enron ousted CFO Fastow
in an attempt to restore investor confidence. On November 8, Arthur Andersen, Enron’s
financial auditing firm, received a federal subpoena for documents related to Enron, and
on December 2, Enron made the largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection filing in U.S.
history. Clearly, the accounting records made public by Enron, which were released
quarterly and were not audited, did not reflect the financial health of the company.
Enron began as an oil pipeline company in Houston in 1985. With the deregulation of
electrical power markets, starting in the mid-1990s, Enron began working as an energy
139
Accounting in ERP Systems

broker—trading electricity and other commodities. As a broker, Enron entered into
separate contracts with sellers and buyers of energy, making money on the difference
between the selling price and the buying price. Because Enron kept its books private, it
was the only party that knew both prices. Enron’s business evolved over time, extending
to practices that allowed customers to insure themselves against a range of risk factors,
including changes in interest rates, weather, and a customer’s inability to pay. The
volume of these financial contracts eventually became far greater than the volume of
contracts to actually deliver commodities.
To manage the risk in these contracts, Enron employed a team of people with Ph.D.s
in mathematics, physics, and economics. Risk management balances the opportunities
offered by a business against the risks inherent in taking that business. As Enron’s
business became more complex and its stock soared, the company created partnerships
between Enron and companies involved in Internet broadband technologies, computer
technology, and energy, to name a few. While some of the partnerships were set up
legitimately, others were created for the sole purpose of masking billions of dollars in
debt, allowing Enron managers to shift debt off the books.
The partnerships that Fastow engineered were the subject of discussion long before
Enron’s bankruptcy. In a June 1, 1999, article in CFO magazine, Ronald Fink noted that
the Financial Accounting Standards Board was looking at rule changes that would affect
companies using creative financing techniques, such as those used by Enron. Enron
owned a number of subsidiaries, but it made sure that it owned no more than 50 percent
of the voting stock, which allowed it to keep the debt and assets of these subsidiaries off
Enron’s own books. If Enron had not used these creative accounting practices, the
company would have had to report a much higher percentage of debt, which would have
increased the costs that Enron paid to borrow money.
For years, Enron’s financial statements had been audited by Arthur Andersen, a
highly regarded accounting firm. As Enron’s auditor, Andersen issued annual reports
attesting to the validity of Enron’s financial statements; it was supposed to function as an
unbiased, incorruptible observer and reporter. Enron’s October 16, 2001, press release
characterized numerous charges against income for the third quarter as “nonrecurring,”
even though Andersen had determined that Enron did not have a basis for concluding that
the charges would in fact be nonrecurring. Andersen advised Enron against using that
term and documented its objections internally in the event of litigation, but the firm did
not report its objections or take any other steps to correct the public statement. On
March 7, 2002, Arthur Andersen was charged with obstruction of justice.
Perhaps the most damning part of Andersen’s obstruction of justice indictment related
to the destruction of documents. On October 23, 2001, the day after Enron publicly
acknowledged the SEC inquiry, Andersen personnel in Houston were called to mandatory
meetings where they were instructed by Andersen partners and others to immediately
destroy documentation relating to Enron; Andersen employees were told they should work
overtime if necessary to accomplish the destruction. Over the next few weeks, employees in
several Andersen offices worldwide undertook a concerted initiative to shred tons of paper
documentation and to delete hundreds of computer files relating to Enron.
Outcome of the Enron Scandal
The effects of the Enron scandal were felt both within and well beyond the company.
Many of Enron’s shareholders were Enron employees who invested their 401K accounts in
140
Chapter 5

Enron stock. Shareholders lost an estimated $40 billion dollars—in many cases,
individuals lost their entire life savings. A class-action lawsuit against financial institutions
that had dealings with Enron (including Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, JPMorgan,
and Citigroup) produced more than $7 billion in settlements, although legal fees consumed
a significant portion of this.
Thousands of Enron workers lost their jobs, and 31 individuals were either charged or
pled guilty to criminal charges. J. Clifford Baxter resigned as Enron’s vice chairman on
May 2, 2001. He was found shot to death in his car on January 15, 2002, in an apparent
suicide. In 2006, Andrew Fastow, Enron’s former chief financial officer, was sentenced to
six years in prison. His sentence had been limited to a maximum of 10 years as part of a
plea agreement in which he agreed to testify against former CEO Jeffrey Skilling and CEO
Ken Lay. Fastow’s wife, Lea, also received a one-year prison sentence for filing a false
income tax return. In October 2006, Jeffrey Skilling was convicted on 19 counts of
conspiracy, fraud, insider trading, and making false statements to auditors. He was ordered
to pay nearly $45 million into a restitution fund for Enron’s victims, and was sentenced to
24 years in jail. Although he is appealing his conviction, he began serving his sentence in
late 2006. Ken Lay was convicted on fraud and conspiracy charges in May 2006, but two
months later, prior to being sentenced, he died of a heart attack.
On June 15, 2002, jurors convicted the accounting firm Arthur Andersen of
obstructing justice by destroying Enron documents while on notice of a federal
investigation. Andersen executives had claimed that the documents were destroyed as part
of general housekeeping duties, and not as a ruse to keep Enron documents away from the
regulators. That October, U.S. District Judge Melinda Harmon sentenced Andersen to the
maximum: a $500,000 fine and five years’ probation. Those events were anticlimactic,
however, as the former auditing giant had been all but dismantled by then. Once a world-
class firm with over 85,000 employees globally, Andersen has since been whittled down to
almost nothing. As of early 2012, Andersen has not declared bankruptcy or been dissolved,
but it is no longer an active company.
As a result of the failure of Enron, as well as the high-profile bankruptcies of
WorldCom and Global Crossing, the United States Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002. This act was intended to prevent the kind of fraud and abuse that led to the
Enron downfall.
Key Features of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act is designed to encourage top management accountability in firms
that are publicly traded in the United States. Frequently, top executives involved in
corporate scandals claim that they were unaware of abuses occurring at their company. Title
IX of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires that financial statements filed with the SEC include a
statement signed by the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, certifying that the
financial statement complies with the SEC rules. Specifically, the statements must certify
that “the information contained in the periodic report fairly presents, in all material
respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the issuer.” Anyone who
willfully certifies a statement “knowing that the periodic report accompanying the statement
does not comport with all the requirements set forth in this section shall be fined not more
than $5,000,000, or imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both.”
141
Accounting in ERP Systems

Title II of the act addresses auditor independence. Among other things, this section of
the act limits the nonaudit services that an auditor can provide to an audit client; the
prohibited nonaudit services include the following:
•
Bookkeeping or other services related to the accounting records or financial
statements
•
Financial information systems design and implementation services
•
Legal services
•
Expert services unrelated to the audit
•
Management functions
•
Human resources functions
•
Any other service that the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(PCAOB) determines to be impermissible. (The PCAOB was created in Title I of
the act with broad powers to regulate audits and auditors of public companies.)
Title IV of the act covers enhanced financial disclosures, and it specifies more stringent
requirements for financial reporting. Section 404 of Title IV requires that a public company’s
annual report contain management’s internal control report. The control report must outline
management’s responsibility for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting, and it must also assess the effectiveness of the company’s internal control
structure and procedures. Section 409 of Title IV addresses the timeliness of reports, and may
require companies to file an SEC report within two days of a significant trigger event—for
example, completion of an acquisition or a default by a major customer.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT
FOR ERP SYSTEMS
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act has had significant ramifications for the design of information
systems of publicly traded companies. To meet the internal control report requirement, a
company must first document the controls that are in place and then verify that they are
not subject to error or manipulation.
An integrated information system provides the tools to implement internal controls, as
long as the system is configured and managed correctly. However, even the passage of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the availability of state-of-the-art ERP technology cannot prevent
the type of insidious and systematic fraud that was involved in the Enron scandal. An ERP
system relies on a central database with accurate information. ERP systems make it difficult
to hide fraudulent dealings, and perhaps Enron’s problems would have been more obvious to
stakeholders of the company had the company implemented an ERP system. But it is
unlikely that an ERP system or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act can prevent all fraud.
142
Chapter 5

A N O T H E R
L O O K
Sarbanes-Oxley Ten Years Out
Ten years has passed since the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and to date, the
SEC—the organization in charge of prosecuting violations of the law—has filed cases
against only 20 companies accused of violating the act. The backbone of the act was
increased responsibility placed on company executives. The act allows the SEC to seize pay
from the CEOs and CFOs of companies found to have filed fraudulent financial statements,
even if the executives were not directly involved in the fraud. However, some experts, such
as Jack T. Ciesielski, president of R. G. Associates and the editor of The Analyst’s
Accounting Observer, believe the act is a “dormant enforcement tool” and is not a
deterrent because it is not really being used. A primary challenge to enforcing the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act is that much of the language in the bill was poorly drafted and
ambiguous. In addition to the small number of cases filed under Sarbanes-Oxley, half of the
companies that have been charged have been small companies, and many cases have yet to
be resolved.
Recently, however, some larger companies have been charged with violations of the
act. For instance, Navistar was charged by the SEC with overstating its income from
2001 to 2005, and, as a result, the chief executive of the company, along with the former
chief financial executive, were forced to give back stock they had earned during that
time frame. Similarly, the former CEO at Diebold (a maker of automated teller
machines) was forced to repay cash and stock after the SEC charged the company with
overstating its results over the course of five years. And in a recent case against Beazer
Homes and two of its former executives, the SEC collected $8 million and 119,000
shares of Beazer stock. While these cases do involve larger companies, with executives
being forced to return at least some portion of their compensation, many feel that
enforcement is still lacking. According to Harvey Goldschmid, a professor at Columbia
Law School and a former SEC commissioner, “The trick is to create deterrents and
accountability in the system. You don’t do it if you’re soft on individuals.”
Question:
1.
Use the Internet to research the latest news surrounding the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act. Make a list of companies that have been charged with fraudulent
activities in the last three years. Can you see any patterns of an increase or
decrease in fraud over the past few years?
The next section explores ways in which SAP ERP and other ERP systems can
prevent corporate fraud and abuse.
Archiving
One of the first things a new SAP ERP user typically notices is that the software offers very few
ways to delete items. For example, the menus in the SAP ERP system related to material
master data (master records that describe material characteristics) are shown in Figure 5-11.
143
Accounting in ERP Systems

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-11
Transaction options for material master data
This screen offers options for creating, changing, and displaying, but not simply
deleting—the closest alternative is an option to flag data for deletion. Before material
data can be deleted from the SAP ERP system, a user must create an auditable record of
its existence. Data are removed from the SAP ERP system only after they have been
recorded to media (tape backup, DVD-R) for permanent storage. This permanently stored
data, or archive, allows auditors to reconstruct the company’s financial position at any
point in the past.
Suppose data could be freely deleted from an ERP system. An unscrupulous employee
could create a fictitious vendor, post an invoice from the vendor, have payment made for
the bogus invoice to a Swiss bank account, and then delete all records of this transaction.
It would be very hard to detect the fraud and probably impossible to find out who
committed it, because the records would no longer exist.
Not only does the SAP ERP system require archiving before data can be deleted, but it
also keeps track of when data are created or changed. Figure 5-12 shows the change
record for the material master. Each time a user changes the material master, the change
record tracks the change in the data, who changed them, and when the change occurred.
For example, in Figure 5-12, you can see that Cindy made changes to the material’s basic
data (such as the description, measurement units, or weight) on April 28, 2010.
144
Chapter 5

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-12
Change record for material master
User Authorizations
Another way that an ERP system can prevent employee theft is through user
authorizations and separation of duties. SAP ERP has sophisticated user administration
tools that allow different levels of authorization management, to ensure that employees
can perform only the transactions required for their jobs. The system controls user
authorizations through its Profile Generator, which provides a simple method for selecting
the functions a user should be allowed to perform.
Figure 5-13 shows a predefined role in the SAP ERP system for a user whose job
involves managing material master data and bills of material. This employee can perform
any transactions shown on the role menu in Figure 5-13.
145
Accounting in ERP Systems

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-13
Display Roles screen in SAP
Managing authorized usage can be one of the most complex tasks in an ERP system.
The joke in the world of authorizations is “If you’re doing your job, we’re not doing ours.”
It may be a challenge to provide users with the proper authorizations in a timely manner,
but most companies take the position that it is better to err on the side of caution, by
taking a little longer to grant the right level of authorization, than to give users too much
authority quickly.
Tolerance Groups
As another way to make sure employees do not exceed their authority in financial
transactions, companies using an ERP system can set limits on the size of transaction an
employee can process. In the SAP ERP system, this is done using tolerance groups. As you
learned in Chapter 2, tolerance groups are preset limits that define transaction limits.
Tolerance groups are used to set limits on the dollar value for a single item in a document
as well as on the total value of the document. Just as importantly, they are used to set a
limit on payment differences. For instance, suppose a customer has been invoiced for
$1,005 but accidentally sends in a check for $1,000 to pay the invoice. The cost of
146
Chapter 5

requesting and processing a second payment for the $5.00 would cost both parties more
than $5.00. In this case it is better to accept the $1,000 check as payment in full and
account for the difference as a variance. Figure 5-14 shows the SAP ERP Change View
screen for tolerance groups. The Permitted payment differences section in this figure
shows that the system would allow the user to process a payment that was in error by no
more than 1 percent or $10.00. In Figure 5-14, the group field is blank, which indicates
that this group is the default tolerance group. If an employee is not assigned to any other
tolerance group, then by default the limits in the default group apply. As with
authorizations, it is a safe policy to define a default tolerance group with low limits and to
err on the side of less authority rather than more authority.
No group specified,
so this is the default
tolerance
Default setting
allows posting of
documents for
$1,000 or less
Payments can differ
by $10 or 1%
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-14
Default tolerance group
Financial Transparency
A key feature of any ERP system is the ability to drill down within a report to get to the
source documents (transactions) that were used to create the report. For example, if sales
figures for a region look unusually high, the user can verify the results by double-clicking
the figure in the report to drill down to review the specific sales orders that constitute the
overall sales figures. The ability to drill down from within reports to get to transaction
information makes it easier for auditors to confirm the integrity of the reports. Figure 5-15
shows a general ledger account balance for raw material consumption. This general ledger
accounts for all raw material usage at the company.
147
Accounting in ERP Systems

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-15
G/L (general ledger) account balance for raw material consumption
To see the source of the figures in this report, a user can double-click on the 8,810.00
figure for the Accumulated Balance of the Raw Material Consumption Expense row to
bring up the Account Line Item Display screen, shown in Figure 5-16. Figure 5-16 shows
that two items make up the $8,810.00 raw material consumption total.
Detail
button
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-16
Documents that make up G/L account balance for raw material consumption
148
Chapter 5

A manager might be intrigued by the $10 expense and want more information on what
caused it. Clicking the Detail button on the Account Line Item Display screen brings up
more detailed information on the $10 expense, as shown in Figure 5-17. Fifty pounds
of material were charged to cost center R010, which is a research and development
cost center.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 5-17
Details on $10 line item in G/L account for raw material consumption
From this screen even more details can be displayed. With a few mouse clicks, an
auditor could move from a summary statement of the general ledger account to screens
showing the details related to an employee in the Research and Development Department
taking 50 pounds of oats from inventory for product development. With a properly
configured and managed ERP system, direct links between the company’s financial
statements and the individual transactions that make up the statements help an auditor
more easily detect fraud and abuse.
149
Accounting in ERP Systems

Exercise 5.3
Assume that you are the manager of the Accounting Department at Fitter, which still does
not have an ERP system. What changes must you make in your accounting practices to get
the company in compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act? Write a proposal to your
manager outlining your plan to be ready for the additional amount of reporting necessary.
For this exercise, assume that Fitter does not have an ERP system in place.
TRENDS IN FINANCIAL REPORTING—XBRL
The finance departments of most corporations are under pressure from a variety of
sources. The financial crisis of 2008 along with the global recession has affected almost all
companies. Profit margins are being squeezed, market volatility has brought increased
risk, and new government regulations are more numerous and complex. As noted
previously, ERP software can help companies effectively handle challenges such as
complying with Sarbanes Oxley regulations. Another regulation, put forth by the SEC in
2009, is the Interactive Data to Improve Financial Reporting rule, which requires the
gradual implementation of XBRL tags in financial reporting documents.
Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) is a standards-based language for
the electronic communication of business and financial data. XBRL is a subset of
Extensible Markup Language (XML), the new programming language of the Internet. XML
uses tags that define the data contained within them. Similar to data types assigned to
records in a database, XML tags apply specific meaning to the data within a Web page.
XML-coded data can go directly from a Web page into a database without having to pass
through middleware or, worse yet, be rekeyed into the system. This reduces the chance of
errors. In comparison, most current Internet pages are written in Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML). HTML specifies only how your data will look (by assigning text styles,
coloring, placement of graphics, and so on) when viewed through a browser. XML changes
that data into information with meaning and usefulness. For financial reporting, XBRL
provides an identifying, computer-readable tag for each item of financial data. For
instance, “company net profit” has its own unique XBRL tag.
Apart from new regulations, there are other reasons why XBRL is becoming prevalent.
Reports written in XBRL are processed faster because the imbedded tags directly relate to
a database, and XBRL financial reports can more easily be validated electronically and
then compared to other reports. More importantly, investors and other interested parties
are concerned with transparency in reporting. To assess the risk of a given investment,
the investor must understand the financial aspects of the investment. If a report is
obscure or hiding information, then the risk is not easily assessed. XBRL results in more
transparency of reporting.
XBRL is controlled by a nonprofit group of 600 international companies and other
organizations, including governmental agencies. The group is responsible for creating and
standardizing these financial tags. In addition to the SEC, entities such as the U.S. Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), which provides deposit insurance guaranteeing the
safety of deposits in member banks, and Her Majesty’s Revenue & Customs (the United
Kingdom’s customs and tax-collection departments), are beginning to require the use of
XBRL tags.
ERP systems can accept data in XML and XBRL format. For example, SAP’s Business
Objects XBRL Publishing tool allows users to avoid complex tags and simply use a drag-
and-drop system for categorizing financial data.
150
Chapter 5

Chapter Summary
•
Companies need accounting systems to record transactions and generate financial
statements. Accounting activities can generally be classified as either financial accounting
or managerial accounting.
•
Financial accounting consists of documenting all the transactions of a company that have
an impact on the financial state of the organization, and then using those documented
transactions to create reports for investors and external parties and agencies. Managerial
accounting deals with determining the costs and profitability of a company’s activities. The
goal of managerial accounting is to provide managers with detailed information so they can
make informed decisions, create budgets, determine the profitability of a particular product,
sales region, or marketing campaign, and so on.
•
An accounting system should let a user summarize data in meaningful ways so the data
can then be used to assist managers in their day-to-day work and in long-range planning.
•
Unintegrated information systems are more likely to result in accounting data that is
inaccurate or not current, which can affect decision making and therefore profitability.
•
Closing the books means that balances for temporary or nominal accounts (such as
revenue, expense, gain, and loss) are transferred to the retained earnings account. An
integrated information system simplifies the process of closing the books and preparing
financial statements. Using an integrated information system and a common database to
record accounting data has important inventory cost-accounting benefits. More precise
record keeping is possible, which can lead to more accurate product cost calculations.
These, in turn, can help managers determine which products are profitable and which are
not.
•
The use of an integrated system and a common database to record accounting data has
important management-reporting benefits. With an ERP system, a user can use the built-in
query tools to build reports as well as drill down within reports to the source documents
(transactions) that were used to create the report.
•
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, passed in the wake of the Enron collapse and other high-
profile bankruptcies, promoted management accountability by requiring extra financial
approval and reporting. Because ERP systems can help companies meet the requirements
of this legislation, the act has increased the demand for integrated data reporting.
•
Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL), a subset of XML (Extensible Markup
Language), is a standards-based language for the electronic communication of business
and financial data. For financial reporting, XBRL provides an identifying, computer-readable
tag for each item of financial data. For instance, “company net profit” has its own unique
XBRL tag.
151
Accounting in ERP Systems

Key Terms
accounts payable
accounts receivable
activity-based costing
archive
balance sheet
cost variance
currency translation
direct costs
drill down
Extensible Business Reporting Language
(XBRL)
Extensible Markup Language (XML)
financial accounting
general ledger
income statement
indirect costs
intercompany transactions
International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS)
managerial accounting
overhead
product cost variant
profit and loss (P&L) statement
U.S. GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles)
Exercises
1. Outline the way an ERP system’s handling of transactions affects a company’s general
ledger. List three specific SAP modules and how they cause changes to the general ledger.
2. This exercise tests your understanding of the information needed to trace a sale through a
multistep ERP sales cycle: sales order, inventory sourcing, delivery, billing, and payment.
Assume that an order has been placed with your company and entered into your ERP
system. The following events then take place:
a.
The system automatically checks the customer’s credit and finds it to be acceptable.
The order is recorded for the delivery date requested.
b.
The system schedules the production of the goods. (There is not enough inventory to
ship from stock.)
c.
The system schedules raw material orders from the vendors to produce the goods
ordered.
d.
The raw materials are received and stored.
e.
The goods are produced and reserved for shipment to the customer.
f.
The system schedules the delivery, and an invoice is printed and included with the
shipment. The goods are then put on the delivery truck
g.
Shipping notifies Accounting of the shipment’s details.
h.
A month later, the customer sends in payment, which is recorded in accounting.
For each of these events, list the information that must be recorded in the common
database. You do not need to know how to use a database to do this, nor do you need to
understand bookkeeping. For example, for the credit-check step, think about what
information is needed to perform a credit check on a given customer.
At each step, did the wealth of the company increase or decrease? At each step, how did
the company’s obligations to outside entities change? At each step, how did the obligations
of outside entities to the company change?
152
Chapter 5

3. Assume that you are the manager of Accounting at Fitter, which is privately owned by a
family and headed by a board of directors. The board members are set to visit the company
tomorrow morning and would like to see sales data for today, as an example of a typical
day. Your boss calls you up and asks you to work with the employees on your team to
complete the table shown in Figure 5-18, in anticipation of the board members’ visit
tomorrow.
Sales data
September 29
Distributor
Division
Direct Sales
Division
Total
# Bars sold
NRG-A
NRG-B
Total
$ Value of bars sold
NRG-A
NRG-B
Total
# Customers sold to
NRG-A
NRG-B
Total
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 5-18
Table for sales report
Given Fitter’s current sales order data-processing practices, why will this be a difficult task
to complete? Explain the business practices that would cause difficulty in quickly and
accurately gathering this data. Why would this task be easy to complete if Fitter had an
ERP system? To answer this question, review Chapters 3 and 4 to see how sales orders
are processed.
4. The following exercise will test your understanding of Fitter’s current credit-check system. In
each situation, you are given background data and information about documents in the
system.
153
Accounting in ERP Systems

Background data
6/29/13
Today’s date
$1.50/bar
Current list price, NRG-A
$1.60/bar
Current list price, NRG-B
Accounts receivable balance at start of business day, ABC Corporation                   $9,000
$12,000
Credit limit, ABC Corporation
Current order
NRG-A
Product
4 cases (1,152 bars)
Amount
Price
List
ABC headquarters
Ship to
7/5/13
Date desired
A1001
Next invoice number
Documents in system
No documents relating to ABC are in the system.
SITUATION 1
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
a.
Given the information currently in the system, will credit be granted or denied for ABC
Corporation’s current order?
b.
If the system processed data in a more timely way, would it change the answer as to
whether or not credit be granted?
154
Chapter 5

Background data
7/3/13
$1.50/bar
$1.60/bar
Accounts receivable balance at start of business day, KLM Corporation         $6,000
$8,000
Credit limit, KLM Corporation
Current order
NRG-B
Product
5 cases (1,440 bars)
Amount
List
Price
KLM headquarters
Ship to
7/8/13
Date desired
A1200
Next invoice number
Documents in system
Purchase order KLM 82332 for three cases (864 bars) of NRG-A. This order is in the sales order entry
program, but it has not been transferred to the accounting program (thus, Accounting does not yet
know about this sale).
Today’s date
Current list price, NRG-A
Current list price, NRG-B
SITUATION 2
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
c.
Given the information currently in the system, will credit be granted or denied for KLM
Corporation’s current order?
d.
If the system processed data in a more timely way, would credit be granted or denied?
155
Accounting in ERP Systems

Background data
7/13/13
$1.50/bar
$1.60/bar
Accounts receivable balance at start of business day, ACORN Corporation
$6,000
$6,000
Credit limit, ACORN Corporation
Current order
NRG-A
Product
150 boxes (3,600 bars)
Amount
List
Price
ACORN headquarters
Ship to
7/15/13
Date desired
A1300
Next invoice number
Documents in system
A check from ACORN was received in yesterday’s mail and entered into the accounting system. The
check is for $2,000, applied to invoices from June’s sales. The sales clerks are working from credit-
limit printouts prepared at the beginning of the week (two days ago).
Today’s date
Current list price, NRG-A
Current list price, NRG-B
SITUATION 3
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
e.
Given the information currently in the system, will credit be granted or denied for
ACORN Corporation’s current order?
f.
If the system processed data in a more timely way, would credit be granted or denied?
5. ERP systems save time for accountants in many ways. Some researchers expected that
job opportunities for accountants would diminish with the implementation of an ERP
system. In reality, accountants are needed more than ever in industry. Use an online job
search Web site and look at the jobs available for accountants. How many positions require
experience with ERP systems? Do any positions require data analysis capabilities that
involve Business Warehouse technology?
6. Companies usually prepare annual division- and company-wide budgets that show
projected monthly results, such as: sales, cost of sales, inventory levels, cash on hand, and
other key data. Such budgets are effective for planning and controlling operations if they
are designed as “flexible” budgets. A flexible budget is restated as conditions change from
month to month, so goals remain reasonable and useful for evaluating performance. If not
kept up to date, budgets are not useful for planning and controlling operations.
If information systems are unintegrated, getting data from the company’s departments to
create the initial budget is a chore, and keeping the data current is often so difficult that it is
not done. Thus, while the flexible budget concept is a good idea, it is difficult to achieve
with unintegrated systems. Because ERP makes flexible budgeting more achievable, ERP
156
Chapter 5

helps management discharge its planning and controlling roles better. Why do you think
flexible budgeting would be more achievable with an ERP system? List your reasons, and
explain.
7. Using the Internet, research the status of the government regulations in the United States
concerning the requirements of companies publicly traded to adopt IFRS. The SEC Web
site (www.sec.gov) is a good source of information on this topic. Report any updates to the
requirements.
8. Review Fitter’s unintegrated production and purchasing procedures, described in Chapter 4.
How would its current job-scheduling, production, and purchasing procedures result in
variances from standard costs? Why would Fitter have trouble researching these costs at
month’s end to adjust the “standard costs per unit” to accurate “actual costs per unit”?
9. Investigate the adoption of XBRL by companies, and report on the status of XBRL
implementation at this point in time.
For Further Study and Research
Barnhart, Todd M. “The Financial Supply Chain.” Darwin Magazine, April 2004.
Bloomberg News. “Lawyer Who Negotiated Enron Settlements Retiring.” August 28, 2007.
The Economist. “Sarbanes-Oxley: Five Years Under the Thumb.” July 26, 2007.
www.economist.com/business/displaystory.cfm?story_id=9545905&CFID=19771870&
CFTOKEN=7941782.
Fink, Ronald. “Balancing Act: Will a New Accounting Rule Aimed at Off-Balance-Sheet
Financing Trip up Enron?” CFO, July 1, 1999.
Flood, Mary. “Andersen Conviction Affirmed.” Houston Chronicle, July 1, 2004.
Gaskin, James E. “XML Comes of Age.” InternetWeek.com, April 3, 2000.
Goff, John. “They Might Be Giants.” CFO. January 12, 2004. www.cfo.com/article.cfm/3011295?
f=related.
Hays, Kristin. “Ex-Enron CFO Fastow Sentenced to 6 years in Prison.” Houston Chronicle,
September 26, 2006.
Herm, Marcus. “XML - An Opportunity for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises.” Software AG.
http://webmethods.com/xml/library/herm.htm.
Johnson, Carrie. “Enron’s Lay Dies of Heart Attack.” Washington Post, July 6, 2006.
www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/07/05/AR2006070500523.html.
Information Age. “Spreadsheet Creep.” 27 May 2008. www.information-age.com/research/
information-integrity/331821/spreadsheet-creep.thtml.
Kimmel, Paul D., Jerry J. Weygandt, Donald E. Kieso. Financial Accounting Tools for Business
Decision Making, 5th edition. New Jersey: Wiley; 2009.
KPMG LLP. “Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404: Management Assessment of Internal Control and the
Proposed Auditing Standards.” White Paper, March 2003.
www.kpmg.ca/en/services/audit/documents/SO404.pdf.
KPMG LLP. “Sarbanes-Oxley: A Closer Look.” White Paper, January 2003.
Krumweide, Kip R., and Win G. Jordan. “Reaping the Promise of Enterprise Resource Systems.”
Strategic Finance, October 2000, 49–52.
List, Allison. “The Lax Enforcement of Section 304 of Sarbanes-Oxley: Why Is the SEC Ignoring
Its Greatest Asset in the Fight Against Corporate Misconduct?” Ohio State Law Journal 70,
no 1 (2009).
157
Accounting in ERP Systems

Lubin, Joann S., and Kara Scannell, “Critics See Some Good from Sarbanes-Oxley.” Wall Street
Journal, July 30, 2007.
McClenahen, John S. “The Book on the One-Day Close.” IndustryWeek.com. April 1, 2002.
www.industryweek.com/ReadArticle.aspx?ArticleID=1058.
Morgenson, Gretchen. “Clawbacks Without Claws.” New York Times. September 10, 2011.
www.nytimes.com/2011/09/11/business/clawbacks-without-claws-in-a-sarbanes-oxley-tool.
html?pagewanted=all.
Preacher, Debbie. “Sarbanes-Oxley: A Business Blessing in Disguise.” ebizq.net. July 17, 2005.
www.ebizq.net/topics/com_sec/features/6116.html.
SAP.com. “SAP ERP Financials: IFRS Compliance.” 2011. www.sap.com/solutions/business-
suite/erp/financials/ifrs.epx.
SAP.com. “SAP Customer Success Story: NB Power: Deferred Restructuring Elicits Impressive
Flexibility from SAP Consulting.” 2004. www.sap.com/platform/netweaver/pdf/
CS_NB_Power.pdf.
SAP.com “SAP Delivers New XBRL Publishing Software to Enable Easier Communication of
Financial and Business Data.” February 18, 2009. www.sap.com/news-reader/index.epx?
pressid=10944.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, H.R. 3763, Title III, Section 302, §1350 (a)(3).
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, H.R. 3763, Title IX, Section 906, §1350 (c).
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “The Investor’s Advocate: How the SEC Protects
Investors, Maintains Market Integrity, and Facilitates Capital Formation.” www.sec.gov/
about/whatwedo.shtml.
VanVuren, Ken, W. Mark Wilder, and Rick Elam. “An Empirical Investigation of the Effectiveness
of ERP Systems as Assessed by Management Accountants.” Journal of Business and
Public Affairs, (Fall 2006): 57–76.
Washington Post. “Timeline of Enron’s Collapse.” July 9, 2004. www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/articles/A25624-2002Jan10.html.
White, Clinton Jr. The Guide & Workbook for Understanding XBRL, 5th edition Newark:
SkipWhite.com; 2011.
XBRL International. “XBRL Basics.” www.xbrl.org.
158
Chapter 5

C H A P T E R6
HUMAN RESOURCES
PROCESSES WITH ERP
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Explain why the role of the human resources department is critical to the
success of a company
•
Describe the key processes managed by human resources departments
•
Describe how an integrated information system can support effective
human resources processes
I N T R O D U C T I O N
A company’s employees are its most valuable resource, which means that the human resources (HR)
department plays a critical role within an organization. The human resources department is
responsible for many of the activities that a company performs to attract, hire, reward, train, and,
occasionally, terminate employees. The decisions made in the human resources department can
affect every department in the company. Companies are increasingly aware of the importance of an
experienced, well-trained workforce, and many organizations have begun using the term human
capital management (HCM) to describe the tasks associated with managing a company’s workforce.
As a company grows, the need for an organized and effective human resources department
becomes increasingly important. The responsibilities of a human resources department usually
include the following:

•
Attracting, selecting, and hiring new employees using information from résumés, references,
and personal interviews
•
Communicating information regarding new positions and hires throughout the organization
and beyond
•
Ensuring that employees have the proper education, training, and certification to successfully
complete their duties
•
Handling issues related to employee conduct
•
Making sure employees understand the responsibilities of their jobs
•
Reviewing employee performance and determining salary increases and bonuses
•
Managing the salary and benefits provided to each employee and confirming that the proper
benefits are disbursed to new and current employees
•
Communicating changes in salaries, benefits, or policies to employees
•
Supporting management plans for changes in the organization (expansion, retirements,
reorganizations, and so on) so competent employees are available to support business
processes
Ensuring that these tasks are accomplished and that valid human resources-related information
is communicated throughout the organization requires a system that effectively controls the flow of
information. In this chapter, we will explore the role of an integrated information system in human
resources.
PROBLEMS WITH FITTER’S HUMAN RESOURCES PROCESSES
Fitter Snacker’s has just three employees in its Human Resources Department, and some
problems arise simply because of the large number and variety of department
responsibilities (from hiring and firing to managing health benefits) as well as the number
of people with whom Human Resources interacts. A lack of integration among all
departments often results in inaccurate, out-of-date, and inconsistent information.
As with Fitter’s other departments, Human Resources’ information systems are not
well integrated with the company’s other information systems. The department relies
160
Chapter 6

heavily on paper records and a manual filing system, which creates problems because
information is not readily accessible or easy to analyze. The Human Resources
Department’s recruiting, hiring, and postplacement processes would operate more
efficiently with an integrated information system.
Recruiting Process
When a department within Fitter has an opening for a new employee, the department
supervisor communicates this need to the Human Resources Department by filling out a
paper job vacancy form that describes the position, lists the qualifications a candidate
must have, specifies the type of position (temporary, part-time, full-time, or internship),
and states when the position will become available. Using this information, Human
Resources gets final approval from the president of Fitter to begin the recruiting process.
Because there is no central information system, the details on the job vacancy form are
frequently inconsistent among, and sometimes within, departments. For example, the
requirements for a clerical position in one department includes experience with
Microsoft Word, while in another department, the specification is for experience with
Microsoft Office.
Usually a job is initially posted internally so current employees have the first
opportunity to apply for the position. If no current employees are acceptable for the
position, then Fitter posts the position externally.
Problems can occur throughout Fitter’s recruiting process. First, the description of the
required job qualifications may be incomplete or inaccurate—sometimes because the
supervisor is in a hurry, sometimes because the supervisor is not aware of all of the
functions required for the position, and sometimes because the supervisor assumes that all
candidates will have certain basic skills. Second, if the job vacancy form is lost or not
routed properly, the Human Resources Department will not know that the position is
available, while the supervisor assumes that the paperwork is in process. When this
happens, the department can end up shorthanded, creating productivity issues as well as
the possibility of tension or animosity between the departments. Obviously, this problem
is more likely to occur when job openings are circulated by paper. With an integrated
information system, job information is available immediately and is easier to monitor.
Another serious recruiting problem related to a paper-based hiring process is the potential
loss of a good candidate due to drawn-out hiring practices or lost data.
Although Fitter does not use recruiting agencies or Internet job sites such as
Monster.com to find candidates, it does use several other methods. The company
publishes its job vacancies on the company’s Web site, in local newspapers, and, in the
case of management positions, in national publications. In addition, a representative from
the Human Resources Department attends career fairs and recruits on college campuses
for prospective candidates. Occasionally, referrals are made by other Fitter employees,
and sometimes individuals searching for open positions at Fitter send unsolicited résumés.
Filing and keeping track of résumés and applications is an ongoing challenge. Fitter
has dozens of jobs with different titles and descriptions, and the company receives dozens
of résumés and applications each day. The Human Resources Department must classify
and file all applications and résumés according to the appropriate description. For
example, if the résumé of a mechanical engineer is accidentally filed with résumés of
candidates applying for jobs in the accounting department, the mistake may not be
discovered in time to include the engineer in the search process. In this case, Fitter may
161
Human Resources Processes with ERP

not hire the best person for the engineering position, and the mistake might damage
Fitter’s competitiveness as well as its reputation.
Keeping the applicant’s data on a paper form means that retrieving the applicant data
and using it to evaluate candidates is also challenging. To generate a list of potential
candidates, Human Resources evaluates the résumés and applications it receives in
response to a job posting; it also reviews applications that have been on file for less than a
year. These résumés and applications must be photocopied and then circulated through
the department making the job request. Frequently, more than one person in the
requesting department reviews the applications, and because the applicant data are on
paper, managers review the applicant files sequentially, slowing the review process.
The Interviewing and Hiring Process
At Fitter, the requesting department develops a short list of candidates for the position by
selecting up to three applicants, based on the data provided by the Human Resources
Department. Human Resources contacts the candidates on the short list, schedules
interviews, and creates a file for each candidate. A candidate’s file includes a form that
shows when the application was received, the position(s) applied for by the candidate, and
the date and time of any interviews. If this is not the first time the candidate has applied
for a job with the company, the form indicates the more recent status of the candidate:
whether the candidate was interviewed and rejected, whether the candidate rejected a job
offer, and so on.
If a candidate accepts the interview offer, the Human Resources Department makes
the arrangements for the job candidate, including travel arrangements and a schedule of
interview activities. A representative from the Human Resources Department conducts an
interview that includes a discussion of the applicant’s experience and questions relevant to
the position for which the candidate has applied. The supervisor of the department in
which the position exists also interviews the candidate, and other employees in the
department are usually given time to talk to the candidate as well. For most professional
positions at Fitter, the candidate is interviewed by the plant manager and, frequently, the
company president.
After the initial interview process, a Human Resources’ staff member updates the
candidate’s file to indicate whether he or she is still a possibility for hire. In some cases, a
second interview is scheduled. Once someone in Human Resources has interviewed all the
candidates on the short list, a representative of the Human Resources Department and the
supervisor of the requesting department rank the candidates on the short list. If there is an
acceptable candidate, the Human Resources employee makes that person a verbal job
offer over the phone. If the candidate accepts the verbal offer, a written offer letter is sent,
which the candidate must sign and return. Once the candidate formally accepts the
written offer, his or her file is again updated, showing that the candidate has accepted the
offer. The Human Resources person then schedules a background check and drug test for
the candidate, determines the employee’s start date and makes plans for the new
employee’s orientation session.
If no acceptable candidates were found, or if none of them accepts the job offer, then
the process must be repeated, which at a minimum will require the development of a new
short list but may involve starting over with a new job posting.
Many of Fitter’s problems in the interviewing and hiring process have to do with
information flow and communication. Fitter does not have group appointment calendar
162
Chapter 6

software, which would allow Human Resources staff to easily find a time when all key
personnel would be available to interview a candidate. A group appointment calendar
(available in email systems and ERP systems such as SAP) allows users to check others’
calendars to schedule meetings. Without such a calendar tool, scheduling interviews is
frequently a cumbersome process, requiring the Human Resources employee to coordinate
the interview schedule between the candidate and the appropriate personnel at Fitter. Because
this is done by email and phone, it can take days and sometimes weeks to schedule an
interview. A similar problem occurs after the interviews have been completed. Gathering
feedback from all involved parties and ranking the candidates takes time and may require
multiple meetings. Managing the travel arrangements and reimbursing candidates for their
travel expenses are also cumbersome tasks. More than once, Fitter has lost a promising
candidate to another company because of delays in the Fitter interviewing and hiring process.
Fitter hires a human resources consulting firm to perform drug tests and conduct
background checks to verify that candidates have not falsified any information and do not
have serious criminal records. Fitter outsources this work because of the special skills
required. If the background check and drug test are satisfactory, this information is added
to the candidate’s file, and the job offer stands. If the consultant finds evidence of falsified
information or legal troubles or the candidate fails the drug test, the file is likewise
updated, and the job offer is rescinded with a written explanation.
On a new employee’s first day of work, he or she attends an orientation meeting, which
includes completing additional paperwork covering employment terms and conditions, tax
withholding, and benefits. All Fitter employees must sign a form that states that the
employee has been given a copy of—and agrees to abide by—the company’s policies and
procedures. The new employee must complete an IRS W-4 form, which tells the employer
the correct amount of tax to withhold from the employee’s paycheck. Next, a Human
Resources representative reviews Fitter’s benefits plan. Fitter offers a comprehensive
benefits plan that gives employees a range of choices for healthcare plans, life insurance,
retirement plans, and medical savings accounts. The employee’s dependents may also be
covered under Fitter’s health insurance plan. If the employee elects dependent coverage,
then the Human Resources Department must obtain basic information about each
dependent to include in the employee’s file.
Because employees must provide a significant amount of detailed data to properly
manage compensation and benefits, it is not surprising that Fitter frequently has problems
enrolling new employees in the correct benefits plans and establishing the proper payroll
deductions. It can often take months to manage the new employee’s compensation and
benefits correctly. The enrollment issues can generate many time-consuming phone calls to
Human Resources management—calls that would not be needed with an integrated system.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Human Resources Data in the Cloud
Cloud computing, discussed in more detail in Chapter 8, is the use of computing services
provided by another company. Programs and data are stored on servers operated by the
cloud computing company and are accessed via the Internet. This arrangement can be
(continued)
163
Human Resources Processes with ERP

cost effective and flexible, but companies must consider several important factors (the
first of which is data security) when deciding whether to use cloud computing for
sensitive data such as human resources records.
Numerous laws impact a company’s relationship with its employees, and much of
the data maintained for human resources’ purposes is sensitive and governed by privacy
laws that vary by country. Companies must develop procedures to control access to this
information. If a company’s human resources data is stored on the cloud, it is much
more difficult to ensure that the data is managed in a manner that meets privacy laws.
A company cannot simply assume that the cloud-computing supplier provides this
security. For example, in 2011, German data protection authorities adopted an
“orientation guide” to cloud computing that emphasizes that German cloud computing
customers are responsible for compliance with all data protection requirements under
German law. This compliance includes all subprocessors involved in providing cloud
computing services. Thus, it is not sufficient for a company to just accept the cloud
computing provider’s assurance that its systems are secure. Cloud computing customers
should “access logs, tour the data center, go through data center questionnaires and see
who has the administrator’s password,” according to Grady Summers, principal,
information security, at Ernst & Young. “Make sure that the service provider can meet
regulatory requirements as well.”
Questions:
1.
What modifications would be required to a company’s standard human
resources security procedures to address using a cloud-based human
resources information system? What documentation would you require from
the service provider?
2.
Will laws and regulations affecting cloud-based human resources systems
become more standardized and simpler in the future, or will there be a growth
in complexity with an increase in associated costs? Provide the reasoning
behind your answer.
Human Resources Duties After Hiring
A human resources department has responsibilities that continue beyond the hiring and
job start of an employee. The human resources department must maintain an ongoing line
of communication with the employee and his or her supervisor to make sure the employee
is performing well.
Fitter, like most companies, issues performance evaluations to new and current
employees. As part of the process, the supervisor performs an evaluation and reviews it
with the employee. After the review, the supervisor may modify the evaluation, which
both the supervisor and the employee then sign. The employee may also submit a written
response to the review, listing any disagreements or explanations. The employee’s
department manager is expected to review the performance evaluation and employee
response, and may add a separate written comment. The completed package is then
forwarded to the Human Resources Department, where all documents become part of the
employee’s file. These files are critically important if an employee fails to perform
adequately over a period of time. If an employee must be terminated, the company needs
sufficient documentation to demonstrate that the termination is warranted; otherwise, if
164
Chapter 6

the employee sues the company for wrongful termination, the company may have
problems substantiating the termination decision.
Because Fitter does not have an effective information system, it is difficult to manage
performance evaluation data. This makes it more challenging for the Human Resources
Department to identify problems with an employee and take corrective action (such as job
performance counseling or a transfer) before the problems lead to termination. With
Fitter’s paper-based system, an employee’s file can be viewed by only one person at a
time, and it is possible to lose track of an employee’s file—temporarily or permanently.
Also, it is difficult to maintain proper control of sensitive personal information when it is
maintained in paper files.
Employee turnover can be a significant problem for a company. The cost of hiring an
employee has been estimated from thousands of dollars to over $50,000. When evaluating
the cost of hiring an employee, a company should consider both the direct costs of hiring an
employee and the less tangible costs that occur during a new employee’s first year or so. For
example, while new employees are learning their jobs, other employees have to take time
from their normal jobs to train them, which can negatively impact their productivity.
Another cost that is difficult to quantify is an employee’s experience and job
knowledge, which is lost when he or she leaves a company. For example, if a purchasing
manager leaves a company, then all of the manager’s knowledge about supplier relations
may be lost. The company would have records of the contracts signed with various
suppliers, but details of the negotiations that led to each contract may not be documented.
Such details can be crucial in successfully negotiating the next contract. The manager may
have developed good relations with a certain supplier and know whom to contact when
problems arise. These relationships are not specified as part of the purchasing manager
position but accrue over time with the individual holding the position. When companies
experience high rates of turnover, they lose knowledge and skills that may be crucial to
keeping them competitive.
Employee turnover is strongly tied to job satisfaction and compensation. If employees
have satisfying jobs and are well compensated, they are less likely to leave the company.
Human resources can help maintain a satisfying work environment through a number of
means, such as by holding training programs for supervisors and managers, conducting
periodic employee satisfaction surveys, and gathering data from employee exit surveys.
Human resources also has a critical role to play in compensation, which should be related
to the skills and tasks required by the job and the performance of the employee. One
important function of a human resources department is to make sure compensation levels
are competitive and are applied fairly to all employees. Failure to do so can result in high
rates of turnover as well as discrimination lawsuits.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
At Novartis, Reputation Did Not Match Reality
After 10 years of being on Working Mother magazine’s “100 Best Companies for Working
Mothers” list, Novartis pharmaceutical settled a gender discrimination class action
lawsuit in 2010 for $175 million dollars. The settlement covered more than 6,000 female
(continued)
165
Human Resources Processes with ERP

current and former sales representatives who alleged systemic discrimination in pay,
promotions, and other working conditions at Novartis.
How did this happen? Novartis had numerous programs designed to help working
mothers. As noted in a 2009 article in Working Mother magazine, Novartis offered
“lunch and learn” sessions on pediatric issues ranging from sleep to nutrition. The
company also offered a variety of childcare benefits, including discounts on full-time
care at national daycare chains and in-home sick care, and the company made a
$1,000 childcare contribution to anyone who saved $4,000 in a pretax childcare
account.
Unfortunately, these innovative programs apparently did not reflect the culture of
the sales organization at Novartis. The class action lawsuit included numerous charges of
sexual harassment and unfair denial of pay raises and promotions. As noted in a Wall
Street Journal article, the court found that new mothers or pregnant women were
singled out. For example, one mother was passed over for promotion because the
company felt that she would not be able to leave home for the travel involved in the job
because she had four children. In another instance, one woman who was highly-rated in
her company evaluations was overlooked for further management education. And some
pregnant women were given an extra workload because a manager thought the maternity
leave policy at Novartis was too generous.
In addition to the financial payment to the plaintiffs, the settlement requires
Novartis to implement a number of changes to its human resource processes, including:
•
Revising its policies and processes for investigating discrimination claims
•
Implementing specified changes to its performance evaluation system and
conducting mandatory training for all managers regarding that system
•
Creating an appeals process for employees who disagree with their
performance ratings
•
Implementing changes to its management development program training
•
Implementing changes to its tracking and monitoring of promotional
opportunities
Probably the most important factor in avoiding workplace discrimination is making sure
the culture of the company does not tolerate it, but good Human Resource information
processes can provide the data and tools to analyze and monitor a company’s Human
Resource practices to avoid discrimination.
Questions:
1.
In addition to the damages assessed against it in the discrimination case,
what other costs were incurred by Novartis in association with this lawsuit?
How do these compare to the financial cost of the settlement?
2.
How could an integrated human resources information system be used to
detect potential pay discrimination before it becomes systematic?
3.
How would you design a compensation system so that pay discrimination is
not likely to occur?
166
Chapter 6

HUMAN RESOURCES WITH ERP SOFTWARE
Now that you are familiar with the numerous business processes required to manage a
company’s human capital, you can begin thinking about how ERP software can improve
those processes—leading to overall improvements in a company’s performance. With an
integrated system, a company can store employee information electronically, eliminating
the piles of papers and files that make the retrieval of information difficult. A good
information system allows human resources staff members to retrieve relevant employee
information in a matter of seconds and to maintain proper controls so sensitive information
is not compromised and privacy rules are not violated. An integrated information system is
a key component in this process.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Data Analytics for Enhancing Performance and
Recruiting in Professional Sports
An organization’s human resources department is typically responsible for a large amount
of data, and sports teams are no exception. Many teams collect and analyze huge volumes
of data in hopes of improving player performance and recruiting high-quality players.
Recently, Gartner Research named data analytics one of the most important “strategic
technologies” in 2011, and the London Irish rugby club can attest to that. During games,
the team collects video data (including GPS data) to analyze factors such as distances run
and the g-force of various tackles. Injury analysis can be correlated with this rich data set
to teach players to use techniques that will minimize the potential for injury. This rich
data set not only aids in future game direction but also helps in training. However, the
business director of the team, Chris Miles, adds a caveat, “You can’t use analytics to
replace judgment—it supports it.” The Manchester City football (soccer) club also uses
data analytics to assess performance during game play. The club measures about 180
actions during a game, but it does not rely solely on data analysis. As with the rugby team,
coach intuition supersedes any data result.
In England, players are often traded from football club to another, in hopes of
improving a team’s performance. Trading is common because of the heavy pressure on
clubs to win. Hence football clubs spend a large amount of money obtaining top
experienced players. In hopes of nurturing new, younger players, and alleviating some of
the enormous expense of trading experienced players, a new rule—called the Home
Grown Player rule— has been enacted by the England’s top football league. This requires
teams to have at least eight players that have been with the team for three seasons
starting before that player turned 21. With fewer opportunities to improve teams through
trades, teams must make better recruiting decisions to be successful. Prozone, a software
tool accessed through the cloud, allows teams to analyze performance data on players
and perform what-if analyses on potential trades. It takes football performance data—
such as video, shots, percentage passes, tackles won, along with age and nationality, and
uses statistics to determine performance ratings. Prozone markets the product as
“recruiter software.”
(continued)
167
Human Resources Processes with ERP

Questions:
1.
Assume you are the human resources manager at Fitter. What metrics or
measurements would you develop to assess the potential of an applicant for a
production supervisor position? A sales manager position? A chief
accountant?
2.
Choose a type of sports you enjoy watching. What elements of player
performance would you track to analyze? Make a list of at least 20 attributes.
Would these attributes also work well for recruiting new players? Explain your
answer.
Successfully using a human resources ERP system requires managing a significant
amount of detailed information. The SAP ERP Human Resources (HR) module provides
tools for managing an organization’s roles and responsibilities, definitions, personal
employee information, and tasks related to time management, payroll, travel management,
and employee training. Figure 6-1 shows the SAP Personal Data screen, which is where
basic data for an employee is managed in the SAP system.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 6-1
Personal data stored in SAP Human Resources software
168
Chapter 6

Most companies have an organizational chart or plan that helps define management
responsibilities. Without an ERP system, the organizational chart typically defines only
the managerial relationships among employees. With an ERP system, it is possible to
create an organizational chart with more detail that supports human resources tasks, such
as recruiting employees and planning organizational changes.
SAP ERP provides an Organization and Staffing Plan tool that is used to define a
company’s management structure and the positions within the organizational structure as
a whole. The Organization and Staffing Plan tool also names the person who holds each
position. Figure 6-2 shows how the Fitter organizational structure could be defined in SAP
ERP. The figure shows that Fitter consists of three main organizational units:
Manufacturing, Marketing, and Administrative. The Accounting and Human Capital
Management organizational units are part of the Administrative organization. Within the
Human Capital Management organizational unit are three positions: the manager and two
analysts.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 6-2
Organization and staffing plan in SAP ERP
SAP ERP distinguishes between a person, task, job, and position. In SAP, a person is a
unique individual who holds a position and who performs tasks, which are the assigned
responsibilities related to a specific job or position. Tasks can be assigned to a position
directly, or they can be grouped together in a job. A job is a general classification of tasks
that are routinely performed together. For example, the job of department head could be
169
Human Resources Processes with ERP

defined by assigning it tasks such as review employee performance and prepare monthly
budget reports.
A position is an individual employee assignment within the organization. Tasks can
be assigned directly to a position, or they can be assigned to the position by assigning a
job to that position. For example, the position of purchasing manager could be defined
with the department head job assigned to it. The purchasing manager would then be
responsible for the review employee performance and prepare monthly budget reports
tasks. The purchasing manager position could also have tasks such as review monthly
spending assigned to it directly. Figure 6-3 shows the relationships among persons, tasks,
jobs, and positions in a marketing organization.
Administrative
assistant
Emily Best
Review
time charges
Marketing
administrative
assistant
Review
expense reports
Prepare
budget reports
Prepare
sales reports 
person
position
job
tasks
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 6-3
Relationships among persons, positions, jobs, and tasks
In Figure 6-3, the job of administrative assistant is assigned a number of tasks, such
as reviewing employee time charges, reviewing employee expense reports, and preparing
monthly budget reports for the department. These are tasks the company requires of any
administrative assistant, whether that job is in marketing, engineering, or production. In
SAP, the job of administrative assistant can be defined once—by assigning it specific
tasks—and that definition can be used to create administrative assistant positions in
different organizational units. The administrative assistant job in marketing is one
position, while the administrative assistant job in accounting is a different position.
Additional tasks can be added to an administrative assistant position to tailor it to the
specific requirements of the organizational unit. For example, in Figure 6-3, the position
of marketing administrative assistant has the marketing-specific task of preparing sales
reports; an administrative assistant in procurement would not be required to perform
that task.
170
Chapter 6

Figure 6-4 shows the SAP ERP screen where tasks are assigned to jobs; in this case,
the task “Prepare budget reports” is assigned to the job “Administrative assistant.”
Job
Task
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 6-4
Assignment of a task to a job in SAP ERP
If the tasks associated with jobs and positions are well defined and current, recruiters
in human resources can more easily determine whether candidates have the necessary
qualifications for a job. Determining appropriate compensation for a position is also
simplified if the tasks required for each position in a company are clearly and consistently
defined.
Complete and accurate human resources data simplify a manager’s duties. The
Manager’s Desktop tool within the SAP Human Resources module provides access to all
the human resources data and transactions in one location. Figure 6-5 shows the
Personal Data portion of the Manager’s Desktop, which provides all of the data
maintained in the Human Resources module for all employees who report to the
manager—which in this case is Fitter’s president, Sara Decker. In Figure 6-5, the
171
Human Resources Processes with ERP

Human Capital Management organizational unit is expanded to show the individual
employees in that unit.
Functions in
task area
Organizational
structure and
employees
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 6-5
SAP’s Manager’s Desktop provides a single point of access to human resources
functions
Human resources data includes employees’ personal information, so controlling
access to that data is critical. An advantage of an integrated information system over a
paper-based system is that controlling access to data is automated; managers can use the
system to determine which users should have access to various data.
ADVANCED SAP ERP HUMAN RESOURCES FEATURES
Discussing in detail the many SAP Human Resources processes is beyond the scope of this
text; however, some of the advanced features of the Human Resources module, including
time management, payroll processing, travel management, and training and development
coordination are presented in the following sections.
Time Management
Hourly employees, who are paid for each hour worked, must record the hours they work
so they can be paid. Salaried employees are not paid based on the number of hours
worked, but typically their time must still be tracked. For cost-accounting purposes, it is
often important to be able to attribute an employee’s time to a cost object—such as a cost
center (which may be a department or division), project, or production order—and any
time not worked must be attributed to vacation or leave. The SAP Human Resources
172
Chapter 6

module uses Cross Application Time Sheets (CATS) to record employee working times
and provide data to other modules, including the following:
•
SAP Controlling module—Monitors and manages costs
•
SAP Payroll module—Calculates employee pay; payroll data is then
transferred to the Financial Accounting module for payroll processing
(issuing paychecks as well as making payments for taxes, health insurance
payments, retirement contributions, etc.)
•
SAP Production Planning module—Determines whether enough labor is
available to support production plans
Payroll Processing
Payroll processing is probably the most important function of a human resources
department. Employees are, not surprisingly, very particular about being paid the correct
amount at the correct time. Without proper management of the payroll process,
employees might not be paid for all of the hours they worked, they might not be paid at
the appropriate rate, or they might have too much or too little money withheld from their
pay for taxes and benefits. Mistakes in payroll can cause significant job dissatisfaction.
The two key processes in determining the pay an employee receives are calculation of
the remuneration elements and determination of statutory and voluntary deductions. The
remuneration elements of an employee’s pay include the base pay, bonuses, gratuities,
overtime pay, sick pay, and vacation allowances the employee has earned during the pay
period. The statutory and voluntary deductions are paycheck withholdings, including
taxes (federal, state, local, Social Security, and Medicare), company loans, and benefit
contributions. Properly determining the pay for an employee requires accurate input data
and correct evaluation of remuneration elements and deductions.
The process of determining each employee’s pay is called a payroll run. In the payroll
run, the SAP ERP system evaluates the input data and notes any discrepancies in an
error log. Payroll employees review the error log, make any necessary corrections, and
repeat the payroll run until no errors are recorded. Then the payroll run is used to
generate employee pay statements, process electronic funds transfers to individual
employees’ bank accounts, submit tax payments to the appropriate government entities,
and perform other calculations as required by human resources and accounting.
Travel Management
Many companies spend a substantial amount of money on employee travel, and managing
travel and its associated expenses can be a significant task. A travel request, which may
originate with the employee or the employee’s manager, is the first step in the travel
management process. Travel requests usually require management approval, and the
organizational level at which travel must be approved may depend on the duration,
location, and cost of the travel. Once management has approved the travel, employees
must make their travel reservations. Because airfare, hotel, and rental car costs can vary
widely, companies frequently require employees to make reservations through either a
company travel office or a travel agency that is under contract to the company. The
employee must keep receipts for expenses incurred during the trip in order to complete an
expense report and receive reimbursement. The SAP ERP Travel Management system
facilitates this process by maintaining travel data for each employee—including flight,
173
Human Resources Processes with ERP

hotel, and car preferences—and integrating this data with the Payroll module (to
administer reimbursements) and with the Financial Accounting and Controlling modules
(to properly record travel expenses). Companies using the SAP ERP Travel Management
system can also make use of a Web-based application that allows employees to submit
expense reports through a Web browser.
Travel management is also getting easier—and mobile—with SAP’s Travel OnDemand
product, which is hosted by SAP and accessed via the Internet. (As noted in Chapter 2,
this software delivery model, called software as a service, or SaaS, is a subset of cloud
computing and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.) With Travel OnDemand,
employees can use their smartphones to automatically categorize their travel expenses
by simply taking a picture of each receipt. The system then reads the receipt and puts
it in the correct expense category. For instance, a receipt from a restaurant would
be categorized under meals, while a train ticket receipt would be placed under
transportation. When the employee returns to the office after a trip, the expense report is
already almost complete. This is a huge help to employees who spend a large portion of
their time on the road; the hassle of gathering receipts and filling out paperwork is often a
source of significant source of job dissatisfaction for employees who travel frequently. In
addition, employees using Travel OnDemand are able to query the system about travel and
expense policies, such as the company policy on taking clients out to dinner.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
What’s New in Human Capital Management (HCM)
The goals and aspirations of a company’s employees should be aligned with the strategic
goals of organizations. Surprisingly, research shows that 95 percent of employees are
unaware or do not understand their company’s strategic goals. In addition, newly
recruited employees often do not perform as well as hoped because the employee’s
personal goals are not aligned with those of the organization. Tools now exist that allow
hiring organizations to assess potential candidates not only on their intelligence but also
on other, harder to define characteristics, such as motivation and behavior.
Once an employee is hired, new performance evaluation tools allow companies to
assess employees in a consistent manner across the organization. Traditionally,
individual managers within a company perform evaluations, which might be based on
criteria that is inconsistent between different managers. This variation can cause
problems when employees are evaluated across departments, perhaps for an internal
promotion or a new job. Tools that improve the consistency of evaluations help to
alleviate this problem. Many companies are also working to improve their performance
assessment process through the use of the “360-degree evaluation,” in which employees
perform their own evaluations, and are also evaluated not only by their managers, but
also by their coworkers, and perhaps even their customers.
Although many organizations are still using spreadsheets to analyze their workforce,
those that use the SAP ERP software have the advantage of fast prediction. Using SAP’s
new in-memory computing (HANA) feature, the Human Capital Management module can
now handle large volumes of employee data—such as data related to hiring, promotion,
and termination—to predict the three- and five-year makeup of the workforce. SAP is
(continued)
174
Chapter 6

planning an expansion of social networking into the Human Capital Management module
in the near future as well.
Question:
1.
In what ways could social networking improve human capital management
software?
Training and Development Coordination
The Personnel Development component of the SAP ERP Human Resources module allows
companies to plan and implement employee development and training activities that
maximize an employee’s ability to contribute to the organization. Because advances in
technology can quickly render an employee’s knowledge obsolete, employees will not
remain productive without continuing development and training efforts. In addition, many
positions require certifications that must be updated, and continuing education is
frequently required for recertification. Without an effective human resources information
system, managing the training, development, and certification needs for a company’s
employees can be both time consuming and prone to error.
In the SAP ERP system, employee development is driven by qualifications and
requirements. Requirements are skills or abilities associated with a position, while
qualifications are skills or abilities associated with a specific employee. Requirements and
qualifications refer to the same concept from a different perspective. By using the SAP
Personnel Development tool, a manager can compare an employee’s qualifications with the
requirements for a position to which the employee aspires. This comparison enables the
manager to identify gaps and to plan development and training efforts to close those gaps.
It can also serve as a basis for employee evaluation, and it can help motivate the employee
by providing a goal and the means to achieve it.
One of the most important reasons companies must manage the development and
training of employees is the need for succession planning. A succession plan outlines the
strategy for replacing key employees when they leave the company or move to another
position within the company. The success of a company depends in large part on the skills,
abilities, and experience of its management team. This is especially true for small companies
like Fitter. Savvy customers have been known to avoid establishing long-term relationships
with companies that do not have well-developed succession plans. The Career and
Succession Planning components of the SAP ERP Human Resources module allow human
resources professionals to create, implement, and evaluate succession planning scenarios.
Human resources departments use career planning tools when working with individual
employees, identifying potential career goals and drawing up career plans. Companies use
succession planning tools to find people to fill unoccupied positions. Succession planning
allows human resources employees to meet staffing requirements by proactively identifying
candidate employees within the company and ensuring that their training and development
plans will prepare them for the new position when it becomes available. Using the career and
succession planning tools in an ERP system ensures that human resources will have accurate
and timely employee and position data when developing those plans. The system also lets
human resources staff more easily track and integrate personnel changes (such as new
175
Human Resources Processes with ERP

employees starting and current employees leaving or getting promoted to a new position),
and it gives all approved users easy access to data.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Executive Succession Planning for the CIO Position
As with any executive search, finding the right CIO (chief information officer) can be
very challenging since often the requirements for an individual company’s CIO are
somewhat subjective. The average CIO lasts three to five years at a company, and about
two-thirds of the time a replacement is found outside the organization. At E. & J. Gallo
Winery, the current CIO, Kent Kushar, has made it a point to work with the Human
Resources Department to find himself a successor. He found one possible candidate in
the Sales and Marketing Department, a vice president named Kevin Barnes. Barnes
understood Gallo’s strategy of linking technology with a customer-oriented approach.
Barnes was sent on a CIO training course, so to speak. The course, run by Harvard
Professor Jim Cash, is a six-month training course with workshops, teleconferences, and
personal advisers. The cost of the course is $35,000, but those who complete it generally
find themselves ready to step into a CIO job.
Experienced CIOs have put together a list of key ideas for creating a good
succession plan, as explained in the magazine, CIO:
•
Perform needs assessments—Focus on the skills and the type of
information technology leadership that the company will require in the
future. HCM software can help a company standardize the assessment of
potential candidates for leadership positions. Also, find out who is going to
retire over the next several years.
•
Determine how far down the ladder the plan will go—Ideally, successions
plans should also be developed for middle management, so if someone
leaves the company, the transition to promotion is smooth. Again, HCM
software can be used to track the skill set of each employee to identify
those who are ready to move up.
•
Evaluate skills, performance, and goals for growth—Performance
evaluations of employees can accomplish this task. At Marriott
International, an employee’s performance evaluation is compared to a set
of company “key dimensions.” This helps Marriott to not only do
succession planning, but also to ensure their employees are utilized to their
full potential.
•
Identify potential—This task is usually performed by senior management, such
as the CIO. While potential can be difficult to assess, international shipping
company, UPS, has a standardized way of assessing employees in four areas of
leadership—business, people, results, and self. This balanced evaluation is
shared with all groups across the organization and is used when evaluating
people for senior-level management positions.
•
Put potential leaders to the test—Give employees opportunities to show
their potential and develop new strengths. UPS rotates upper-level IT
(continued)
176
Chapter 6

managers through different IT functions and business areas to gain
experience. CIOs can groom future leaders by putting them in charge of
projects or meetings.
•
Keep succession criteria consistent and up to date—Succession plans
should become part of an organization’s culture. According to George Hall,
senior vice president at Marriott, “Succession planning is not a means to an
end; it’s the end itself. It’s really what falls out of doing other things
correctly.”
Questions:
1.
Assume that Fitter needs to replace their current CIO who is retiring. Make a
list of the pros and cons of hiring a new CIO from outside the company as
opposed to promoting someone from within the company. Which do you think
is the correct approach? Explain your answer.
2.
What are the risks to the company if they fail to create a succession plan?
ADDITIONAL HUMAN RESOURCES FEATURES OF SAP ERP
Human resources staff must keep pace with rapidly changing social, technological, and
legislative developments that affect the corporate world. Because of that, the SAP Human
Resources module has been expanded to include features that assist managers with
human resources tasks that have only recently become important to corporations.
Mobile Time Management
Many employees, especially sales personnel who spend a significant amount of time on the
road, may not have regular access to a PC. SAP’s Mobile Time Management tool allows
employees to use smartphones or other mobile devices to record their working times,
record absences, or enter a leave request.
Management of Family and Medical Leave
The Human Resources module alleviates some of the administrative burden imposed by
the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993. Companies can program the
Human Resources module to determine whether an employee is eligible to take FMLA
leave and to automatically deduct those absences from the employee’s allowable leave.
Management of Domestic Partner Benefits
Many companies provide benefits for domestic (unmarried) partners. The Human Resources
module now supports the management of benefits for domestic partners and their children.
The system provides companies more flexibility in customizing dependent coverage options
for health plans, eligibility for enrollment of dependents, and designation of beneficiaries.
Administration of Long-Term Incentives
An outgrowth of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (discussed in Chapter 5) is that companies must
account for the expected costs that will occur as a result of long-term employee incentives,
177
Human Resources Processes with ERP

such as stock options. The Human Resources module provides more options for processing
long-term incentives. For instance, the SAP Payroll module enables companies to calculate
taxes accurately when employees exercise stock options and sell their shares in the
company. The Human Resources module can be programmed to share that incentive data
with Accounting so that Accounting can complete the necessary financial reporting.
Personnel Cost Planning
Changes in an organization (including expansions, acquisitions, and downsizing) can affect
employee-related expenses, which are usually a significant portion of a company’s costs. The
Personnel Cost Planning tool allows human resources staff to define and evaluate planning
scenarios to generate cost estimates. Performing cost planning allows human resources to
forecast cost estimates by integrating data with other SAP ERP modules.
Management and Payroll for Global Employees
Companies who manage a team of employees around the globe face many complicated
issues, including managing relocation plans, visas and work permits, housing, taxes, and
bonus pay in a variety of countries. SAP ERP has enhanced features to support the
management of these issues, with customized functionality for over 50 countries—helping
companies ensure their payroll processes meet current legal regulations and collective
bargaining agreements in the local business environments.
Management by Objectives
The concept of management by objectives (MBO) was first outlined by Peter Drucker in his
1954 book The Practice of Management. In MBO, managers are encouraged to focus on
results, not activities, and to “negotiate a contract of goals” with their subordinates without
dictating the exact methods for achieving them. SAP ERP supports the MBO approach
through a process that incorporates performance appraisal. The appraisal results can affect
an employee’s compensation, generating annual pay raises that can be significant, depending
on the employee’s performance. The MBO process in SAP ERP also allows managers to
include the results of achieved objectives in the employee’s qualifications profile.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
FMLA Management
Under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993, eligible employees can take up
to 12 weeks of unpaid time off per year to recover from a serious medical condition or to
care for a sick member of their immediate family or a new child. At Banner Health, a
company with hospitals and healthcare facilities in seven states, about 5 percent of
employees make use of FMLA leave. The company has calculated the cost of that leave
at close to $1 million per year, not including the cost of regular sick days, vacations,
bereavement leave, and so on. In fact, the Human Resources staff at Banner thinks that
cost estimate probably does not reflect leave taken by another 1 percent of employees
whose time is not accurately tracked. Some absences are not tracked because they are
not documented properly. For example, if an employee takes time off for migraine
(continued)
178
Chapter 6

headaches during the year, but those headaches do not occur in a continuous set of
12 weeks, the absences might not be documented as part of FMLA. By tracking absences
with human capital management software, employees might be encouraged to see
specialist doctors sooner to get treatment that could reduce future absences.
Part of the challenge of documenting FMLA absences is the complexity of the task.
First, in addition to the FMLA, there are many state laws governing medical leave rights,
such as the California Family Rights Act (CFRA). Second, the FMLA rules are complex.
For example, the following is a small section of the FMLA that defines intermittent or
reduced leave:
Leave under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (a)(1) shall not be taken by an
employee intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule unless the employee and
the employer of the employee agree otherwise. Subject to paragraph (2), subsection
(e)(2), and subsection (b)(5) or (f) (as appropriate) of section 103, leave under
subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(1) or under subsection (a)(3) may be
taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically necessary.
Subject to subsection (e)(3) and section 103(f), leave under subsection (a)(1)(E)
may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule. The taking of leave
intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule pursuant to this paragraph shall not
result in a reduction in the total amount of leave to which the employee is entitled
under subsection (a) beyond the amount of leave actually taken.
Obviously, understanding and properly accounting for FMLA leave is complex.
Software to manage FMLA leaves, such as SAP’s FMLA Workbench, can help companies
do the following:
•
Determine FMLA eligibility based on an employees hours worked and hire
date.
•
Track concurrent and intermittent FMLA leave simultaneously with other
leave types such as vacation or personal leave.
•
Generate the necessary forms and documents for managing FMLA events.
•
Store doctor’s certifications and send alerts when new certifications are
required.
•
Reduce the likelihood of Department of Labor investigations and employee
lawsuits.
The last point is especially important for human resources professionals. In the
recent legal case Narodetsky v. Cardone Industries, the court held that human
resources managers may be individually liable for FMLA violations at an organization.
Question:
1.
Using the Internet, investigate the cost of absenteeism for companies in the
United States. How can human capital management software help companies
reduce their costs for this?
2.
Using the Internet, find at least two changes to the FMLA act since its creation
in 1993.
179
Human Resources Processes with ERP

Chapter Summary
•
Employees are among a company’s most valuable assets. Without qualified and motivated
employees, a company cannot succeed.
•
The human resources department has responsibility for ensuring the company can attract,
assess, and, hire the right employees—those that will allow it to achieve its goals. Human
resources is also responsible for employee compensation, evaluations, training and
development, succession planning, and termination.
•
Managing, sharing, controlling, and evaluating the data required to manage a company’s
human capital are simplified by an integrated information system.
•
Some of the advanced features of the SAP Human Resources module include tools to
facilitate time management, payroll processing, travel management, and training and
development coordination (including succession planning).
•
Additional features of the SAP Human Resources system address the rapidly changing
social, technological, and legislative developments that affect the corporate world.
Key Terms
error log
human capital management (HCM)
job
payroll run
person
position
qualification
remuneration element
requirement
short list
statutory and voluntary deduction
succession planning
task
Exercises
1.
Go to your school’s career and jobs Web site and find a position you would like to have.
What type of information must be collected by the hiring company to determine if a
candidate is appropriate for this job? List the skills that you think would be required for this
position. Do you have those skills? If not, how can you acquire them?
2.
Suppose you are designing a system to summarize information from résumés submitted to
a company’s human resources department. Create a list of the information that you think
would be useful to collect from the résumés.
3.
Using the Internet to do your research, describe a position in a company that you would like
to have after five years of work experience. List the requirements that you think would be
necessary to hold this position.
4.
Suppose you are a manager of Fitter’s Accounting and Finance department. What human
resources information do you think you would need to effectively manage your Accounting
and Finance employees?
5.
List the steps in a typical recruiting process. Highlight the steps that involve interaction with
the potential job candidate. Identify problems in the process that might lead a candidate to
develop a negative opinion of the company. How might an effective information system
180
Chapter 6

reduce the potential for these problems? Incorporate into your answer experiences you may
have had in looking for a job.
For Further Study and Research
Ferguson, Tim. “Goal! How Data Analytics Drives Sport Teams to Victory.” Silicon.com.
December 6, 2010. www.silicon.com/technology/software/2010/12/06/goal-how-data-
analytics-drives-sport-teams-to-victory-39746685/.
Fisk, Margaret Cronin, and Karen Gullo. “Wal-Mart Accused of Bias Against Women.”
Bloomberg, October 28, 2011. www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-10-28/wal-mart-
discriminated-against-women-workers-over-pay-suit-in-texas-says.html.
Frank, Diane. “Plan for Succession.” CIO, April 24, 2008. www.cio.com/article/341072/
Plan_for_Succession.
McGee, Marianne Kolbasuk. “Out Sick: New Tools Help Companies Better Manage Employee
Absences.” InformationWeek, May 5, 2005. www.informationweek.com/news/162600186?
queryText=out+sick%3A+new+tools+help+companies+better+manage+employee+
absences.
Prozone. “Asset Management – The Application of Analytics to Player Recruitment.” 2009.
www.prozonesports.com/news-article-asset-management—the-application-of-analytics-to-
player-recruitment.html.
Reuters. “Novartis Fined $250 Million in Sex Discrimination Suit.” New York Times, May 19,
2010. www.nytimes.com/2010/05/20/business/20drug.html.
Schuppert, Stefan. “German DPAs Issue Rules for Cloud Computing Use.” Hogan Lovells
Chronicle of Data Protection, October 13, 2011. www.hldataprotection.com/2011/10/articles/
international-eu-privacy/german-dpas-issue-rules-for-cloud-computing-use.
Smith, Mark. “SAP Brews New Human Capital Management for the Cloud.” Perspectives by
Mark Smith, May 24, 2011. http://marksmith.ventanaresearch.com/2011/05/24/sap-brews-
new-human-capital-management-for-the-cloud.
Soat, John. “Tomorrow’s CIO Next in Line.” InformationWeek, August 18/25, 2008.
Swabey, Pete. “Personnel Development.” Information Age, September 16, 2008.
www.information-age.com/channels/business-applications/features/643106/personnel-
development.thtml.
Shellenbarger, Sue, “Novartis Ruling Offers Lesson on ‘Family-Friendly’ Workplaces.” WSJ.Com,
May 21, 2010. http://blogs.wsj.com/juggle/2010/05/21/novartis-ruling-offers-lesson-on-family-
friendly-workplaces.
Wooldridge, Adrian. “A Survey of Talent.” The Economist, October 7, 2006.
Working Mother. “Novartis Pharmaceuticals.” 2009. www.workingmother.com/work-life-balance/
2009/08/novartis-pharmaceuticals.
Wright, Aliah D., “Cloud Computing and Security: How Safe is HR Data in the Cloud?” August
15, 2011. www.shrm.org/hrdisciplines/technology/Articles/Pages/CloudSecurity.aspx.
181
Human Resources Processes with ERP


C H A P T E R7
PROCESS MODELING,
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT,
AND ERP IMPLEMENTATION
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Use basic flowcharting techniques to map a business process
•
Develop an event process chain (EPC) diagram of a basic business
process
•
Evaluate the value added by each step in a business process
•
Develop process-improvement suggestions
•
Discuss the key issues in managing an ERP implementation project
•
Describe some of the key tools used to manage an ERP implementation
project
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The theme of business processes management underlies much of the discussion in this text. In this
chapter, we will explore tools, such as flowcharts and process chains, that can be used to describe
business processes. You will learn how these tools, which are not specific to ERP, can help
managers identify process elements that need to be improved. We will finish by studying the role
these process-modeling tools play in ERP implementation projects.

PROCESS MODELING
By now, it should be clear that business processes can be quite complex. Adding to that
complexity is the fact that individuals with various skills and abilities are responsible for
executing business processes. For business processes to be effective (achieve the desired
results) and efficient (achieve the desired results with the minimum use of resources), the
processes must be clearly defined, and individuals must be adequately trained to perform
their roles and to understand how their roles fit within the overall business process.
We will use the term process model to describe any abstract representation of a
process. A process model can be as simple as a diagram with boxes and arrows or as
complex as computer software that allows for process simulation. Graphical
representations are usually easier to understand than written descriptions, and process-
modeling tools provide a way to describe a business process so anyone viewing the model
can easily understand the process. Frequently, process models are developed by a team of
employees involved in the process. The interaction required to develop a process model
often reveals misunderstandings and ensures that all team members are “on the same
page.” A well-developed process model provides a good starting point for analyzing a
process so participants can design and implement improvements. Process models can also
be used to train employees who will support the business process.
Flowcharting Process Models
Flowcharts are the simplest of the process-modeling tools. A flowchart is any graphical
representation of the movement or flow of concrete or abstract items—materials,
documents, logic, and so on. Flowcharts originated with mathematicians and computer
programmers, who used them to trace the logical path of an algorithm. In the early days of
computer programming, computer resources were limited, and executing a program
used considerable resources. As a result, most programmers spent a significant amount
of time clearly defining the logic of their programs using flowcharts before actually writing
the code and testing the program.
A flowchart is a clear, graphical representation of a process from beginning to end,
regardless of whether that process is an algorithm or a manufacturing procedure.
Flowcharting has been used in business applications since the 1960s to help
businesspeople visualize workflows and functional responsibility within organizations.
Today the term process mapping is often used interchangeably with flowcharting, the
distinction being that process mapping refers specifically to the activities occurring within
an existing business process. Process mapping develops an “as is” representation of a
process, with a goal of exposing weaknesses that need to be addressed. Once a company
develops a process map, it can perform a gap analysis, which is an assessment of
disparities between how the process currently works and how the organization wants
it to work.
Flowcharting uses a standardized set of symbols to represent various business
activities. You can use a wide range of symbols for process mapping, but the basic set
shown in Figure 7-1 is sufficient to describe even a complicated business process. Using a
few simple symbols places the focus on the process rather than on the tool used to
represent it.
184
Chapter 7

1
Operation
Decision
Connector
Boundaries (beginning/end of process)
Direction of logic
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-1
Basic flowcharting symbols
The next section describes Fitter Snacker’s process for reimbursing sales personnel for
their business expenses; we will use this example to illustrate process mapping.
Fitter Expense-Reporting Process
Maria is a Fitter salesperson who travels frequently for her job. After Maria incurs travel
expenses on her personal credit card, she completes a paper expense report, makes a copy
for her records, attaches receipts for any expenses over $25, and mails the report to her
zone manager at the branch office. The manager, Kevin, reviews the report and either
approves it or mails it back to Maria with a note asking for an explanation, verification, or
modification. Once Kevin approves the expense report, he mails it to the corporate office.
After the administrative assistant sorts the mail at the corporate office, she forwards the
expense report to the accounts payable (A/P) clerk, who performs a preliminary check of
the report. The clerk contacts Kevin for any necessary clarification, then forwards the
expense report to the expense report auditor, who reviews it. If there is a problem with the
report, the auditor mails it back to Maria, who revises it and returns it. Then the auditor
enters the report into Fitter’s PC-based accounting system and files a hard copy with the
receipts in a filing cabinet, organized by employee name.
At the end of each week, an A/P clerk uses the PC-based accounting system to print
payroll checks, payments to suppliers, and expense reimbursement checks. When Maria
receives her reimbursement check, she deposits it into her checking account and mails a
payment to the credit card company, which credits her card account. Figure 7-2 shows
the process map for the first part of the current Fitter Snacker expense-reporting process.
185
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

1
Expenses incurred
Employee prepares
expense report
Employee copies
report and receipts
Employee attaches
receipts for all
expenses > $25
Employee mails
expense report to
sales manager
Sales manager
reviews report
Employee modifies
expense report
Sales manager
mails report back
to employee
Expense
No
Yes
report
approved
?
Sales manager mails
expense report to
corporate office
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-2
Partial process map for Fitter’s expense-reporting process
Establishing process boundaries is one of the most important steps in process
mapping. The process boundaries define which activities are to be included in the
process, and which are considered part of the environment—external to the process. It is
important to clearly define the activities that are part of the process and those that are
external to the process. Without clearly defined boundaries, a project can expand to the
point where it can become unmanageable. Many activities related to sales employee
expenses are considered outside of the boundary of Fitter’s expense-reporting process
map. For example, Fitter might provide cash advances or issue corporate credit cards for
travel expenses. Employees might need to make reservations for air travel or hotels
186
Chapter 7

through a corporate travel office. The company might require employees to use a
preferred hotel, or it might have specific policies regarding car rentals, including preferred
rental companies, approved car classes, insurance, and prepaid gas. While all of these
considerations are important and should be documented somewhere, the process mapped
in Figure 7-2 is the expense-reporting process; the process boundaries do not include
these additional travel-related activities. Including these external considerations in the
process map would greatly increase the size of the process-mapping project and put
the process-improvement project at risk. The complete process map for the expense-
reporting process begins after travel expenses have been incurred and ends with the
receipt by the salesperson of a refund check. These starting and end points are the process
boundaries for the expense-reporting process.
All processes should have only one beginning point and one ending point. In Figure 7-2,
the beginning process boundary is represented by the oval figure containing the text
“Expenses incurred.” Next, the process map shows four operation blocks that define the
tasks performed by the employee in completing the expense report. The number of
operation blocks used and the level of detail in the descriptions are a matter of preference
and depend on the purpose for which a process map is created. If the process map will be
used to improve a business process, and the members of the process-improvement team are
familiar with the process, then less detail is needed. In fact, too much detail could obscure
the key features of the process. On the other hand, if the process map will be used to
document the process for training new sales employees, more detail is required to ensure
that new employees can use the process map to follow the process properly.
Figure 7-2 also contains one decision diamond. A decision diamond asks a question
that can be answered with Yes or No. In this case, the decision diamond asks whether the
sales manager approves the expense report. There are only two possible options—Yes and
No. It may tempting for the novice to create process maps with decision diamonds that
have more than two outcomes; however, doing so can lead to confused logic. All business
processes can be defined using one or more decision diamonds, each with only two
outcomes.
Finally, because Figure 7-2 only shows part of the expense-reporting process, the
flowchart ends with a connector. Most business processes are too complicated to fit on a
single sheet of paper. Connectors provide a way to continue process maps from one sheet
to the next.
Exercise 7.1
Complete the process map for the Fitter Snacker expense-reporting process started in
Figure 7-2, using the description of the process provided at the beginning of this section
and the process-mapping symbols shown in Figure 7-1.
Extensions of Process Mapping
The development of computer technology—specifically, high-quality graphical interfaces—
has allowed process-mapping tools to evolve beyond the simple symbols of flowcharting.
One helpful tool is hierarchical modeling, which is a type of process mapping in which a
business process can be described in greater or less detail, depending on the task at hand.
Figure 7-3 illustrates a hierarchical model of Fitter’s expense-reporting process.
187
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

Yes
No
Yes
No
1
Expenses incurred
Sales manager
reviews report
Employee modifies
expense report
Sales manager
mails report back
to employee
Expense
report
approved
?
Sales manager mails
expense report to
corporate office
1
Expenses incurred
Sales manager
reviews report
Employee modifies
expense report
Sales manager
mails report back
to employee
Expense
report
approved
?
Sales manager mails
expense report to
corporate office
Employee prepares
expense report
Employee mails
expense report to
sales manager
Employee copies
report and receipts
Employee attaches
receipts for all
expenses > $25
Employee prepares
expense report
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-3
Hierarchical modeling of Fitter’s expense-reporting process
For training purposes, it is important to document the detailed steps a salesperson
must follow to complete an expense report; however, the details can make the process
map cumbersome for process-improvement activities. In hierarchical modeling, the four
steps that the salesperson follows to complete an expense report can be condensed into
one step: “Employee completes expense report.” Hierarchical modeling software provides
the user with the flexibility to move easily from higher-level, less detailed views to lower-
level views with more details. Hierarchical modeling can aid in process mapping by
allowing a user to create a broad, high-level view of a process and then add more detail as
the process is analyzed.
Another widely used and widely recognized type of process-mapping technique is
deployment flowcharting (also known as swimlane flowcharting). This type of flowchart
depicts team members across the top, with each step aligned vertically under the
appropriate employee or team. Figure 7-4 shows the Fitter expense-reporting process as a
deployment flowchart. This process-mapping technique has the advantage of clearly
identifying each person’s tasks in the process.
188
Chapter 7

Salesperson
Sales
manager
A/P
clerk
Auditor
Yes
No
Sales manager
mails report back
to employee
Sales manager
reviews report
Expense
report
approved
?
1
Expenses incurred
Employee prepares
expense report
Employee copies
report and receipts
Employee attaches
receipts for all
expenses > $25
Employee mails
expense report to
sales manager
Employee modifies
expense report
Sales manager mails
expense report to
corporate office
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-4
Deployment, or swimlane, flowcharting of Fitter’s expense-reporting process
Event Process Chain (EPC) Diagrams
SAP’s ERP software supports hundreds of business processes, and SAP has developed
graphical models for many of these business processes using the event process chain
(EPC) format. The EPC format uses only two symbols to represent a business process.
The advantage of the EPC format is that it matches the logic and structure of SAP’s ERP
software design. The EPC modeling technique is available as a software tool through
Software AG’s ARIS (Architecture of Integrated Information System) platform.
In EPC modeling, the two structures used to represent business processes are events
and functions. Figure 7-5 shows the graphical representations of events and functions in
189
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

EPC modeling. Events reflect a state or status in the process and are represented by an
elongated hexagon, and functions reflect the part of the process where change occurs and
are represented by rectangles with rounded corners.
Event
Function
Object
Past
participle
Prepare
expense report
Expense
incurred
Object
Verb
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-5
Event process chain (EPC) components
A standardized naming convention for functions and events is also used in EPC
modeling. For example, the convention for naming events is object—past participle,
as shown in the following examples:
Object
Past Participle
Expense
incurred
Expense report
approved
Hard copy
filed
For functions, the naming convention is verb—object, as shown in the following
examples:
Verb
Object
Prepare
expense report
Review
expense report
Mail
refund check
190
Chapter 7

Figure 7-6 shows a simple EPC diagram for part of the Fitter expense-reporting
process. EPC diagrams begin and end with events. Furthermore, events must be followed
by functions, and functions must be followed by events.
Expense report
received
Prepare
expense report
Expense
incurred
Mail expense
report
Expense report
completed
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-6
Basic EPC layout
In addition to direct connection of events to functions, EPC diagrams employ three
types of branching connectors. Branching occurs when logic either comes from more than
one source or proceeds to more than one potential outcome. The three connector types
are AND, OR, and Exclusive OR (XOR). Figure 7-7 shows how the AND connector
functions. The figure indicates that the expense report must be recorded and a hard copy
must be filed.
191
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

AND connector
Enter
expense report
Expense report
recorded
Hard copy
filed
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-7
AND connector in an EPC diagram
The OR connector indicates that one or more potential outcomes could occur; it is
not exclusive. Figure 7-8 shows an application of the OR connector, which indicates that
after a payment is processed, the salesperson is notified, or the sales manager is notified,
or both the salesperson and sales manager are notified.
Process
payment
Salesperson
notified
Sales manager
notified
OR connector
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-8
OR connector in an EPC diagram
Figure 7-9 shows how the XOR connector can be used to represent the manager’s
decision on whether to approve the expense report. Unlike the OR connector, the XOR
connector is exclusive; only one event can occur after an XOR connector. Figure 7-9
indicates that only one event can occur after reviewing the expense report: it is approved
or it is not approved.
192
Chapter 7

Review
expense report
Expense report
approved
Expense report
rejected
XOR connector
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-9
XOR connector in an EPC diagram
Figures 7-7 through 7-9 show one function connecting to two events using a branch
connector; however, it is not always the case that functions lead into the connector, nor
do multiple events always follow the connector. For example, Fitter could require that
salespeople complete expense reports at the end of a short sales trip, but at the end of
each week if a trip lasts more than one week. This condition is illustrated in Figure 7-10,
where the preparation of the expense report can be triggered by either of two events: the
end of the trip or the end of the week. It is also possible that more than two events could
trigger the function.
Trip
completed
Week
ends
Prepare
expense report
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-10
OR connector with two triggering events
Figure 7-11 shows all possible connection combinations. Note that it is not possible to
have a single event connect to multiple functions with OR or XOR connectors, because
events represent a status or state. When OR and XOR connectors lead to multiple
193
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

outcomes (functions or events), then a decision is required to decide what path(s) should
be followed and an event cannot produce a decision.
Event
Function
Function
Function
Event
Event
Event
Event
Function
Event
Function
Function
Function
Event
Event
Event
Event
Function
Event
Function
Function
Function
Event
Event
Event
Function
Function
Event
Event
Function
Function trigger
Event trigger
Single
Multiple
Single
Multiple
AND
OR
XOR
Not
allowed
Not
allowed
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-11
Possible connector and triggering combinations
Finally, Figure 7-12 shows the splitting and consolidating of a path through the
process. In this case, the Fitter salesperson can submit her expense report online if she
has Internet access; otherwise, she must send in a paper report. Note the same type of
connector that is used to split the path must be used to consolidate it.
194
Chapter 7

Check
Internet availability
Expense
incurred
Prepare
paper report
Internet
not available
Internet
available
Prepare
online report
Report
mailed
Report
submitted
electronically
Review
expense report
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-12
Splitting and consolidating paths
The basic EPC diagram can be augmented with additional information. In EPC
terminology, this additional information is called a data element. For example, Figure 7-13
shows the first part of an EPC diagram for the Fitter expense-reporting process; the
diagram also shows data elements (“Unapproved multicopy expense report”) and
organizational elements (“Salesperson,” “Sales manager”). The additional elements allow
195
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

for a more complete description of the process, documenting the “who” and “what”
aspects of the process.
Expense report
received
Prepare
expense report
Expense
incurred
Mail expense
report
Expense report
completed
Review
expense report
Salesperson
Salesperson
Sales
manager
Unapproved
multicopy
expense report
Unapproved
multicopy
expense report
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-13
EPC diagram with organizational and data elements
Exercise 7.2
Using the description of the process provided earlier in the chapter, complete the EPC
diagram of the Fitter expense-reporting process shown in Figure 7-13. Add both the logic
elements (events, functions, and connectors) and the organizational elements.
196
Chapter 7

PROCESS IMPROVEMENT
Process-mapping tools provide the ability to describe business processes in a universally
understood format. Generally, the task of mapping a process requires a team consisting of
key personnel who are involved in the process. Frequently, the act of accurately
describing the process, and understanding how the functional areas interact, make it
obvious to the team what steps are necessary to improve the process. This is especially
true for organizations that have previously focused on functional responsibilities rather
than business processes.
Using the simple technique of value analysis can also generate process-improvement
ideas. In value analysis, each activity in the process is analyzed for the value it adds to
the product or service. The value added is an increase in a product’s or service’s value,
from the perspective of the customer. Activities can add:
•
Real value—Value for which the customer is willing to pay
•
Business value—Value that helps the company run its business
•
No value—An activity that should be eliminated
The Fitter expense-reporting process does not provide real value, because Fitter’s
customers do not care whether sales employees receive prompt and accurate
reimbursement of their business expenses. However, the expense-reporting process does
add business value, and it should provide this value at a minimum cost. Determining the
value of a good or service is easy—it is what someone is willing to pay for it. Evaluating
the value of part of a business activity, however, is not an exact science because parts of a
process cannot be sold on the open market. Although it is a challenging task, evaluating
each activity on the basis of value provided can highlight opportunities for improvement.
Activities that cost more than their value added should be improved.
The value analysis concept can be expanded to an evaluation of both the time and
cost of each process step. For each step in the current process, you estimate the actual
time and cost. Then you estimate the value-added time and cost—determining how much
of the actual time is adding value and how much of the cost is worth paying for.
We will use the “Mail expense report” function of Fitter’s expense-reporting process to
illustrate value analysis. This function could cost upwards of $50, including not just the
cost of the envelope and postage, but also the time spent by the salesperson to mail the
expense report. The value analysis includes the elapsed time for mailing the expense
report, including the time it takes the salesperson to find a mailbox, the time the
postal service takes to deliver the expense report to the company headquarters, and the
time it takes the company’s internal mail system to deliver the expense report to the
sales manager.
Suppose that for Fitter the elapsed time is typically three days. To perform value
analysis, you would determine how much of this time and cost is value added. To
determine this value, you must view the activity “Mail expense report” in terms of what is
actually being accomplished. In this case, it is not the physical transmission of paper that
matters. Mailing the expense report is a means to transmit expense data and
documentation. Email could minimize the time and cost required to transmit that data;
therefore, mailing an expense report at a cost of $50, to arrive in three days, is only
providing value worth pennies (which is the cost to send an email) in a function that
could be executed within seconds. Looking at the current time and cost of each process
197
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

step, then asking, “What is actually being accomplished, and what is the value?” can help
identify areas for process improvement.
Each step in a business process should be challenged to determine if it is providing
value. H. James Harrington, in his book Business Process Improvement, suggests that
companies ask the following questions about their business processes to identify areas for
improvement:
•
Are there unnecessary checks and balances?
•
Does the activity inspect or approve someone else’s work?
•
Does it require more than one signature?
•
Are multiple copies required?
•
Are copies stored for no apparent reason?
•
Are copies sent to people who do not need the information?
•
Is there unnecessary written correspondence?
•
Are there people or agencies involved that impede the effectiveness and
efficiency of the process?
•
Do existing organizational procedures regularly impede the efficient,
effective, and timely performance of duties?
•
Is someone approving something they already approved (for example,
approving capital expenditures that were approved as part of a budget)?
•
Is the same information being collected at more than one time or location?
•
Are duplicate databases being maintained?
Harrington also suggests using the following approaches to improving processes:
•
Perform activities in parallel (for example, approvals).
•
Change the sequence of activities.
•
Reduce interruptions.
•
Avoid duplication or fragmentation of tasks.
•
Avoid complex flows and bottlenecks.
•
Combine similar activities.
•
Reduce the amount of handling.
•
Eliminate unused data.
•
Eliminate copies.
Evaluating Process Improvement Prior to Implementation
While identifying process improvements can be difficult, implementing them is even more
challenging. Disrupting the current process to make changes can be costly and time
consuming, and managers are frequently reluctant to risk trying process-improvement
ideas—especially if the ideas require a significant change in the way an activity is
completed. One way to mitigate this risk is to use dynamic process modeling to evaluate
process changes before they are implemented. Dynamic process modeling takes a basic
process flowchart and puts it into motion, using computer simulation techniques to
facilitate the evaluation of proposed process changes. Computer simulation repeatedly
generates random variables (such as customer orders) that interact with a logical model of
the business process to predict the performance of the actual system. A dynamic process
model can estimate the performance of a system, using measures such as cycle time (how
long the process takes), productivity, total cost, idle time, and bottlenecks.
198
Chapter 7

A N O T H E R
L O O K
Business Process Management—A Business Responsibility
Although many people may think of automating a process as an IT responsibility, it is
not. It is a business responsibility. Business users within an organization must agree on
what the old business processes are before the organization can begin to think about
adopting—and automating—new business processes. That is exactly what happened with
the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (RPSGB).
The RPSGB is the professional body for pharmacist professionals in Great Britain.
The RPSGB’s responsibilities include investigating complaints against pharmacists and
pharmacy technicians, and recommending criminal prosecutions, when appropriate.
The RPSGB’s business process management project began in response to challenges
the organization was experiencing with the Access database system that handled
complaints. By 2006, the database could no longer effectively handle the volume of
complaints the RPSGB was receiving, so the organization established a team to introduce
new software to help manage its complaint process. Initially, the team could not decide
which processes the new software should automate. Team members also disagreed on
what level of automation was required and on what type of documentation needed to be
maintained. Therefore, the team decided they needed to define the organization’s
current business processes before determining how to make the complaint management
process more efficient. The team created various process maps to develop a graphic
representation of the existing processes.
The complaint process begins when a complaint is filed against a pharmacist. For
example, complaints might be triggered by a rude pharmacist or, more seriously, by a
drunk pharmacist dispensing the wrong medication. Some types of complaints require
specific actions, which were documented with the process map.
Only after the team had mapped all the current processes and identified ways to
make them more efficient was software applied to automate those processes. The team
also worked with the British government to ensure the new processes had the flexibility
to be changed quickly if new rules governing the pharmaceutical industry were passed
in Parliament.
The entire project took almost two years to complete. During that time, the RPSGB
focused considerable energy on change management to convince those involved that
changing the processes was worthwhile. In this case, many employees were more easily
convinced of the merits of the project because legislation that would require certain
process changes was due to be passed shortly. The new automated system greatly
reduced the RPSGB’s dependence on paper, and it helped the organization achieve its
goal of having 80 percent of all cases requiring further action being filed with the
organization’s Investigation Committee within three months of the completion of the
initial investigation.
Questions:
1.
Why is it important to understand your current business processes before
trying to improve them?
2.
Why might it be difficult for a group of workers to come to an agreement
about what their current business processes are?
199
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

ERP WORKFLOW TOOLS
Most business processes are performed regularly, enabling employees responsible for the
process to become efficient in the tasks involved in the process. For example, the sales
order process is fundamental to a manufacturing business; the salespeople, sales order
clerks, warehouse managers, accounts receivable clerks, and others spend most of their
day supporting the process. If the process is efficiently designed and managed, and the
employees are properly trained, workers will experience enough repetition to become
efficient in their daily tasks.
Some business processes, however, are performed only sporadically. Often, such
processes are inefficient, especially when the processes involve more than one functional
area. Work may “fall through the cracks,” not necessarily through negligence, but due to a
lack of repetition. For example, the process of establishing credit limits may occur only
occasionally and may require coordination between the Sales Department, which
identifies new customers and gathers basic data (contact names, addresses, contract terms
and conditions) and the Accounts Receivable Department, which evaluates a customer’s
credit history to establish a credit limit. Unless employees manage the process of
establishing a credit limit properly, a new customer’s order may be blocked for an
unacceptable length of time. For sporadic processes such as this, a workflow software tool
can help employees avoid “dropping the ball” by providing tools for tracking and
monitoring the tasks in the project and providing reminders to the employees involved.
Workflow tools are software programs that automate the execution of business
processes and address all aspects of a process, including the process flow (the logical steps
in the business process), the people involved (the organization), and the effects (the
process information that documents the process steps). ERP software provides a workflow
management system that supports and speeds up business processes. It enables employees
to carry out complex business processes and track the current status of a process at
any time.
The SAP ERP workflow tool, called SAP Business Workflow, links employees to the
business transactions that need to be performed. In a normal business process, an
employee uses his or her knowledge to determine what transactions to process at what
times. Sometimes this work is triggered by an external source, such as a customer call
that causes the sales order clerk to perform the sales order creation transaction. In other
cases, an employee uses a reporting tool to determine what transactions need to be
processed. For example, as discussed in Chapter 5, industrial credit management is
implemented by blocking sales orders when there is a credit issue. The blocked sales
order report (shown in Figure 5-7) is the report that an employee can use to decide what
transactions must be processed to resolve the credit issue.
In the case of sporadic processes, the SAP Business Workflow tool proactively
connects employees with business transactions using SAP’s internal email system and
workflow tasks, which are email messages that can include basic information, notes, and
documents, as well as direct links to business transactions. The SAP system can monitor
workflow tasks, and if the tasks are not completed on time, the workflow system can
automatically take various actions, including changing the workflow task priority and
sending email reminders to the employees responsible for the work.
200
Chapter 7

Consider vacation requests. Employees performing critical operational tasks within an
organization may be required to request time off from work in advance. The process of
requesting time off is likely a relatively infrequent process that can create operational and
employee morale problems if not handled properly. As such, it is a prime candidate for a
workflow tool. In SAP, the Workflow Builder is used to define the process behind a
workflow. In addition to defining the steps in a business process, the software identifies
individuals involved in the process and sets other process parameters. Figure 7-14 shows
a Workflow Builder screen for the workflow that manages an employee’s request for
time off.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 7-14
SAP ERP Workflow Builder screen
In the first step in this process, an employee completes the Create Notification of
Absence screen (shown in Figure 7-15) to request time off from work.
201
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 7-15
Create Notification of Absence screen
Once the employee completes this screen, the time-off request becomes a workflow
item in the Business Workplace for the employee’s supervisor. The Business Workplace is
an interface for accessing a variety of SAP functions, including email, a calendar, and
workflow—similar to other comprehensive communication and collaboration software
packages such as Microsoft Outlook or IBM’s Lotus Notes software.
Figure 7-16 shows a request for time off in the Workflow inbox of the manager’s
Business Workplace. From this screen, the manager can either approve or deny the
request. If the request is approved, the employee receives notification of the approval by
email. If the request is denied, the manager can include a note explaining the rationale.
The rejected request will be sent to the employee’s Workflow inbox, where that person
can either modify the request or cancel it.
202
Chapter 7

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 7-16
Manager’s Business Workplace with workflow task
SAP’s workflow tool provides a number of useful features. Employees can track the
progress of workflow tasks they have an interest in, reviewing their status at any time.
The system can be programmed to send reminders to the employee(s) responsible for a
task after a predetermined period of time. Managers can also build flexibility into
workflow tasks in terms of who can perform the task. For example, suppose that the
Accounts Receivable (A/R) Department has three employees who can set credit limits.
The A/R manager could create a workflow task to set a new customer’s credit limit and
send it to the Workflow inbox of all three A/R employees. When one of the employees
completes the task, the system removes it from all three Workflow inboxes. The manager
could also generate statistics on the number of workflow tasks handled by each employee
and the average time taken to complete the tasks, resulting in better staffing decisions.
For regular, day-to-day business processes, workflow tools are not required. But for
sporadic processes—those that are repeated frequently enough to justify the development
costs—workflow tools are a powerful way to improve process efficiency and effectiveness.
IMPLEMENTING ERP SYSTEMS
In Chapter 2, you learned about some of the issues and challenges in implementing ERP
systems. Implementation was particularly challenging in the late 1990s, as many firms rushed
to implement ERP systems to avoid the Y2K problem. The explosive growth in demand for ERP
implementations at that time caused a significant shortage of experienced consultants. Since
2000, the pace of implementations has slowed considerably. Most Fortune 500 firms have
203
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

implemented an ERP system. The current growth area in ERP implementations is in the small
to midsized business market, and vendors have been developing products, including Microsoft
Dynamics and SAP Business One, tailored to this market.
Recall that the implementation of ERP is an ongoing process, not a one-time task.
ERP systems are extremely complicated, and no company ever takes full advantage of all
the capabilities in a system. Because of the challenges in the initial implementation of an
ERP system, many firms limit the scope of the implementation projects to only what is
absolutely necessary to operate the business, and rightly so. After the implementation
is complete and the system is running smoothly, many firms seek to further improve
their business processes by updating and expanding upon their original ERP system
implementation. These follow-on implementation projects, while smaller than the initial
ERP implementation, still require effective management.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Business Process Improvement at Multi-Chem
What do you do when your organization grows so rapidly that documents start to fall through
the cracks? Smart companies turn to business process management to help them get their
organizations running more efficiency. Multi-Chem, an international specialty chemicals
company selling to the oil and gas industry, did just that in an attempt to improve its business
processes. The company is based in San Angelo, Texas, and has over 700 employees. Due to
its rapid growth, the company’s document approval processes had become slow and
ineffective. Documents, such as vacation requests, were only trickling through an inefficient
approval process and some were even languishing on workers’ desks.
Before setting out to improve this inefficient business process, Multi-Chem’s
management established some criteria for the solution. The company wanted a program
that was more than a simple email system; the solution had to be able to manage
documents electronically, and it needed to be able to control the processes’ workflow.
Management also wanted to put the system in the user’s hands, that is, they did not want
a system that the IT Department would have to manage on a daily basis. In addition, the
solution needed to be scalable since the company was growing fast.
The solution chosen by Multi-Chem was BP Logix’s Process Director. Internally,
Multi-Chem refers to the new system as eDocs. The company focused first on creating a
new personnel request form, which is used for new hires and new positions. With the
new system, Multi-Chem was able to design a user-friendly form that simplified the
hiring process, and because the new form and process was so intuitive, it was widely
accepted by employees. And through the system’s use of audit trails, tracking
authorizations has been simplified. Further implementation phases included the
development of new documents and workflows for approving capital expenditures,
training employees, and creating customer profiles.
Multi-Chem’s eDocs system continues to save the company money and time. All
employees are using eDocs, and the system has become a critical part of their work.
Question:
1.
Think of an example of a paper-based inefficient business process, such as one
you might see at a traditional doctor’s office. How could an electronic
document system that uses workflow improve the efficiency of that process?
204
Chapter 7

ERP System Costs and Benefits
As you learned in Chapter 2, ERP implementation is expensive (with costs ranging
between $10 million and $500 million, depending on company size). The costs of an ERP
implementation include the following:
•
Software licensing fees—ERP software is quite expensive, and most ERP
vendors charge annual license fees based on the number of users.
•
Consulting fees—ERP implementations require the use of consultants with
the skills to configure the software to support the company’s business
processes. Good consultants have extensive experience in the way ERP
systems function in practice, and they can help companies make decisions
that avoid excessive data input, while capturing the information necessary to
make managerial decisions.
•
Project team member time—ERP projects require key people within the
company to guide the implementation. These are team members who have
detailed knowledge of the company’s business. They work closely with the
consultants to make sure the configuration of the ERP software supports the
company’s needs, which means these workers are frequently taken away
from their daily responsibilities.
•
Employee training—Project team members need training in the ERP software
so they can work successfully with the consultants in the implementation.
Those team members also frequently work with training consultants to
develop and deliver company-specific training programs for all employees.
•
Productivity losses—No matter how smoothly an ERP implementation goes,
companies normally lose productivity during the first weeks and months after
switching to a new ERP system.
To justify the costs associated with an ERP system, a company must identify a
significant financial benefit that will be generated by the use of the software, but the only
way a company can save money with an ERP system is by using it to support more
efficient and effective business processes. This means that an implementation project
should not just re-create the company’s current processes and information systems,
although that is a possibility since SAP provides the source code with its ERP package.
A company could choose to alter the package through SAP’s internal programming
language, called Advanced Business Application Programming (ABAP)—which you first
learned about in Chapter 2. With access to the SAP ERP source code, it is possible for a
company to spend a significant sum of money on software code development to avoid
changing a business process to the best practice process designed into the ERP software.
Many companies have difficultly handling change and prefer to continue doing business as
they always have—rather than adopting the best practices built into the ERP system.
As part of the implementation, a company must also manage the transfer of data from
its old computer system to the new ERP system. In addition to managing master data such
as materials data, customer data, vendor data, and so on, a company must also transfer
transaction data, which includes sales orders and purchase orders, many of which are
likely to be in various stages of processing—a challenging task.
205
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT
How does a company ensure that its ERP investment pays off in increased profitability?
The key challenge is not in managing technology, but in managing people. An ERP system
changes how people work, and for the system to be effective, the change may have to be
dramatic, going beyond the way employees interact with the software to the way they
perform their tasks. Furthermore, business processes that are more effective require fewer
people. Some employees will no longer be needed. It is no small thing to ask people to
participate in a process that may not only change their day-to-day activities, but could
also eliminate their current jobs.
Managing the human behavior aspects of organizational change is called
organizational change management (OCM). Do not underestimate the importance of this
aspect of the implementation process. One of the keys to managing OCM is to realize that
most people do not mind change, they mind being changed. If the ERP implementation
is a project that is being forced on the employees, they will resist it. If employees view it
as a chance to make the company more efficient and effective by improving business
processes—and if these process improvements will make the company more profitable
and therefore provide more job security—there is a greater likelihood that employees will
support the implementation efforts. As mentioned earlier, the best way to improve a
business process is to have the people most familiar with the process leverage their
experience and creativity to develop process-improvement ideas. When employees have
contributed to a process change, they have a sense of ownership and will be more likely to
support the change.
Implementation Tools
Many tools are available to help manage implementation projects. Process mapping,
described previously, is perhaps the most critical. For an ERP implementation to go
smoothly and provide value, it is critical that a company understand both its current
processes and the desired state of the processes after implementation.
SAP provides Solution Manager, a set of tools and information that helps companies
manage the implementation of SAP ERP. In Solution Manager, the ERP implementation
project is presented in an Implementation Roadmap, consisting of the following five
phases:
•
Project Preparation (15 to 20 days)
•
Business Blueprint (25 to 40 days)
•
Realization (55 to 80 days)
•
Final Preparation (35 to 55 days)
•
Go Live and Support (20 to 24 days)
Figure 7-17 shows an example of this roadmap. The left side of the Solution
Manager screen shows a hierarchical menu structure that organizes each step in the
implementation, and on the right side of the screen are the detailed items, the
descriptions, documents, white papers, tools, and so on to support each step.
206
Chapter 7

Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 7-17
Implementation Roadmap in SAP’s Solution Manager
The first phase of the Implementation Roadmap is Project Preparation. Some of the
tasks in the Project Preparation phase include organizing the technical team, defining the
system landscape (the computer servers, networking hardware, and peripherals necessary
to operate the ERP system), selecting the hardware and database vendors, and most
importantly, defining the project’s scope—what the project is to accomplish. A common
problem in ERP implementations is scope creep, which is the unplanned expansion of the
project’s goals and objectives. Scope creep causes the project to go over time and over
budget and increases the risk of an unsuccessful implementation. Defining the project’s
scope ahead of time helps prevent this problem.
In the second phase, Business Blueprint, project team members produce detailed
documentation of the business process requirements of the company. The Business
Blueprint phase results in a detailed description of how the company intends to run its
business with the SAP ERP system. Process mapping is critical in the Business Blueprint
phase. The results of the Business Blueprint phase will guide consultants and project team
members in configuring the SAP ERP system (which occurs in the third phase). During the
Business Blueprint phase, technical team members determine the method of data transfer
from the firm’s existing computer systems (called legacy systems), which may be replaced
by the ERP system or may continue to function with the ERP system through an interface.
207
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

In the Realization phase (the third phase), the project team members work with
consultants to configure the ERP software in the development system. In an SAP
implementation, a company uses three separate SAP systems over the course of the
implementation process—a development system for configuring the SAP software to match
the Business Blueprint, a test (or quality assurance) system for evaluating the software
configuration, and a production system, on which the company runs the final software.
The team also develops any necessary ABAP code or other tools (such as third-party
software packages) and creates the required connections to the legacy systems.
The fourth phase, Final Preparation, is critical to the success of the implementation
project. Tasks in this phase include:
•
Testing the system throughput for critical business processes (determining
whether it can handle the volume of transactions) in the quality assurance
system
•
Setting up the help desk where end users can get support
•
Setting up operation of the production system and transferring data from
legacy systems
•
Conducting end-user training
•
Setting the Go Live date
When scope creep occurs in a project, it is commonly not discovered until well into
the Realization phase, when the team begins to miss deadlines, and the costs begin to
exceed the budget. By the time the scope creep is discovered and its impact is understood,
there is often little management can do to correct the problem, as most of the time and
budget have been spent. In some cases, management chooses to shorten or omit the Final
Preparation phase, which means that testing of the system and training of employees are
reduced or eliminated. Unfortunately, with reduced testing, errors in configuring the
system may not be discovered until it is put into use. Likewise, with reduced training,
employees may not know how to use the system properly, which can create a complicated
chain of problems, due to the integrated nature of the system. Any cost savings gained by
shortening the Final Preparation phase are often overshadowed by productivity losses and
consulting fees in the Go Live and Support phase.
In the fifth and final phase, Go Live and Support, the company begins using the new
ERP system. Wise managers try to schedule the Go Live date for a period when the
company is least busy. A properly staffed help desk is critical for the success of the Go
Live phase because users have the most questions during the first few weeks of working
with a new system. The SAP ERP project team members and consultants should be
scheduled to work the help desk during the first few weeks of the Go Live period.
Although significant testing of the system and settings should have been done
throughout the project, it is not possible to test all the settings and thoroughly evaluate
the throughput of the system. Therefore, monitoring of the system during the Go Live and
Support phase is critical so changes can be made quickly if the performance of the system
is not satisfactory. Finally, it is important to set a completion date for the project. Any
enhancements or extensions to the system should be managed as separate projects, not as
extensions of the original implementation project.
208
Chapter 7

A N O T H E R
L O O K
ERP Implementations Help Nonprofits
Direct Relief International, a nonprofit organization providing medical supplies and
assistance to people affected by poverty, disaster, and civil unrest around the world, has
used its recent implementation of an online community network to help those in need.
While many nonprofits are well intentioned, they often lack the information they need to
be effective. For instance, in the aftermath of the Haitian earthquake disaster in January
2010, many containers of medical supplies sat at airports, unable to reach their
destination. With its online network, which is built on a foundation of SAP software,
Direct Relief was able to supply victims of the earthquake with over $50 million in
support—due to the organization’s close attention to supply chain and logistics details.
Direct Relief initially implemented some SAP ERP modules in 2008, with a second
phase in 2010. In the second stage, a new online community network interface was built
using SAP’s NetWeaver Portal. In addition, SAP’s CRM, BusinessObjects, and Business
Warehouse tools were used to create the online network, which brings donations
together with need. Direct Relief’s goal was to bring the efficiency of a profit-oriented
company to its nonprofit organization. After users are registered and screened, they can
log on to a secure portal to donate medicine and volunteer medical services. Those
requesting aid can do the same to determine what supplies and services are available.
The network was initially rolled out to users in the United States only; however, the new
system was so successful that it has since been expanded to 70 countries.
According to Direct Relief’s President and CEO, Thomas Tighe, the nonprofit has
been “able to increase the flow of aid provided, help more people at a lower cost, and
produce more precise reporting,” all of which helps the organization match the needs of
a particular group to that of a supplier of that required product or service. The new
system also proved it is scalable. During the Haiti earthquake crisis, donations made
through the network doubled in a two-week period, and over the course of a few days,
the number of system users (donating and supplying) grew by 300 percent.
Ross Comstock, the IT director, also explains how the new system is highly user-
friendly, “Because our product donors are offering products that are in many cases
already in our warehouse, we decided to adapt the e-commerce functionality to have it
face upstream as well—so we can take product donations through it, which I think is
pretty innovative.” The efficiency of running a real-time system with a single database
and integrated processes has paid off in helping those in need.
Questions:
1.
Do you think implementation of an ERP system into a nonprofit organization
is different than in a traditional for-profit company? Why?
2.
List at least three ways an ERP system can help nonprofit organizations, and
support your answers using news articles that illustrate the problems that ERP
would solve.
209
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

System Landscape Concept
For an ERP implementation, SAP recommends a system landscape like the one shown in
Figure 7-18. In this system landscape, there are three completely separate SAP systems,
designated as Development (DEV), Quality Assurance (QAS), and Production (PROD).
Transport directory
QAS
DEV
PROD
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 7-18
System landscape for SAP ERP implementation
The Development (DEV) system is used to develop configuration settings for the
system, as well as special enhancements using ABAP code. These changes are
automatically recorded in the transport directory, which is a special data file location on
the DEV server. Changes recorded in the DEV system are imported into the Quality
Assurance (QAS) system, where they are tested to make sure they function properly. If
any corrections are needed, they are made in the DEV system and then transported again
to the QAS system for testing. Once the configuration settings and ABAP programs pass
testing in the QAS system, all settings, programs, and changes are transported to the
Production (PROD) system, which is the system the company will use to run its business
processes.
The use of separate systems is important during the initial implementation of an SAP
ERP system, and it is even more important after the Go Live phase. All software packages
have occasional updates, and having systems available to test these updates before
applying them to a Production system can prevent problems. If a company wants to
use features of the SAP ERP system that were not included in the initial project
implementation, then the company should have a process like the one SAP provides
to manage future changes to the production system in a controlled fashion.
210
Chapter 7

Chapter Summary
•
ERP systems provide the analysis and communication tools required to support efficient
and effective business processes. Process modeling is a fundamental tool for
understanding and analyzing business processes.
•
Process mapping is a process-modeling tool that uses graphical representations to document
business processes. Other process-modeling methodologies include hierarchical modeling,
deployment flowcharting, and event process chain (EPC) diagramming. Value analysis is a
technique that can be used to generate process-improvement ideas, and dynamic process
modeling uses software to evaluate process improvements prior to implementation.
•
ERP Workflow tools provide the ability to monitor and facilitate sporadic business
processes so important work does not “fall through the cracks.”
•
Most challenges to ERP implementation involve managing personnel and their reactions to
the change, rather than managing technical issues. Managing the human behavior aspects
of organizational change is called organizational change management (OCM).
•
SAP’s Solution Manager is a set of tools and information that helps companies manage the
implementation of SAP ERP software. In Solution Manager, the ERP implementation
project is presented in an Implementation Roadmap, consisting of five phases.
•
SAP’s system landscape was introduced to show how changes to the ERP system during
implementation (and beyond) are managed. In this system landscape, there are three
completely separate SAP systems, designated as Development (DEV), Quality Assurance
(QAS), and Production (PROD).
Key Terms
deployment flowcharting (swimlane
flowcharting)
Development (DEV) system
dynamic process modeling
event process chain (EPC)
flowchart
gap analysis
hierarchical modeling
organizational change management (OCM)
process boundary
process mapping
process model
Production (PROD) system
Quality Assurance (QAS) system
scope creep
transport directory
value added
value analysis
workflow tools
workflow task
Exercises
1.
Develop a process map for the following outdated course registration process in place at a
local university:
•
Students first fill out forms listing their desired classes. They bring those completed
forms to the academic advisement office, where, working with an advisor, they create a
course selection document. Then, the student fills out a computer-readable form with
211
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

the course and section number for all classes approved by the advisor. This form is
submitted to the registration office where it is fed into a document reader, which
electronically reads the completed forms; the data is then written to the master course
schedule disk.
•
At the end of the two-week registration period, data from the master course schedule
disk is fed into the master scheduling program, which assigns students to courses. The
scheduling program is designed to maximize the number of students who receive their
requested courses while staying within class capacity limits. Once the master
scheduling program has been updated for all students, the program produces three
documents: (1) individual schedules for each student, (2) initial student lists for each
class, and (3) the summary schedule report for the administration.
•
After students receive their schedules, they are allowed to drop or add classes for a
period of two weeks. To add or drop a class, a student must first obtain permission
from the professor teaching the class. Once that signature is obtained on the drop/add
form, the student brings the form to the computer center where the clerk enters the
change into the scheduling system, which in turn updates the master course disk. The
clerk then prints out a new schedule for that student.
2.
Develop a swimlane process map for the online ordering process for Active Bicycle
Company, shown below. Each of the following functions should be one swimlane: sales,
accounting, warehouse, and shipping.
•
The process begins when a customer submits an online order form to Active Bicycle
via the Web. The customer supplies his or her name, address, email address, model
number of the bicycle they desire, and credit card number.
•
When the customer clicks on the Confirm button on the Web page, Active Bicycle’s
system gets approval for the transaction from the credit card company. If the credit
charge is approved, the system assigns a number to the sales order, displays an order
summary for the customer to print, and sends a confirmation email to the customer. If the
credit charge is denied, the customer is asked to provide a different form of payment.
•
The system then generates a two-part invoice, a stock release form, and a two-part
packing slip form. The stock release form is sent to the Warehouse Department, and
the two-part packing slip and one copy of the invoice are sent to the Shipping
Department. The other copy of the invoice is maintained in a holding file in the
Accounting Department to be filed later with the shipping certificate.
•
In the warehouse, employees use the stock release form to pull the appropriate
inventory to fill the order. Assuming there is enough stock (for the purposes of this
exercise you can assume there is enough stock), the bicycle is packed into a special
box for shipping, with added protection so it will not be damaged in transit. Using the
stock release form, the warehouse staff inputs data into the inventory management
program to update the master inventory file. The warehouse clerk also must take the
information from the stock release form and manually fill out a shipping certificate,
which is sent to the Accounting Department for a further check that the items are being
released from the warehouse. The boxed inventory, along with the packing slip, is then
sent to the Shipping Department.
•
In the Shipping Department, one copy of the two-part packing slip is placed in the
shipping department’s file cabinet, and one is included with the goods to be sent to the
customer.
212
Chapter 7

•
Back in the Accounting Department, the shipping certificate is matched with the copy of
the invoice, and the accounting database is updated to record the completion of the
order. The accounting program then submits a payment request to the credit card
company, and both the shipping certificate and the invoice are filed in the accounting
office.
3.
Develop a process map for the following request-for-quote process:
•
Your company assembles affordable washing machines from purchased parts. Your
customers buy in bulk from you and then relabel the washing machines with their own
brand. Customers typically want unique features for their washers, and they often
submit a request for new features or other design changes, which results in a new
model being created. Customers initiate the new design process by submitting a
request for quotation (RFQ), which is a document that provides all the details for the
new washing machine model, including the quantity to be ordered. Your company
responds to the RFQ with a written quote, which details the cost for an order that
would meet the requirements of the RFQ. Many different departments, as well as the
manufacturers of the washing machine component parts, are involved in creating
the quote. The Sales Department must work closely with the Costing Department, the
Procurement Department, and the Assembly Department to provide a competitive
quote to the customer. Create a swimlane flowchart to document the flow of
information between departments and external partners in creating the quote, using
the following information:
•
The following internal departments are involved in the RFQ process:
•
Sales—Receives the customer’s request for a price quote; creates the final quote
and sends it to the customer.
•
Assembly—Prepares production documents that detail the labor, tools, and
equipment required to produce the new washing machine.
•
Procurement—Creates RFQs for vendors for any new components needed for
the new design.
•
Costing (Accounting)—Computes the final cost estimate.
•
The following external parties are involved in the RFQ process:
•
Customer—Submits a request for a price quote; receives the completed RFQ.
•
Vendor—Receives the request for a quote on the cost of component parts,
computes their costs, and submits a bid.
4.
Develop an event process chain (EPC) diagram for the following staff-recruiting process at
Yellow Brook Photography:
•
The current recruitment process for Yellow Brook Photography takes approximately 90
days. It begins when a manager completes a requisition and sends it to the Human
Resources Department. The Human Resources Department reviews and assigns a
number to the requisition and returns it to the manager for approval. He or she
approves it, obtains the required approval signatures, and then returns it to Human
Resources.
•
Next, Human Resources creates a job posting and announces the position internally
through the company’s intranet, bulletin boards, or a binder of current job openings.
Human Resources collects responses internally for eight days. After that, Human
Resources solicits résumés from external sources by advertising in newspapers and
213
Process Modeling, Process Improvement, and ERP Implementation

online. Human Resources then prescreens the résumés and forwards information on
qualified candidates to the hiring manager for review. The hiring manager tells Human
Resources which candidates should be interviewed. Human Resources conducts brief
phone interviews of candidates recommended by the hiring manager; if the phone
interview is promising, Human Resources schedules an on-site interview. Candidates
interview with the hiring manager and with a Human Resources staff member. Human
Resources records the interviews in an applicant flow log.
•
Once a candidate is selected for hire, Human Resources and the hiring manager
prepare an offer, and a background check on the candidate is initiated. Then, the hiring
manager must approve the offer and obtain the required approval signatures on a job
offer approval form. Subsequently, the hiring manager extends the offer verbally to the
candidate, while Human Resources sends the written offer, including an employment
start date. Once the applicant accepts the offer, a drug screening is scheduled for the
candidate, who must also sign the offer letter and return it to Human Resources. At
that point, Human Resources notifies the hiring manager of the candidate’s
acceptance. Finally, if the drug test comes back negative, the new employee
completes new-hire orientation on the first day of work.
For Further Study and Research
Bonneau, Lauren. “Direct Relief Brings Technology from the Commercial World to the
Humanitarian World.” insiderProfiles, 2, no. 4 (October 2011): 24–29.
Cordes, Ronald M. “Flowcharting: The Essential Tool of Quality.” Quality Digest. January 1998.
www.teamflow.com/qdjan98.html.
Coronado, Fernando. “Multi-Chem Relies on BPM Solution to Improve Operational Processes.”
Business Process Trends. February 1, 2011. http://www.bptrends.com/publicationfiles/
02-01-11-CS-Multi-Chem-Relies%20on%20BPM-Coronado-final.pdf.
Hammer, Michael, and James Champy. Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for
Business Revolution. New York: HarperCollins. 1993.
Harmon, Paul. “Royal Pharmaceuticals Case Study.” Business Process Trends. May 4, 2010.
www.bptrends.com/publicationfiles/05-10-CS-Royal%20Pharmaceuticals-Metastorm.doc2.pdf.
Harrington, H. James. Business Process Improvement: The Breakthrough Strategy for Total
Quality, Productivity, and Competitiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill, April 1991.
214
Chapter 7

C H A P T E R8
RFID, BUSINESS
INTELLIGENCE (BI), MOBILE
COMPUTING, AND THE CLOUD
L E A R N I N G
O B J E C T I V E S
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
•
Define RFID and its role in logistics and sales
•
Define business intelligence (BI), and provide examples of its uses
•
Explain how in-memory computing will change the use of BI
•
Discuss the importance of mobile applications to businesses
•
Describe cloud computing and why it is becoming important for ERP
providers
•
Explain how the service-oriented architecture (SOA) concept has
changed ERP development
•
Describe Web services, and outline the unique components of
NetWeaver
•
Define software as a service (SaaS), and identify the advantages and
disadvantages of using this software delivery model
I N T R O D U C T I O N
This chapter examines advanced topics relevant to Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems.
As you have read in earlier chapters, an ERP system allows a company to accomplish tasks that
cannot be done well, if at all, without such a system. Traditionally, ERP systems have been
software applications that are run on a company’s own computer systems, and the focus of ERP
has been on managing business transactions. In this chapter, you will see how technologies such

as radio frequency identification (RFID) are increasing the amount of data that is contained in ERP
systems, how business intelligence technologies are turning this data into valuable information, and
how cloud computing and mobile technologies are changing where ERP data is stored and how it
is delivered.
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) TECHNOLOGY
Radio frequency identification technology, known commonly as RFID, is becoming an
increasingly efficient tool for tracking items through a supply chain. An RFID device,
which can be attached to products, is a small package (or tag) made up of a
microprocessor and an antenna. The location of an item with an RFID tag can be
determined using an RFID reader, which emits radio waves and receives signals back
from the tag. The reader is also sometimes called an interrogator because it
“interrogates” the tag. Because microprocessors have continued to become more
powerful and less expensive over time, the cost of RFID technology is approaching a level
at which it is becoming inexpensive enough to be cost-effective for many businesses.
Today, most materials are still tracked using bar codes and bar-code readers. However,
bar-code labels can degrade in bad weather, and an employee must point a bar-code
reader directly at a bar code to read it. RFID technology does not need this line-of-sight
connection, and can withstand most environmental stresses.
Walmart has been on the leading edge of the move to integrate RFID technology
into the supply chain. In 2003, Walmart announced that it would require its top
100 suppliers to begin tagging pallets and cases with RFID tags, which would allow
Walmart to more efficiently track products through its logistics network. (A Walmart-
sponsored report from the University of Arkansas’ Information Technology Research
Institute concluded that RFID reduced retail out-of-stock situations in stores
by 16 percent.) However, by early 2007 reports began to surface that Walmart’s RFID
initiative was not progressing as planned. Although Walmart publicly denied that it was
experiencing any issues with its RFID technology, by October 2007, the company
announced a major change in its RFID strategy, shifting its focus to the use of RFIDs in
its stores rather than in its distribution centers. Unfortunately, Walmart still faced the
reality that the cost for RFID tags was still too high to put on individual items, even
though that is the area from which the biggest benefit would come. The major
opportunity for RFID technology to reduce out-of-stock situations is not in the supply
chain between the manufacturer and the storeroom at the individual store, but between
the backroom stock area and the store shelves.
Walmart initiated its third RFID initiative in July 2010, announcing that it would
begin requiring suppliers to place removable RFID smart tags on individual apparel items.
According to Raul Vazquez, the executive in charge of Walmart stores in the western
United States, the “ability to wave the wand and have a sense of all the products that are
on the floor or in the backroom in seconds is something that we feel can really transform
our business.” The potential return on investment of technologies that can improve
216
Chapter 8

inventory accuracy is particularly high in a clothing retail setting, especially in terms of
avoiding out-of-stock situations. A story may have 100 pairs of blue jeans on display
racks, but if there is not a pair in a customer’s size, then a sale is not possible. A 2007
pilot project at American Apparel Inc. resulted in sales increases of 14.3 percent in stores
that using RFID technology. Garment-level RFID tags also have the potential to reduce
employee theft by making it easier to check stockroom inventory and determine what
items are missing.
Pharmaceutical firms are also evaluating the use of RFID technology to comply with
requirements to combat counterfeit drugs. Regulatory agencies such as the FDA are
developing rules that would require companies to track pharmaceutical products down
to the package level. California is leading this trend with their ePedigree law that will
take effect on a staggered basis from January 1, 2015, through July 1, 2017. An
ePedigree is an electronic record that contains information regarding each transaction in
the supply chain that results in a change of ownership of the given prescription drug,
from initial manufacturer to returns from retailers. To accomplish this, manufacturers
must create a unique serial number for the smallest package size that can be sold to a
consumer.
RFID technology is also being employed to track medical devices. For example,
Spectrum Health’s Meijer Heart Center is using RFID technology to track stents—wire
mesh tubes that are implanted into weakened or narrowed cardiac arteries to keep them
open. The Meijer Heart Center implants thousands of stents each year, and managing the
inventory of stents is challenging. Stents are small, but can cost up to $2,000 each. In
addition, stents have an expiration date. In the past, manual systems were used to manage
stents, a time-consuming process that was error prone. Inventory accuracy in the old
system was 95 percent accurate—a figure that might sound good at first glance, but not
when you consider that if the heart center handles 2,000 stents per year (at $2,000 each),
a 5 percent inventory error becomes a $200,000 problem.
With the new system, stents are stored in RFID-enabled cabinets. Attached to each
stent is an RFID tag, which provides it with a unique identification number. To withdraw
a stent for use, a nurse swipes his or her ID card to a device attached to the cabinet.
Through the device, the nurse can then access a list of patients in the hospital database.
The nurse identifies the patient requiring the stent, and the cabinet unlocks. Then all the
nurse has to do is remove the required stents from the cabinet; the RFID technology
tracks which stents have been removed for the patient. In addition to tracking the
removal of inventory, the system sends the information on the stents used to the
hospital’s information system for patient billing. The system also monitors inventory levels
and triggers an order for new stents when necessary. If some of the stents that were
removed for a patient are not used, the nurse can return the stents to the cabinet, and the
RFID device will automatically credit the patient’s account. The system also tracks
expiration dates so employees can make sure those stents are used before their expiration
date. With the new RFID cabinet system, Spectrum’s inventory accuracy for stent
inventory is now nearly 100 percent.
217
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

A N O T H E R
L O O K
RFID and Corporate Culture
American Apparel is a unique company even by the standards of the fashion industry.
The company was founded in 1989 by Dov Charney, who started out in the clothing
business as a college student selling t-shirts. Eventually, Charney built American Apparel
into a vertically integrated fashion company that makes its clothing in Los Angeles
rather than importing it from manufacturers in low-wage countries. In addition to
manufacturing its own clothes, American Apparel designs its own garments, which it
sells through a network of company-owned stores. The company also creates all of its
advertising and marketing materials (which are known for generating heated
controversy).
However, while the American Apparel was cultivating a hip image in the world of
retail, it was also developing a reputation for being soft on shoplifting. Former employees
allege that managers were asked to turn a blind eye to shoplifting so the “right type of
person” would be wearing American Apparel clothing. In addition, lax internal controls
over shipping and delivery combined with young store employees allegedly hired more
for their looks than for their management ability led to high levels of employee theft. In
an initial trial of RFID tags on garments in 2007, American Apparel found that inventory
“shrinkage”—a reduction in inventory due to human error, theft, or damage—was
20 percent, double the retail industry average. Employee theft was clearly a significant
portion of this high level of shrinkage.
While reducing theft is an important part of American Apparel’s RFID initiative,
improved customer service is the primary goal. With RFID, American Apparel can use a
continuous replenishment process to ensure on-shelf availability of their products. RFID
also improves on-the-rack availability and inventory control at American Apparel by
reducing mistaken identity. Many of American Apparel’s styles look similar, and
manually inputting inventory data increases inventory accuracy problems. Stores with
the RFID technology now have inventory accuracy above 99 percent, and in many
stores, the RFID technology has paid for itself within 6 months, based on inventory cost
savings. “We measure everything, and have accountability of every item. Every item
counts, and when we change that culture, employees start treating products better,” says
Stacey Shulman, American Apparel’s vice president of technology. On February 8, 2012,
American Apparel reported that it intends to equip all of its 285 stores with RFID
technology.
Questions:
1.
RFID technology allows a company to more accurately track employee
performance—from mistakes in inventory handling to theft. How would you
feel about working at a company that used RFID technology to monitor your
performance? Do you think this use of technology is good for a company’s
culture?
2.
In what other industries might RFID technology have an impact similar to that
seen at American Apparel?
218
Chapter 8

BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE/BUSINESS ANALYTICS
The combination of technologies such as RFID and mobile computing (described in the
following section) with traditional ERP system data is providing companies with an
exponential growth in business data. While this data plays a fundamental role in the day-
to-day operations of a business, it also provides an opportunity for a company to perform
sophisticated analyses to determine ways to improve its business. Business intelligence (BI),
also referred to as business analytics, is a term used to describe a range of different
applications and technologies used to extract and analyze large amounts of data to aid in
decision making. BI includes data-mining tools and querying tools, which are often
interactive and visual. The growth of data-generating technologies such as RFID,
combined with improvements in BI tools, has led to significant growth in the BI market. Prior
to 2008, almost all of SAP’s ERP business came from traditional ERP suite applications.
However, in the period from 2008 to 2011, the percentage of the business that came from BI
rose to 50 percent.
Figure 8-1 shows a framework for how SAP views BI.
Access
Analytic
applications 
Collaboration
Analytic capabilities
Business
intelligence
Enterprise
performance
management
Governance,
risk, and
compliance
Data
warehousing
Enterprise
information
management
Data sources
Social
media
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 8-1
SAP Business Intelligence (BI) framework
On the left side of the diagram are the potential BI data sources, which are growing
both in number and in the volume of data produced. For example, sources such as
Facebook, Twitter, and other social media applications can provide information on
consumer reaction to new products.
The center section represents the analytical capabilities of BI; it includes items such
as analytic applications and business intelligence, which are similar sets of data analysis
tools. In SAP’s framework, analytic applications are data analysis tools applied to specific
219
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

industries, such as financial services, manufacturing, consumer products, retail, and
utilities or to functional areas, such as supply chain management, finance, human
resources, IT, and service, sales, and marketing. SAP BI includes a set of tools for
exploration, analysis, and presentation that can be applied to a wide range of business
questions. Enterprise performance management is the concept of developing strategic
goals for the organization and then gathering data to evaluate how the organization is
performing in relation to those goals. The governance, risk, and compliance category
represents a group of activities focused on ensuring an organization is functioning
ethically and legally. Governance refers to the processes that ensure that top management
is receiving accurate and timely data necessary to run the organization and that control
mechanisms are in place to make sure that management directions and instructions are
being carried out. Risk, or risk management, consists of processes to identify risks to the
organization (technological, financial, information security, supply chain disruptions, and
so on) and to develop plans to minimize the potential damage to these risks. Compliance
means conforming to stated requirements, which could be customer specifications for
goods or services, Sarbanes-Oxley reporting requirements (discussed in Chapter 5), or
state and federal regulations such as those relating to product safety. Data warehousing is
the technology used to store the large volumes of data used in the analysis. Enterprise
information management is a relatively new term that describes the business and
technology functions that manage information as a corporate asset.
The final section of the diagram in Figure 8-1 is titled “Access,” and it describes how
users will access BI. Previously, this was primarily through personal computers, but with
the growth in mobile technology, an increasing variety of devices can now be used to
access BI.
IN-MEMORY COMPUTING
Up until recently, BI systems have typically accessed data that was stored on data
warehouse servers, which use hard disk technology to store data. Data stored in
data warehouse servers usually consist of aggregated data—from an ERP system or other
sources. To speed access to this data, the data in a data warehouse are structured as
multidimensional data cubes, which allow for relationships in the data to be analyzed
quickly. For example, a company might want to look at sales over time, by store, and by
product. This means analyzing sales along three dimensions, and the sales data would
need to be structured as a three dimensional cube. If the company was also interested in
looking at these sales by geographic region, it would need a four dimensional data cube.
There are two main challenges with using a multidimensional cube structure. First,
a significant level of technical expertise is needed to construct a cube, which means that
an IT specialist rather than an end user usually must complete this task. In practice,
the end user and an IT specialist usually have to collaborate to construct the correct
multidimensional data cube, and frequently they do not speak the same language—that is,
the end user thinks in terms of business problems while the IT specialist thinks in terms
of database technology. Second, the multidimensional cube is a structure that necessarily
restricts how the data can be analyzed.
In Chapter 2, we introduced the topic of SAP’s HANA in-memory computing
technology. HANA allows customers to analyze large amounts of data instantly. The key to
this technology is that data is stored in computer memory rather than on hard disk servers.
220
Chapter 8

The time required to access data from memory is a small fraction of the time required to
access data from a hard disk. The primary performance measure for data storage systems is
latency, which is the time between when a request is made for data from a storage device
and when the data is delivered. For hard disk storage, typical latency is currently around
13 milliseconds. For memory, the latency is around 83 nanoseconds. To understand the
significance of this speed differential, think of in-computer memory as an F-18 fighter jet
that can travel at a speed of 1,190 miles per hour and disk memory as a banana slug with a
top speed of 0.007 miles per hour. With such a substantial difference in speed, the obvious
question is why would data warehouses use disk memory? The answer is storage capacity.
Hard disk storage is now being measured in terabytes, while the maximum capacity of
memory chips is still in the gigabytes—so hard disks can store one thousand times more
data than memory for a comparable cost. While hard disks can store significantly more data
than memory chips, the cost and capacity of in-computer memory have reached levels at
which in-memory BI is becoming more feasible.
Data compression is another technology that makes in-memory BI possible. Figure 8-2
shows data for an SAP ERP data table used to store material master data. This is a typical
SAP ERP table; it consists of 223 data fields, which are the column headings.
Many
columns are
blank or have
zero values
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 8-2
Material master data table
As shown in Figure 8-2, many of the fields, or columns, in the data table are blank or
contain values of zero. By storing the data as columns rather than rows, in-memory
systems can reduce the size of the data by eliminating the large numbers of blank or zero
values by just noting their positions in the table. Essentially the system says “this entire
column is zero” or “the next 100 items in this column are zero.” When you look across
the rows of the table, the number of zero or blank values are not as large, so the saving
from noting zero or blank values are not nearly as large.
With the data compression provided by column storage, it is now feasible to store
large volumes of data in memory without aggregation. This means that multidimensional
cubes are not required. An end user can analyze BI data “on the fly” without needing an
IT specialist to translate the data into multidimensional cubes.
221
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

SAP is not the only ERP provider with in-memory capability. In February 2012,
Oracle released its in-memory solution for business analytics called Exalytics. Both SAP’s
and Oracle’s in-memory solutions are designed to analyze what is now being termed
“big data.” Big data refers to the enormous amount of data that is now available for BI use
from all the available sources, including ERP systems, Web sites, corporate databases,
scientific research, Twitter, and other social networking applications. Big data needs fast
computing to be usable, and in-memory computing allows for rapid processing. New chips
designs, such as chips made from carbon rather than silicon, may be the answer to
creating even faster machines. Computing’s processing is moving towards memory and
away from the processor, according to experts in the field such as John E. Kelly, the head
of IBM research. Big data is generating a lot of interest and investments from large
companies. The total investment in big data technology is in the billions of dollars, which
includes investments by many companies other than SAP and Oracle, including IBM,
Microsoft, and Hewlett-Packard.
Many feel that BI and its capabilities are strategic assets to an organization that can
be used to enhance future growth and viability, and some experts now say that companies
should be hiring a chief data officer who can link the data with the computing power and
the strategy of the organization.
According to Gartner Research, in 2011, only 30 percent of employees in
organizations with BI tools were actually using them. This low rate of use is due to the
fact that BI software is often difficult to use and slow to perform, and the data is
sometimes of limited relevance for end users. Gartner anticipates that as BI tools
become easier to use, organizations with BI capabilities will have about 50 percent of
their workers using the software by the year 2015. Worldwide revenue in the business
intelligence, analytic applications, and performance management software market rose
16 percent to $12.2 billion in 2011 from $10.5 billion in 2010, according to a report
from Gartner. SAP was the market leader in BI and analytics with a 24 percent market
share. The report also showed that BI analytics was the top technology priority for CIOs
in 2012.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Recovery.gov
Even the federal government is getting into the BI arena. As part of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (also known as the “Recovery Act”),
the Recovery.gov Web site was created to serve as “the U.S. government’s official
website that provides easy access to data related to Recovery Act spending and allows
for the reporting of potential fraud, waste, and abuse.” With an interactive, user-friendly
interface and a set of highly interactive BI tools, the site allows the average citizen to
easily review the various destinations for tax dollars spent under the Recovery Act. The
site’s BI tools let users review preexisting charts and graphs or create their own. Filters
are available for the data, and the results can be emailed or exported. Figure 8-3 shows a
sample output of the top 10 states by funds awarded from the Recovery Act of 2009, as
an example of a BI query.
(continued)
222
Chapter 8

Source Line: Recovery.gov.
FIGURE 8-3
Recovery.gov’s top 10 awards for states from the Recovery Act
Question:
1.
Go to the Recovery.gov Web site, and run a set of analytics to compare
Recovery Act spending for your state with that of a neighboring state.
Determine the top three projects funded in each state, and provide a brief
description of them in a memo to your instructor.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Real-Time Business Intelligence (BI)
BI is now used for real-time monitoring of systems and is capable of sending out alerts
based on the results of the BI. United Parcel Service (UPS) uses complex computerized
event processing to monitor the transactions related to the millions of packages it ships
daily around the globe. In its old system, reports would be run each evening to monitor
the server loads on the computers that maintained these important transactions. If a
problem occurred, UPS would find out about it the next morning. With real-time BI,
which includes easy-to-understand dashboards and analytics, problems are identified
immediately, and automatic emails are sent to alert employees of any problems with the
company’s computer systems.
Another example of the use of real-time BI is at Insurance.com, where its new
IBM Cognos Now system helps the company cope with its e-commerce transactions. With
Cognos Now, Insurance.com is able to monitor network performance and make any
necessary changes immediately. For example, when a new call comes in to
Insurance.com’s call center, the business intelligence system scans for available agents
and alerts the CRM software, which routes the call to one of the free agents.
Question:
1.
How could real-time BI help an organization like Fitter monitor its IT
systems? Be specific in your answer.
223
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

MOBILE COMPUTING
With the sale of smartphones and tablet computers exceeding that of personal computers in
2011, many organizations are facing the necessity of developing and deploying their own
mobile applications. Often these efforts are driven by the expectations of young workers
who—having grown up with mobile computing and a myriad of mobile apps, such as
Facebook—are appalled at some companies’ existing legacy systems. It is predicted that by
the year 2015, there will be more than 6.7 billion smartphones in the world, and a 2011
survey conducted by CIO magazine found that 54 percent of the companies responding were
planning to increase their spending on mobile applications. People are relying on
smartphones for social networking and shopping information, with the lines of work and play
often blurred. With today’s smartphone—40 times more powerful than those in 2000—and
cloud computing (discussed in the next section) making data available wherever a person is, it
is not surprising there is pressure on companies to increase their support of mobile apps.
There are, however, many challenges to face. For example, smartphones come in a
wide range of formats and operate on a variety of operating systems, and mobile
applications need to be developed with that in mind. Many experts agree that to develop
effective applications, companies cannot simply take computer-based applications and
modify them for use on mobile devices. Rather, mobile applications need to be developed
from scratch to take into account the limitations in screen size and user input capability.
Companies must also set up a road map for implementation, deciding which applications
may be high cost and low value (eliminate) or low cost and high value (adopt). There are
many questions to answer as well: Should a company require its employees to use
company-supplied devices, or should employees be allowed to supply their own
smartphones? If employees are allowed to use their own smartphone, should a company
limit the choice of devices or allow employees to choose the device they will use?
Accenture Consulting, for example, estimates that 85,000 of its employees use
smartphones, of which more than one-half are provided by the individual employee. If an
employee supplies his or her own device, who will support it? Which carrier will be used?
Security is always a concern, especially because most security breaches are caused by
users not by technology. It has been estimated that only slightly over one-half of all
smartphone users set up their password security on their phones. If a company does not
directly support a device it might not be able to ensure that proper security measures are
taken, which could allow for potential data breaches. Some organizations are attempting
to manage mobile devices from central servers, so if a device is lost or stolen, sensitive
data can be removed or the device can be wiped clean.
ERP companies have provided mobile connections in the past, but most are ramping
up their offerings. For example, SAP recently acquired Sybase, a company with a platform
called Sybase Unwired, which lets a company quickly develop mobile apps for almost any
mobile device. Another Sybase tool, Afaria, allows IT staff to manage those mobile apps
centrally and push out new applications and updates remotely. If a device is lost or stolen,
the central administrator can delete the application remotely.
Although mobile device apps are typically thought of as tools to provide users with
information, mobile devices can also be the source of information. For example, the
increasing sophistication of smartphones is leading people to use their smartphones—
rather than dedicated GPS devices—for navigation. Smartphone users can also subscribe
to traffic information services that may use static sensors or traffic cameras to augment
the built-in maps so users can avoid accidents and rush-hour traffic. Increasingly, this
224
Chapter 8

traffic information is also being provided by other smartphone users. For example, when a
user of the Google Maps for mobile application chooses to enable the My Location option,
which shows the user’s location on the map, it sends anonymous bits of data back to
Google describing how fast the user is moving. By combining the data of thousands of
phones moving around a city at any given time, Google can provide an accurate picture of
live traffic conditions. This traffic data is then provided to mobile users in the Google
Maps traffic layers.
A N O T H E R
L O O K
Corporate and Military Apps
Companies are now using mobile applications (apps) in unique ways, and many
companies are creating their own internal app stores. For example, the pharmaceutical
company, Pfizer, has an app that helps employees who are traveling find and contact
other Pfizer employees who are also traveling. Aflac, an insurance company, has an app
that allows claims adjusters to see data and coordinate insurance claims on a mobile
device without having to go to a computer and log onto the main enterprise system. For
disaster recovery, Deloitte Consulting created an app called Bamboo, which can push
emergency information out to employees’ smartphones in the event of an emergency.
Deloitte is implementing the app internally, and in the future, the firm plans to offer it to
its customers.
The military is also a major potential user of specialized mobile devices and apps.
Harris, an electronics and communications company is working on an app for tablet
computers, such as Apple’s iPad, to control the remote camera on an Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV). While there are durability issues with using a commercial tablet in harsh
environments, it could make economic sense to use a $400 tablet in a rugged case
instead of a $10,000 wireless receiver. If a tablet breaks, it is much cheaper to replace.
In addition, because these devices are familiar to many young soldiers from their
personal experience, training costs are reduced.
In April 2011, Textron announced that the U.S. Army was beginning tests of
SoldierEyes, a smartphone-based battle analysis and tracking system the company has
been developing. According to Textron, this application would allow every soldier to act as
a sensor. Using this application, soldiers could collect and report real-time mission critical
data, incorporating photos and video, which can be linked to the geographic location of the
soldier. With SoldierEyes, this information can be communicated (via the SoldierEyes
Application Cloud) to existing command, control, communications, intelligence, and
surveillance systems using 3G/4G cellular and Wi-Fi networks. For remote areas where
these networks are not available, Textron has developed a secure mobile battlefield
cellular network called FASTCOM, which can use manned and unmanned aircraft,
aerostats (tethered blimps), or ground vehicles to provide cellular coverage.
Question:
1.
Choose an industry in which you might eventually like to work. Think of three
types of mobile apps that could be used to help you work more efficiently in
that industry. Use the Internet to find out if those apps have been developed
by any company. Present your findings in a one-page report to your
instructor.
225
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

FROM INTERNET-ENABLED TO CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing can be defined in simple terms as the delivery of a software product to a
user via the Internet. The user typically accesses the cloud product through a Web
browser or a lightweight (meaning small and simple) application for a computer or mobile
device. Cloud computing is not a completely new concept, rather it simply represents the
latest stage of the development of computing and the Internet. To better understand how
cloud computing will impact ERP system development, it is useful to review the
development of SAP’s ERP systems with the advent of the Internet.
SAP and the Internet
In 1996, SAP introduced its joint Internet strategy with Microsoft. The core of SAP’s first
effort to integrate the Internet with its products was the Internet Transaction Server (ITS)
a server-based software system that enabled efficient communication between an SAP ERP
system and the Internet. To provide some context for the state of the Internet at this
time—in 1996, Amazon.com was only one year old, and the online travel agencies Expedia
and Travelocity were both just being founded. Many other Internet services we take for
granted today did not exist at this time.
In May 1999, SAP announced mySAP.com, a new strategy designed to completely
realign the company and its product portfolio. The goal of this initiative was to combine
e-commerce solutions with SAP’s existing ERP applications, using cutting-edge Web
technology. In 2000, SAP began building on the mySAP.com vision by adding the
capability for electronic marketplaces and corporate portals.
NetWeaver
In 2004, SAP introduced its first version of SAP NetWeaver, a collection of components that
support business transactions over the Internet by providing seamless connectivity of diverse
applications. By the end of the year, over 1,000 customers had acquired the product. With
the introduction of NetWeaver, SAP announced that it was planning its future initiatives
around the concept of enterprise service-oriented architecture (enterprise SOA), with a goal
of making all of its business applications service based—to provide its customers with the most
flexibility possible.
E-commerce needs are driving companies to connect their business applications, such
as ERP systems, both internally and externally through the Internet. Software designed
with an SOA can be quickly deployed and reconfigured as business conditions require
changes to the applications, databases, and other infrastructure hosted in data centers
owned by a company. The combination of software tools that enables an organization’s
various systems and applications to communicate with other applications is called
Web services. SAP’s NetWeaver is a Web services platform that allows various vendor
applications to share data over the Internet.
Companies continue to warm to the idea of Web services and SOA. Information Age’s
“Effective IT” research report found that 50 percent of enterprises have some sort of SOA
strategy. One benefit of adopting SOA is the ability to quickly add new applications,
making the organization more responsive. SOA also relies on open standards, allowing
easier integration of software and offering the potential to reuse computer code, which can
reduce the time and cost of implementing new systems. This aspect of SOA is certainly
enticing, especially when compared with traditional systems that are often cumbersome
226
Chapter 8

and time consuming to implement. However, implementing SOA is not easy. The IT
analyst group Ovum reported that one in five U.S. companies implementing SOA have
experienced “unexpected complexity.”
The return on an SOA investment is often difficult to determine. According to a study
published by Nucleus Research, only 37 percent of 106 organizations polled claimed that
their SOA projects had a positive ROI. Respondents indicated that the main benefit of
SOA was the ability to reuse computer code.
NetWeaver Tools and Capabilities
SAP’s NetWeaver platform is a collection of modules, including Enterprise Portal, Mobile
Infrastructure, Business Intelligence, Master Data Management, and Exchange
Infrastructure.
The SAP Enterprise Portal gives users complete access to all their work on a single
screen, using links to connect users to all the major applications needed to perform their
jobs. The Enterprise Portal acts as a central access point to a company’s intranet (its
secure, internal network), operating through a secure link on a browser. For example, a
user in the Finance Department could set up Enterprise Portal with links to SAP ERP
financial transaction processes, as well as links to financial metrics for the company, stock
market indices, email, a calendar, and other information important for that person’s job.
The advantage of having a personalized portal is its efficiency. A user only has to log
on to one system to get all the information needed to perform his or her job. Without a
portal, users often have to log on to multiple systems, such as an ERP system, email,
industry exchanges, or suppliers’ sites. Transferring information between systems is
frequently difficult. With the Enterprise Portal, all information is available through the
Web services provided by NetWeaver. All the important links are presented in one screen,
and transferring data is simplified by the ability to “drag-and-relate” data from one area
to another.
NetWeaver’s Mobile Infrastructure module allows users to access and work with data
through mobile devices such as smartphones and pagers. Mobile Infrastructure provides
remote access to data within a company’s SAP system and other information systems. The
benefits are obvious. A salesperson could use his or her smartphone to see a customer’s
historical order information while in the middle of a sales call with that customer.
Connecting SAP and VoiceObjects AG adds voice capability to NetWeaver, allowing users
to enter data into the SAP CRM system using voice commands from their cell phones.
Linking the SAP and VoiceObjects AG systems can be done without middleware or any
changes to the software.
Another facet of NetWeaver is the linkage with SAP’s Business Intelligence (BI) data
warehouse and analytical tools. With the Enterprise Portal, BI can be delivered in a
personalized fashion. It can integrate information from various sources and processes,
both within and outside of the firm. BI works with any database management software and
any operating system that is running NetWeaver.
Another NetWeaver module, Master Data Management, provides data consistency
within a company’s SAP system. NetWeaver allows a seamless Web interface to ensure
proper data synchronization. While this interface simplifies the data synchronization
process, it is not automatic—users with the proper knowledge and skills are still needed to
manage this process.
227
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

NetWeaver’s Exchange Infrastructure module allows different applications to share
data. By adhering to the standard of the Exchange Infrastructure, companies can eliminate
the need to write code to enable different applications to share data. For example, using
Exchange Infrastructure, a business can keep its current electronic data interchange (EDI)
system and seamlessly integrate that with its ERP system. SAP’s Web Application Server,
the development environment that is the foundation of NetWeaver, gives Exchange
Infrastructure its customizability.
NetWeaver at Work for Fitter
Now we will examine how NetWeaver could help Fitter. Assume that Fitter has an SAP
ERP system and that Fitter’s two top salespeople, Amy Sanchez and Donald Brown, are
busy selling NRG bars directly to customers and to distributors. Amy works from home,
and she logs on to the SAP system with her laptop computer, using the SAP GUI. She does
not know much about the SAP system, nor does she have to. She needs to know how to
place customer orders and check on their status. When Amy goes on a sales call, she
brings her calculator and notepad with her to determine quote prices and jot down order
details. When she returns home, she plugs those numbers into the SAP system and
confirms her quotes. Amy would like to have some additional information on how
salespeople in other regions are doing and what mix of bars they are promoting, but she
does not know how to access any of that information. She also would like to see if there
are new ways to market to her customers.
Donald Brown sells Fitter’s BRG bars to distributors, and he has been chosen by his
manager to test SAP NetWeaver for possible implementation at Fitter. With this new
capability, Donald’s work day has changed dramatically. During the test, Donald logs on to
his Enterprise Portal, which was tailored for his job, using his office computer. When he
does so, he can see his email, sales figures from his top 10 customers, data on production
and inventory, the current stock quote for Fitter on the NASDAQ exchange, the current
market price for oats, wheat germ, and honey, and the local weather report. Today,
Donald will make an important sales call for a regional grocery chain. He grabs his
smartphone and some extra business cards, and heads out the door. During lunch with the
purchasing manager for the grocery chain, Donald is able to check up-to-the-minute
details on current sales orders and can confirm promises to ship additional bars to the
customer next week, thanks to SAP’s Mobile Infrastructure. Back at the office, Donald calls
up the Business Intelligence module in NetWeaver. From there, he can run a few reports
to find out which snack bars are selling best nationwide, grouped by region and time of
year. He can also analyze snack bar sales using data mining, to find sales patterns that can
help him plan future sales calls.
Exercise 8.1
1.
Now that you have read about the features of SAP’s NetWeaver and have
learned how Amy Sanchez and Donald Brown perform their duties at Fitter,
try to convince Fitter’s CEO to implement NetWeaver across the organization.
Write a memo to the CEO outlining your arguments.
2.
The CEO is impressed with your work but has asked you for an ROI (return
on investment) analysis. How would you begin doing that? What numbers do
you need, and who are the people you would have to interview to get those
numbers?
228
Chapter 8

SAAS: SOFTWARE AS A SERVICE
Software as a service (SaaS) is a software delivery model in which a software product
is hosted by a company—such as SAP—on its servers and is accessed by customers
via a Web browser. Some people describe SaaS as a utility, similar to a telephone or
electric company. It is simply a way to sell and distribute software that uses the
Internet. While definitions vary, this book treats SaaS as a subset of cloud computing.
For example, Amazon and Apple are promoting data storage “on the cloud,” but the
applications that use that data are stored on the device, updated regularly from the
cloud (Internet).
A recent Forrester Research report claims that the analytics portion of SaaS will
become highly important to the users of this software delivery model. Users will be also be
looking for SaaS applications that can integrate social media with a company’s other
sources of information. According to the report, adopters of SaaS should also consider
how their service providers can handle mobile apps.
SAP Business ByDesign
One example of SaaS for the ERP market is SAP’s Business ByDesign. First released in
2007, Business ByDesign is a full ERP system delivered to customers via the cloud. For
small to medium-sized companies, it lowers the total cost of ownership of the software and
enables a rapid and smooth implementation. Customers can choose to have SAP handle
the implementation of Business ByDesign, or they can manage the implementation
themselves. As shown in Figure 8-4, the main screen of BBD displays easy-to-understand
menu paths.
Source Line: SAP AG.
FIGURE 8-4
SAP Business ByDesign main screen
Small organizations such as PlaNet Finance, which offers microloans to customers in
30 international offices, often find that Business ByDesign is a good fit for their needs.
With Business ByDesign, PlaNet was able to reduce its costs while improving reporting to
donors. In terms of cost, the full Business ByDesign package will run a company about
229
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

$90 per month per user. There are different facets of Business ByDesign, which are
illustrated in the Figure 8-5.
Executive
management
support
Compliance
management
Financial
management
Customer
relationship
management
Supplier
relationship
management
Human
resources
management
Supply chain
management
Project
management
Bu
ilt
-i
n 
bu
si
ne
ss
 a
na
ly
ti
cs
   
   
Bu
ilt
-i
n 
se
rv
ic
es 
an
d 
su
pp
or
t
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 8-5
SAP Business ByDesign’s key capabilities
Advantages of Using SaaS
Many companies find a number of advantages with using the SaaS model, including:
•
Initial affordability—Companies that previously could not afford to purchase
an ERP system—or another application—can now “lease” one on a monthly
basis, avoiding the high cost of obtaining the hardware and software and
hiring and training support personnel, thereby reducing their TCO (total cost
of ownership). The lower cost to implement software provided through SaaS
means that companies can explore whether a particular software package will
work for them without a large, up-front expense.
•
Shorter implementation time—The time required for implementation is
usually shorter with the SaaS model as the user does not have to worry about
the technical issues; the provider has servers, telecommunications systems,
230
Chapter 8

and highly trained personnel already in place. The SaaS provider handles all
the maintenance, including execution of backups, training, and customizing
of the system.
•
Lower support costs and complexity—Companies that make use of the SaaS
model do not need to hire additional IT personnel to implement new systems
and applications. SaaS providers can also run information systems more
efficiently because they do it on a large scale; they can spread fixed costs
over many users, thus achieving economies of scale that translate into a
lower total cost of ownership. In addition, an SaaS provider usually has an
easier time attracting, training, and retaining a talented workforce than a
small manufacturing company like Fitter.
Disadvantages of Using SaaS
There are some potential downsides to using SaaS, and companies should consider these
carefully before choosing an SaaS provider:
•
Security—Companies using SaaS are turning their information systems over
to a third party. They must be confident that the SaaS provider has a high
level of security. An SaaS provider will typically have data from multiple
clients on a single piece of hardware. Each customer’s data must be
shielded from other customers. Although this is a legitimate area of concern
for clients looking to move to the SaaS model, the reality is that SaaS
providers often have better security systems in place than many small
companies do.
•
Bandwidth/response time—The telecommunications channel from the SaaS
provider to its customers must be fast enough to handle multiple users, and
the SaaS must have sufficient hardware to provide the necessary computer
processing capabilities.
•
Flexibility—The SaaS provider should be flexible in working with its
users and satisfying their requests for software modifications and
enhancements.
•
No frills—SaaS software providers can usually provide basic systems well,
but asking for unusual configurations may cause problems, and the SaaS
provider might not allow for third-party add-ons. Further, the provider
might not want to develop custom software, or it may not be affordable for
a small company.
•
Technical, not business focus—An SaaS provider will understand the
technical aspects of the software it is delivering, but it may not have
sufficient business process knowledge, in which case the customer
will need to define the business processes and make configuration
decisions.
231
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

A N O T H E R
L O O K
Plex Systems Cloud Community
Founded in 1995, Plex Systems developed out of a project initiated at an automotive supplier.
The company has expanded its customer base and develops software for a variety of
manufacturing companies. In particular, Plex provides a complete, cloud-based ERP solution
for manufacturing companies. Plex moved to cloud computing in 2000 and developed its
cloud strategy using the multi-tenant model versus a hosted environment. In a hosted
environment, a separate system is created and managed for each customer, while in a multi-
tenant model, there is only one system and each customer is a tenant in the system.
Plex chose this approach because it wanted to leverage customer enhancements.
Because there is only one copy of the Plex system, whenever an improvement is made to
it, the update is available to all tenants. Plex makes sure enhancements are designed
to add functionality that might be valuable to multiple customers, but customers are not
required to adopt every update. Customers can choose whether or not to adopt a change
through simple configuration settings.
While manufacturing environments are complex, Plex decided that users needed a
simple interface design for the shop floor. The simple interface makes the software easy
to use. In addition, the interface is configurable so individual users can organize icons
and buttons and control them with user authorizations as they are provided with Plex’s
screen building tool. A sample Plex screen is shown in Figure 8-6.
Source Line: Plex Systems.
FIGURE 8-6
Sample Plex screen
(continued)
232
Chapter 8

Another unique feature of Plex’s software is its pricing model. Many ERP companies
price their software on a per-user basis. Plex saw a problem with this approach: it
encouraged companies to limit the number of people who would interact with the
software. Plex, however, wanted to encourage customers to use software. In addition, the
company wanted to match its pricing to the real costs of transactions processed. In a
seat license model, a customer may minimize users but have the same volume of
transactions as a customer with many more users. Plex prices its software based on the
size of the business, whether measured by company revenue or total number of
employees. Plex adjusts the amount of the subscription on a yearly cycle. If a company
suffers a downturn in business—and its revenue or number of employees is reduced—
then its subscription is reduced. Of course, if the customer grows, so does its
subscription.
Plex has observed an interesting phenomenon with its customers. At first, new
customers are hesitant to use a cloud system—they are concerned about data integrity
when all customers reside in a single system. But after a while, customers typically
realize that other Plex customers actually form a community, and collaboration within
the Plex community provides value. Rather than being a software company that is sales
and marketing driven, Plex has become a company where users, and the user
community, directly drive innovation, and all customers benefit.
Questions:
1.
How will SaaS affect large ERP companies such as SAP and Oracle? Will their
size and research capabilities allow SAP and Oracle to gain dominance of
the SaaS marketplace, or will ERP systems be provided by a growing number
of small companies, such as Plex, each providing specialized ERP packages
specially tailored for specific industries?
2.
Will Fortune 500 companies eventually leave SAP ERP for SaaS systems? Will
they adopt SaaS products from smaller providers? Will they use Business
ByDesign? Or will companies like SAP and Oracle migrate their current large
ERP packages to an SaaS environment?
Exercise 8.2
Returning to the example company, Fitter, assume that under its newly appointed CIO,
Fitter has made the decision to acquire an ERP system. Now the CIO must decide how to
implement the system. After talking with various ERP software vendors, the CIO has
determined that Fitter has two options for implementing ERP software:
1.
Buy a license for the ERP software, purchase the hardware required to run it,
and hire and train system administrators.
2.
Run Fitter’s ERP system over the Web through an SaaS provider, which
would deliver ERP services for a monthly fee.
Both types of implementations have advantages and disadvantages, as you have
already seen. For the first part of this exercise, you must write a memo to the CIO
enumerating the pros and cons of each method. Use a table similar to the one shown in
Figure 8-7 to organize your thoughts.
233
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

Advantages of purchasing software
and computers for ERP
Advantages of using SaaS to run ERP
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 8-7
Arguments for purchasing ERP system and software versus using SaaS
After reviewing your memo, the CIO has asked you to provide some financial data to
help him make a decision. He would like you to prepare a spreadsheet that analyzes the
financial impact of both scenarios. You need to compare the monthly cost of using the
SaaS provider with the total cost of purchasing an ERP system that would run on Fitter’s
servers. Weigh the pros and cons of each method, and then make a recommendation,
which the CIO will present to the chief financial officer of Fitter. As you work through
these calculations, keep in mind that Fitter’s net income is $3.4 million (you can find
more details in Chapter 5). The following sections provide you the financial details you
should take into consideration.
Option 1: Buying Computers and Software Rights for an ERP System
To set up its own ERP system, Fitter must buy the following:
•
Database server—The server would cost $70,000.
•
Application server—Fitter needs a server to run the ERP application, which
would cost about $40,000.
•
PCs—Some of Fitter’s existing PCs could be loaded with the ERP software’s
GUI and be used to access the system. Because more Fitter employees will be
connected to the new system, however, Fitter will need 10 additional
computers. Total cost for the PCs would be $15,000.
•
Computer maintenance—Fitter needs to make sure all its PCs and servers
run properly. To do this, Fitter would purchase a maintenance contract to
cover all hardware. This contract would cost about $1,000 a month, or
$12,000 yearly, and is in addition to any costs Fitter currently incurs to
maintain its existing hardware.
•
Licensing rights—Licensing rights to the ERP software for all users for five
years would cost $500,000. The CIO does not know whether further outlays
will be required after the fifth year, and therefore is limiting the analysis to
the years 2013 through 2017.
•
Installation—The ERP vendor will help install the system, but Fitter also
needs to hire consultants for the six-month implementation. At $3,000 per
day, the cost is estimated at $486,000.
•
User training—Included with the purchase of the rights to the ERP software
is training at a local training center for key personnel involved in the ERP
implementation project. Fitter wants further training, however, for Fitter-
specific business practices. The additional training will cost $2,000 per day
234
Chapter 8

for two weeks. This includes a training consultant to run classes at Fitter
headquarters. With travel and lodging, the total cost is $23,000.
•
Ongoing consulting—Once the system is up and running, Fitter will need to
pay for consultants to help maintain the system. Fitter believes that having
consultants come in once a month should be sufficient for handling ongoing
issues such as bug resolution and minor updates to the system. The
consulting fees are estimated to be $3,000 per day, with a total annual cost
of $36,000.
•
Network and database administrator—Fitter would need a full-time network
and database administrator to run the system. Salary, including benefits, for
a skilled person is $200,000 per year.
Option 2: Using an SaaS Provider to Deliver ERP Software
The other option available to Fitter is to use an SaaS provider to deliver ERP software.
Estimated costs for this option are as follows:
•
PCs—Fitter estimates that it would still need to purchase 10 new PCs with
this option because many more users will now be accessing the computer
system. Each PC costs $1,500, for a total of $15,000.
•
Computer maintenance—The maintenance contract on the additional PCs
would be $600 per month, or $7,200 yearly. Because Fitter would not need to
purchase additional servers, the maintenance costs are less with this option.
•
Software through the SaaS provider—The monthly cost of delivering ERP
software to Fitter over the Web is $33,333—or $400,000 yearly.
•
User training—Training of Fitter employees is provided by the SaaS provider
as part of the monthly software fee.
Calculate the NPV and Make a Recommendation
In the next part of this exercise, you will set up a spreadsheet to total all the costs of each
option. In each scenario, you must deal with the net present value (NPV) of money.
NPV is a way to figure out whether an investment is profitable, or in this case, to
compare outlay of funds from one method to another. NPV addresses the time value of
money—that is, being paid one dollar today is worth more than being paid one dollar a
year from now. Because of the time value of money, if a firm is borrowing the money for
an investment, they have to pay interest on that money. If they have cash on hand to
finance the investment, the company still needs to consider that the cash could be
invested in other ways that would pay the firm interest. When analyzing an investment, a
firm must consider the time value of money, and performing a NPV calculation is a
common way to do that by adjusting future earning or expenses based on an assumed
interest rate. When calculating two different investment options, the NPV calculation
allows different future expenses or earnings to be calculated as an equivalent amount in
the present time. For example, earning $10,000 dollars one year from now might be
equivalent to having $9,345.79 today. NPV can be calculated over a number of years; in
our case, we need a five-year outlay of funds for the ERP project. In an Excel spreadsheet,
the syntax of the NPV calculation is =NPV (hurdle rate percentage, range of values). The
values in the range can be positive or negative numbers. In our case, they are all outflows,
235
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

but we can work with them as positive numbers. The hurdle rate is the rate of discount
over the period, and it is the minimum acceptable rate of return on a project that a
company will accept. For this example, assume a hurdle rate of 20 percent.
Your spreadsheet should begin like the one shown in Figure 8-8 (with years continuing
through 2017).
2013
SaaS
2014
2015
2016
2017
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
FIGURE 8-8
Cost comparisons: buying versus SaaS
To complete this part of the exercise, perform the steps that follow:
1.
Calculate the cost of the two methods of implementing an ERP system for
five years. Use the spreadsheet illustrated in Figure 8-8 as your guide. Use the
NPV calculations to reference the hurdle rate shown at the bottom of the
spreadsheet. Vary the hurdle rate, following the directions your instructor
provides.
2.
Consider using different hurdle rates for each option. Why might varying
hurdle rates be applicable for this decision?
3.
Write a memo, with your spreadsheet attached, to the CIO. Answer this
question: Which method should Fitter choose, and why? Weigh the pros and
cons of each method, and make a recommendation, which the CIO will
present to the chief financial officer of Fitter. Be sure to consider both the
qualitative aspects and the quantitative aspects of the choice.
236
Chapter 8

Your instructor might assign the following additional exercises:
1.
Use the Internet or library resources to research the use of SaaS providers.
Find cases of companies that have been successful in using an ERP system
through an SaaS provider. Describe one success story in a report to your
instructor.
2.
Think about whether you would give different advice to a smaller company
than you would to a medium-sized company or to a large company, regarding
the use of SaaS providers. Why?
237
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

Chapter Summary
•
Technologies such as radio frequency identification (RFID) and smartphones are fueling
explosive growth in the amount of data available for businesses to process. This data can
provide real business value, but the challenge is how to manage and evaluate this data to
gain business knowledge.
•
Business intelligence (BI) tools are growing in sophistication and power. Technologies such
as in-memory computing will provide greater speed and flexibility to BI users and will
increase the number of employees in a company that can make use of BI.
•
Mobile computing technology is increasing the use of ERP and BI data by making it more
convenient to access data when and where it is needed.
•
Cloud computing is the delivery of a software product to a user via the Internet. The user
typically accesses the cloud product through a Web browser or a lightweight (meaning
small and simple) application for a computer or mobile device.
•
Web services and service-oriented architecture offer a combination of software tools that
enables various programs within an organization to communicate with other applications.
•
SAP’s Web services platform is NetWeaver, which is a collection of components that
support business transactions over the Internet by providing seamless connectivity of
diverse applications through the Internet. NetWeaver also includes modules such as
Enterprise Portal, Mobile Infrastructure, Business Intelligence, Master Data Management,
and Exchange Infrastructure.
•
Software as a service (SaaS) is a software delivery model in which a software product is
hosted by a company—such as SAP—on its servers and is accessed by customers via a
Web browser. The SaaS model allows companies to use ERP without a large initial
investment, making ERP systems available to smaller companies. SaaS solutions allow for
more rapid improvements in the software through user communities. There are risks
associated with using an SaaS provider, however, and the decision to buy or lease must be
weighed carefully.
Key Terms
business intelligence (BI)
cloud computing
enterprise information management
multidimensional data cubes
radio frequency identification (RFID)
service-oriented architecture (SOA)
software as a service (SaaS)
Web services
Exercises
1.
Assume you have just graduated and you have landed a job at Fitter as its new sales
manager. The person you replaced has just retired after 35 years in the job. You are eager
to put to use some of the skills you learned at school, especially the work you did on
mobile computing and SaaS. Write a memo to your new boss, the vice president of
Marketing and Sales, on the virtues of SaaS and mobile computing, and explain why Fitter
238
Chapter 8

should develop a plan to adopt a mobile strategy for managing sales using SaaS through
mobile devices.
2.
Do some research on the Internet to find current opinions on the pros and cons of using
SaaS. Try to find some examples of success and failure stories. Under what circumstances
do you think using an SaaS makes sense?
3.
List the advantages of using mobile devices from the point of view of a Fitter salesperson.
Next, list the challenges of developing and supporting those mobile applications from the
point of view of Fitter’s IT staff. Assume the company is hosting its own ERP system. What
should the company’s strategy be? Why?
4.
In-memory computing technology is changing the face of BI. Create a PowerPoint
presentation that brings the Fitter crew up to speed on this emerging technology.
5.
Research the current status of mobile applications for phones and tablets in the corporate
world. Write a two-page summary of how these applications are being used, and cite
specific examples. Be sure to include your references with the summary.
6.
Using the library or Internet sources, write an update on the status of FDA legislation
surrounding RFID packaging on drugs. Are there any privacy concerns?
For Further Study and Research
Barrett, Larry. “Who Will Win the SAP, Oracle Battle?” Internetnews.com. August 23, 2007.
www.Internetnews.com/ent-news/article.php/3695956.
Barth, David. “The Bright Side of Sitting in Traffic: Crowdsourcing Road Congestion Data.”
August 25, 2009. http://googlemobile.blogspot.com/2009/08.
Bustilo, Miguel. “Wal-Mart Radio Tags to Track Clothing.” Wall Street Journal. July 23, 2010.
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704421304575383213061198090.html.
Eddy, Nathan. “BI, Performance Management Software Market Surpassed $12B.” eWeek.com.
April 3, 2012. www.eweek.com/c/a/IT-Management/Business-Intelligence-Performance-
Management-Software-Market-Surpassed-12-Billion-in-2011.
Fox, Jason. “Bringing Order to the Chaos in Mobility.” SAP Insider, 12, no. 4 (Oct/Nov/Dec
2011): pp. 22–24.
Giles, Martin. “Beyond the PC.” The Economist. October 8, 2011. www.economist.com/node/
21531109.
Hamblen, Matt. “iPads, Android Tablets and Smartphones Join the Military.” Computerworld.
March 16, 2011. www.computerworld.com/s/article/9214624/iPads_Android_tablets_and_
smartphones_join_the_military.
Henschen, Doug. “Next-Gen BI Is Here.” InformationWeek. August 31, 2009. pp. 21–28.
Horwitt, Elisabeth. “How to Craft a Mobile-Application Strategy.” CIO. September 28, 2011.
www.cio.com/article/690621/How_to_Craft_a_Mobile_Application_Strategy.
Kanaracus, Chris. “Forrester: As SaaS Matures, Buyers Face New Considerations.” CIO.
December 2, 2011. www.cio.com.au/article/409181/forrester_saas_matures_buyers_face_
new_considerations.
Kutik, Bill. “The Hottest Trends in HR Technology.” Human Resource Executive Online.
September 16, 2011. www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=533341158.
239
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud

Logan, Rebecca. “Making RFID Fashionable.” July 2008. www.stores.org/stores-magazine-
july-2008/making-rfid-fashionable.
Lohr, Steve. “Big Data, Speed and the Future of Computing.” New York Times. October 31,
2011. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/10/31/big-data-speed-and-the-future-of-computing.
McWilliams, Gary. “Wal-Mart’s Radio-Tracked Inventory Hits Static.” Wall Street Journal.
February 15, 2007. http://online.wsj.com/ad/upsarticle-2-4-1.html.
Parades, Christian. “Understanding Disk I/O—When Should you be Worried?” Scout (blog).
February 10, 2011. http://blog.scoutapp.com/articles/2011/02/10.
Roberti, Mark. “RFID Delivers Unexpected Benefits at American Apparel.” RFID Journal.
October 5, 2011. www.rfidjournal.com/article/view/8843.
SAP AG. “SAP Customer Testimonials.” www.sap.com/solutions/products/sap-bydesign/
customer-testimonials/index.epx.
SAP AG. “SAP Corporate History.” www.sap.com/corporate-en/our-company/history.epx.
SAP AG. “SAP Solution Brief: Exchange Infrastructure.” www.sap.com/netherlands/platform/
netweaver/pdf/brochures/BWP_SB_ExchangeInfrastructure.pdf. 2004.
SAP AG. “SAP Solution Brief: SAP Master Data Management.” www.sap.com/search/index.
epx?q1=Solution%20Brief%3A%20SAP%20Master%20Data%20Management.
SAP AG. “SAP Solutions for Auto-ID and Item Serialization.” www.sap.com/solutions/auto-id/
index.epx.
Sauers, Jenna. “The End of an Era: American Apparel Finally Anti-Theft Tags Its Clothes.”
February 20, 2012. http://jezebel.com/5886604/the-end-of-an-era-american-apparel-finally-
anti+theft-tags-its-clothes.
SCDigest. “Looking Back at the Wal-Mart RFID Time Line.” February 23, 2009. www.scdigest.
com/assets/On_Target/09-02-23-1.php.
SCDigest. “RFID News: Will WalMart Get RFID Right This Time?” July 28, 2010. www.scdigest.
com/assets/On_Target/10-07-28-1.php?cid=3609.
Sullivan, Laurie. “Fast Track to Success.” InformationWeek. June 21, 2004.
www.informationweek.com/news/22100642.
Sullivan, Laurie. “IBM Takes RFID Services to Midsize Companies.” InformationWeek.
September 20, 2004.
Sullivan, Laurie. “Wal-Mart’s Way.” InformationWeek. September 27, 2004.
www.informationweek.com/news/47902662.
Surowiecki, James. “EZ Does It.” New Yorker. September 8, 2003. www.newyorker.com/archive/
2003/09/08/030908ta_talk_surowiecki.
Swabey, Pete. “Most SOA Projects Bring No ROI.” Information Age. September 6, 2007.
www.information-age.com/channels/development-and-integration/news/270631/most-soa-
projects-bring-no-roi.thtml.
Swabey, Pete. “Structural Hazard.” Information Age. March 19, 2007. www.information-age.com/
channels/soa-and-development/features/273511/structural-hazard.thtml.
Swedburg, Claire. “Spectrum Health’s Meijer Heart Center Tracks Stents.” RFID Journal. March
29, 2010. www.rfidjournal.com/article/view/7495.
Textron. “Press Release: U.S. Army to Test, Evaluate SoldierEyes, FASTCOM Systems.”
April 1, 2011. BusinessWire. www.businesswire.com/news/home/20110330005113/en/
U.S.-Army-Test-Evaluate-SoldierEyes-FASTCOM-Systems.
240
Chapter 8

VoiceObjects. “Press Release: VoiceObjects Technology to be Integrated in SAP NetWeaver
Phone Application Server Technology to Enable Voice-Driven Telephone Access to SAP
Applications.” March 13, 2007. www.voiceobjects.com/en/news/2007/031307.html.
Wailgum, Thomas. “How Wal-Mart Lost Its Technology Edge.” CIO. October 4, 2007.
www.cio.com/article/143451/How_Wal_Mart_Lost_Its_Technology_Edge.
Weier, Mary Hayes. “Wal-Mart Rethinks RFID.” InformationWeek. March 26, 2007.
www.informationweek.com/news/198700170.
Woods, Dan, and Jeffrey Word. SAP NetWeaver for Dummies. Indianapolis: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc. 2004.
241
RFID, Business Intelligence (BI), Mobile Computing, and the Cloud


GLOSSARY
Accounting and Finance (A/F) A functional
area of business that is responsible for recording
data about transactions, including sales, raw
material purchases, payroll, and receipt of cash
from customers.
accounts payable Accounting information that
records the amount the company owes for goods it
has received from a supplier.
accounts receivable Accounting information
that records the amount a customer owes for goods
received by the customer.
activity-based costing An advanced form of
inventory cost accounting in which overhead costs
are assigned to products based on the
manufacturing activities that gave rise to the costs.
Advanced Business Application
Programming (ABAP) The SAP ERP internal
programming language.
archive Permanently stored data.
Asset Management (AM) module A module in
SAP ERP that helps a company manage fixed-asset
purchases (plant and machinery) and related
depreciation.
audit trail A linked set of document numbers
related to an order.
balance sheet A summary of a company’s
account balances includes cash held, amounts
owed to the company by customers, the cost of
inventory on hand, fixed assets such as buildings,
amounts owed to vendors, amounts owed to
creditors, and amounts the owners have invested
in the company.
best practice The best, most efficient way of
handling a certain business process.
bill of material (BOM) The “recipe” listing the
materials (including quantities) needed to make
a product.
business function A business activity within a
functional area of operation.
business intelligence (BI), also referred to as
business analytics, is a term used to describe a
range of different applications and technologies
used to extract and analyze large amounts of data to
aid in decision making.
business process A collection of activities that
takes one or more kinds of input and creates an
output that is of value to a customer. Creating the
output might involve activities from different
functional areas.
capacity The amount of an item that can be
produced.
cash-to-cash cycle time The time that elapses
from when suppliers are paid for raw materials to
cash is collected from the customer (used in supply-
chain management metrics).
client-server architecture A central computer–
local computer arrangement in which data stored in
a central computer (a server) are downloaded to a
local PC (a client of the server) where data are
processed. Historically, client-server architecture
replaced many companies’ mainframe-based
architecture.
cloud computing The delivery of a software
product to a user via the Internet.
condition technique An SAP control mechanism
that accommodates the various ways that
companies offer price discounts.
Controlling (CO) module A module in SAP ERP
that is used for internal management purposes. The
software assigns a company’s manufacturing costs
to products and to cost centers, facilitating cost
analysis.
cost variance The difference between actual costs
and standard costs.
currency translation Converting financial-
statement account balances expressed in one
currency into balances expressed in another
currency.
customer master data Permanent data about
each of a company’s customers; customer master
data is stored in central database tables in SAP ERP.
Master data are used by many SAP ERP modules.

customer relationship management (CRM)
software A collection of software tools that use
data from a company’s ERP system to enhance
the company’s relationships with its customers.
CRM software allows for the following activities:
segmenting customers, one-to-one marketing,
sales-force automation (SFA), sales-campaign
management, marketing encyclopedias, and
call-center automation.
data mining The statistical and logical analysis of
large sets of transaction data, looking for patterns
that can aid decision making and improve customer
sales and customer service. Data mining is often
done with data in a data warehouse.
data warehouse A database, separate from a
company’s operational database, that contains
subsets of data from the company’s ERP system.
Users analyze and manipulate data in the
warehouse. Thus, they do not interfere with the
workings of the database that is used to record the
company’s transactions.
database management system (DBMS) The
technology that stores database records in an
organized fashion and allows for the easy retrieval
of the data.
delivery In SAP, release of the documents that a
warehouse uses to pick, pack, and ship orders.
deployment flowcharting (swimlane
flowcharting) A method of flowcharting in which
team members are depicted across the top, with
each process step aligned vertically under the
employee or team working on it.
Development (DEV) system In an SAP system
landscape, one of three separate SAP systems; DEV
is used to develop configuration settings for the
system using ABAP code.
direct costs Costs of a finished product, such as
labor or material costs, that can be estimated fairly
accurately.
document flow The linked set of document
numbers related to an order; an audit trail.
drill down In SAP, to view the details behind a
summary of information by double-clicking an on-
screen item.
dynamic process modeling A method of
evaluating process changes before they are
implemented by putting into motion a basic process
flowchart using computer simulation techniques to
facilitate the evaluation of proposed process
changes.
electronic data interchange (EDI) A
computer-to-computer transfer of standard
business documents that allows companies to
handle the purchasing process electronically,
avoiding the cost and delays resulting from
paper-based systems.
enterprise information management The
business and technology functions that manage
information as a corporate asset.
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) A
system that helps a company manage business
processes such as marketing, production,
purchasing, and accounting in an integrated way.
ERP does this by recording all transactions in a
common database that is used by information
systems throughout the company and by providing
shared management-reporting tools.
error log A record of discrepancies that occur
during a payroll run.
event process chain (EPC) A graphic model of a
business process that uses only two symbols: events
and functions.
Extensible Business Reporting Language
(XBRL) A standards-based language for the
electronic communication of business and financial
data.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) An
Internet programming language that uses tags that
define the data contained within them.
financial accounting Accounting processes that
deal with documenting the transactions of a
company that have an impact on the financial state
of the organization. The documented transactions
form the basis for financial statements for external
parties and agencies.
Financial Accounting (FI) module A module
in SAP ERP that records transactions in the
general ledger accounts and generates
financial statements for external reporting
purposes.
flowchart Any graphical representation of the
movement or flow of concrete or abstract items.
functional areas of operation A broad
categorization of business activities, including
marketing, sales, production, and accounting.
244
Glossary

gap analysis An assessment of the disparities
between an organization’s current situation and its
long-term goals.
general ledger The primary accounting record of
a business.
hierarchical modeling The ability to flexibly
describe a business process in greater or less detail
depending on the task at hand.
human capital management (HCM) Another
term for human resources that describes the
tasks associated with managing a company’s
workforce.
Human Resources (HR) A functional area of
business that manages recruiting, training,
evaluating, and compensating employees.
Human Resources (HR) module A module in
SAP ERP that facilitates employee recruiting,
hiring, training, and payroll and benefits
processing.
IFRS See International Financial Reporting
Standards.
income statement A financial statement that
shows a company’s revenue and expenses and
profit or loss for a period of time; also called a profit
and loss (P&L) statement.
indirect costs Overhead cost items that are
difficult to associate with a specific product.
information system (IS) The people,
procedures, software, and computers that store,
organize, and deliver information.
initial fill rate The percentage of an order that
the supplier provided in the first shipment.
initial order lead time The time needed for the
supplier to fill an order (used in supply-chain
management metrics).
integrated information system An information
system that allows sharing of common data
throughout an organization. ERP systems are
integrated systems because all operational data
are located in a central database, where they
can be accessed by users throughout an
organization.
intercompany transaction A transaction that
occurs between a company and one of its
subsidiaries.
International Financial Reporting Standards
(IFRS) A set of international accounting
standards.
job In SAP, a general classification of tasks that
are routinely performed together.
lead time The cumulative time required for a
supplier to receive and process an order, take the
material out of stock, package it, load it on a truck,
and deliver it to the manufacturer.
legacy system An older and often outdated
information system.
lot sizing The process for determining purchase
and production order quantities.
managerial accounting Accounting processes
that deal with determining the costs and
profitability of a company’s activities.
Marketing and Sales (M/S) The functional area
of business that is responsible for developing
products, determining pricing, promoting products
to customers, taking customers’ orders, and
creating sales forecasts.
master production schedule (MPS) The
production plan for finished goods.
Materials Management (MM) A module in SAP
ERP that manages the acquisition of raw materials
from suppliers (purchasing) and the subsequent
handling and storage of raw materials, work in
process, and finished goods.
material master data Relatively permanent data
about materials that are stored in central database
tables in SAP ERP. These data are used by SD, MM,
and other SAP ERP modules.
material requirements planning (MRP) A
production-scheduling methodology that
determines the timing and quantity of production
and purchase-order releases to meet a master
production schedule. This process uses the
bill of material, lot-size data, and material
lead times.
metrics Measurements of performance; discussed
in this book in relation to the effects of supply-
chain management efforts.
modules Individual programs that can be
purchased, installed, and run separately, but that
all extract data from the common database.
MRP record The standard way of showing the
materials requirements planning (MRP) process on
paper.
multidimensional data cubes The structure
of data in a data warehouse that allows for
relationships in the data to be analyzed quickly.
Glossary
245

on-demand CRM CRM software and computer
equipment that resides with the CRM provider
rather being installed in-house.
on-time performance A measure of how often a
supplier meets agreed-upon delivery dates (used in
supply-chain management metrics).
open architecture Software that allows
integration with third-party software. SAP ERP is an
example of open-architecture software. The term
can also be applied to hardware products.
organizational change management (OCM)
The management of the human behavior aspects of
organizational change.
organizational structure In SAP, the method
used to define the relationships between
organizational groups such as companies, plants,
storage locations, sales divisions, and distribution
channels.
overhead A company’s cost of operations, such
as the costs for factory utilities, general factory
labor, factory management, storage, insurance, and
other manufacturing-related activities. Overhead
is often called an indirect cost of production.
payroll run The process of determining each
employee’s pay.
person In SAP, the unique individual who holds a
position.
Plant Maintenance (PM) module A module in
SAP ERP that allows planning for preventive
maintenance of plant machinery and managing
maintenance resources, so equipment breakdowns
are minimized.
position In SAP, an individual employee
assignment in an organization. Tasks can be
assigned directly to the position, or by assigning
jobs to the position.
process boundary In process mapping, a
definition of those activities to be included in the
process and what is considered part of the
environment.
process mapping A type of flowcharting that
pictorially represents the activities occurring within
an existing business process.
process model Any abstract representation of a
process.
product cost variant The procedure for
developing a product cost analysis; many variants
can be created for different planning requirements.
Production Planning (PP) module A module
in SAP ERP that maintains production information;
production is planned and scheduled, and actual
production activities are recorded.
Production (PROD) system In an SAP system
landscape, one of three separate SAP systems; the
actual system that the company uses to run its
business processes.
profit and loss (P&L) statement See income
statement.
Project System (PS) module A module in SAP
ERP that allows for the planning and control of new
R&D, construction, and marketing projects. This
module allows for costs to be collected against a
project budget, and it can be used to manage the
implementation of ERP itself.
qualification A skill or ability associated with a
specific employee.
Quality Assurance (QAS) system In an SAP
system landscape, one of three separate SAP
systems; the system where testing is done.
Quality Management (QM) module A module
in SAP ERP that helps companies plan and record
quality-control activities, such as product
inspections and material certifications.
R/3 The first integrated information system
released by German software vendor SAP in 1992;
now called SAP ERP. This ERP system contains the
following main modules, which can be implemented
as a group or selectively: Sales and Distribution (SD),
Materials Management (MM), Production Planning
(PP), Quality Management (QM), Plant Maintenance
(PM), Human Resources (HR), Financial Accounting
(FI), Controlling (CO), Asset Management (AM),
Project System (PS), and Workflow (WF).
radio frequency identification (RFID) A
tracking technology that uses a small package
device, or tag, that includes a microprocessor and
antenna that can be attached to products. The
location of an item with an RFID tag can be
determined using an RFID reader, which emits
radio waves and receives signals back from the tag.
raw data Data on sales, manufacturing, and other
operations that have not been analyzed or
manipulated for presentation.
remuneration element Part of an employee’s
pay, such as the base pay, bonuses, gratuities,
overtime, sick pay, and vacation allowances the
employee has earned during the pay period.
246
Glossary

repetitive manufacturing A manufacturing
environment in which production lines are
switched from one product to another similar
product.
requirement A skill or ability associated with a
position.
return on investment (ROI) An assessment of a
project’s value calculated by dividing the value of
the project’s benefits by the project’s cost.
RFID See radio frequency identification.
rough-cut planning A common term in
manufacturing for aggregate planning.
sales forecast An estimate of future product
demand, which is the amount of a product
customers will want to buy.
Sales and Distribution (SD) module A module
in SAP ERP that records sales orders and scheduled
deliveries.
safety stock Extra raw material and packaging
kept available to help avoid stockouts.
SAP ERP ERP software produced by SAP; previous
versions were known as R/3 and mySAP ERP.
scalability A characteristic of an information
system that indicates the system’s capacity can be
extended by adding servers to the network, rather
than replacing the entire system. Scalability is a
characteristic of client-server networks, but usually
not of mainframe-based systems.
scope creep The unplanned expansion of a
project’s goals and objectives, causing the project to
go over time and over budget, as well as increasing
the risk of an unsuccessful implementation.
service-oriented architecture (SOA) Software
that enables systems to exchange data without
complicated software links, also called Web
services.
short list The top candidates for a position, each
of whom will be interviewed.
silo An unintegrated information system
configuration in which individual business functional
areas each have their own hardware, software, and
methods of processing data and information.
software as a service (SaaS) A software delivery
model in which a software product is hosted by a
company on its servers and is accessed by
customers via a Web browser.
software modules See modules.
standard costs The expected cost of
manufacturing a product during a particular period.
Standard costs for a product are established by
(1) studying the historical cost patterns (direct and
indirect) in a company and (2) taking into account
the effects of current manufacturing changes.
statutory and voluntary deduction A paycheck
withholding, such as taxes (federal, state, local,
Social Security, and Medicare), company loans, and
benefit contributions.
stockout A manufacturing shortfall that occurs
when raw materials or packaging run out.
succession planning Outlining the strategy for
replacing key employees when they leave the
company.
supply chain All of the activities that occur
between the growing or mining of raw materials and
the appearance of finished products on the store shelf.
Supply Chain Management (SCM) A
functional area that includes developing production
plans, ordering and receiving raw materials,
manufacturing products, maintaining facilities, and
shipping products.
swimlane flowcharting See deployment
flowcharting.
task In SAP, an assigned responsibility related to a
specific job.
tolerance group A range that defines limits on
the transactions that an employee can process.
transport directory In an SAP system landscape,
a special data file location on the DEV server that
stores changes to the system landscape.
U.S. GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles) The current standard for reporting
financial statements in the United States.
value added An increase in a product’s or
service’s value, from a customer’s perspective.
value analysis An analysis of each activity in a
process to determine the value the activity adds to
the product or service.
vertical integration The extent to which a
company produces the components and assemblies
used in the products it manufactures.
Web services A combination of software tools
that enables various programs within an
organization to communicate with other
applications.
Glossary
247

Workflow (WF) module A module in SAP ERP
that can be used to automate any of the activities in
SAP ERP. It can perform task-flow analysis and
then prompt employees (by e-mail) if they need to
take action.
workflow tasks Within the SAP ERP Workflow
module, email messages that can include basic
information, notes, and documents, as well as direct
links to business transactions.
workflow tools Software programs that automate
the execution of a business process.
XBRL See Extensible Business Reporting
Language.
XML See Extensible Markup Language.
248
Glossary

INDEX
A
AACSB (Association to Advance Collegiate Schools
of Business), 3
ABAP (Advanced Business Application
Programming), 38, 39, 205
absenteeism, 179
Accenture Consulting, 224
accounting. See also A/F (Accounting and Finance)
module
managerial, 121
problems, 81–82
production data for, 107–108
sales and, 55, 65–66
systems overview, 117–158
accounts payable entry, 122
accounts receivable entry, 122
activity-based costing, 132, 133
A/F (Accounting and Finance) module, 2–3, 7, 8,
12–13. See also accounting
Aiken, Howard H., 41–42
AM (Asset Management) module, 30, 122
Amazon, 11, 226
America’s Blood Centers, 92
American Apparel, 217, 218
AND connector, 191
Anderson, Arthur, 26
APO (Advanced Planner and Optimizer) module,
69–71
Apple Computer, 42
apps, 225. See also mobile computing; software
archives, 143, 144
ARIS (Architecture of Integrated Information
System) platform, 189
Arthur Andersen, 139, 140, 141
ASAP (Accelerated SAP), 34–35
ATP (available-to-promise) capabilities, 57, 70–71
Au Bon Pain (company), 42
audit trails, 63
B
balance sheets, 118
Bamboo app, 225
bandwidth, 231
Barnes, Kevin, 176
Baxter, J. Clifford, 141
BI (Business Intelligence)
described, 219
overview, 215–241
real-time, 223
tools, 135
billing, 57
blogs, 73
blood banks, 93–94
BOM (bill of material), 97, 98, 131
Business Blueprint phase, 206, 207, 209
business functions
described, 2
overview, 1–17
sample, 4
business process(es). See also processes
described, 1
functional areas and, 2–6
overview, 1–17
sample, 3–3
very small businesses and, 6–8
BW module, 35, 69, 70, 84, 139
C
Cadbury, 34
call center automation, 68
capacity, use of the term, 80
Cash, Jim, 176
cash-to-cash cycle time, 112
CATS (Cross Application Time Sheets), 173
CFRA (California Family Rights Act), 179
change management, 206–210
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 28
Ciesielski, Jack T., 143
CIOs (chief information officers), 176–177, 222,
233–234, 236
client-server computing, 22, 26–27, 28
cloud computing, 163–164, 215–241
described, 226
Plex Systems and, 232–233
overview, 226–228
CO (Controlling) module, 30, 31, 88, 122
Columbia Law School, 143
Comstock, Ross, 209
condition technique, 64, 65
Congress (United States), 141
consultants, 35, 205
Controlling module, 173
convergence, 134–135
cost(s)
of CRM, 72
direct, 128
of goods manufactured (COGM), 131
of goods sold (COGS), 131
indirect, 128
labor, 80, 81–82
per unit (CPU), 93
standard, 81
variances, 129

credit checks, 53
credit management, 123–127
CRM (customer relationship management).
See also customers
activities, core, 67–68
benefits of, 72–73
cost of, 72
described, 67
Netweaver and, 227
on-demand, 67
overview, 66–73
SAP and, 35
currency translation, 134, 135
customer(s). See also CRM (customer relationship
management)
development cycle, 71
master data, 61
service, document flow for, 137–138
D
Dannon, 38
data
analytics, 167
archiving, 143–144
consolidating, from subsidiaries, 133–134
cubes, 220, 221–223
flows, 136–137
mining, 70
raw, 7, 8
synchronization, 227–228
database(s)
administrators, 235
management systems (DBMSs), 22
servers, 233
delivery, 57
Dell Computers, 34
Deloitte Consulting, 40, 225
demand management, 84, 96–97
detailed scheduling step, 84, 105–107
DEV (Development) system, 210
Diebold, 143
direct costs, 128
disaggregation process, 93–95
distribution channels, 60–61
document flow, 63, 137–138
domestic partner benefits, 177
Domino’s Pizza, 11
drill down, 138
Drucker, Peter, 178
Duffield, David, 27
Dunn, Jeri, 41
dynamic process modeling, 198
E
E. & J. Gallo Winery, 176
earthquakes, 209
EDI (electronic data interchange), 23, 110, 113
eDocs system, 204
Ellison, Larry, 28
employee training, 205
Enron, 25, 139–142
enterprise information management, 220
environmental sustainability, 113
EPC (event process chain) diagrams, 189, 190–196
ePedigree law, 217
Epicor, 34
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning). See also SAP
ERP
described, 1
the evolution of data management systems and,
14, 20–25
implementing, 203–210
investments, expected returns from, 39–40
management’s impetus to adopt, 23–25
manufacturing roots of, 22–23
midsized companies and, 34–35
new directions in, 27
packages, when to purchase, 37
questions about, 36–42
significance/benefits of, 36–37
smaller companies and, 34–35
suppliers and, 108–109
systems, development of, 19–48
error logs, 173
Excel (Microsoft), 135
Exchange Infrastructure module, 228
Exclusive OR (XOR) connector, 191, 192, 193
expense reports, 185–189
EZ-FLO International, 36
F
Facebook, 73
family and medical leave, 177, 178–179
FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board), 118
FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), 150
FedEx, 11, 38
FI (Financial Accounting) module, 30, 31, 35, 122.
See also financial accounting
Final Preparation phase, 206, 208
financial accounting, 118, 147–150. See also FI
(Financial Accounting) module
Fink, Ronald, 140
flowchart(s)
deployment/swimlane, 188
described, 184, 185–186
symbols, 185
FMLA (Family and Medical Leave Act), 177,
178–179
Ford, Henry, 110
Forrester Research, 229
Fortune 500 companies, 33, 34, 203–204
FoxMeyer, 34
fraud, risks of, 32
functional areas
described, 2
information systems, 8–14
overview, 2–6
very small businesses and, 6–8
Fusion Applications (Oracle), 28
250
Index

G
GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles),
134, 135
gap analysis, 184
Gartner Research, 41, 73, 136, 167, 222
Gates, Bill, 42
general ledger, 122
General Motors, 24
GL Company, 135
Global Crossing, 141
Go Live and Support phase, 206, 208
“Go green” efforts, 113
Gomersall, Nick, 135
Google Maps, 225
Great Plains, 34
H
Haiti, 209
Hall, George, 177
Hammer, Michael, 25
hardware
evolution of, 21–22
System R/3 and, 26–27
Harmon, Melinda, 141
Harrington, H. James, 198
Harris (company), 225
Harvard Business Review, 37
Harvard University, 176
HCM (human capital management), 159, 174–175
Hebert, Phil, 92
Hector, Hans-Werner, 25
Hershey, 40
Hewlett-Packard, 42, 222
hierarchical modeling, 187, 188–189
hiring process, 162–166
Home Depot, 40
Hopp, Dietmar, 25, 26
HR (Human Resources), 13–14, 31, 38, 159–181.
See also human resources processes
described, 8
information systems and, 9–10
overview, 2–3
HR module, 30, 122, 168, 171–173, 175–176
human resources processes. See also HR (Human
Resources)
advanced features for, 172–177
problems with, 160–166
I
IASB(InternationalAccountingStandardsBoard),134
IBM (International Business Machines), 25–27,
202, 222, 223
IFRS (International Financial Reporting
Standards), 134, 135
income statements. See profit and loss (P&L)
statements
indirect costs, 128
industrial credit management, 123–127
initial fill rate, 112
initial order lead time, 112
in-memory computing, 220–223
integrated information systems, 4, 5–6, 15
intercompany transactions, 135
Internet, early importance of, 42
Internet Explorer browser (Microsoft), 42
interviewing process, 162–164
inventory. See also SCM (Supply Chain
Management); stock
accounting and, 128–133
costing systems, inaccurate, 128–133
disaggregation and, 93–95
information systems and, 79–82
order entry forms and, 59
problems, 80–81
production process and, 82–108
sales order process and, 54
sourcing, 57
invoicing, 55
iPad (Apple), 225
IRS (Internal Revenue Service), 118, 163
IS (information system)
described, 3
evolution of, 14, 20–25
functional area, 8–14
integrated, 4, 5–6, 15
marketing, 49–76
production, 77–115
Israel, 34
J
Japan, 111
JD Edwards, 27–28
job, use of the term, 169
K
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 113
Keal, Donald A., 92
Kendal-Jackson, 38
key fields, 59
Kmart, 37
Korea, 111
Kushar, Kent, 176
L
labor costs, 80, 81–82
Lay, Ken, 141
layoff policies, 11
lead times, 98, 99–101
legacy systems, 27, 32
licensing, 205, 234
Lockheed Martin Aeronautics, 15
long-term incentives, 177–178
lot sizing, 98, 99–101
Index
251

M
mainframe computers, 26
make-to-order approach, 78–79
make-to-stock approach, 78, 79
management reporting, 136–139
managerial accounting, 121
manufacturing, 79–80, 105, 106, 110.
See also production
Mariott International, 176
marketing. See also M/S (Marketing and Sales)
encyclopedias, 67
information systems, 49–76
one-to-one, 67
planning, 71–72
Marriott, 177
Master Data Management module, 227
material master data, 61
MBO (management by objectives), 178
Meijer Heart Center, 217
memory, 26, 27, 220–223
metrics, 112. See also performance measures
Microsoft Corporation, 34, 222, 226
Microsoft Excel, 135
Microsoft Internet Explorer browser, 42
Microsoft Office, 161
Microsoft Outlook, 202
Miles, Chris, 167
military apps, 225
Miner, Bob, 28
MM (Materials Management) module, 29, 122
mobile computing, 215–241
Mobile Infrastructure module, 227
Montclair State University, 43
Moore’s Law, 21
MPS (master production schedule), 95, 96–97
MRP (material requirements planning), 84,
97–105
described, 23
list, 101–105
record, 99
M/S (Marketing and Sales), 9, 12, 23. See also
marketing
communications problems and, 80
described, 6
overview, 2–3, 6–7
multidimensional data cubes, 220, 221–223
mySAP ERP. See SAP ERP
N
Narodetsky v. Cardone Industries, 179
NASDAQ, 228
natural disasters, 209
needs assessments, 176
Nestlé, 39, 41
Netscape, 42
NetWeaver platform (SAP), 31, 35, 209,
226–228
nonprofit organizations, 209
Novartis, 165–166
NPV (net present value), 235–236
O
Oates, Ed, 28
OCM (organizational change management), 206
Office (Microsoft), 161
Oliveri, Tim, 42
on-demand CRM, 67
on-time performance, 112
open architecture, 27
operational decision-making, 123–127
operations planning, 88–95
OR connector, 191, 192, 193
Oracle, 28, 36, 39, 43, 222
organizational structures, 61
Outlook (Microsoft), 202
overhead, 128
Owens Corning, 34
P
payments, 55, 57
Payroll module, 173, 178
PCAOB (Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board), 142
Peerstone Research, 39
PeopleSoft, 27–28, 38, 40, 43
performance
evaluations, 176
measures, 72–73, 112
on-time, 112
person, use of the term, 169
Personnel Cost Planning tool, 178
Personnel Development component, 175
Pfizer, 225
Plattner, Hasso, 25, 26
Plex Systems, 232–233
PM (Plant Maintenance) module, 30
PO (purchase order) numbers, 62, 100, 102
position, use of the term, 170
PP (Production Planning) module, 29, 35, 131, 173.
See also production
pricing
conditions, 64–65
discount, 64–65
process(es). See also business processes
boundaries, 186, 187
improvement, 183–214
mapping, 184, 187–189
models, 183, 184, 185–214
PROD (Production) system, 210
product(s)
cost variant, 132
profitability analysis, 127–136
production. Seealso PP(ProductionPlanning)module
data, providing, for accounting, 107–108
information systems, 77–115
overview, 78–82
planning process, 82–108, 173
problems, 80–82
sequences, 79–80
profit and loss (P&L) statements, 119, 120
project team member time, 205
252
Index

Project Preparation phase, 206, 207
PS (Project System) module, 30
purchasing, 81–82, 84
Q
QAS (Quality Assurance) system, 210
QM (Quality Management) module, 30
qualifications, 175
quality assurance, 208
R
raw data, 7, 8
real time, use of the term, 19
Realization phase, 206, 208
recall policies, 11
record keeping, inconsistent, 127–128
Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 222–223
recruiter software, 167
recruiting process, 161–162
remuneration elements, 173
repetitive manufacturing, 105, 106
requirements, 175
response times, 231
RFIDs (radio frequency identification devices),
41, 107, 113, 215, 216, 217–218
River Rouge manufacturing complex, 110
RMA (returned material authorization) numbers, 55
Rodgers, Steve, 111
ROI (return on investment), 39, 40
RONA (return on net assets), 93
rough-cut planning, 88
RPSGB (Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain), 199
S
SaaS (software-as-a-service), 34, 229, 230, 235–237
safety stock, 11, 86
Sage Business Solutions, 34
sales
accounting and, integration of, 65–66
campaign management, 67, 71–72
forecasts, 7, 82, 83–85
order entry forms, 58–66
order process, 49–76
orders, blocked, 126
planning, 88–95
quotations, 52–53
SAP. See also SAP ERP; specific modules
Business All-in-One, 34, 36
Business ByDesign, 229–230
Business One, 34, 204
Business Warehouse, 35
Business Workflow tool, 200–203
CRM software, 68–71
EEC (Enterprise Central Component), 29, 58–64
Enterprise Portal, 227
formation of, 25–26
LIS (Logistics Information System) tool, 138
Manager’s Desktop tool, 171
NetWeaver platform, 31, 35, 209, 226–228
Organization and Staffing Plan tool, 169
SIS (Sales Information System) tool, 138
Solution Manager, 206–207
System R/3, 26, 27, 28, 34
Travel OnDemand, 174
Workflow Builder, 201
SAP ERP. See also SAP
accounting and, 122, 124–127
archiving and, 143–144
described, 28
document flow and, 137–138
features, 33–34
implementation, 31–33
overview, 28–31
product cost analysis, 131–132
production planning and, 82–108
sales and operations planning and, 88–95
standard orders in, 58–64
user authorizations, 145–146
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 25, 141–150, 177–178
scalability, 22
SCM (Supply Chain Management), 8–12, 23, 29, 70
described, 8
information systems and, 9, 77–115
overview, 2–3
scope creep, 207
Scott, Lee, 113
SD (Sales and Distribution) module, 29, 35, 56–57,
84–85, 122
SDL (Software Development Laboratories), 28
Sears, 40
SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission), 118,
134, 139–141
security, 231
SFA (sales force automation), 67
short list, 162
Siebel, 28
silos, 20
Skilling, Jeffrey, 141
Sloan, Alfred P., 24
SOA (service-oriented architecture), 226, 227
social media, 73
software. See also specific software
evolution of, 21–22
licensing fees, 205
modules, 26
SoldierEyes, 225
SOP (sales and operations planning), 83–84
spreadsheets, 135–136, 236
standard costs, 81
statutory and voluntary deductions, 173
stock. See also inventory
disaggregation process and, 93–95
target levels, 88–89
stockout, 11
succession planning, 175, 176–177
suppliers, 108–109
supply chain, 109, 110–111. See also SCM
(Supply Chain Management)
sustainability, 38, 113
Sybase, 224
Index
253

system landscape concept, 210
System R/3 (SAP), 26, 27, 28, 34
T
task, use of the term, 169
Temkin Group, 11
testing, 208
Textron, 225
time management, 172–173, 177
tolerance groups, 32, 33, 146–147
TopManage Financial Systems, 34
Toyota, 110, 111
training, 234–335
travel management, 173–174
Tschira, Klaus, 25
Tumi, Inc., 15
Twitter, 73
U
UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle), 225
UNIX, 27
UPS (United Parcel Service), 11, 176, 223
user authorizations, 145–146
user training, 234–335
V
value added, use of the term, 197
value analysis, 197
Vazquez, Raul, 216
vendors, choosing, 35
vertical integration, 110, 111
W
Walmart, 37, 38, 113, 216
Web browsers, 42, 150
Web services, 226
Welch Foods, 36
Wellenreuther, Claus, 25, 26
WF (Workflow) module, 31
Wi-Fi, 225
wikis, 73
Winfrey, Oprah, 109–110
W. L. Gore, 40
workflow tasks, 200
workflow tools, 200, 201–203
WorldCom, 141
Wozniak, Steve, 42
X
XBRL (Extensible Business Report Language), 150
XML (Extensible Markup Language), 150
Y
Y2K problem, 27, 203
YouTube, 73
254
Index

