CONFLICTS OVER
NATURAL RESOURCES
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Cults, James R. Lewis
Forest Fires, Philip N. Omi
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Hate Crimes, Donald Altschiller
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Hurricanes, Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
Illicit Trafficking, Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan, Joseph DiSerio
International Environmental Disputes, Aaron Schwabach
Invasion of Privacy, Kevin M. Keenan
Juvenile Justice, Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
Native American Issues, William N. Thompson
New Slavery, Kevin Bales
Punishment in America, Cyndi Banks
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
United Nations System, The, Chadwick F. Alger
Violence in the Media, Nancy Signorielli
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
Upcoming Titles
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


CONFLICTS OVER
NATURAL RESOURCES
A Reference Handbook
Jacqueline Vaughn
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vaughn, Jacqueline.
Conflicts over natural resources : a reference handbook / Jacqueline
Vaughn.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-015-5 (hard cover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-59884-015-0 (hard cover : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-016-2 (ebook)
ISBN-10: 1-59884-016-9 (ebook)
1.  Conservation of natural resources—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2.
Natural resources—Environmental aspects—Handbooks, manuals,
etc. I. Title. 
S944.V38 2007
333.7--dc22
2006030998
ISBN-13: 978-1-59884-015-5
(ebook) 978-1-59884-016-2
ISBN-10: 1-59884-015-0
(ebook) 1-59884-016-9
11  10  09  08  07    10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

To Don Reisman,
for discovering great talent


Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
From the Dawn of History, 4
Colonial America, 5
An Overview of Natural Resource Issues and Conflicts, 7
Acquisition: 1781–1867, 7
Disposal: 1781–, 10
Reservation: 1872–, 12
Custodial Management: 1897–1950, 16
Intensive Management: 1950–1960, 21
Consultation and Conflict: 1960–, 22
References, 29
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
Minerals, Oil, and Natural Gas Exploration and
Drilling, 32
Supply and Demand, 33
Extraction and Money, 35
Damage from Mining Activities, 36
Oil and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, 37
Protected Areas Policy, 41
Fee Demonstration Program, 43
Staffing and Infrastructure Maintenance, 48
Too Many Protected Areas?, 50
Rangeland Management, 53
Regulating the Range, 55
Subsidization of the Livestock Industry, 57
Environmental Impacts of Grazing, 58
ix

Conflict Management on the Range, 59
Timber and Forests, 62
Maintaining a Sustainable Supply, 63
Protecting Old Growth Forests, 66
Collaboration Efforts, 70
References, 71
3
Worldwide Perspective, 75
Diamonds and Precious Metals, 76
Oil and Natural Gas Development, 82
Timber and Forest Destruction, 88
Water Resources and Scarcity, 93
References, 99
4
Chronology, 103
5
Biographical Sketches, 131
Ansel Adams, 131
Bruce Babbitt, 132
David Ross Brower, 133
Robert Marion Clawson, 134
Bernard DeVoto, 136
Wayne Hage, 137
Julia Hill, 138
Andy Kerr, 140
J. Horace McFarland, 141
Chico Mendes, 142
Milford Muskett, 143
Joan Norman, 145
William Penn, 146
Sandra Postel, 148
Ken Saro-Wiwa, 149
Maurice Strong, 150
Nicola Temple, 152
Courtney White, 153
Terry Tempest Williams, 154
Howard Zahniser, 156
6
Documents and Data, 159
Legislation, 159
National Park Service Organic Act, 160
Excerpts, Taylor Grazing Act, 162
x
Contents

Federal Land Policy and Management Act, 163
Reports, 165
U.S. General Accounting Office: Livestock Grazing, 166
Resolutions, 167
Excerpt, Memorial of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science in Behalf of a Proper Forest
Policy, 169
Joint Resolution, World Federation of Diamond Bourses
and International Diamond Manufacturers
Association, 171
Preamble to the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, 173
Bonn Ministerial Declaration, 175
Facts and Data, 178
U.S. Natural Resource Agencies, 178
National Landscape Conservation System, 179
National Park Visitation, 182
Ten Most Endangered Birds in America, 182
U.S. Most Endangered Wildlife Refuges, 183
U.S. Gold Prices, 184
Extent of Worldwide Forest and Wooded Land, 187
Gas and Oil Supplies, 188
Energy Use and Trends, 191
Water Use, 192
7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and
Agencies, 195
U.S. Government Agencies, 239
UN Organizations, 244
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources, 247
Books, 247
Monographs, U.S. and International Government
Publications, 273
Articles, 275
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos, 283
Glossary, 293
Index, 299
About the Author, 312
Contents
xi


Preface
T
he United States has a heritage in both the preservation and
the utilization of natural resources: its trees, water, minerals,
and public lands. From the beginning of the country’s history
until today, efforts have been made to consider the effects of
industrialization, westward expansion, land acquisition and dis-
posal, population growth, and consumerism of those resources,
once thought to be almost limitless.
This book is designed to provide an overview of the disputes
over natural resources that are at the center of both U.S. and
global debates. Chapter 1 begins with a more detailed definition
of renewable and nonrenewable resources and identifies six key
periods in world and U.S. history that have both defined and con-
tributed to contemporary conflicts. Chapter 2 consists of four sub-
sections that describe key controversies over natural resources in
the United States, chosen from a much lengthier list because they
are enduring issues. The first subsection, on minerals, oil and nat-
ural gas exploration and drilling, represents one of the most his-
torically contentious bases of natural resource conflict. The battle
over “black gold” begins with the discovery of deposits in the
West and attempts to extract oil and natural gas to fuel the grow-
ing demands for energy by both consumers and industry.
In 1872, when land to create Yellowstone National Park was
set aside by the government, the United States started a lengthy
debate over protected area policy, the second subsection in Chap-
ter 2. From the enactment of the Forest Reserve Act of 1891 to
today’s concerns about user fees and the resources of the National
Park Service to maintain hundreds of designated units, stake-
holders have argued over the cost of protecting scenic areas and
xiii

wilderness, the resources available and how to increase them, and
which sites should be protected.
Historically, public lands have been used for grazing live-
stock, with little attention paid to the ecological damage done to
natural resources, such as soil compaction, watershed pollution,
forest degradation, and the introduction of exotic species. Con-
flicts over grazing management, the third subsection in this chap-
ter, involve ranchers and livestock producers, who feel that they
have a right to use the land, and environmental organizations,
which differ among themselves in their approach to protecting
and restoring native biodiversity and self-sustaining ecosystems.
Lastly, Chapter 2 explores how the U.S. government has
treated forests as a commodity, giving preference to large logging
companies and the implementation of policies that have required
the harvest of a continuous supply of wood for the growing na-
tion. Those policies have led to litigation and protests over main-
taining a sustainable supply of timber and, more recently, the pro-
tection of old growth forests.
Chapter 3 shifts the discussion of natural resource conflicts to
the global level. Many of the disputes are localized or regional,
even though they have international implications. The chapter
begins with the first of four subsections, starting with conflicts
over diamonds and precious metals. Gems, gold, and other min-
erals have been the source of conflict, especially in Africa, since
the early twentieth century, fueling civil war among rebels, gov-
ernments, indigenous peoples, and large trading companies.
As is the case in the United States, petroleum-producing
countries are the sites of various types of unrest, ranging from the
environmental damage caused by extraction and boundary dis-
putes over oil reserves to military intervention to protect valuable
oil and gas resources. The second subsection shows how increas-
ing demand for energy makes conflict more likely and, increas-
ingly, more violent. Some argue that the discovery of energy re-
sources in Latin America and Africa leads to increased economic
gain for all; others feel that development brings only hardship,
corruption by ruling elites, and environmental disaster.
Chapter 3 continues with a discussion of deforestation in a
global context. Human rights and environmental groups believe
that timber exploitation and forest destruction have led to re-
gional instability, civil war, and severe economic and social con-
sequences for indigenous populations. Although the United Na-
tions has sent peacekeeping missions to numerous countries, and
xiv
Preface

imposed trade embargoes in some cases, nongovernmental or-
ganizations believe that resolution to these conflicts lies in better
border controls and enhanced law enforcement.
The chapter ends with one of the most difficult natural re-
source issues facing the world today—water scarcity. Many of the
conflicts stem from disputes among countries that share trans-
boundary water reserves. An estimated fifty countries on five
continents share reservoirs, rivers, and underground aquifers,
and some experts believe that the next major world conflict will
be over water.
Chapter 4 is a timeline of key events in chronological order
that briefly annotates benchmarks in the identification of conflicts
and how they have progressed over time, both in the United
States and worldwide. Chapter 5 presents a series of biographical
sketches, or profiles, of some of the individuals who have had an
impact on natural resource conflict, either as participants in the
disputes themselves or in resolving them. Some are well-known
names, while others may be famous only in their home regions.
Chapter 6 provides a selection of legislation, reports, resolutions,
facts, and documents that provide historic background and a
more direct presentation of conflicts and their resolutions.
Chapters 7 and 8 are designed to be used as resources for fur-
ther study and discussion. Chapter 7 is an annotated list of or-
ganizations, associations, and agencies that relate specifically to
the topics presented in Chapters 1, 2, and 3. The chapter includes
contact information, including websites, for a broad range of
groups. Chapter 8 follows with an annotated bibliography repre-
senting an array of print and electronic sources, from books and
articles to videos and DVDs. These reference materials are gener-
ally available in public or educational libraries, making them ac-
cessible to a wide audience. Lastly, the book ends with a glossary
of key terms that can be used to reference the other chapters as
needed.
Since many natural resource conflicts overlap, it is difficult to
cover them all in a single volume. But this book provides a gen-
erous overview that will allow the reader to develop both back-
ground knowledge and an awareness of specific issues.
Preface
xv


1
Background and History
T
he definition of the term natural resources is largely dependent
upon the context in which it is used. Sometimes the phrase
refers to renewable resources—those that can be replaced,
either by human intervention or by nature itself. This usually
includes trees and forests, water, wildlife, wilderness, soil, grass-
land and prairies, and marine life. Some definitions include non-
renewable natural resources—petroleum, natural gas, and hard
minerals. One difference relates to the length of time it takes for
resources to be replaced. Renewable resources such as trees can
be replanted, fish habitats can be restored, and some wildlife can
be reintroduced into their natural habitat. Nonrenewable
resources like coal are limited, inasmuch as it has taken eons for
them to be formed, and once depleted, they may never be avail-
able again. Other definitions refer to the fact that most natural
resources are managed by the same network of governmental
agencies and, therefore, ought to be combined. There is agree-
ment, though, that the definition does not include problems relat-
ing to pollution, defined as the injection of a class of products into
an ecosystem (water pollution and air pollution, for instance).
One way of working with such complex definitions is to
begin with an overview of the history of natural resource man-
agement, by tracing the development of policies and laws that
govern their use. Because the major issues that have arisen in the
last century or so come from legal interpretations, legislation, and
changes in public attitudes, a chronological approach is an ap-
propriate way to explore the background of natural resource con-
flicts. Chapter 4 offers a more comprehensive timetable of key
1

events, which add detail to this chapter. Land management is key
to understanding natural resources, because from most perspec-
tives, land includes resources native to the soil, including trees
and minerals. In more recent times, land law has expanded to
cover activities taking place below and above the surface, such as
drilling for oil, grazing cattle, and logging.
This chapter begins with the earliest records of human
awareness about natural resources, which date from biblical
times. The development of early English laws is the basis for poli-
cies and disputes that reach colonial America between the 1600s
and the late eighteenth century, when the United States changes
from a confederated system of government to a federal one. After
that initial period of governmental involvement, researchers have
identified six historical eras of public land management that form
the basis for natural resource policy and conflicts today. 
1. Acquisition (1781–1867): The public domain grew
through a variety of methods: the addition of all lands
from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean through the
ceding of colonial lands to the federal government;
purchase (the Louisiana Territory, Alaska); annexation
(Texas); or negotiation (the Oregon Compromise).
2. Disposal (1781– ): The federal government has
continually tried to balance its role as steward of the
public lands and as property owner. Grants were made
to homesteaders as a way of encouraging westward
expansion; settlers were given land if they promised to
plant trees, farm, or irrigate their property; veterans
were “paid” in acres rather than in currency; new states
were given land (including swamplands) that they could
later sell to support education or transportation;
railroads gained acreage alongside tracks that were
being built; and direct sales were made to the public, a
process that continues today.
3. Reservation (1872– ): The Constitution grants Congress
the right to withdraw a specific portion of public lands
from the public domain (the total inventory of
government-held property) for future use, ranging from
logging and mining to preservation. This power was
used to create Yellowstone National Park, the national
forest reserves, and various unit designations that
would be administered by the National Park Service.
2
Background and History

The Antiquities Act of 1906 gave similar power to the
president for the designation of historic landmarks and
other sites.
4. Custodial management (1897–1950): A series of statutes,
starting with the Forest Management Act of 1897,
marked the federal government’s formal
acknowledgment of its role as the caretaker of reserved
lands. New agencies were established to administer
public lands, such as the General Land Office, the
National Park Service, the U.S. Forest Service, and the
Bureau of Land Management. Over the years, as
conflicts over natural resources developed, the agencies
would change leadership, culture, and jurisdiction.
5. Intensive management (1950–1960): Trees have always
been treated as a commodity, from the time when the
Forest Service was included under the umbrella of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture. The cutting of timber
produced income, jobs, and needed lumber for
post–World War II development. Leases were granted
for oil and gas exploration, grazing privileges, mining
operations, and even recreational use.
6. Consultation and conflict (1960– ): The use of public
land became the source of major conflict just as the
environmental movement was reaching its prime. The
concept of multiple use (designating the types of
activities that could be conducted, from skiing to
wilderness preservation to extraction) became the basis
for natural resource management. Congress became
more involved in decisions about land use, agencies
battled over the coordination of conflicting activities,
litigation became a key environmental group tactic, and
the public sought a greater participatory role in
decision-making. Budgetary considerations often shaped
policy more than scientific research, a problem that
continues to cloud key issues described in Chapter 2
(Clawson 1983).
It is important to note that there is some disagreement about these
somewhat arbitrary categorizations of time. Certainly, conflicts
relating to timber management in the United States have been vir-
tually continual since 1691; the Charter of Massachusetts con-
tained a provision protecting trees for the masts of ships for the
Background and History
3

Royal Navy. Today, similar disputes divide the federal govern-
ment and environmental organizations over the practice of clear-
cutting and the management of old-growth forests.
But natural resource policies and the conflicts arising from
them have changed over time, and there are specific periods
when disputes have focused on the actions of a presidential ad-
ministration or an individual statute. The following sections
should be viewed as just one way of explaining historical trends
and key events.
From the Dawn of History
Identifying the point in time when concern about natural re-
sources developed is an imprecise science. Some point to scrip-
tural references in the Bible that mention the earth’s bounty and
humankind’s responsibility for stewardship over its creatures, a
reference found in the Book of Genesis. There is mention of lands
in which nothing is lacking, and also of human exploitation, in
the book of Deuteronomy. Verses and their meaning are always
subject to interpretation, of course, and not everyone agrees on
simple issues such as the accuracy of translation from ancient lan-
guages to modern ones. The concept of stewardship has re-en-
tered contemporary religious dialogue, however, as a way of
bridging Scripture and modern environmental challenges such as
energy use and water scarcity.
By the fifth century, Christianity was the predominant faith
in much of the Roman Empire, and by a century later, most west-
ern Europeans had converted from paganism. Paganism was
based on the premise that people and nature share a spiritual con-
nection, and that spirits are present in all forms: trees, rivers,
mountains, and as elves and fairies. Paganism called upon its fol-
lowers to respect the natural spirits and to offer prayers before
killing an animal or cutting a tree. Christianity, from about A.D.
500 to 1500, was more likely to promote the dominion of man
over nature, and the harnessing of resources became God’s gift to
man (Kline 2000).
Many legal scholars believe that contemporary views about
natural resources stem from Roman law and the customs and tra-
ditions that would later be systematically compiled into codes
governing behavior and property during the fifth century A.D.
The Digest of Justinian and the Institutes of Justinian, named for the
4
Background and History

ruling emperor of the time, contained specific reference to com-
mon property resources, or res communes, which were owned by
and open to everyone (Adams 1993).
During the Middle Ages, there was general agreement that
forests were to remain wild, with little attention paid to their
value for production. There were separate forest courts and a
complicated hierarchy of officials responsible for the conditions
of the forests, enforcing grazing regulations and monitoring the
availability of game for hunting. Laws governed the clearance of
land, the cutting of tree limbs, and the building of ponds. This led
to conflicts between the monarchy and freeholders (landowners)
as land was reserved for royal forests through unofficial routes of
acquisition. By A.D. 1217 the disputes, driven largely by the eco-
nomic impact of the Crusades and foreign wars, led to revisions
in forest law and the issuance of the Carta de Foresta, which would
later become part of the Magna Carta. While the codification of
forest law could be seen as benefiting some, lands that had previ-
ously been protected quickly became open to timber cutting, es-
pecially during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, when
wood was needed for ships for trade and exploration. What may
have started as land reform ended up as mismanagement driven
by greed and corruption (ibid.).
Colonial America
Early settlers found that Europeans expected the New World to
be a source of materials to meet their needs, whether spices, tim-
ber, or meat. There was a kind of grocery-store mentality that left
the impression among some that America was a storehouse that
could be raided as often as necessary. What is more important,
colonists imported laws and customs that governed land owner-
ship, something foreign to the native tribes that had lived there
for centuries before European settlement. The idea of buying and
selling land, which belonged to no single individual or family
(partly because of the mobile nature of much of the Native Amer-
ican population), was based on the English system. In the early-
seventeenth-century settlements, lands and resources were
treated much the same as the feudal relationships of monarchs
and their subjects. The privilege of land ownership was extended
primarily to the upper classes, granted by a king to reward mili-
tary service, as a reward for loyalty, or through birthright.
Colonial America
5

By the mid-1700s, the abundance of land encouraged some
settlers to move to unclaimed land that had not been surveyed;
squatters simply declared ownership, legal or otherwise. If a par-
cel of land was not claimed by a white man, then it was consid-
ered free for the taking. Native Americans who had occupied the
land were driven off or killed so that colonists could take what
they believed was rightfully theirs.
In the Virginia Colony, men received a warrant for an area
from the land office, found acreage they wanted, defined its
boundaries using crude maps, and made their claim (called a
patent). After the Revolutionary War, colonial leaders expanded
their claims westward, with boundaries often overlapping and
large grants of lands made to influential individuals. To reduce
conflicts over boundaries and land holdings, the survey process
was formalized, with some land auctioned off for minimal prices
to the highest bidder. By this time, land ownership was a firmly
entrenched custom, even though it meant that native populations
“lost” something they never had considered as theirs to begin
with.
Among the earliest natural resource disputes were conflict-
ing claims by the colonies/states over the land between the Ap-
palachian Mountains and the Mississippi River. The colonies of
Connecticut, Georgia, Massachusetts, New York, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Virginia sought control of large tracts of
land. The Maryland colony, which had no land claims in the dis-
puted area to the west, argued that the territory had been se-
cured through bloodshed against the British Crown and should
be considered as “common stock.” At stake, in addition to the
western lands, was the signing of the Articles of Confederation.
Maryland refused to sign the document, with leaders arguing
that the land claims would put it in an unfair economic and po-
litical position. 
To resolve the impasse, New York agreed to cede its claims on
the western lands in 1780; by 1802, the remaining states had done
so as well. Maryland signed the Articles of Confederation, and
agreement was reached that the newly formed Continental Con-
gress would be responsible for any future land disposal. As new
territories were added, any lands that were not part of existing
claims by corporations or individuals remained under public
ownership (Dombeck, Wood, and Williams 2003). These political
agreements appeared to resolve the question over what to do with
the new frontier, although the debate was really just beginning.
6
Background and History

An Overview of Natural Resource Issues
and Conflicts
To understand contemporary natural resource conflicts, it is use-
ful to look to the past and the development of U.S. policies relat-
ing to public lands, because that is where many of the current dis-
putes originated. The issues that divide the country have not
always been the same, but there are common themes that can be
traced through each of the following six periods.
Acquisition: 1781–1867
The state cessions, which took place between 1781 and 1802, in-
creased the public domain by 236 million acres, at a cost of $6.2
million to the newly formed government. With control of most of
the acreage between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River,
an additional 10 percent of the total public land had been added.
Although the early explorers and colonists had little idea what
lay to the west of the Mississippi River, they did expect to find
more land and some kinds of riches—at least based on rumors
and stories passed along by explorers and Native Americans. The
states and federal government now owned all of the land east of
the Mississippi (except Florida, which was claimed by Spain), and
there was an agreed-upon desire to add as much more as possi-
ble. Land meant wealth; the more land the government owned,
the more credibility it developed and the more resources it was
likely to find and control.
One of the driving forces behind the acquisition process was
the concept of Manifest Destiny. In 1839, John L. O’Sullivan wrote
in an article in The United States Democratic Review that Americans
were unique in history because “our national birth was the be-
ginning of a new history, the formation and progress of an un-
tried political system, which separates us from the past and con-
nects us with the future only; and so as regards the entire
development of the natural rights of man, in moral, political, and
national life, we may confidently assume that our country is des-
tined to be the great nation of futurity.” O’Sullivan went on to de-
scribe the boundless future of U.S. greatness, writing: “In its mag-
nificent domain of space and time, the nation of many nations is
destined to manifest to mankind the excellence of divine princi-
ples” (O’Sullivan 1839).
An Overview
7

The vision that O’Sullivan described became the clarion call
and campaign promise for dozens of political and social leaders
during the 1840s. Manifest Destiny carried with it a sense of the
need to fulfill a spiritually driven mission of converting “the im-
mutable truth and beneficence of God...to the nations of the
world, which are shut out from the life-giving light of truth”
(ibid.). This was interpreted to mean that it was America’s duty to
spread democratic principles of freedom and brotherhood to the
rest of the continent, and eventually to the world. It, by inference
and later policy, excluded those incapable of self-government, in-
cluding non-Europeans and Native Americans, who were be-
lieved to be savages. Purchasing, annexing, or taking the land
east of the Mississippi River was considered the mechanism for
fulfilling that destiny.
Before O’Sullivan wrote about Manifest Destiny, the process
of acquiring land for the new nation had already begun. In 1803,
President Thomas Jefferson led the acquisition rush with the
Louisiana Purchase: 529 million acres of land between the Missis-
sippi River and the Rocky Mountains, or about 23 percent of the
public domain. The $15 million agreement with France was con-
sidered by some an extravagance, but it typified Jefferson’s thirst
for knowledge, which could be quenched only by finding out
what was there. It also established a firm economic base that Jef-
ferson believed would make the country self-sufficient.
Almost immediately after securing the purchase, Jefferson
arranged political and financial support for the exploration of the
West in hope of finding a trade route to the Pacific (among other
resources). From 1804 to 1806 the Lewis and Clark expedition
traveled the waters of the frontier, crossing the Rocky Mountains
and meeting native people, some of whom were friendly and
some of whom were not. After returning to Washington to report
to Jefferson on the sights they had viewed in their long journey,
the expedition’s members were unable to grasp, or convey to the
president, the vastness of the Western frontier. Although Jefferson
was considered a visionary, he thought it would take a thousand
years for the region to be reached and settled (Kline 2000).
The Louisiana Purchase was followed by acquisition of the
30 million acres of the Red River Basin (1782–1817), and the addi-
tion of Florida (a cession from Spain in 1819 that added 46 million
more acres for $6 million). At this point, the United States was al-
ready experiencing both a high birthrate and immigration that
led to a population boom. Having large families to work the
8
Background and History

growing agricultural areas of the nation’s midwest was consid-
ered not only desirable but also necessary. Expansion into new
territories was needed to provide more land for the country’s 20
million residents, 4 million of whom moved to the Western terri-
tories between 1820 and 1850. Economic depressions in 1818 and
again in 1839 forced many urban dwellers and farmers to head to-
ward the frontier areas, which were still being explored, opening
up new opportunities for land ownership, commerce, and self-
sufficiency. A new phase of land acquisition resulted from negoti-
ations with Great Britain that resulted in the Oregon Compromise
of 1846 and 183 million acres added to the public domain.
Mexico, which had achieved its independence from Spain in
1821, faced a different situation. Internal political struggles left
the country in financial and social ruin; attempts repeatedly were
made to colonize its borders despite fierce battles with Native
Americans. The frontier communities were lawless and poor de-
spite the efforts of the Catholic Church and military to civilize the
natives. The United States took advantage of Mexico’s situation
in the 1848 Mexican Cession, adding 389 million acres as condi-
tions under a peace treaty and boundary dispute. Texas, which
had won a war of independence with Mexico and had operated
under independent rule for nine years, was annexed in 1845; an
additional $10 million was spent to acquire 19 million acres of
land along the current U.S.-Mexican border which became Ari-
zona (the 1853 Gadsden Purchase).
Among the most controversial land acquisitions of all was
the 1867 Alaska Purchase, also known as Seward’s Folly. The
Russian government, which had held claim to the Alaska terri-
tory since 1741, offered to sell it to the United States because of re-
peated land disputes between U.S. and British settlers. More im-
portant, the Russian czar needed money, so in December 1866, the
Russian minister to the United States was told to negotiate the
sale of the territorial lands. The secretary of state, William H. Se-
ward, initially offered to purchase 365 million acres for $5 million
in gold, an amount that the Russian minister, Baron Edouard de
Stoeckl, was authorized to accept. But believing that Seward’s
dreams of expansion would not allow him to walk away from a
deal, Baron de Stoeckl negotiated a better deal, and Seward ended
up agreeing to pay $7.2 million, or about 2 cents per acre—a bar-
gain still, but criticized heavily at the time. Seward persuaded
President Andrew Johnson to call the Senate back into special ses-
sion to approve the sale and treaty, which radical Republicans
An Overview
9

derided because the government had bought “the northern ice-
box.” Although the Senate finally approved the agreement on
April 9, 1867, the House would not appropriate the necessary
funds to complete the purchase. After numerous bribes, scandals,
and the impeachment of President Johnson, the purchase of
Alaska was finalized in July 1867. The added land was twice as
large as Texas, but most Americans saw little value in Alaska until
the Great Klondike Gold Rush in 1896. In sixty-four years the
United States had grown from the original 500 million acres along
the East Coast to more than 2.3 billion acres, spanning all of the
land between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Manifest Destiny
appeared to be complete.
Disposal: 1781–
Despite the flurry of acquisition, the new government quickly re-
alized two things: it did not want to be in the public land busi-
ness, and there was an overwhelming need to produce revenue
not only to run the country but also to pay off debts incurred dur-
ing the Revolutionary War. Some political leaders saw the newly
purchased public lands only as a commodity to be sold as a
source of revenue. Many Easterners wanted the “new” land con-
veyed to individuals, while some, such as Daniel Webster, be-
lieved that the country’s first priority was to get the frontier set-
tled and economically productive. In 1783 the population of the
United States was about 3.25 million, about one-third of whom
were slaves or in jail. By 1850 the total population had reached 50
million, and between 1851 and 1860, 2.6 million immigrants,
mostly from Ireland and Germany, arrived to settle the country
and to become the major source of cheap labor.
A number of factors eventually led to the passage of the Gen-
eral Land Ordinance of 1785, one of the first major signs of a
change in land policy. Among other provisions, Congress granted
public lands to the states to support education, based on the for-
mula of one section of land per township. These “trust” lands
were to provide states with a revenue source (land that could be
sold or leased as needed) and would prioritize the provision of
education, especially in the newly emerging West. In 1850 the
school land grants were increased to two sections per township,
and Utah, New Mexico, and Arizona received four sections per
township. This form of land disposal accounts, in part, for the
high percentage of state-owned lands in those three states, al-
10
Background and History

though the federal government was still the majority landowner.
The existing states also protested the efforts by Western territories
to convince the federal government to give them public land, ar-
guing that the public domain benefited the new nation and
should be held in reserve for future use. As a condition of en-
trance, new states agreed not to tax federal property or to inter-
fere with the disposal of federal lands. They eventually accepted
agreements granting them money and other concessions instead.
Over time, states began to interpret the 1785 statute in differ-
ent ways. Some specifically required that sales from trust lands be
used for infrastructure development such as new roads or public
buildings. Other states, such as Idaho, constitutionally required
that state lands be managed for the highest return, which usually
meant that the land be sold to the public or leased for single-pur-
pose harvest, such as mineral exploration or logging (Cawley
1993).
The government encouraged the rush to the West, support-
ing settlement by giving land away. The 1862 Homestead Act
granted 160 acres of land to any settler who agreed to live on it for
a minimum of five years, developing it through farming or ranch-
ing or some other type of activity that “controlled” nature. The
domestication of the wilderness, as it has been called, was based
on the idea that the European garden could be easily transported
to even the most arid and desolate areas of the West. One settler,
Henderson Luelling, an Iowa Quaker, hauled 700 trees, vines, and
shrubs along the treacherous Oregon Trail in 1847. The fruit trees
and other plants brought by pioneers in the Pacific Northwest
would become the basis for the multimillion-dollar orchard and
fruit industry in the region (Kline 2000).
In some cases, when settlers encountered large groups of Na-
tive Americans on land they wanted, they attempted to deal with
them peacefully by trading goods for land. Native Americans
were valuable to settlers for their knowledge of the area and its
resources, and whites offered alcohol for maps and trapping tech-
niques, colorful beads and fabric for buffalo robes. Unlike the in-
digenous population’s understanding of the ecology of native
plants and animals and their role in maintaining a steady supply
of food, whites wasted many of the natural resources they con-
sidered to be in abundance. Trees were burned down rather than
felled, and wild animals like squirrels that found their way into
granaries were considered pests subject to bounty hunting. Euro-
pean and eastern women eagerly purchased fur coats and hats
An Overview
11

and added the plumage of exotic birds to their hats as fast as they
could be killed.
Shortly after the government had reached the Pacific Ocean
in its move for acquisition of new land, divestiture became the
predominant federal policy, encouraging speculation, fraud,
bribery, and, over the next several decades, the kind of environ-
mental misuse and degradation that became the basis for the next
phase of natural resource policy, the creation of federal reserves.
Reservation: 1872–
The concepts of conservation, preservation, and reservation are
closely intertwined in the history of natural resources. While it
would be simple to attribute those ideas to influential writers
such as George Perkins Marsh, Henry David Thoreau, and Ralph
Waldo Emerson, that was not always the case. In 1832, Congress
set aside four sections of Hot Springs, Arkansas, for “future dis-
posal,” with the idea that they might be developed at a later date
(the land later became part of the national park system). In 1864,
Senator John Conness of California sponsored legislation that
granted the Mariposa Grove of giant redwood trees to the state
for “public use, resort, and recreation,” to be held “inalienable for
all time” (Adams 1993, 179). Conness was not known as a preser-
vationist; the request for the legislation had come from a repre-
sentative of the Central American Steamship Transit Company
and the manager of the nearby Mariposa Mining Estate. The idea
of setting aside land for future use became more common after
the passage of legislation that set aside public land in the Yellow-
stone area  in 1872. The statute made clear that the government
had the power to “reserve” some of the public domain for specific
purposes, an idea that was clarified by other acts of Congress
over the next thirty years. The Forest Reserve Act of 1891 (also
known as the Creative Act) gave the president the power to set
apart and reserve public timberland as reservations. The 1891
statute is considered a milestone in the history of U.S. environ-
mental law because it not only became the basis for the develop-
ment of forest policy but also served as the impetus for the cre-
ation of protected areas, such as the national parks.
The law marked one other major change. The federal gov-
ernment stopped the disposal of public forest lands into private
ownership, and in 1911, under the provisions of the Weeks Act,
the Forest Service was authorized to purchase forests that had
12
Background and History

previously been owned by individuals and timber companies.
The land, in many cases, was nearly barren, all of the marketable
timber having been harvested, and many owners stopped paying
taxes on their property, simply abandoning it. Thousands of acres
west of the Mississippi were purchased and gradually restored,
expanding the federal government’s timber resources.
The power to reserve large tracts of land was disputed by
economic interests, however, especially large lumber and mining
companies. Along with ranchers and farmers, they felt that the
federal government had exceeded its authority, tying up the land
and giving them limited access to the resources on those lands—
timber, oil, minerals, and grazing areas. The government sought
to limit private exploitation of natural resources, and the extrac-
tive industries sought to have the lands in question returned to
the states for control.
Unlike the lands that were reserved for protected areas and
for timber, the government did not secure the same type of pro-
tection for mining lands. The 1872 Mining Law emerged after
gold was discovered in California; it represents one of the few
areas where natural resource conflicts were initially quite mini-
mal. Although there were disputes between miners over individ-
ual claims, the federal and state governments seemed  content to
legitimize claims with little interference. Since no bureaucracy ex-
isted at the time to regulate mining, the only administrative con-
trol was provided by the U.S. Army. The early mining industry
basically worked out its own system of property rights and pri-
vatized any form of dispute resolution.
Less than a month after the Forest Reserve Act was signed in
1891, President Benjamin Harrison used his power under the law
to designate the Yellowstone Park Forest Reservation, expanding
the size of the initial park. In 1906, Congress passed the Antiqui-
ties Act and delegated authority to the president to designate his-
toric landmarks and objects and sites of historic or scientific in-
terest on federally owned or controlled land. The concept of
reservation further protected valuable watersheds, areas of scenic
beauty, and forest lands for future use or enjoyment. By 1900,
there were six national park units covering more than 4 million
acres; by 1916 there were twenty national monuments, many of
which would later become the centerpieces for future national
parks.
But at the same time, there were few resources available to
manage the reserved areas. Many of the park superintendents
An Overview
13

served without pay or had no budget, and the reserve staff often
consisted of army soldiers who were authorized to prevent tres-
passing and poaching. Later, army engineers would be used to
build roads and bridges and to mark park boundaries, and cav-
alry troops provided patrols and protection. The management of
the reserves and monuments was fragmented and controlled by
three federal agencies: the departments of Agriculture, Interior,
and War.
Two individuals, Gifford Pinchot and John Muir, epitomized
the very public debates over how natural resources on public
lands should be used. Pinchot, who had been trained in forest
management in Europe, and who is considered the first American
forester, believed that “the rational management of forests could
not be successfully conducted without ‘the supervision of some
imperishable guardian; or in other words, of the state’” (Miller
2001, 94). Governmental control of forests would establish a base
for scientific forestry on the ground, he said. Those principles
were dependent upon two ideas, Pinchot believed: that individ-
ual trees required many years before they reached what he called
“merchantable size,” and that a “forest crop” could not be har-
vested year after year from the same plot of land. Forestry practi-
tioners must be patient, he said, and the government needed to
take a paternal approach to forest lands.
Pinchot’s vision of conservation was based on three princi-
ples: development (the use of natural resources for the benefit of
people here today); prevention of waste; and the development
and preservation of natural resources for the benefit of the many,
and not merely for the profit of the few. Those principles, he be-
lieved, would result in planned, orderly development, and even-
tually national efficiency. Eventually, this view would become
known as utilitarian conservation.
John Muir, in contrast, had a different view of resource use.
Although Muir and Pinchot often traveled together and fre-
quently socialized, Muir sought the preservation of wilderness
lands, not enhanced use and commercial development. Muir
thought of himself as a mentor to Pinchot, and agreed that na-
tional forests should be both preserved and used. He supported
Pinchot through the years of the late nineteenth century because
he believed that scientific management was preferable to past
practices that obliterated forests.
But around 1898 their views diverged sharply, resulting in
one of the most bitter conflicts over natural resources in the his-
14
Background and History

tory of the United States. The issue that divided them was a pro-
posal, initially made in the 1880s, that the Hetch Hetchy Valley in
Yosemite National Park be dammed to create a reservoir for water
that would serve the residents of San Francisco. In 1903 and 1905,
the city applied to the Department of the Interior for a permit to
build the dam. The permit was denied on the basis of the belief
that it would damage the spirit of the national park. Pinchot, who
was head of the U.S. Forest Service in the Department of Agricul-
ture, told Interior Department officials that the dam would not
detract from the beauty of Yosemite, and he argued that there
needed to be a tradeoff between preserving Hetch Hetchy and the
needs of the communities in the growing San Francisco area.
Muir, in turn, urged Pinchot to ignore “the benevolent outcry for
pure water for the dear people,” and warned of graft and corrup-
tion if the dam were to be built. He countered with a plan to build
a dam below the valley (Miller 2001).
The 1906 San Francisco earthquake led to fires and the break-
down of the city’s water system, and city officials reapplied for
permission to build in Hetch Hetchy, believing that with Pin-
chot’s support and that of a new secretary of the Interior, they
would finally be successful. But Muir, who had been one of the
founders of the Sierra Club in 1892, marshaled his friends and
successfully lobbied Congress to oppose the dam. When the two
men met in 1907, Pinchot admitted to Muir that he had never seen
the Hetch Hetchy Valley and was unaware of how it was an im-
portant part of Yosemite National Park. He told Muir to send a
letter to the secretary of the Department of the Interior asking that
no action be taken until the Sierra Club’s views could be consid-
ered. Muir thought that Pinchot was becoming less adamant
about the dam, but, in fact, Pinchot wrote President Theodore
Roosevelt that the highest possible use of the Hetch Hetchy
would be to provide a source of water for San Francisco.
The question of the dam was revived in 1913, when Congress
took up the issue in hearings in which both Pinchot and Muir tes-
tified. According to Pinchot, preservation of the valley would
benefit only a small group of elites, compared with the benefits to
thousands of residents. Muir countered that the dam would actu-
ally benefit special interest groups and was a political ploy to se-
cure the political ambition of the city’s leaders. The eventual de-
cision to build the dam was made in 1913 by President Woodrow
Wilson, whose secretary of the Interior had previously served as
the city attorney for the city of San Francisco.
An Overview
15

Hetch Hetchy symbolizes the tug-of-war between conserva-
tion and preservation that would continue well into the twentieth
century. However, it also shows how Pinchot’s vision of conser-
vation became the nation’s resource management philosophy for
the next fifty years. Commodity users became an important po-
litical force, dominating the development of new legislation and
policies over how natural resources would be used until the birth
of the contemporary environmental movement in the 1960s.
Custodial Management: 1897–1950
Just before the turn of the century, the federal government shifted
its role from simply owning land to taking a more active role in
managing it, including its natural resources. The Progressive
movement, conservationism, scientific management, and the em-
phasis on efficiency were gradually affecting both the govern-
ment and professions dealing with resources. The generic ap-
proach to land was broken down into its organic parts, with laws,
agencies, and technicians divided by resource. Management by
expertise became the norm, with foresters determining how
much timber should be cut in a specific plot, and agronomists
making decisions about the number of cattle that could be grazed
and how much water was needed.
Custodial management was intertwined with the slowly
emerging discipline of public administration, and the develop-
ment of what has been called the resource management state. The
term refers to the replacement of a legalistic, localistic system
with a centralized, bureaucratic one. During the presidency of
Theodore Roosevelt, the United States became a frontrunner in
environmental policy. As one historian notes: “Assembling a
cadre of trained, dedicated public employees, resource manage-
ment agencies initiated policies, introduced new techniques of
public management, and literally reshaped the nation’s land-
scape” (Schulman 2005, 378).
The structure and reorganization of the federal government
was another element of custodial management. Legislation cre-
ated new agencies, new policies, and new leaders. The jurisdic-
tional disputes were based on securing authority over natural re-
source management. Pinchot had started his service in the federal
government in 1898 as an administrator for the Agriculture De-
partment’s Division of Forestry, which at the time supervised all
of the government’s foresters. The federal forest reserves them-
16
Background and History

selves, however, were under the jurisdiction of the Department of
the Interior. Pinchot wanted authority over both the foresters and
the forests, and after a long struggle he was successful. In 1905 his
agency was renamed the U.S. Forest Service, the forest reserves
became national forests, and Pinchot built up an institutional
army of loyal employees who were compared to the U.S. Marines
and totally devoted to their chief (Schulman 2005).
A similar phenomenon took place with the Bureau of Recla-
mation under the leadership of Frederick Newell, one of Pin-
chot’s allies in Washington. The “age of the engineer” gave the
bureau considerable credibility at a time when the country was
deeply immersed in the building of dams, flood control systems,
canals, and hydroelectric projects. The Department of the Interior,
however, did not fare as well when federal reorganization efforts
began under Roosevelt. Pinchot and Newell wanted to have all
natural resources under the Department of Agriculture, arguing
that Interior lacked the skilled employees, the necessary office
equipment, and the rigorous organizational structure that was
needed to manage public lands. Field offices were often staffed by
patronage appointments and were greatly susceptible to fraud.
In 1905, Pinchot convinced Roosevelt to establish the Com-
mittee to Investigate the Executive Business of the Government,
more commonly known as the Keep Commission after its chair-
man, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Charles Keep. The com-
mission, charged with a review of the executive branch, uncov-
ered incompetence throughout the Department of the Interior,
with a promotion and rewards system that promoted the most
unskilled clerks to positions of responsibility. The Land Office
was nothing more than an administrative nightmare, according to
the commission: “The fact that possession of land has been or-
dained through perjury with perfect impunity for many years
through many of the regions of the West has naturally resulted in
complete public indifference to this particular crime. In addition,
the laws and officers of the United States have become subjects of
public ridicule, both from the glaring character of the frauds and
the ease with which they have been accomplished” (Schulman
2005, 387).
Despite the Keep Commission’s scathing indictment of the
existing administrative structure for natural resource manage-
ment, Congress rejected every one of the initiatives that required
legislative approval, even refusing to fund the Keep Commis-
sion’s official reports. When Roosevelt left office, President
An Overview
17

William Howard Taft forced Pinchot and his supporters out of of-
fice, and the vision of the autonomous natural resource bureau-
cracy was left behind.
Pinchot’s influence was not totally gone, however. The Hetch
Hetchy controversy with Muir heightened public awareness
about the importance of managing wilderness areas like Yellow-
stone and Yosemite, and led to the creation of the National Park
Service in 1916. The dispute strengthened the notion that devel-
opment ought to be kept out of the national parks in order to pre-
serve their scenic beauty for future generations. The concept of
stewardship was a dramatic change in how reserved areas were
to be managed.
Preservation groups also emerged around the turn of the
century, especially in the East. Organizations such as the National
Audubon Society and local associations sought more designa-
tions, often aided by wealthy and influential businessmen. John
D. Rockefeller provided financial assistance to a group formed to
protect Mount Desert Island, off the coast of Maine. The New
England preservationists began acquiring and purchasing about
6,000 acres that were threatened with development, and in 1916
they persuaded President Wilson to use the Antiquities Act to
designate the area as a national monument.
The groups were often aided by the National Park Service it-
self, which created study commissions to determine whether
there were appropriate sites for consideration as national parks.
The Temple Commission, chaired by Pennsylvania congressman
H. W. Temple, surveyed the southern Appalachian region in 1924,
examining sites of at least 500 square miles that included moun-
tain scenery, areas that could be used for visitor recreation, un-
touched forests and waterfalls, springs and streams for fishing,
wildlife conservation, and perhaps most important, sites that
were accessible by rail and road. The result of the commission’s
recommendations was a 1925 statute directing the secretary of the
Interior to determine the boundaries of what would eventually
become Shenandoah, Great Smoky Mountains, and Mammoth
Cave national parks (Adams 1993, 192–193).
Problems of visitation were already beginning to plague sev-
eral of the most popular national parks. In 1890, President Ben-
jamin Harrison signed legislation creating Sequoia National Park
in California, the home of giant, 2,000-year-old trees. The area ini-
tially needed to be protected because of damage being done by
sheepherders, prospectors, and loggers who had begun to fell the
18
Background and History

valuable timber. By 1903 the first road was built, followed by au-
tomobiles that replaced pack trains, and by 1930 there were four
campgrounds, more than 200 cabins, corrals, a gas station, retail
stores, offices, and dining halls catering to tourists. Water and
sewer systems were built, damaging the shallow roots of the
trees, and buildings and parking lots weakened them even more.
The park’s superintendent called for commercial activity to be
moved out of the Giant Forest area, but his recommendations
were ignored. To make more space for visitors, during the 1950s
the National Park Service (NPS) would move out cabins, cut
down the trees, and then move the cabins back in (Leonard 2005).
Protected area policy became more and more controversial as
the number of designated units and acreage grew. Lumber com-
panies, for instance, were hostile to the idea that prime timber-
lands were being declared off limits. In 1907, Western members of
Congress garnered sufficient opposition to the forest reserve con-
cept that they took away the president’s authority to create or en-
large forest reserves in six Western states. States were angry that
they were expected to pay for the acquisition of park land, or to
conduct fund-raising efforts to do so. The Great Depression led to
cuts in agency budgets and subsequent reductions in park
staffing and maintenance. Park protection was often limited, and
management of the national forests was curtailed to minimal lev-
els. Mining companies objected to the idea that they could not
purchase land but could only lease it.
Salvation came in the form of the Civilian Conservation
Corps (CCC), created in 1933 as part of President Franklin Roo-
sevelt’s New Deal program as a way of putting unemployed men
to work, even at the most menial jobs and minimal pay. More
than 250,000 men were immediately mobilized, paid $30 a month,
given clothing, medical care, housing, and training, and sent to
the 17,000 CCC camps that were created. Most were deployed to
work in the Forest Service and became part of a massive refor-
estation and restoration effort. Many were assigned to timber
management programs that probably would not have occurred
otherwise, or to firefighting efforts. The CCC was terminated in
1942, but its legacy can still be found in trails built by young la-
borers, national park cabins and lodges, or in the initials they
carved into bridges and roadways.
In 1940, the national park system included about 22 million
acres of land for a population of 130 million people; by 1960 only
a few more acres had been added, while the population grew to
An Overview
19

183 million. The parks were overcrowded, and the NPS had a lim-
ited capability to manage the visitors, let alone the resources
within the parks. While resource management had been a goal of
the agency since its formation, the reality was that the demand for
recreation outstripped staffing and budgets.
The management of rangelands underwent a similar trans-
formation. The U.S. Forest Service held responsibility for grazing
on public lands for the first thirty years of the twentieth century.
Until 1906, there was only minimal support for any type of  reg-
ulation of livestock grazing on the nation’s vast grasslands and
prairies. The doctrine of custom and culture, explored more in
Chapter 2, dominated the West, and ranchers seldom encoun-
tered any resistance to moving their cattle or sheep to more pro-
ductive land, whether public or private. The General Land Office,
charged with regulating livestock access on public lands, was re-
placed by the Grazing Service, and in 1934 by the Taylor Grazing
Act. Under the new law, ranchers who had previously taken their
herds wherever they wanted now had to apply for federal per-
mits and to consult with local grazing advisory boards. For an in-
dustry that was used to unfettered access to the land, these types
of regulatory policies were unfathomable.
While the government’s goal had been to create economic
stability within the ranching interests by developing a more
structured management approach, any structure at all was certain
to be opposed by ranchers. To counter the initial resistance to the
1934 law, the government agreed to keep grazing fees artificially
low and to give existing grazing interests priority in the permit-
ting process. Attempts to increase fees were met with strong con-
gressional opposition, and the eventual creation of the rancher-
friendly Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Influential
stockmen’s associations supported Western members of Con-
gress, who held the BLM’s purse strings, creating a decentralized
management structure that was controlled by local-level interests.
Mining regulation remained virtually intact after the passage
of the 1872 Mining Law. It was not until after the turn of the cen-
tury that the government took particular interest in hardrock
minerals, oil, gas, and chemicals. About 150 million acres of pub-
lic land were gradually reserved as the conservation ethic began
to emerge, and the public sought to have some sort of return for
the profits being made by large companies. In 1917, Congress
granted the secretary of agriculture authority to lease lands with
hardrock mineral claims on them, and in 1920 the Mineral Leas-
20
Background and History

ing Act was passed. In order to maintain some level of govern-
ment control, the statute allowed private companies to lease land,
but not to purchase claims. Instead, a rudimentary royalty system
was passed to give the federal government a percentage for re-
sources found on public land, a program that did not invoke con-
troversy until the advent of the environmental movement.
Intensive Management: 1950–1960
After World War II the United States changed dramatically, from
shortages to abundance, from a work-intensive society to one that
had leisure time, and from war-related industries to more spe-
cialized, technology-driven companies. Americans had more dis-
posable income, more time in which to spend it, and more trans-
portation options that gave them a sense of almost limitless
mobility. These changes opened the door to recreational activities
and created a desire for families to enjoy the outdoors.
At the same time, the U.S. Forest Service was attempting to
manage the national forests under conflicting mandates. The 1897
Organic Act required the agency to improve and protect the for-
est reserves, while at the same time requiring the Forest Service to
provide a continuous supply of timber for the nation’s needs.
There were competing goals of protection, regulation, and public
use that led to decades of conflict both within the agency and out-
side of government. 
In parallel actions involving the BLM and the Forest Service,
the federal government began to take a second look at public
rangelands. Through the 1950s and early 1960s, ranching interests
still controlled grazing policies despite any attempt to weaken
their hold on the BLM. Groups such as the National Cattlemen’s
Beef Association, which had developed statewide chapters, con-
tinued to make large contributions to Western legislators and
joined with other powerful interests whenever any change in
public land use was being proposed.
Few of the early environmental organizations focused on en-
ergy policy, concentrating instead on wilderness and natural re-
sources. Ironically, the postwar period’s emphasis on con-
sumerism and mobility was having a major impact on the oil and
gas industry. More vehicles on the road meant a higher demand
for fuel, as did consumer purchasing of appliances and overall
national energy needs. Congress, however, was hesitant to initi-
ate any major changes in energy laws, and it limited its regulatory
An Overview
21

activity to three pieces of legislation. The Multiple Mineral De-
velopment Act of 1954 covered hardrock minerals claims being
leased for oil, and the Common Varieties Act of 1955 deleted pro-
visions related to substances such as pumice, clay, and cinders
from the 1872 Mining Law. Another 1955 statute, the Surfaces Re-
sources Act, restricted the surface use of mineral claims to those
required for mining (Davis 2001). Generally, though, consumer
interests for more energy trumped environmental organizations’
efforts to reform the 1872 law. Most groups were still focused on
pollution and wilderness, and the petroleum and mining indus-
tries’ power in Washington stayed strong enough to keep conflict
to a minimum.
Consultation and Conflict: 1960– 
Some scholars believe that one of the major factors influencing
natural resource conflicts since 1960 has been the country’s de-
mographic changes. In 1960 the population of the thirteen West-
ern states was about 28 million, or 15.7 percent of the nation’s
total. Over the next forty-five years, not only would the percent-
age of Western residents increase substantially but, in addition,
the region would become the most urbanized area of the United
States.  In 1990, about three-fourths of the nation was considered
urbanized; in the West, more than 86 percent was urbanized,
with nearly 89 percent of the Pacific considered urban (ibid.).
The most dramatic growth has been in the states of Alaska, Ari-
zona, and Nevada—states that also have a high percentage of
public lands.
The change from a rural population to an urban one has
brought about changes and conflicts over natural resources. Ur-
banization has led to a reduced reliance upon mining, logging,
and other extractive industries, one of the factors responsible for
the demise of many timber- and mining industry–based small
towns. As jobs in those industries have disappeared, so, too, have
the people who once depended upon them. Not everyone left
communities like Superior, Arizona, or Roseburg, Oregon, but
younger generations found that the loss of a major employer also
meant the loss of opportunity.
With the publication of Rachel Carson’s groundbreaking
book, Silent Spring, in 1962, the public gained an awareness of the
dangers posed by many of the chemicals that had been devel-
oped during World War II. Pesticides, chemical fertilizers, and
22
Background and History

toxic substances that had been used as part of the military arse-
nal had found their way into U.S. agriculture. Carson docu-
mented the impact on the country’s songbird populations, not-
ing that she no longer heard the bird calls that usually
accompanied the start of spring and the end of hibernation. In-
stead, the avian world was silent, and she had decided to find
out why. Carson’s research led to a series of warnings and de-
bates over the role of technology, and questions about why so
many substances had been used with so little concern about how
they might affect the soil, plants, wildlife, and human beings.
She was vilified by the chemical industry; many scientists criti-
cized her research methods, motivation, and even the fact that
she was a woman. A Federal Pest Control Review member said
that he “thought she was a spinster, [so] what’s she so worried
about genetics for?” (Kline 2000, 75).
Silent Spring’s influence went far beyond alerting the public
to the dangers of chemicals, however. It opened up a period of cit-
izen participation and activism that resulted in the beginnings of
the contemporary environmental movement. That activism
quickly spread from initiatives related to toxic chemicals to con-
cerns about forests, natural scenic areas, wilderness, and other
natural resources. What had been started by Muir and the Sierra
Club expanded during the 1960s and 1970s to cover every con-
ceivable species and issue. President John F. Kennedy pushed for-
ward pollution legislation during his brief administration, and
his successor, Lyndon Johnson, focused attention on the appreci-
ation of nature and wild places.
What government agencies and industry groups did not ex-
pect was the rapid growth and popularity of the environmental
movement. For the first time, industry interests faced real oppo-
sition from both new and established groups who raised concerns
about the damage caused by overgrazing. In 1964, the Classifica-
tion and Multiple Use Act (CMU) required the BLM to apply the
same standards for multiple use to rangelands as were required
for national forests. Under Interior Secretary Stewart Udall, the
federal government took a more proactive role in managing graz-
ing, rather than simply responding to the demands of livestock
owners.
A typical example of the shift in both governmental and pub-
lic attitudes is Sequoia National Park. As described previously,
massive increases in the number of visitors and vehicles had se-
verely degraded the park’s ecosystem. It was not until 1974 that
An Overview
23

a planning report underscored the warnings of infrastructure
impacts and recommendations written in 1930. The NPS eventu-
ally removed 282 buildings, 1 million square feet of asphalt,
buried propane tanks, and miles of overhead power lines, and
converted the old village market into an interpretive center. Com-
mercial enterprises were moved out of the park, the grove was re-
stored, and a shuttle system plan is under development (Leonard
2005). These changes in park management would not have oc-
curred were it not for the role of the environmental movement,
especially in states like California.
Environmental groups have found a niche in the West; not
only have the mainstream groups maintained a presence in cities
like San Francisco, Missoula, and Santa Fe, but, in addition, hun-
dreds of grassroots groups have mushroomed to deal with more
local and regionalized concerns. The Federation of Fly Fishers
(Livingston, Montana), High Country Citizens’ Alliance (Crested
Butte, Colorado), Nevada Tahoe Conservation District (Stateline,
Nevada), and Center for Biological Diversity (Tucson, Arizona)
are typical of the kinds of nongovernmental organizations that
exist today as a result of the expansion of environmentalism in
the West.
Some communities that were once dependent upon natural
resource–based employers found a new base for their economy—
tourism. Those near recreational areas turned timber jobs into
service industry employment. In Flagstaff, Arizona, for instance,
new federal regulations led to reductions in logging in the Co-
conino, Kaibab, and Prescott national forests, and the subsequent
closing of local mills. But the city is less than two hours’ drive
from the Grand Canyon, and less than one hour from a ski area
and the red rock area of Sedona, Arizona. Realizing that there was
little to be gained by trying to stop a national change in natural
resource policies, the city began to move toward a hospitality-
based economy, building hundreds of new motel and hotel
rooms, restaurants, and second homes for owners from Phoenix,
Las Vegas, and California.
Not everyone rushed to become part of the tourist boom,
though, and even environmental groups balked at large new de-
velopments and traffic leading into the Grand Canyon. Many
were discouraged by the new Indian casinos being built on the in-
terstate highways, and the mushrooming gasoline stations, mini
markets, and chain restaurants that seemed to appear overnight.
Others were dismayed by efforts to thin forests under the provi-
24
Background and History

sions of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003, concerned
that the timber industry was trying to make a comeback under
the guise of ecological restoration and wildfire prevention.
Another factor that has been advanced for the controversies
that took place after 1960 is the redefinition of the concept of con-
servation. Gifford Pinchot’s goal of national efficiency through
scientific management, which had been the cornerstone of na-
tional policy throughout the first half of the twentieth century,
was gradually replaced after World War II with a belief that com-
modity production should be secondary, rather than primary, to
interests relating to outdoor recreation, wildlife protection, and
preservation of scenic areas for aesthetic reasons. Pinchot’s defi-
nition of multiple use was replaced by a new one—with new ad-
versaries and supporters.
While interest in natural resource problems has waxed and
waned since 1960 as some environmental issues have taken
precedence over others, there has been one key shift in direction.
In the late 1950s through the early 1970s, much of the public and
governmental concern was over pollution, primarily water and
air quality, and later, over hazardous waste and toxic pollution.
A deadly smog siege in New York in 1962 resulting in eighty
deaths focused attention on air quality in urban areas; the 1969
Santa Barbara oil spill represented a crisis in marine pollution. It
was during this time that most of the major environmental laws
were enacted by Congress, from the 1961 Federal Water Pollu-
tion Control Act to the Clean Air Act of 1963.  By the time that
the first Earth Day was held, on April 22, 1970, the public had
been awakened to the environmental issues brought on by both
technological change and by crisis. The National Environmental
Policy Act of 1970 (NEPA), considered by many to be the foun-
dation of modern environmental law, put new restrictions on
government projects, requiring an assessment to determine
what impact, if any, there might be on the overall environment.
At the same time Congress began fine-tuning the earlier pollu-
tion laws, passing the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Clean Water
Act of 1972. By the mid-1970s energy issues, especially those re-
lated to supply and demand, were at the top of the political
agenda. The United States, faced with the Arab oil embargo and
energy crisis of 1973–1974, took a closer look at how regulations
might affect domestic oil and gas production. From that time on,
most pollution laws reflected incremental changes rather than
wholesale reform.
An Overview
25

By the 1980s and 1990s, pollution gave way to other con-
cerns, many of which reflected a return to issues relating to natu-
ral resources. One legislative response that attempted to remedy
the divergent objectives was the Multiple Use and Sustained
Yield Act of 1960 (MUSYA). It was among the first of several at-
tempts to balance the need for timber against the desire of citizens
to use the national forests for outdoor recreation. Four years later,
the 1964 Wilderness Act gave Congress, rather than the Forest
Service, the authority to designate tracts of land as wilderness.
The designation trumped the MUSYA, essentially eliminating
any development that was permitted under the definition of mul-
tiple use. Despite the two statutes, timber harvesting continued as
the dominant use of federal lands until the 1970s. With passage of
the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (NFMA) and the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA), Con-
gress made clear its intent to retain control of public lands while
directing both the Forest Service and BLM to operate under the
evolving principle of multiple use.
The center point of the land management debate became
Alaska, which was still being homesteaded until the mid-1970s.
In 1980, the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
(ANILCA) placed 104 million acres of land under federal protec-
tion, much as forest reserves had been created in the late 1800s.
Some of the region had already gained protection with the cre-
ation of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR), but some
areas were set aside for future development because of the po-
tential for oil and natural gas drilling and production. Environ-
mental groups sought wilderness designation, but energy inter-
ests (and the Alaska congressional delegation) wanted the land to
be leased to private companies for exploration. The conflict has
not yet been resolved, despite more than twenty-five years of
hearings, protests, and lobbying by both sides, most recently in
2006.
Public land issues resurfaced in the 1970s and into the new
century because of several factors. The economic recession of the
early 1970s resulted in outmigration from the frostbelt states be-
cause of industrial and manufacturing plant closures and rising
unemployment. At the same time, sunbelt states experienced an
influx of population, lower tax rates, and employment opportu-
nities. Western states were criticized for taking advantage of the
recession by increasing energy development, even though the
temporary boom came with a high environmental cost. States’
26
Background and History

rights issues resurfaced over taxes on nonrenewable resources
such a minerals, and some states viewed Eastern interests as in-
terventionists, trying to impose their regulations on the still-fron-
tier mentality of the West. Regionalism became pervasive.
Jimmy Carter failed to win any Western state electoral votes
in the 1976 presidential election, and many leaders felt that the
former Georgia governor had little knowledge of, or concern for,
Western issues. Although he had benefited from the support of
the environmental movement, by the end of 1979 one author pro-
claimed that “the long honeymoon of the environmental move-
ment with Jimmy Carter is over” (Cawley 1993, 86). The election
of Ronald Reagan in 1980 encouraged a recurrence of the Sage-
brush Rebellions that had characterized several earlier conflicts
over grazing rights on public lands. Wise use groups, such as the
League for the Advancement of States’ Rights (LASER) and the
Center for the Defense of Free Enterprise, jumped on the Reagan
bandwagon and tried to steer it in their direction. They expected
that Reagan, who had served two terms as the governor of Cali-
fornia, would understand the needs of Western ranchers, miners,
and loggers, and that he would end the regulatory nuisances
pushed forward by environmental groups during the 1960s and
1970s. They cheered when both Reagan and his secretary of Inte-
rior, James Watt, publicly supported wise use and condemned
government intrusion.
Public rangelands re-emerged as the scene of conflict not
only because of the Sagebrush Rebellion but also because of sev-
eral major federal policies. With rangelands constituting about 70
percent of the Western states, grazing issues are a natural source
of conflict. Critics have often complained that the BLM has failed
in its role as a steward of natural resources, failing to inventory
and monitor rangeland conditions, ignoring damage to riparian
areas, and allowing uncontrolled spread of noxious and invasive
species such as cheatgrass and star thistle. Environmental groups
focused their complaints not only on the BLM but also on live-
stock owners who ignored the terms of federal grazing permits,
and an industry that seemed to control the permit process and the
BLM as well.
Cattle ranchers, in particular, have accused environmental
organizations of trying to “lock up the land” from livestock pro-
duction, putting family ranchers out of business and destroying
Western culture at the same time. This topic, discussed further in
Chapter 2, is centered in the West but has far-reaching policy and
An Overview
27

political implications reaching to Washington, D.C., and the
growing influence of members of Congress representing Western
states.
A benchmark event took place in 1990 with the designation
of the Northern spotted owl as a threatened species. For years en-
vironmental groups had sought to have the owl listed under the
1973 Endangered Species Act because its natural habitat is prima-
rily old growth forests in the Pacific Northwest. Timber interests
argued that setting aside critical habitat for the bird would limit
logging and, therefore, cause economic harm to local communi-
ties. Although the debate over forest management and practices
like clear-cutting had been going on for years, the passage of the
Endangered Species Act and the NFMA gave environmental or-
ganizations a legal foundation for changing the way forests were
protected. Most of the attention has been focused on the owl, but
by the early 1990s, 162 species in the region had been candidates
for federal listing as threatened or endangered (Dombeck, Wood,
and Williams 2003). The designation of each species brought new
disputes, new protests, and new lawsuits.
Another major conflict involved timber in roadless areas. As
early as 1952, the chief of the Forest Service had told Congress
that unless funds were appropriated to build logging roads in the
national forests, much of the most productive timber would be in-
accessible. Most roads at the time were built by the timber com-
panies, which assumed that they controlled access to them and
the land they covered. After the Forest Service got into the road-
building business using taxpayer funds, conflicts developed over
not only ownership but also access. In 1962 the attorney general
ruled that there must be reciprocal access, and the number of
miles of roads skyrocketed.
As will be discussed further in Chapter 2, the 2001 Roadless
Area Conservation Rule became the most controversial public
issue ever faced by the Forest Service, and it remains unresolved
even now. Hundreds of public meetings, more than 1.6 million
public comments on the proposed rule, countless appeals and
lawsuits, and angry protests by both supporters and opponents
of roadless areas have led to flip-flops in policy for years. Nearly
60 million acres are considered roadless areas, the majority of
which are not productive timber acreage. But millions are consid-
ered recreational areas that should be available for snowmobiles,
off-road vehicles, and other motorized vehicles.
By the start of the twenty-first century, some Americans be-
28
Background and History

lieved that the major environmental problems, such as air and
water pollution, had been solved and were no longer of critical
importance. Federal budget cuts to resource agencies had led to
closures of popular campgrounds, fewer interpretative pro-
grams, less research and monitoring of resources, and less en-
forcement of existing laws. Under President George W. Bush,
new regulations reduced public participation in natural resource
decision-making, and while cooperative collaboration became
the buzzword out of Washington, environmental groups criti-
cized the president for rollbacks of protective legislation. By 2006
the president’s political popularity had sunk to record lows, and
many observers believed that the Republican majority in Con-
gress would be soundly defeated in the midterm elections. Some
even predicted that a Democrat would be elected president in
2008.
But those predictions had little to do with the environment.
Despite an enduring presence in U.S. politics, the environmental
movement had become fragmented and lacked visible leader-
ship. Natural resource issues such as grazing on public land, log-
ging in national forests, and mining royalties were not even on
the public’s radar screen. In most public opinion polls during the
century’s first decade, the environment rarely made the list of
problems considered to be the most important. War, the economy,
health care, and education headed most lists, leading two ac-
tivists to question whether environmentalism was dead.
The chapter that follows does not attempt to answer that
question, but it does outline the major natural resource conflicts
that emerged from the twentieth century. Those issues remain on
the political agenda, and with them have come new ways of set-
tling disputes, negotiating conflict, and managing natural re-
sources in the United States. Chapter 3 goes a step further, by ex-
ploring parallel resource issues on the global level. There are
overlaps in some areas, but the level of conflict and the efforts by
individuals and groups to deal with problems are often amaz-
ingly quite similar.
References
Adams, David A. 1993. Renewable Resource Policy: The Legal-Institutional
Foundations. Washington, DC: Island.
Cawley, R. McGreggor. 1993. Federal Land, Western Anger: The Sagebrush
Rebellion and Environmental Politics. Lawrence: University Press of
Kansas.
An Overview
29

Clawson, Marion. 1983. The Federal Lands Revisited. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Davis, Charles, ed. 2001. Western Public Lands and Environmental Politics.
2d ed. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Dombeck, Michael P., Christopher A. Wood, and Jack E. Williams. 2003.
From Conquest to Conservation: Our Public Lands Legacy. Washington, DC:
Island.
Kline, Benjamin. 2000. First along the River: A Brief History of the U.S. En-
vironmental Movement. San Francisco: Acada.
Leonard, Bruce. 2005. “Returning the Land to the Giants.” National Parks
79, no. 1 (winter): 18–22.
Miller, Char. 2001. Gifford Pinchot and the Making of Modern Environmen-
talism. Washington, DC: Island.
O’Sullivan, John L. 1839. “The Great Nation of Futurity.” United States
Democratic Review 6, no. 23: 426–430.
Schulman, Bruce J. 2005. “Governing Nature, Nurturing Government:
Resource Management and the Development of the American States,
1900–1912.” Journal of Policy History 17, no. 4: 375–403.
30
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
A
s outlined in Chapter 1, conflicts over natural resources began
when the first settlers arrived on the coast of colonial
America. Stories of potential wealth brought immigrants
looking for land, timber, minerals, and adventure. They quickly
began exploiting what they found, cutting down forests for ships,
housing, and fuel, and clearing land for agriculture. Settlement
meant claims and sales of vast parcels of land to private owners,
who then broke the parcels up and sold them to others.
Unlike the colonial experience, much of the West was pur-
chased by the newly emerging federal government. Many of the
contemporary conflicts relating to natural resources in the United
States have their roots in the West, in large part because that is
where many of those resources are found. Much of the acreage
that is federally owned and managed as national forests, range-
lands, and protected areas is in Western states, where privately
owned land is less common than in the East or South. Although
there is a significant amount of mining in the East and Appalachia
(primarily coal production), and significant amounts of petro-
leum and gas are extracted in the Southwest, the controversies
that accompany resources in those regions are primarily related
to the impact of fossil-fueled power plants on air quality and acid
rain. Similarly, national forests have been designated in nearly
every state. But in the South, timber sales have declined over the
past fifty years, and the amount of lumber being harvested is not
nearly at the scale of what takes place in the Pacific Northwest.
31

Livestock grazing on public land is a Western enterprise, and
many of the nation’s most visited parks and monuments are in
the thirteen Western states.
This chapter looks at four of the nation’s most enduring con-
troversies involving minerals, oil, and natural gas exploration
and drilling; policies relating to protected areas such as national
parks and monuments; rangeland management, and livestock
grazing on public lands; and timber and forest conflicts, usually
over old growth trees. Although some of the conflicts are more lo-
calized than others, there is a pattern to many of the struggles
being fought by environmental organizations and advocates, in-
dustry interests, local, state, and national governments, con-
sumers, public interest groups, and regulatory agencies. Despite
the intensity of the dispute, or the bitterness of the debate, there
are efforts being made to create collaborative partnerships, to
reach consensus on even the most intractable issues, and to de-
vise new ways of managing the nation’s natural resources. The
four sections that follow provide an overview of the controversy,
identify the primary stakeholders, and explore the strategies
used, both successfully and unsuccessfully, to resolve conflict.
Minerals, Oil, and Natural Gas
Exploration and Drilling
Although the definition of natural resource, explained in Chapter
1, can be confusing, that is not the case with nonrenewable re-
sources. They exist on earth in fixed amounts and generally can-
not be replenished. A nonrenewable resource is considered de-
pleted when 80 percent of its total estimated supply has been
removed and used. Supplies of the remaining 20 percent are usu-
ally too expensive to find, extract, and process. Only a few non-
renewables, including aluminum, can be used and then recycled;
most are finite.
Minerals, the first class of nonrenewable resources, consist of
chemical elements or compounds, usually in solid form, that
occur naturally in the earth’s crust, the lithosphere. Minerals were
produced through geochemical processes that occurred over hun-
dreds of millions of years. They generally fall into two categories:
metallic, such as iron, aluminum, copper, and tin, and nonmetal-
lic, such as sand and salt. Another class of natural resources re-
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

lated to mining—fossil fuels—includes coal, natural gas, and pe-
troleum, or oil. Unlike minerals, fossil fuels are the remains of an-
cient plants and animals that have been compressed for millions
of years by geophysical processes (Cable and Cable 1995).
The U.S. economy has been driven, in large part, by natural
resources discovered from the beginning of western expansion in
the 1800s and into the twenty-first century. In California, the dis-
covery of gold in 1849 led to a rush of settlement and exploration,
even though the land belonged to Mexico and was occupied by
U.S. troops. Another gold rush in the Klondike in 1896 made the
purchase of Alaska an important addition to the territories of the
United States. In Wyoming, the discovery of one of the world’s
largest oilfields in the early 1900s caused cycles of boom and bust
that continued until a second period of expansive growth in 2000.
King Coal dominated U.S. fossil fuel policy for decades until
other forms of energy were discovered and produced.
Similarly, mining regulations and laws have evolved gradu-
ally, from the mid-1800s when informal mining districts and
codes were created, to the enactment of the first federal law in
1866, to the 1872 Mining Law, which continues to govern much of
the industry today. For the most part, the mining, oil, and natural
gas industries have been regulated by economic liberalism, the
belief that government and society should have minimal interac-
tion, and then only as a means of facilitating additional energy
production (Klyza 1996).
The 1872 legislation was designed to bring structure, even if
minimal in its impact, to the growing mining industry. The land
remains under federal ownership, with the leases generating rev-
enue, estimated at about $2 billion per year in royalties, split
evenly between the state and the federal government. The Min-
eral Leasing Act of 1920 gave 37.5 percent of mineral leasing rev-
enues to the states, with another 52.5 percent allocated to the fed-
eral Reclamation Fund for water projects.
Supply and Demand
Understanding the role of minerals and fossil fuels is critical be-
cause of the realities of supply and demand, and because those
supplies are dwindling in the face of increasing demand. Federal
agencies, including the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), have
warned about the domestic reserves of minerals, which are con-
sidered adequate for the next several decades. The exceptions are
Minerals, Oil, and Natural Gas
33

chromium, cobalt, platinum, tin, gold, and palladium. But the
USGS says that present reserves of other key minerals will not
satisfy U.S. demand for more than 100 years without increased re-
cycling, conservation, or substitution by other minerals. Identi-
fied coal reserves in the United States are expected to last another
300 years (Cable and Cable 1995).
The status of natural gas and oil are quite different. A half-
century ago, a Shell Oil geophysicist, M. King Hubbert, proposed
that there would come a time when the amount of oil that the
United States could pump out of the ground would reach its peak
and then begin to fall. That peak occurred in 1970, and then sup-
plies dwindled while demand continued to rise. The United
States began to import oil from other countries, increasingly those
in the Middle East; by 2006, more than 60 percent of the country’s
oil supplies were coming from abroad. Worse yet, producers be-
lieve that within the next fifteen years, the world’s oil supply will
also reach its peak (Jenkins 2005). Even if more oil can be found,
the resource still remains finite, and conflicts over supply are in-
evitable.
When U.S. gasoline prices jumped past the $3 per gallon
mark in 2005, consumers were angered by reports that oil com-
panies were experiencing record profits. Industry officials
pointed to the ups and downs of oil prices: during the 1980s and
1990s, the price of a barrel of oil ranged from nearly $100 per bar-
rel down to about $10 per barrel. The dry spells when many com-
panies declare bankruptcy can sometimes be offset by periods of
growth and consumer demand, they note, and also affect other
segments of the economy. In 1980, Congress imposed a windfall
profits tax when the war between Iraq and Iran caused U.S. prices
to skyrocket. The tax was withdrawn in 1988, after countries such
as Saudi Arabia expanded their operations and U.S. profits fell
dramatically. Some analysts believe that imposition of another
windfall profits tax now, even with the price of oil approaching
$80 a barrel, would put the United States at a competitive disad-
vantage in the international market. At the same time it is un-
likely that the market for oil and gas will be reduced, because of
increased demand in developing countries such as China.
There are two major conflicts that typify contemporary prob-
lems relating to these forms of nonrenewable natural  resources:
the calculation of value and a fair return for extraction of re-
sources, and environmental and infrastructure damage caused by
industries and processes.
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Extraction and Money
The issues of value and return are not ones that can be dealt with
simply by consulting accountants and attorneys. How much
should companies pay to the government, and, indirectly, to citi-
zens, for the rights to conduct mining or drilling operations on
publicly owned  land? That question has frustrated both industry
interests and government officials since the 1800s. The debate has
broadened to include not just the right to conduct operations
within the public domain but also the question of reducing and
mitigating the damage these industries cause to the environment.
To help deal with the value issue, several states have enacted
severance taxes imposed on extractive industries like mining, oil,
and natural gas. The taxes are based on the premise that there is
a value attached to the minerals severed from the earth, and that
the industry that receives the benefits (profits) ought to pay back
a portion of those revenues to the state. In the past, severance
taxes have been used for funding schools and government serv-
ices such as fighting wildfires and road building, producing
budget surpluses and incentives for states to create trust funds for
projects such as college scholarships, economic assistance, pre-
serving wildlife habitat, and expanding health care insurance.
New Mexico received about $1.8 billion in royalties and taxes in
2005, based on nearly $12 billion worth of oil and gas production;
Colorado’s severance tax rate of about 2 percent on the $8 billion
in 2005 production resulted in considerably less. From 2000 to
2004 annual severance tax revenues varied, from a low of $23 mil-
lion to a high of $107 million, making financial planning prob-
lematic (Ring 2005). 
In November 2005, another attempt at mining reform was
made when the House of Representatives approved an obscure
provision in the budget bill that would increase the price that
mining companies pay, currently $2.50–$5 an acre, to $1,000 an
acre or fair market value, whichever is higher. According to the
Congressional Budget Office, the federal government could real-
ize $158 million over the next five years, ostensibly to increase
revenues that would then be applied to the federal deficit
(Burkhart 2005). While this might seem like a way of resolving the
conflict over the low land prices now in effect, the impact would
have a spillover effect on mineral rights. Under the budget pro-
posal, the land sales would be accompanied by the rights to any
minerals found on the land, ending the existing royalty system.
Minerals, Oil, and Natural Gas
35

Damage from Mining Activities
There are many types of damage attributable to these industries
and practices, ranging from roads that bear the weight of heavy
equipment to piles of tailings from mines, many of which are
abandoned. The burden of infrastructure damage falls primarily
on local governments. The environmental impacts of mining and
oil and natural gas drilling affect a much larger population and
are long term. Water quality is often compromised as runoff from
mining (acids, silt, and toxic substances) seeps into the ground
and percolates down into groundwater, or finds its way into sur-
face waters. Pollution from mining activities, such as dust and
other particulate matter, is known to cause damage to public
health and affect air quality. Waste, including piles of leftover
rock and materials, must be hauled to another site, buried, or oth-
erwise recovered.
The history of dealing with the environmental impact of
mining and fossil-fuel production in the United States is not
pretty. Nineteenth-century mining operations were frequently de-
scribed in graphic terms. One writer who visited the lead mines
southwest of St. Louis in 1818 told of winding along a country-
side of “pits, heaps of gravel, and spars, and other rubbish con-
stantly accumulating.” A gold mine operation near Dahlonega,
Georgia, was observed as having “[a]ll the valleys being dug up
and washed gravel thrown into heaps, their beauty was entirely
destroyed, and the scene resembled a series of brickyards.” And
Jamestown, North Carolina, was pictured as “turned topsy-turvy
by the gold diggers, who had utterly ruined the valley for agri-
cultural purposes” (Smith 1987).
One strategy for dealing with the environmental damage
caused by mining has been legislation, although it often comes
long after a problem has been identified. In 1977, Congress ad-
dressed the issue of coal mining and reclamation with passage of
the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, placing respon-
sibility for environmental cleanup under the Office of Surface
Mining (OSM) within the U.S. Department of the Interior. The
law requires active coal mine operators to reclaim the land as they
go; previously, mines were simply abandoned, creating hazards
from open portals and vertical openings, piles and embankments,
and clifflike high walls. The OSM has a three-region organiza-
tional structure that handles mines in twenty-five states and four
Indian tribes in the West,  midcontinent, and Appalachia. Envi-
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ronmental cleanup costs are paid by a combination of state and
federal funds, and by tonnage-based reclamation fees paid by ac-
tive coal producers. This system has reduced the types of conflicts
common to the cleanup of hazardous waste sites under the na-
tion’s Superfund legislation.
Oil and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
The best known, and still unresolved, issue that typifies the envi-
ronmental conflicts over oil exploration and drilling in the United
States is that of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR). The
value of Alaskan wilderness was first publicized by Bob Mar-
shall, one of the foremost environmental activists of the 1930s.
Marshall sought to have the region, which was not yet a state,
protected in pristine condition in perpetuity. The territory was
seen as valuable for other reasons, however. The Department of
Defense saw the potential for military bases, especially during the
Cold War with the Soviet Union. Whalers and fur traders, who
had long used Alaska for fishing, hunting, and trapping, assumed
that the region would stay much the same as it had always been,
remote and forsaken by commercial development. Real estate in-
vestors saw the potential for an economic boom if the issue of
transportation could be settled. By 1959, when Alaska became a
state, political and economic interests were paying more attention
to the area than were environmental organizations, which were
only beginning to recognize the environmental potential and pos-
sibilities for degradation.
During the 1960s, Alaska became more than just a far-off ex-
tension of the continental United States. The Atlantic Richfield Oil
Company had discovered oil in the Prudhoe Bay area in 1967, and
development of new energy sources was frenzied. President
Richard Nixon chose Walter Hickel, the state’s governor, as his
secretary of the Department of the Interior, giving him the inside
track on any and all policies affecting Alaska. Hickel had been in
a lengthy pursuit of an economic goal—the building of a pipeline
to carry oil from the state’s North Slope to the port of Valdez,
where it could be loaded onto tankers for shipping.
Hickel’s plans coincided with the growing influence of the
environmental movement, whose leaders were looking for a fo-
cusing event that would push their activist agenda from the
drawing board to Washington, D.C. That event was the January
29, 1969, Santa Barbara oil spill; a Union Oil drilling rig six miles
Minerals, Oil, and Natural Gas
37

off the coast ruptured, causing 200,000 gallons of crude oil to bub-
ble to the surface. The resulting 800-square-mile oil slick spread
over 35 miles of the California coastline and south to the islands
nearby. Workers spent nearly two weeks trying to control the
leaking oil well, which caused the deaths of thousands of shore-
birds and marine mammals.
Three factors relating to the oil spill galvanized the grass-
roots movement that subsequently developed. First, the news
media coverage was unsurpassed compared with any previous
environmental event. The imagery was impossible to ignore, as
dead seals, dolphins, and birds covered in oil washed ashore.
Second, subsequent investigations revealed that the USGS had
given the company permission to cut corners and operate the
drilling platform with materials below federal and state stan-
dards. Because the site was beyond California’s three-mile
coastal zone, the company did not have to comply with state
standards; the backlash against Union Oil was immediate. Third,
there were no partisan forces at work. Neither Republicans nor
Democrats could support Union Oil’s operations, given the level
of damage and the public uproar that followed. The event virtu-
ally ruined the oil industry’s reputation, and new outraged ac-
tivists cut up their oil company credit cards, boycotted gas sta-
tions, and called upon Congress to strengthen regulations and
laws on offshore drilling.
Less than two weeks later, on February 10, 1969, plans were
announced for the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System (TAPS), a pro-
posed 798-mile-long conduit for oil that would vastly increase
U.S. energy capabilities. It is unclear whether Hickel and the oil
companies underestimated the impact of the Santa Barbara oil
spill, or the strength of the environmental organizations that had
seized upon the event to mobilize support for stronger legisla-
tion. Three major lawsuits against the project were filed by oppo-
nents, and public skepticism over claims that there would be min-
imal environmental damage grew. By early 1971, President Nixon
had replaced Hickel, and a new Department of the Interior secre-
tary, Rogers Morton, held hearings on the pipeline. Environmen-
talists formed a new group, the Alaska Public Interest Coalition,
to coordinate opposition to the project, and the oil industry re-
mained steadfast in its position that new sources of oil were es-
sential to the nation’s economy.
Even after the department released documents in 1972 that
favored oil drilling to reduce the reliance on foreign sources, en-
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

vironmentalists continued to litigate against the agency, using the
new National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the Mineral
Leasing Act. Public sentiment against TAPS was tempered, how-
ever, by the 1973 Arab oil embargo, when the images of birds
stuck in tar were replaced by scenes of hundreds of cars stretched
in lines waiting to fill up on gasoline. By the end of the year, the
pipeline project had passed through Congress and was signed by
the president.
Having lost one battle to preserve Alaskan wilderness, envi-
ronmental organizations turned to existing legislation rather than
litigation. In 1960, the federal government had set aside 8.9 mil-
lion acres as the Arctic National Wildlife Range; another 3.7 mil-
lion acres were added later under the Alaska Native Claims Set-
tlement Act (ANCSA) of 1971. In 1980, the Alaska National
Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) became another pro-
tective measure supported by environmental groups, reclassify-
ing the initial 8.9 million acres as the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge and adding 9.1 million acres of adjoining public lands.
The pipeline corridor is adjacent to the ANWR, an area almost as
large as New England (Layser 2006).
The current conflict is almost a repeat of what happened with
TAPS. A consortium of environmental organizations is working
with the Canadian government and indigenous groups reliant
upon the caribou herds that traverse the refuge to keep the area
pristine. Oil interests point to provisions of ANILCA that exclude
from protection areas with significant development potential.
Other stakeholders include the Inupiat Eskimos, who support
further exploration because oil drilling has brought prosperity to
their people, and the Coalition for American Energy Security,
which includes the Inupiat and the motorized recreational vehi-
cle industry and users, transportation companies that would
profit from shipping, labor unions, and agricultural interests.
Supporters of exploration and drilling cite the need for de-
veloping domestic sources of fuel and the crisis in the Persian
Gulf as prime reasons for reducing U.S. dependence upon foreign
oil. The Coastal Plain would become the third largest oil field in
the country, according to the Department of the Interior. The war
in Iraq helped bolster their position by framing ANWR as part of
the debate over national security. Opponents have relied less on
the issues of damage to wildlife and environmental degradation,
and have argued that the answer to oil dependency lies with con-
servation of fossil fuels and reduced energy use, not more
Minerals, Oil, and Natural Gas
39

drilling. The two sides dispute the potential amount of fuel
within ANWR, the number of jobs that could be created, and pro-
jections on the price of oil.
But the images of an environmental disaster that worked so
well after the Santa Barbara oil spill have not resonated as well
with ANWR. Since 1986, Congress has gone back and forth on
the future of oil drilling in the refuge. Members of Alaska’s con-
gressional delegation, who have usually held positions of power
on natural resource committees, have sometimes lost out to
other committee leaders who also claim jurisdiction over the
issue. Focusing events, such as the 11 million gallons of oil
spilled along Alaska’s Prince William Sound by the Exxon Valdez
in 1989, have set supporters of drilling back, but only temporar-
ily. The doom-and-gloom predictions by environmentalists that
the region had suffered catastrophic damage never came to
pass. The 1990 Persian Gulf War against Saddam Hussein after
his country’s invasion of Kuwait again brought forth calls for
congressional action on ANWR for reasons of national security.
Leasing proposals were damaged by allegations of corruption
by the owners of the TAPS and a world oil glut when Saudi Ara-
bia increased its production.
Members of Congress have periodically reopened the
ANWR debate, with varying degrees of success. Supporters
looked to President George W. Bush and his promise of energy in-
dependence, and oil companies pledged to use drilling opera-
tions that would mitigate any environmental damage. The federal
budget was held hostage to provisions relating to ANWR, al-
though the political climate seemed to favor drilling as gas prices
rose again. What this says about conflicts related to oil explo-
ration and drilling is that there seems to be no middle ground.
Environmental organizations have vowed to tie up proposals in
court for years, arguing that no drilling is the only acceptable out-
come. Oil companies keep relying on rising gas prices and issues
relating to national security and the Middle East. There is, it
seems, no room for compromise or collaboration, only periodic
forays into enemy territory.
One of the newer controversies will be dependent upon
where the next major phase of exploration and drilling takes
place. Although the debate over ANWR is certainly not over, sup-
porters of the oil drilling project are using a different strategy,
which is likely to prolong the conflict. Rather than relying upon
Alaskan supplies, energy producers are shifting to new sources in
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

different places. One analyst has predicted that 400,000 new nat-
ural gas wells will be built in the Rocky Mountain region over the
next fifteen years. A recent report by the RAND Corporation esti-
mates that enough oil can be produced from oil shale in
Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah to more than triple Saudi Arabia’s
proven oil reserves. Oil shale is actually a hard rock called marl-
stone that, when heated, produces a low-grade oil. The technol-
ogy is still in the early stages, and there are major environmental
consequences to digging mines, using large amounts of water,
dealing with leftover shale, and refining and transporting the oil
(Lay 2005).
Commercial production is probably a long way off, even
though Congress and the Department of the Interior are support-
ive of oil shale research and the Bureau of Land Management has
begun a ten-year program to lease small parcels of public land to
try out new methods of production. But as a political strategy, fo-
cusing attention on other sources of fossil fuel, whether natural
gas or oil shale, is a smart way to keep environmental organiza-
tions busy. If drilling in ANWR continues to be shuffled on and
off the political agenda, energy companies can keep the heat on
other projects, forcing opponents to spend more resources and
time on less well-known controversies. The conflicts never really
end, they just get moved to other states.
Protected Areas Policy
In 1916, the British ambassador to the United States, James Bryce,
called the creation of the national park system “the best idea
America ever had.” His comments reflect what many people be-
lieve to be one of the major accomplishments in natural resource
policy—the development of a system to protect the country’s nat-
ural and scenic areas. But the National Park Service (NPS) and the
lands and sites that the agency administers have not been with-
out controversy.
The first designated protected area in the United States, Yel-
lowstone National Park, established in 1872, resulted from the ro-
manticized view of the Western frontier that had taken hold after
a decade of exploration and discovery. But eighteen years passed
before a second park was designated, and many members of Con-
gress were not supportive of the concept of withdrawing lands
from public use, or of the cost of protecting and maintaining new
Protected Areas Policy
41

parks. Entrance fees were instituted at Mount Rainier in 1908,
Crater Lake in 1911, and Yosemite National Park in 1913.
Each area was managed individually under the leadership of
three different cabinet agencies, dependent upon where they
were located and the purpose for their preservation. Three de-
partments—War, Interior, and Agriculture—held jurisdiction
over the parks; there was no “system” to coordinate park man-
agement or policies. With passage of the 1916 Organic Act, park
officials were given the seemingly dichotomous roles of preserv-
ing nature and providing recreational opportunities, placed
under the new National Park Service in the Department of the In-
terior (Dilsaver 1994, 2).
The management style of the NPS began to change during
the 1960s and 1970s. From the passage of the Organic Act on, the
primary purpose of the administrative structure was the preser-
vation of scenery, and later, sites of historical or cultural interest.
Decisions on how best to do that were mostly routine and based
upon how much money was available from one fiscal year’s
budget to the next. But with the advent of the environmental
movement and the accompanying advances in the field of ecol-
ogy, science began to play a much more important role in deci-
sion-making. External reports and analyses, many of them writ-
ten by environmental organizations, focused on the need to base
management on scientific research and ecological concerns,
rather than on visitation, legislative pressures, or operational
needs. Many outside observers were critical of the lack of infor-
mation and monitoring of species and the lack of any systematic
planning or inventories. While some efforts to expand staffing
and employees’ natural resource expertise were made in the
1980s, by the end of the decade other needs had been prioritized
(Sellars 1997).
During the 1990s, the federal emphasis on efficiency and the
reinventing government movement also affected protected areas
such as national parks. Bureaucratic agencies responsible for the
delivery of public goods and services, including the NPS, were
subjected to review and audits as part of the performance man-
agement focus of President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al
Gore, Jr. As a result, park managers were increasingly forced to
function with fewer resources, leading to a greater emphasis on
resort-type recreation and less emphasis on protection of natural
resources (Lowry 2001).
Although the issues surrounding protected areas are numer-
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ous, there are three that have created the most problems and con-
troversy, all of which are related to funding: the fee demonstra-
tion program enacted by Congress in 1996, the lack of sufficient
staff and creation of a maintenance backlog within the parks’ in-
frastructure, and the increasing number of protected area desig-
nations.
Fee Demonstration Program
All four of the nation’s land management agencies have been cre-
ative in finding ways to pay for basic operational expenses, as
well as programmatic and research needs, especially during an
era when parks, monuments, and other protected areas are facing
budget cuts. Most of the park units charge a daily or weekly en-
trance fee, and some services within the units are also fee-based.
Other forms of protected areas, such as battlefields, rivers, trails,
and urban parks, where there is unfettered access, generally do
not charge a fee.
In 1996, Congress enacted the Recreational Fee Demonstra-
tion Program (RFDP) to help pay for the increasing number of
visitors and rising operational costs at protected areas managed
by the NPS, U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management,
and the Fish and Wildlife Service. The fee demo program, as it is
known, was established on a trial basis in November 1996 at
forty-seven NPS units. Fees were increased in some units, and
collected for the first time in others. The plan was to return 80 per-
cent of the new revenues to the sites where they were collected.
The other 20 percent of the additional revenue was to be distrib-
uted by the director of the NPS to special emphasis areas in the
parks. In March 1997, forty-five NPS units were added to the pro-
gram, with another seven added in April 1998. The legislation
called for a trial period of three years, and the program was ex-
tended five times.
Additional fees were implemented in 1997 by the Forest Ser-
vice: the Adventure Pass, which is charged for parking a vehicle
on any road for any amount of time within the boundaries of four
national forests in southern California; and the Northwest Forest
Pass, implemented in 2000 at twenty national forests in Oregon
and Washington and in the North Cascades National Park Service
Complex. That latter fee applies to parking and trail and facility
use. Violations of any of the fee demo programs are infractions
(less serious than a misdemeanor), resulting in a maximum $100
Protected Areas Policy
43

fine. Other fee-based programs include the America the Beautiful
Pass, an interagency pass that covers the entrance fee and recre-
ation amenity fee for federal recreational lands.
Agency officials estimate that since the fee demo program
was implemented, about half of the revenues have gone to reduce
the backlog of infrastructure maintenance. Trails have been ap-
proved and improved to comply with federal laws such as the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Historic structures have been re-
habilitated, cultural landscapes have been restored, and museum
objects have been protected. Additional funds have been allo-
cated for visitor orientation and education (mostly capital im-
provements such as amphitheater repair) and to replace camp-
ground structures and informational signs.
Between the first full year of the program’s operation, 1997,
and 2004, several groups and agencies have published reports re-
flecting the controversial nature of the experiment. The General
Accounting Office (now called the Government Accountability
Office, but still using the abbreviation GAO) reported in Novem-
ber 1998 that in fiscal year 1996, the last year before the demon-
stration program was implemented, the four agencies collected a
total of about $93.3 million in fees from visitors (U.S. General Ac-
counting Office 1998). In fiscal year 1997, the total collected at fee
demonstration sites was $123.8 million of the $144.6 million in
fees collected systemwide. For 1998, nearly 85 percent of the fee
demonstration site revenues ($160 million) came from National
Park Service sites, with 11 percent from Forest Service sites, 2.1
percent from the Fish and Wildlife Service, and 2 percent from the
Bureau of Land Management.
An August 2002 report to Congress by the NPS and BLM, re-
quired by the initial fee demo legislation, found that the sites
have received additional funds to undertake projects that might
not have been possible otherwise, although the projects them-
selves could have been completed in a more timely manner. As of
2000, the sites surveyed had completed only about 11 percent of
the fee demo projects (U.S. Department of the Interior 2002). The
National Park Service commissioned a survey of public attitudes
toward fees that, unlike some other studies, included a nation-
wide sampling of visitors and nonvisitors. The June 2003 report
found that 95 percent of Americans are not familiar with the fee
demo program at all; among the people who are familiar with the
program, 94 percent support it. Eighty percent of NPS system vis-
itors think that the fee they paid was “just about right” for the
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

value received, while 11 percent said they had paid “too much.”
By a two to one margin, respondents favored lower entrance fees,
with additional fees for services utilized, rather than one large,
all-inclusive entrance fee. Perhaps the most important finding of
all was that entrance fees do not present a significant barrier to
visitation of NPS units (U.S. Department of the Interior 2003).
While there has been support for entrance fees to national
parks, fee demo sites managed by the Forest Service have been
the target of many complaints. Groups such as the Arizona No-
Fee Coalition have told their supporters not to use national
forests in which fees are charged, and if they do enter a fee demo
site, not to buy a pass. The organization notes that many visitors
refuse to purchase a pass, and often nothing happens as a result.
The GAO has been relatively critical of the agency, questioning
the lack of consistent information on the cost of collecting the fees
and on where the revenues have been spent. Noting that the ac-
curacy of some information was questionable, the GAO gave
credibility to opponents who argue that no one knows where the
money goes (U.S. General Accounting Office 2003).
A major programmatic change took place in December 2004,
when President George W. Bush signed the omnibus appropria-
tions bill containing a rider attached by Rep. Ralph Regula (R-
OH) that changed the intent and management of the fee system.
The legislation, the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act,
defined three levels of fees with a ten-year fee authorization. The
new structure includes:
1. Standard Amenity Recreation Fee: applied to developed
areas with at least six amenities: parking, a permanent
toilet, permanent trash receptacle, interpretive sign,
picnic tables, and security services;
2. Expanded Amenity Recreation Fee: applied to
campgrounds, developed boat launches, developed
swimming areas, and cabin or equipment rental;
3. Special Recreation Permit Fee: applied to commercial
users and organized events. The legislation also clarified
activities for which a fee could not be levied, including
•
Parking, undesignated parking, or picnicking along
roads or trailsides;
•
General access;
•
Dispersed areas with low or no investment, unless
specifically authorized by law;
Protected Areas Policy
45

•
Persons who are driving through, walking through,
boating through, horseback riding through, or hiking
through federal recreational lands and waters
without using the services;
•
Camping at undeveloped sites that do not provide a
minimum of six amenity services or facilities;
•
Use of overlooks or scenic pullouts.
In what might seem like a major change, the law prohibited en-
trance fees for federal recreational lands and waters managed by
the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Reclamation
(newly added to the program), or the Forest Service (the Fish and
Wildlife Service is authorized to collect entrance fees). But there
are numerous exceptions that allow the other three agencies to
charge fees for a National Conservation Area, a National Volcanic
Monument, a destination visitor or interpretive center, and other
sites that provide significant opportunities for recreation, repre-
sent significant federal investment, or in which fees can be effi-
ciently collected. Ironically, fees charged at sites managed by
these agencies have been among the most controversial, even
though the revenues collected are far less than those of the NPS.
Unlike some natural resource conflicts in which there are
signs of collaboration, the fee demo program is an issue that
sharply divides those who support the concept of having users
pay to enter protected areas and those who believe that the “pub-
lic” in public lands entitles them to free visitation and use. The
Sierra Club has opposed the program from the very beginning be-
cause the organization believes that it raises serious questions
about free public access and social equity, since the fees place a re-
gressive tax burden on those with lower incomes and those who
use the lands frequently. They also consider the fee demo pro-
gram to be “double taxation [that] can lead to increased commer-
cialization, privatization, and motorization of America’s public
lands” (Sierra Club 2006).
Although most mainstream groups have been measured in
their public opposition, several smaller organizations have made
the fee demo program the focus of bitter protests. Among the lat-
ter are the organizations Wild Wilderness, Keep the Sespe Wild
Committee, the Western Slope No-Fee Coalition, and the group
Free Our Forests. These groups are generally well connected to
one another, with members who feel strongly about the issue
when it affects sites they visit regularly.
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The Western Slope No-Fee Coalition, based in Norwood,
Colorado, is one of the more activist opposition groups, calling
the fee demo program the Recreational Access Tax, or RAT. The
coalition has accused land management agencies of circumvent-
ing agency guidelines by illegally charging fees for dispersed
areas, general access, and recreational use of undeveloped land.
Although the group says that they have attempted to work with
congressional committee staff to develop reasonable changes,
they have been unsuccessful and now are actively encouraging
defiance (Western Slope No-Fee Coalition 2006).
One of the groups whose interests are affected by the pro-
gram, but which also has other goals, is the American Hiking So-
ciety (AHS). This organization supports the recreational fee pro-
gram in concept, noting that revenues could provide funding to
land management agencies with severe budget shortages. Since
some of the funding is meant to support trails and recreational re-
sources and facilities, the group’s members benefit directly. How-
ever, the AHS, in conjunction with the Outdoor Industry Associ-
ation, has also urged Congress to conduct comprehensive
oversight hearings, including testimony from representatives
from affected constituency groups, before permanently authoriz-
ing the program. Their concerns, some of which have never been
addressed, are similar to those raised by the organizations most
opposed to the program. The difference is that their membership
continues to function with other activities beyond the fee demo
program (American Hiking Society 2006).
Several states, including Oregon, Colorado, and New
Hampshire, have passed resolutions opposing the fee demo pro-
gram, as have city governments and commercial interests. There
are numerous state-level no-fee coalitions, and opposition from
recreation organizations such as American Whitewater. Finding
support for the fees outside the federal bureaucracy is much
more difficult. The National Association of Gateway Communi-
ties, the American Recreation Coalition, and both the Southeast
and Western States Tourism Policy Councils have rallied behind
the federal government’s position. Representatives have testified
before congressional hearings, but their influence pales in com-
parison to that of the leadership of agencies within the executive
branch.
Passage of the ten-year extension of the fee demo program
does not mean that the conflict is over. Some opponents believe
that the new fee structure, confusing and often contradictory
Protected Areas Policy
47

implementation guidelines, and more negative reports about the
program’s operation will eventually reach congressional ears.
After more than ten years of support, however, the federal gov-
ernment and the affected agencies seem more committed than
ever to making the limited “pilot” program an extensive and per-
manent one.
Staffing and Infrastructure Maintenance
Staffing is a very visible problem that affects one of the primary
activities within protected areas—public outreach and interpreta-
tion. In 2005, Olympic National Park reduced the operating hours
of its visitor centers during the summer for the first time in its his-
tory, and at Acadia National Park in Maine, a $500,000 reduction
in the fiscal year budget led to a reduction in the number of the
park’s seasonal interpretative employees. California’s Death Val-
ley National Park has fifteen protection rangers to patrol 3.4 mil-
lion acres of land, down from twenty-three a few years ago. Be-
cause of the need to protect visitors from temperature extremes
and also to protect historical artifacts and petroglyphs, the staff
has minimal resources for answering questions or providing ed-
ucational programs in the park (National Parks Conservation As-
sociation 2005a.)
The National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA), a
nonprofit organization, says that on average, national parks op-
erate with only two-thirds of the money needed to cover annual
operating expenses—or a shortfall of more than $600 million per
year. Estimates as to how much it would cost to repair and re-
place the infrastructure within the national parks vary consider-
ably. The NPCA says that there is a deferred maintenance backlog
of between $4.1 and $6.8 billion, more than double the entire
yearly budget for the NPS. A 1998 report produced by the GAO
found that the NPS estimate of $6.1 billion in its maintenance
backlog was inaccurate, being based on information that was
often unreliable and an imprecise definition of the term mainte-
nance. The figure included, for instance, construction of new em-
ployee housing, land acquisition, and other activities that would
not generally be considered in the same category (U.S. General
Accounting Office 1998).
One solution has been the creation of private organizations
that have attempted to raise money and other forms of assistance
for these sites, absent sufficient federal funding. In 1935 the Na-
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tional Park Trust was established as a mechanism for the private
sector to donate land, gifts, and funds to the national parks; Con-
gress established the National Park Foundation (NPF) in 1967 as
the successor to the trust. Its first grants were made in 1968 for
restoration projects at Theodore Roosevelt’s birthplace and home
in New York. The NPF has acquired land for the Blue Ridge Park-
way, at Gettysburg, in the Virgin Islands, and in Death Valley, and
has sponsored research, surveys, and studies, staged exhibitions,
commissioned public opinion polls, published guidebooks,
launched a children’s environmental education curriculum, and
provided executive-level volunteers. Among its major accom-
plishments has been the foundation’s development of partner-
ships with private corporations, including American Airlines,
Ford Motor Company, Kodak, Discovery Communications, and
Unilever (National Park Foundation 2005).
Other private-sector efforts have focused on specific sites. In
Grand Canyon National Park, for instance, where some of the
first endangered California condors were released, there is only
one wildlife biologist on staff, who is responsible for more than 1
million acres and more than 600 wildlife species. The Grand
Canyon National Park Foundation, a nonprofit support group,
has raised more than $65,000 since 2001 to help monitor the con-
dors and provide public outreach about them. There are more
than 700 miles of trails within the park, some of which are more
than 100 years old; the shortfall for trail maintenance is estimated
at $1 million per year. Volunteers from other nonprofits, such as
the Grand Canyon Trust, are sometimes recruited to help control
the spread of invasive plants, but their work is sporadic and in-
sufficient to cover more than a small area.
One of the more controversial proposals has been to sell off
the national parks, along with the naming rights to visitor centers
and trails, partly to help balance the federal budget. Rep. Richard
Pombo (R-CA), chair of the House Committee on Resources,
floated the idea in September 2005, contending that the sales
would help eliminate many of the inherent problems some parks
face in trying to make ends meet. He later said that the idea was
just a “conversation starter,” and some critics noted that such ex-
treme proposals were not serious attempts at solving the real is-
sues faced by the National Park Service (Burkhart 2005).
But the NPS has moved forward on a new policy of aggres-
sively seeking corporate sponsorship of park projects and facilities.
Sponsors, including alcohol, tobacco, and gaming companies,
Protected Areas Policy
49

could become the “Proud Partner” within a park, and use the
NPS logo alongside their own. “This starts a slow commercializa-
tion of the national park system,” says Jeff Ruch, executive direc-
tor of Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility. “What
will be allowed stops just short of licensing ads for ‘The Official
Beer of Yosemite’ or ‘Old Faithful, Brought to You by Viagra’”
(Public Employees 2005).
In 2005, the NPS received only $17 million in private dona-
tions; Interior Secretary Gale Norton called the plan to seek out
sponsors an “exciting new approach” for broadening the funding
base for national parks. But critics argue that corporate sponsor-
ship will mean that park managers will be under more pressure
to appease donors. As Ruch notes, “Influence peddling will soon
become a major recreational activity in our national parks.”
Too Many Protected Areas?
Funding problems are exacerbated by the growing number of
areas that have been designated for federal protection. When the
agency was created in 1916, the NPS was responsible for fourteen
national parks, twenty-one national monuments, and two na-
tional reservations. The 1970 amendments to the 1916 National
Park Service Organic Act created a wide-ranging list of cate-
gories, termed “units,” greatly expanding the number of sites that
are now under the jurisdiction of the NPS, including 
•
1 International Historic Site
•
11 National Battlefields
•
3 National Battlefield Parks
•
1 National Battlefield Site
•
41 National Historical Parks
•
77 National Historical Sites
•
4 National Lakeshores
•
74 National Monuments
•
29 National Memorials
•
9 National Military Parks
•
57 National Parks
•
4 National Parkways
•
18 National Preserves
•
2 National Reserves
•
5 National Rivers
•
18 National Recreation Areas
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
10 National Seashores
•
3 National Scenic Trails
•
10 Wild and Scenic Rivers
•
11 Nondesignated Units
The NPS also is responsible for the nation’s fourteen national
cemeteries, all of which are administered in conjunction with an
associated unit and are not accounted for separately (National
Parks Conservation Association 2005b).
The process of setting aside protected areas in the United
States is somewhat complicated and highly politicized. When a
park is first proposed, Congress can enact legislation to create it,
or members can ask the secretary of the Interior to conduct a
study to determine whether there is sufficient funding for pur-
chase or maintenance. The criteria for park designations are 
•
Is the site nationally significant? Is it an outstanding
example of a particular type of resource? Does it possess
exceptional value or quality in illustrating or
interpreting the natural or cultural themes of our
nation’s heritage? Does it offer superlative opportunities
for public enjoyment or scientific study? Does it retain a
high degree of integrity as a true, accurate, and
relatively unspoiled example of a resource?
•
Is the site suitable, and not previously represented in the
park system? 
•
Is the area manageable? Can it be protected? Is it
capable of efficient administration by the Park Service at
a reasonable cost?
•
Is the NPS an appropriate manager? Or are there private
entities that would be in a better position or are already
managing the site successfully? (National Parks
Conservation Association 2005a) 
Many of the sites have been controversial because they were
designated under political pressure rather than based on recom-
mendations by organizations, or were designated with little pub-
lic support. For example, an NPS study of a proposed site, the
Moccasin Beds in Chattanooga, Tennessee, showed that the tract
of land was a significant Cherokee Indian settlement. But there
was already a golf course and another facility on the riverside
land, so the NPS objected to including the site. A local member of
Protected Areas Policy
51

Congress objected to the agency’s findings and secured enough
support for the necessary legislation to be enacted. Presidents
Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton used their power under the 1906
Antiquities Act to designate parks and preserves in Alaska, as
well as national monuments in the West. Under the administra-
tion of George W. Bush, the Office of Management and Budget
advised the NPS to make a blanket recommendation against any
new park units, including potential units clearly qualified and se-
riously threatened, according to the NPCA.
However, despite that policy, Congress designated the crash
site of Flight 93 in Pennsylvania (where an aircraft was diverted
during the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks) as a national me-
morial, and the administration agreed to support designation of a
small World War II historic site on the island of Palau, as well as
a battlefield in Virginia’s Shenandoah Valley as the 388th unit in
the NPS system. Recommendations by the NPCA for inclusion of
other sites, such as Puerto Rico’s Bioluminescent Bay (home to a
microscopic organism that glows bright green at night) and
Iowa’s Loess Hills (a unique geological formation), have not been
accepted (ibid.).
Supporters of the more established park units, especially
those with the most visitors, believe that the NPS has become a
client of members of Congress who want to bring attention to a
site, no matter how insignificant, in their district. Presumably, this
would appease areas seeking economic development, tourism,
and the dollars that a unit designation would bring. But critics
argue that even the jewels of the national park system, such as
Yosemite, Yellowstone, and the Grand Canyon, are falling into dis-
repair or suffering from a lack of staff in order to keep open areas
that might better be served if privately protected and operated.
Protected area conflicts are usually not as well publicized as
other types of natural resource controversies. While parks still
have plenty of visitors, both from the United States and other
countries, there are few nongovernmental organizations that can
raise the amount of money the parks need. Even fewer are the
number of lobbyists in Washington, D.C., who will fight for an
entire system in need. Pork-barrel politics and additional desig-
nations are more likely than additional federal funding for the
country’s national parks. Without an identifiable political base or
constituency, protected areas with fewer visitors that have less of
an economic impact on an area, may find their resources plun-
dered, sold, or lost altogether.
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Rangeland Management
Cattle ranching in the United States is a product of an influx of
Spanish missionaries in what is now Texas, who let their long-
horn cattle run freely across the open range. In 1830 an estimated
100,000 cattle roamed in Texas, and by 1860 the number had
grown to 3.5 million. In the mid-nineteenth century, cowboys
began to round up the wild cattle and drove them to areas where
they could be sold. The industry began to flourish as new breeds
were introduced, and grazing areas were free and seemingly end-
less. At the time, the vast publicly owned lands of the West were
virtually independent of any type of government regulation.
There was little understanding of, or interest in, the value of
rangelands as a natural resource.
The General Land Office, established in the Department of
the Treasury and transferred to the Department of the Interior in
1849, took on responsibility for western expansion and settle-
ment, and grazing practices gradually began to change as more
people came to the West. The 1862 Homestead Act encouraged
settlers to identify a parcel of land, up to 160 acres, for which they
received a patent. The patent owners could use the land for any
purpose: mining, grazing, farming, or cutting timber. Home-
steaders interpreted the law as meaning that they could settle on
their 160-acre parcel and then graze livestock on adjacent, un-
claimed lands. The custom of the time was based on the phrase
“He who owns the water owns the land”; fencing was nonexist-
ent. In 1878, explorer John Wesley Powell, who suggested that
unirrigated grazing parcels be available in units of 2,560 acres
(four square miles), also recommended that Congress standardize
grazing rights using procedures similar to those of the 1872 Gen-
eral Mining Law. Ranchers would claim public lands through a
patent system, with appropriation tied to the ownership of wa-
tering places. The plan, Powell argued, would legitimize the
rights of permanent settlers who had “legitimate” control of
water frontage, and thus the right to adjacent grazing land, over
transient stockmen who grazed the open range in the absence of
definitive property laws. Claims were backed by fences erected
by individual ranchers, creating preemptive range rights (Hage
1994).
Powell’s proposals did not gain sufficient support in Con-
gress, and by 1885 an antifencing law was enacted that allowed
Rangeland Management
53

the federal government to remove any unlawful enclosure. Pow-
erful Eastern interests, who saw the natural resources of the West
in terms of dollar signs, quickly bought up parcels in 160-acre in-
crements. State laws governed water, along with the doctrine of
prior appropriation, which was interpreted as meaning that the
first user of a stream in time became the first user in right as well.
The U.S. Supreme Court backed up that view in the 1890 case Bu-
ford v. Houtz, ruling that preemption laws gave settlers the right
to graze cattle on the prairies, and by custom, the right to water
their livestock on the public land. Forest Service chief Gifford Pin-
chot was heavily criticized for proposing that livestock owners
begin paying fees to graze their animals within the national
forests, even though the fee would have been about  five cents per
animal unit month (AUM). An AUM is the amount of forage
(usually about 250 acres of grassland) necessary to sustain a cow
and a calf for one month. Ranchers rebelled against Pinchot’s
plan, arguing that the fees amounted to a tax. But in 1906, a graz-
ing fee was instituted by the U.S. Forest Service; it applied only to
forest reserve lands, not those in the public domain. The number
of permits and acres devoted to grazing rose dramatically, even
with the fees. Between 1908 and 1920, livestock grazing increased
from 14 to 20 million AUMs.
Congress was caught between two conflicting issues. On the
one hand was the heavy national debt incurred as a result of
World War I, and the realization that grazing fees could be in-
creased to better represent the fair market value of the land’s use.
Ranchers were expected to complain, but so many cattle and
sheep were already being grazed on public rangeland that they
would have little option but to pay the additional costs, which
were still considerably lower than fees for grazing on privately
held land. On the other hand were members of Congress, mostly
from Western states, whose constituencies had traditionally ex-
pected the federal government to stay out of their way. Powerful
ranching interests had long considered grazing on federal lands a
right rather than a privilege, and they supported legislators who
agreed with them.
The result was a classic battle between East and West.
Rancher and senator Robert Stanfield (R-OR), who was also a
grazing permittee, orchestrated efforts in Congress to hold hear-
ings on the fee system and rangeland management. Livestock
companies rallied behind him, fully expecting that their interests
would prevail, as they always had. But professional organiza-
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tions, such as the Society of American Foresters and the American
Forestry Association, gained the support of the press. Harsh edi-
torials were printed in Eastern newspapers about the greed of the
ranching industry and their assumption that they were privileged
when it came to the use of the public land. Ranchers struck back
by resisting proposals to force them to pay grazing fees not only
within the national forests but also on the rest of the public do-
main (Layser 2006).
Regulating the Range
Today, grazing policy stems from the 1934 Taylor Grazing Act, en-
acted to provide economic stability for Western ranchers by cre-
ating organizational arrangements to manage livestock grazing
more efficiently without harming ranching interests (Davis 2001).
The statute allotted qualifying ranches, termed base properties,
an exclusive number of annual AUMs to graze their livestock on
federal public lands. Fees were initially kept low, and field
rangers kept conflict at a minimum by handling disputes infor-
mally. The Grazing Division, created under the statute, was re-
sponsible for administering the law; the agency was renamed the
Grazing Service in 1939, and it merged with the General Land Of-
fice in 1946 to create the Bureau of Land Management. Few
changes in statutes or policy were made until 1952, with passage
of the Independent Offices Appropriation Act. That statute pro-
vided that when federally owned resources or property was
leased or sold, a fair market value should be obtained, a provision
that has rarely been applicable to public/private transactions.
Today an estimated 257 million acres of the total 383 million
acres of federal public land in the continental United States are
managed for grazing by four agencies: the Bureau of Land Man-
agement (BLM: 163.3 million acres); the National Park Service
(NPS: 3 million acres); the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS: 1.4
million acres); and the U.S. Forest Service (FS: 89.5 million acres).
About 18 million AUMs are leased from the federal government;
nearly two-thirds of federal public lands in the Lower Forty-eight
states is now being grazed. The majority of the leased land is in
eleven Western states:
1. Arizona
8.4 million acres
2. California
75,000 acres
3. Colorado
2.6 million acres
Rangeland Management
55

4. Idaho
1.9 million acres
5. Montana
4.1 million acres
6. Nevada
110,000 acres
7. New Mexico
8 million acres
8. Oregon
550,000 acres
9. Utah
3.15 million acres
10. Washington
873,000 acres
11. Wyoming
3.6 million acres (National Public Lands
Grazing Campaign 2005) 
Over the years, grazing conflicts have arisen on several fronts. On
one side of the current disputes are ranchers, livestock owners,
and the organizations that represent their interests. One of the
largest groups is the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association
(NCBA), founded in 1898. This trade association is a federation of
state beef councils that coordinate efforts to build consumer de-
mand for beef, as well as advocating for the cattle industry’s po-
litical interests. The public’s demand for beef had declined prior
to the 1980s, when the industry initiated an extensive $50 million
marketing campaign. Beef was losing out to Americans’ prefer-
ence for chicken, pork, seafood, cheese, and vegetables. In addi-
tion, imported beef, primarily from Japan, Brazil, Mexico, and
Canada, has cut into the domestic share of beef being sold, further
decreasing profits. Outbreaks of disease, from mad cow scares to
instances in which restaurant hamburger was infected with E. coli
bacteria, affected consumer buying habits.
Another perspective is provided by landowners who argue
that a grazing lease actually is the legal recognition of a preexist-
ing right to graze on the land. The Taylor Grazing Act made clear
that the public lands were to be leased, not sold, and that the
grazing permits did not create “any right, title, interest, or estate
in or to the lands.” That language was interpreted by the U.S.
Supreme Court in U.S. v. Fuller in 1973, in which the Court ruled
that the provisions of the Taylor Act made clear the congressional
intent that no compensable property right be created in the per-
mit lands themselves as a result of the issuance of the grazing per-
mit. Property rights groups have been unsuccessful, for the most
part, in gaining support for this position, although one rancher,
Wayne Hage, has pushed his case through the federal courts for
more than a decade.
On the other side are environmental groups whose opposi-
tion to the livestock industry focuses on the ecological impacts of
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

grazing, including concerns about water quality, streambank sta-
bility, soil degradation, the increasing number and spread of in-
vasive plant species, and the loss of natural forage for other
wildlife. They point to several problems created by public lands
grazing, although there is no consensus on how best to solve the
conflict.
Subsidization of the Livestock Industry
One of the major contentious issues is the subsidization of the
livestock industry by the federal government directly, and by tax-
payers indirectly. Currently, ranchers pay $1.43 per AUM to graze
their animals on publicly owned lands, while the cost of grazing
livestock on privately held land in the West ranges from $11 to
$12 per AUM, according to the American Lands Alliance (ALA).
Critics call the subsidies “welfare ranching,” because grazing on
public lands costs considerably less than current market prices.
“For many years, the federal grazing fee has been set at [a price
that is] less than it costs to feed a gerbil for a month” (Rosen-
berger 2004).
The current grazing lease programs cost an estimated $500
million per year, with only about $7 million per year collected
from grazing fees. The ALA contends that more than half of fed-
eral grazing permits are leased to “hobbyists” who are not de-
pendent upon ranching income, dispelling the myth of livestock
roundup cowboys who have lived off the land for generations.
They dismiss arguments that reducing or ending public land
grazing will wipe out an entire culture in the region.
A study conducted by the GAO in 2004 showed that federal
agencies lose at least $123 million a year keeping public lands
open. Environmentalists contend that the figure does not include
indirect expenses that are usually borne by local residents and
taxpayers, including the introduction of noxious weeds and inva-
sive species, sedimentation, and the negative effects on regional
hydrology. A representative of the Western Watersheds Project
says that the figure should be closer to $500 million per year in
losses (Talhelm 2005).
Livestock trade associations argue that if the government
does not help to pay the cost of grazing, beef prices will escalate
rapidly, and the cost will be passed on to consumers. Another
contention relates to the future of the livestock industry and
the impact on local communities. One 1986 survey of ranchers
Rangeland Management
57

reported that, when asked what they would do if prohibitions
were put on public grazing, 21 percent reported that they would
retire, 16 percent said that they would find a new occupation, 9
percent said that they would move to another state, and 21 per-
cent said that they would sell their land to private developers
(Anon. 1996). The NCBA also contends that ranchers are good
stewards of the land because they depend on natural resources
for their livelihood. They liken the health of the land to good
business practices; when the land is more productive, ranchers
thrive.
Environmental Impacts of Grazing
The approach taken by many environmental organizations has
been to emphasize the ecological damage done by livestock, es-
pecially on sensitive areas. Dramatic photographs and video
footage of land before and after cattle have grazed an area are a
potent argument for public consumption. Pictures of grassland
on one side of a fence where grazing has been prohibited are in
stark contrast to the dusty and compacted soil where hooves and
manure have degraded the land. The use of such imagery on
websites, at public forums, and at legislative hearings is a key
strategy of many of the most prominent antigrazing groups. 
The High Country Citizens’ Alliance (HCCA) is attempting
to differentiate between historical overuse of public lands and
current overuse. In the past, they note, the public lands were
treated as private lands, and some livestock owners either did not
know about, or did not care about, the consequences of overgraz-
ing. Even with a reduction in the number of livestock being raised
today, past damage has created ecological conditions that may
take hundreds or thousands of years to return to a healthy state.
That is why, they say, it is important not to repeat past mistakes,
or to compound them by continuing practices now known to be
damaging to ecosystems in the West. “No single grazing system
is a panacea in every location,” they note. “We embrace neither
cows nor condos, but seek middle ground that speaks for the
land. The language of that middle ground is grazing reform”
(High Country Citizens’ Alliance 2005).
Other organizations, such as Public Lands Ranching, point to
the increasing conflict between ranchers and recreationists, who
often ignore fencing, gates, and signage and enter livestock graz-
ing areas with little regard to the animals. It is not uncommon for
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

a rancher to discover that water tanks and pipelines have been
shot at, gates have been left open, and fences need costly repair
because of carelessness or vandalism.
RangeNet, for instance, is a network of individuals created in
2001 as a semiautonomous project of the group Western Water-
sheds Project, Inc. Based in Beaverton, Oregon, RangeNet notes
that while no other use impacts as many acres of Western public
lands as frequently as grazing by domestic livestock, those im-
pacts often cannot be detected by the untrained eye. Although
some damage is easy to see, such as forage that has been grazed
down to almost nothing, other effects are more subtle, including
harm to hydrological cycles, indigenous organisms, and water
quality. The group focuses on facilitating communication among
rangeland activists (whose membership is by nomination and in-
vitation only) and often uses photographs on its website.
Groups like Forest Guardians, based in Santa Fe, New Mex-
ico, have approached the rangeland management issue by moni-
toring closely the actions of federal agencies such as the BLM and
FS to show the ecological impact of livestock grazing, especially
in riparian (streamside) areas that are prime habitat for wildlife.
They allege that the two agencies failed to comply with routine
environmental standards to limit environmental damage caused
by cattle grazing on 50 to 75 percent of all grazing allotments in
Arizona and New Mexico between 1999 and 2003 (Forest
Guardians 2005).
Conflict Management on the Range
Most of the efforts to reduce rangeland conflict have been small-
scale pilot projects rather than state- or national-level initiatives.
In southwest Idaho, for instance, a U.S. district judge in Boise or-
dered the owners of fourteen ranches to remove all of their cattle
and sheep from about 800,000 acres of federal land that is part of
the Jarbridge Resource Area. The land is managed by the Bureau
of Land Management, and several lawsuits have been filed
against the agency for failing to complete adequate assessments
of the damage done by livestock. Opponents of grazing argue
that overgrazing has harmed both the landscape’s vegetation and
wildlife habitat, as well as degrading stream water quality.
In an effort to stem the tide of lawsuits and continued graz-
ing, one activist, John Marvel, proposed that the owners of four
ranches reduce the number of cattle they graze on the disputed
Rangeland Management
59

land while a comprehensive environmental impact study is
completed. If the study finds that the overgrazing is still taking
place, then the BLM could impose even more restrictions on
grazing permits. In the meantime, not all cattle would need to
be removed, the court battles could be placed on hold, and the
habitat would be allowed to recover, Marvel says (Ring 2005, 6).
Another project involves ranchers in Hot Springs Canyon, along
the San Pedro River in southeastern Arizona. In 1988 a group of
friends, many of whom had backgrounds as human rights ac-
tivists, purchased 135 acres of land and formed the Saguaro
Juniper Corporation. They hoped to bridge the divide between
ranchers and environmentalists by forming a consensus-based
community in which they could successfully raise cattle while
embracing management techniques that focus on riparian and
rangeland restoration and improvement. At the heart of the
group is a belief that an organic process of societal interaction is
possible in ranching, rather than a traditional corporate farm
orientation. Among the strategies used are rotating grazing
areas, resting the land during the summer when grasslands are
in their peak growing season, and the humane treatment of an-
imals. By 2005 the group had grown to more than sixty share-
holding “associates” who own over 1,000 acres of land, 8,000
acres of state grazing leased land, and 750 acres of privately
leased land. In addition to practicing new types of grazing man-
agement, the corporation’s associates participate actively in the
community and cooperate with governmental agencies and
other organizations.
Montana ranchers have formed an alliance, the Blackfoot
Challenge—“because that’s what it is, a challenge”—to bring to-
gether governmental agencies, timber companies, and conserva-
tion groups in a community effort to protect natural resources in
the Blackfoot River Valley. By using tools such as conservation
easements and buyout incentives, and with a budget of $2.8 mil-
lion, the grassroots initiative has already protected 90,000 acres of
private land from development and restored 47 miles of stream,
2,600 acres of wetlands, and 2,300 acres of native grasslands. The
federal government has assisted by sharing the costs associated
with grazing management and developing off-site water sources
for cattle, allowing for the restoration of riparian areas. Conser-
vation groups consider the effort a way of creating corridors for
wildlife while bringing together 500 private landowners, four pri-
vate corporations, thirty-six governmental organizations, nine
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

foundations, and fourteen conservation and environmental or-
ganizations. The initiative helped ranchers to avoid potential con-
flicts on their own, without being forced to do so by the federal
government (Little 2005).
At the national level are organizations that promote a more
controversial strategy: the voluntary buyout of grazing leases.
What differentiates the groups are the logistics of trying to con-
vince ranchers to end what some consider to be abusive grazing
practices by amending existing federal laws to permit those with
grazing permits to sell them, either to the federal or state govern-
ment or to an organization that would retire the lease. Coopera-
tive agreements and partnerships have been moderately success-
ful, but there are examples in which they have been met with
substantial resistance by local and state officials.
In 1998, the Arizona-based Grand Canyon Trust began pay-
ing ranchers in Utah to give up their grazing rights near the Es-
calante River. The land is marginal economically and at risk envi-
ronmentally, according to the trust. Ranchers could consolidate
their herds in areas where there was more forage for their live-
stock, and be paid by the trust so that the land could be rested and
restored. The program was especially beneficial to ranchers who
were losing money on their livestock operations. The organiza-
tion, which is dedicated to the preservation of the Colorado
Plateau, had paid more than $1 million and ended grazing on
more than 400,000 acres by 2005.
Although the plan seemed to benefit both ranchers and con-
servationists, one of Utah’s state representatives, a former BLM
employee, organized local officials to roll back the agreements
that had been forged by the Grand Canyon Trust. The Utah resi-
dents argued that by reducing the number of acres being grazed,
the organization was hurting the ranching culture of the region
and depriving young people of the “character-building chance to
work on the land.” Trust officials were angered that their free-
market approach to restoring the land was being thwarted.
“We’ve been out there dealing with this. We solved the problems
of the BLM and we’re hurting the Kane County economy by buy-
ing out guys who are going bankrupt? I don’t get it” (Barringer
2005).
The National Public Lands Grazing Campaign (NPLGC),
composed of a coalition of Western antigrazing groups, has per-
haps the most ambitious proposal under consideration. The
group has a threefold mission: to educate the American public
Rangeland Management
61

about the destructive impact of livestock grazing from an envi-
ronmental and economic perspective; to enforce existing grazing
laws and regulations; and to allow voluntary, permanent buyouts
of grazing leases on public lands at the rate of $175 per AUM. The
organization estimates that livestock grazing can be ended alto-
gether for an average of $13.45 for each acre in the program.
One of the factors that has made it difficult to come to any
agreements on rangeland management is the division among en-
vironmental organizations as to which strategy to follow. The
NPLGC, for instance, is focused almost exclusively on its permit
buyout proposal. The Sierra Club, also actively involved in the
policy debate, advocates significant changes to current land man-
agement practices but also acknowledges that grazing may
achieve some ecological objectives. The group also notes that
there are areas where settlement or ownership patterns may re-
quire grazing managers to move toward the restoration of the
land, native plant and animal communities, and water quality on
an incremental basis. The NPLGC counters that many public
lands livestock operators could not meet the Sierra Club’s man-
agement goals because the majority already are facing financial
difficulties. Trying to get these ranchers to engage in less envi-
ronmentally abusive practices “will render their grazing opera-
tions untenable from what was previously merely unprofitable”
(National Public Lands Grazing Campaign 2005).
Rangeland conflict is not likely to be addressed or solved by
governmental pronouncements, Washington lobbyists, or protest
groups. The custom and culture of the West is so thoroughly in-
grained in U.S. history that it will be difficult for grazing practices
and policies to change without consensus and collaboration
among the stakeholders. But that is also an issue where nonlegal-
istic solutions are most likely to be successful, as more and more
ranchers recognize that conditions on the range, and the econom-
ics of livestock ownership, have already changed dramatically.
Timber and Forests
The overview of the history of forest management and conflict in
Chapter 1 provides a background for this section, which goes into
more depth in exploring specific issues. Not surprisingly, many of
the problems that existed in the nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies are still around in the twenty-first century. This does not
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

mean that conflicts cannot be resolved, and, in fact, there have
been many successful partnerships, collaborative agreements,
and pilot projects in timber disputes. But this is a policy area in
natural resources in which the successes have tended to be on a
smaller, more localized level. Deep-seated, emotional perspec-
tives still divide many of the key stakeholders in these conflicts.
What follows is an explanation of two of the most con-
tentious problems in the United States regarding forests as a nat-
ural resource: maintaining a sustainable supply of timber, and
protecting old growth forests. These issues are somewhat over-
lapping, since protection of forests was a part of the nation’s ear-
liest environmental policies. But the way in which conflicts re-
lated to them have been resolved does differ substantially from
other natural resource issues analyzed previously in this chapter.
Maintaining a Sustainable Supply
With the creation of the U.S. Forest Service in 1905, Congress gave
its blessing to the founding principle that had been the vision of
its first chief, Gifford Pinchot: “The continued prosperity of the
agricultural, lumbering, mining, and livestock interests is directly
dependent upon a permanent and accessible supply of water,
wood, and forage, as well as upon the present and future use of
these resources under businesslike regulations, enforced with
promptness, effectiveness, and common sense” (Wilkinson 1992,
128).
Pinchot’s European training had shown him the need for
changing forest practices, and he fully intended to make sustain-
ability the dominating forest management goal for the twentieth
century. In forest parlance, sustainability means that, under fed-
eral law, management agencies must harvest trees at a specific
pace. By the time the last tree of the original, virgin forest is cut,
the first tree of the regrown forest should be big enough to har-
vest. Maintaining sustainability is essential for the “permanent
and accessible supply” that Pinchot sought as a replacement for
the slash and burn practices of the past. These methods, pio-
neered in Germany and France, would bring the young country
up to date with ideas being used elsewhere.
One of the practices that Pinchot considered among the most
wasteful of trees as a resource was clear-cutting—logging all of
the trees within a given area without regard to the value of the
lumber produced. His philosophy of utilitarianism was based on
Timber and Forests
63

the principle that forests provide more products than can be used
efficiently. They are wasted through death and decay but should
not be exploited by humans. Clear-cutting regained popularity in
the late 1940s and early 1950s, even though so much of the timber
ended up being left to rot on the ground or being burned in huge
slash piles. Clear-cutting was less expensive and more efficient
than selective logging, since it did not take the extra time required
to select and then thin out the desired number of trees. Heavy
mechanized equipment made quick work of acre after acre as log-
ging trucks formed their own highways through the national
forests.
During the late 1960s, a combination of high demand and ris-
ing prices made clear-cutting even more desirable. Getting out
the cut by logging as extensively as possible became the norm in
the national forests until the early 1970s. A 1973 lawsuit by the
West Virginia division of the Izaak Walton League against the sec-
retary of agriculture, Earl Butz, alleged that the use of clear-cut-
ting in the state’s Monongahela National Forest was in violation
of the Organic Act of 1897. The Forest Service countered with
their interpretation that the statute directed the agency to manage
the national forests scientifically, leaving the choice of practices to
the discretion of the department. The major goal of the Forest Ser-
vice was to maintain a continuous supply of timber.
The Forest Service lost the initial court battle in U.S. District
Court, and the opinion made it clear that the agency was allowed
to sell only timber that was dead, mature, or large, and it was re-
quired to mark each individual tree for sale, rather than clear-cut-
ting. The government appealed the case, and meanwhile, an al-
most identical case was filed in the Tongass National Forest. In
the latter case, the plaintiff did not rely upon the Organic Act but,
instead, cited NEPA and a series of other environmental statutes.
The Monongahela case was affirmed by the U.S. Court of Ap-
peals, while the U.S. District Court in Alaska ruled that the Forest
Service did not violate the statutes cited by the plaintiff but was
in violation of the Organic Act, citing the West Virginia ruling as
precedent.
The two cases were important not only because they formed
the legal precedent against clear-cutting: they also demonstrated
the power of citizen groups to use litigation as a strategy. Al-
though litigation had worked, it was time consuming and costly.
The Forest Service countered by seeking timber industry support
in Congress, where there appeared to be more support for in-
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

creased logging. The National Forest Products Association pro-
posed legislation that would substantially increase timber yields,
and after some initial confusion over what action to take, envi-
ronmental organizations, led by the National Wildlife Federation,
the Sierra Club, and the Wilderness Society, mounted a vocal op-
position to the proposed statute. The Forest and Rangeland Re-
newable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (RPA) called for a na-
tionwide system of forest planning. It was followed in 1976 by the
National Forest Management Act (NFMA), which became an
amendment to the RPA. The NFMA repealed the controversial
section of the Organic Act by eliminating the restrictive language
referring to dead, mature, or large trees. Most important, NFMA
provided a mechanism for public participation and scrutiny, in-
cluding public hearings, prior to timber sales. It forced the Forest
Service to develop management plans for each of the nation’s 155
national forests. Although the statute did not limit clear-cutting,
it did resolve at least some of the conflicts over forest manage-
ment by requiring the inclusion of scientific studies in preparing
forest plans.
By January 1990, the Forest Service had developed plans for
all but one of the national forests, and ninety-eight unit plans had
been finalized. Almost all were immediately appealed by envi-
ronmental organizations, and several were litigated, as oppo-
nents again turned to the courts for a remedy. It became clear that
the sustainability issue could not be resolved easily or quickly, as
groups like the Wilderness Society and Sierra Club held their
ground. Over the next fifteen years, appeals and litigation, under
both NEPA and the NFMA, became commonplace. The likelihood
that an appeal would be filed caused the Forest Service, in some
cases, to cancel plans for timber sales because of the resources
that would be required to justify any logging at all. Several Na-
tive American tribes were so opposed to logging on tribal land
that the Forest Service stopped all proposed sales, instead creat-
ing a new position within the agency to deal specifically with in-
dividual tribes (Vaughn and Cortner 2006).
Another major statute that affected timber supplies was the
Multiple Use and Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (MUSYA). Congress
identified five purposes that the national forests were designed to
serve: outdoor recreation, range, timber, watershed, and wildlife
and fish. Multiple use was well understood; what was more con-
troversial was the concept of sustainable yield in the era of envi-
ronmental activism. The law stated that sustainable yield referred
Timber and Forests
65

to the achievement and maintenance in perpetuity of a high-level
annual or regular periodic output of the various resources of the
national forests without the impairment of the productivity of the
land.
Conflicts over sustainability and the need to provide for the
growing demand for timber did not end with the passage of the
NFMA, however. Just a few years later, another resource issue
would emerge that moved government officials and environmen-
tal organizations in another direction altogether—protecting the
habitat of a rare bird.
Protecting Old Growth Forests
For much of the nation’s history, the forest was considered an ob-
stacle because it blocked forward movement and took up valu-
able agricultural land needed for ranching and farming. One ac-
count of a stage journey through the Pacific Northwest around
1865 described “trees larger and taller and standing thicker; so
thick and tall that the ground they occupy could not hold them
cut and corded as wood. Washington Territory must have more
timber and ferns and blackberries and snakes to the square mile
than any other state or territory of the Union” (Dietrich 1992, 20).
Progress meant cutting down the forest, if only to get through the
trees to what lay beyond. In 1897, President Grover Cleveland
had set aside two-thirds of the Olympic Peninsula as forest re-
serves because of fears of a “timber famine.” The timber industry
protested, and the reserve was reduced by a third until President
Theodore Roosevelt restored the reserve as a 620,000-acre na-
tional monument in 1909. In 1915 the monument’s acreage was
cut by President Woodrow Wilson, and its status changed again
when President Franklin Roosevelt named the area a national
park. One of the reasons for the back and forth debates over this
particular tract of land was the size of its trees.
A 1902 government survey of Washington’s Olympic Penin-
sula called the region the most heavily forested region of the
country, but because of its remoteness, it was one of the last areas
to be logged. The trees in the Pacific Northwest are conifers such
as Douglas fir, western hemlock, and Sitka spruce, and eventually
many of the largest, most valuable trees were cut and replaced by
an orderly, industrial forest. For decades the lack of roads kept
harvests to a minimum until World War I, when a railroad system
was put in place to provide wood for the war effort. By that time
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

few of the big trees were left, and they formed a mosaic between
the mountains and the ocean.
In the Pacific Northwest, the timber industry was the life-
blood of many small communities, for generations of families. In
1985 logging accounted for 4 percent of the workforce in western
Oregon and 20 percent of the area’s total manufacturing sector
employment; in 1988 the Forest Service estimated that 44 percent
of Oregon’s economy and 28 percent of Washington’s economy
were directly or indirectly dependent on national forest timber.
The stakeholders went beyond just timber companies, however.
The area was home to many smaller, family-owned mills, and log
haulers were well paid for their work in an area that had few
highly paid jobs. Local governments also were deeply involved in
timber harvests; 25 percent of the revenues from timber harvested
on federal lands is returned to municipalities where the forest is
located, to be used for schools and roads. Federal timber revenues
accounted for between 25 and 66 percent of the total income for
ten Oregon counties during the late 1980s (Layser 2006). Any pro-
posed reductions in harvests meant deep cuts in city and county
services in many rural areas.
In California, the situation has been slightly different. The
species that has been the subject of controversy is the coast red-
wood, covering about 1.7 million acres along the state’s northern-
most coast. About 350,000 of those acres are in the public domain,
with the remainder owned by several private timber companies.
Redwoods are not considered threatened, because they have a
shallow root structure that grows very quickly. The conflicts over
the coast redwoods are over old growth, a term that usually refers
to trees 250 years old or more, with a trunk diameter of four feet
at breast height (dbh). There are an estimated 90,000 acres of old
growth left in northern California, and about 80,000 acres are cur-
rently preserved by the federal or state government.
By the mid-nineteenth century, loggers had harvested most
of the ancient forests in the state, some containing trees more than
2,000 years old. By the end of the twentieth century, almost all re-
maining old growth was found in the national forests, and, sym-
bolically at least, that means that the trees belong to all Ameri-
cans. But the goal of the FS and state resource agencies—
maximizing income from logging—conflicted with the desire of
environmental groups: to save those trees more than others. By
the 1980s forests were being cut much more rapidly than they
were being restored, and old growth trees provided substantially
Timber and Forests
67

more lumber than younger, smaller-diameter ones. Environmen-
tal organizations were concerned about predictions that all of the
trees over 200 years old would be gone in less than thirty years
(ibid.). The battle over old growth in Washington, Oregon, and
California became a very real conflict over aesthetics, economics,
and the habitats of endangered species, pitting small communi-
ties and large logging interests against environmentalists who
vowed to do whatever it would take to protect the trees.
The difficulty with environmental groups’ strategy prior to
the 1990s was that old growth forests were considered a regional,
rather than a national, issue, making it more difficult to get sup-
port in Congress for protective legislation. According to forest ac-
tivist Andy Kerr: “Expecting the Northwest congressional dele-
gation to be rational about ending the cutting of ancient forests in
the late 1980s is like expecting the delegation from the American
south to deal rationally with ending segregation in the late 1950s”
(Davis 2001, 68). As the issue gained public exposure and politi-
cal salience, protecting old growth became a politically defensible
position to take.
Transposed upon the old growth debate was a biodiversity
issue that overshadowed the logging of timber. Under the 1973
Endangered Species Act (ESA), the Forest Service was required to
protect the habitat of the Northern spotted owl, which nests and
lives in ancient forests in the Pacific Northwest. For more than a
decade, studies were made of the bird’s nesting habits and range
to determine whether it would be subject to the ESA. In the mean-
time the agency did as little as possible in an attempt to follow di-
rection from the chief of the Forest Service that whatever arrange-
ment was finally agreed upon, the decision would not affect
allowable timber sales in the region by more than 5 percent
(Dombeck, Wood, and Williams 2003).
Both Oregon and Washington gave the spotted owl protected
status under state law in 1988, putting additional pressure on the
federal government to take similar action. But efforts to develop
a conservation strategy that would please all of the affected stake-
holders became heavily politicized, even after lengthy congres-
sional hearings and a scientific report recommending a managed
landscape to protect entire habitat areas rather than nesting sites.
In June 1990, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service declared the bird
“threatened,” a less protected status than “endangered,” but one
that resulted in large sections of national forest lands being de-
clared off limits to logging. Subsequently, environmental organi-
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

zations sued the government for delaying the ESA process and
for failing to comply with NEPA and the NFMA. A federal judge
agreed, and timber sales were temporarily halted.
In April 1993, President Bill Clinton attempted to resolve the
spotted owl controversy by inviting timber workers, community
activists, and representatives of environmental groups to Port-
land, Oregon, for a national Forest Summit. No officials from the
Forest Service or the Bureau of Land Management were invited to
speak. The result was a presidential decree for the agencies to
come up with legally defensible plans for the owl and for the fu-
ture management of old growth forests in the Pacific Northwest.
In 1995, an amendment called a rider was attached to the Forest
Service appropriations bill for fiscal year 1996 that allowed all sal-
vage timber sales to be temporarily exempt from legal challenge
or judicial review. What the Clinton administration considered a
reasonable compromise only mobilized environmental groups
against the plan. Once again they turned to the courts, filing ap-
peals against virtually every project the Forest Service proposed.
Sales since then have plunged as cases make their way through
the judicial arena, with the logging industry accusing the envi-
ronmental movement of extremism, massive job losses, and the
end of the timber industry in the Pacific Northwest.
In California, however, the old growth issue has been more
emotional and symbolic than legalistic and economic. The flash-
point came in 1986, when MAXXAM Corporation acquired Pa-
cific Lumber Company (PLC). Prior to the acquisition, even crit-
ics of PLC felt that the company was making efforts to harvest
trees sustainably on the land it owned, without resorting to clear-
cutting. MAXXAM’s owners had different plans, and sought to
increase substantially the number of acres logged each year, using
intensive harvest methods in the old growth Headwaters Forest.
Those plans enraged environmentalists, from the radical, direct-
action group Earth First! to regional organizations such as the En-
vironmental Protection Information Center. More than 1,000
people were arrested at a protest in 1996, and 9,000 activists ral-
lied against the company in another protest in 1997, the same year
that Julia “Butterfly” Hill began a two-year-long tree-sit in a tree
she named Luna. In 1998 a small group of activists chained them-
selves to shelves at a Home Depot home improvement store near
Santa Rosa to protest the sale of rakes and brooms whose handles
were said to be made out of old growth. Organizations such as
the Campaign for Old Growth, Forests Forever, and the Save the
Timber and Forests
69

Redwoods League rallied around the idea that all remaining coast
redwoods represent a national treasure that should be placed
under a public trust for protection. 
The federal government sought to resolve the Headwaters
conflict by negotiating an agreement among the Bureau of Land
Management, the state of California, the PLC, and the Elk River
Timber Company—which owned lands adjacent to those of the
PLC—to purchase the most sensitive areas for $380 million.
Under the terms of the agreement, finalized in March 1999, the
PLC would be permitted to log on the remaining 200,000 acres it
owned. The agreement required the company to develop a com-
plex habitat conservation plan for another endangered bird, the
marbled murrelet. The new 7,400-acre Headwaters Forest Re-
serve solved some problems by providing protection for some old
growth trees, but not all of them. Many political leaders and some
environmental groups considered the agreement to be better than
going through years of legal wrangling, as had been the case in
Oregon and Washington, while logging continued. Other activists
felt that the buyout had simply given the PLC the go-ahead to
continue logging old growth on other land the company owned,
and there was skepticism about whether the murrelet and other
sensitive species would really be protected.
Simply put, the Headwaters purchase agreement did not end
the conflict. In 2000 the California Board of Forestry considered a
temporary ban on cutting any old growth trees, and in 2001 a
coalition of conservation groups submitted a state ballot initiative
that would have prohibited private land owners from logging or
damaging old growth trees that were alive in 1850, the year in
which California became a state. One of the initiative’s sponsors
claimed that “we are not only saving trees. We are saving a bit of
our humanity by taking responsibility as stewards of God’s cre-
ation. This is not merely an ecological issue, but a moral and eth-
ical issue” (Campaign for Old Growth 2006). The initiative did
not gain enough signatures to be placed on the November 2002
ballot. In 2004 the California legislature considered the Heritage
Tree Preservation Act to protect old growth, but it, too, failed to
get sufficient support for passage.
Collaboration Efforts
While old growth controversies have been marked by lawsuits,
protests, and political brokering, there have been several success-
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ful collaborations among stakeholders to try to deal with the fact
that “the ‘timber wars’ damaged everybody and served nobody’s
true interest” (Quincy Library Group 2005). In 1992 a timber in-
dustry forester, an environmental attorney, and a member of the
county board of supervisors began informal discussions that
would lead to the creation of the Quincy Library Group (QLG).
The initially informal organization dealt with the issue of forest
management within a three-county area in northeastern Califor-
nia with a population of about 50,000. The area is heavily de-
pendent upon the logging industry, has extensive hydroelectric
facilities, and is popular with recreational users—in short, all the
elements needed for natural resource conflicts.
The group took its name from its meeting place, and a steer-
ing committee of about thirty people began to map out a proposal
for integrating forest management and the community’s economic
needs with biodiversity protection and fire and fuels management
objectives. The group developed a northern Sierra working circle,
recommendations for timber management, expanded stewardship
agreements, strategic fuel reduction to reduce wildfire risk, guide-
lines for riparian area protection, the removal of acreage from road
construction and timber harvesting, and selective tree thinning.
The U.S. Forest Service received funding to implement some of the
QLG’s proposals as part of a forest health pilot program, and, in
conjunction with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, the
organization cosponsored a study of the feasibility of manufactur-
ing ethanol from small-diameter trees (ibid.). Similar collabora-
tives have been established in Oregon and Washington, most no-
tably the Applegate Partnership in southern Oregon.
While some organizations still seek a “no cut” policy on pub-
lic lands, most of those involved in a collaborative approach real-
ize that compromise is the only real answer. Groups may be able
to win some battles over old growth, but it is doubtful that they
will ever end logging altogether. The political clout of the timber
industry, coupled with a steady demand for products such as
lumber and paper, will help keep Pinchot’s promise of a perma-
nent and accessible supply of timber alive.
References
American Hiking Society website at www.americanhiking.org (accessed
2006).
American Lands Alliance. “Overview”at www.americanlands.org (ac-
cessed November 6, 2005).
Timber and Forests
71

Anon. 1996. “Cattle Grazing on Public Lands: The Hard Fought Battle in
the Southwestern United States.” Beckoning (October 5) at www.thebeck
oning.com (accessed August 17, 2005).
Barringer, Felicity. 2005. “Plan to Restore West Grasslands Meets with Re-
sistance in Utah.” Arizona Republic, December 4, A19.
Burkhart, Michelle. 2005. “Public Lands Agenda Turns More Radical, Ur-
gent.” High Country News 37, no. 22 (November 28): 5.
Cable, Sherry, and Charles Cable. 1995. Environmental Problems, Grass-
roots Solutions: The Politics of Grassroots Environmental Conflict. New York:
St. Martin’s.
Campaign for Old Growth website at www.ancienttrees.org (accessed
2006).
Davis, Charles. 2001. Western Public Lands and Environmental Politics. 2d
ed. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Dietrich, William. 1992. The Final Forest: The Battle for the Last Great Trees
of the Pacific Northwest. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dilsaver, Lary M. 1994. America’s National Park System: The Critical Docu-
ments. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Dombeck, Michael P., Christopher A. Wood, and Jack E. Williams. 2003.
From Conquest to Conservation: Our Public Lands Legacy. Washington, DC:
Island.
Forest Guardians. 2005. “Activists Take on Irresponsible Government.”
Website at www.fguardians.org (accessed November 6, 2005).
Freemuth, John. 1991. Islands under Siege: National Parks and the Politics of
External Threats. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Hage, Wayne. 1994. Storm over Rangelands: Private Rights in Federal Lands.
Bellevue, WA: Free Enterprise.
High Country Citizens’ Alliance website at www.thinairweb.com (ac-
cessed August 17, 2005).
Jenkins, Matt. 2005. “The Final Energy Frontier.” High Country News 37,
no. 23 (December 12): 7.
Klyza, Christopher M. 1996. Who Controls Public Lands? Mining, Forestry,
and Grazing Policies 1870–1990. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press.
Lay, Jennie. 2005. “Congress Bets on Oil Shale.” High Country News 37,
no. 23 (December 12): 8–9.
Layser, Judith. 2006. The Environmental Case: Translating Values into Policy.
2d. ed. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Press.
Little, Jane Braxton. 2005. “Rising to the Challenge: Montana Ranchers
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Practice Homegrown Conservation.” Nature Conservancy 55, no. 4 (win-
ter): 28–39.
Lowry, William. 2001. “The Impact of Reinventing Government on State
and Federal Parks.” Journal of Policy History 13, no. 4: 405–428.
National Park Foundation website at www.nationalparks.org (accessed
October 18, 2005).
National Parks Conservation Association. 2005a. “Growth of the System:
F” at www.npca.org (accessed November 1, 2005).
National Parks Conservation Association. 2005b. “National Park System
Units” at www.npca.org (accessed November 1, 2005).
National Public Lands Grazing Campaign website at www.publicland-
sranching.org (accessed November 6, 2005).
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility. 2005. “National
Parks to Seek Corporate Sponsorships.” News release (November 30) at
www.peer.org/news.
Quincy Library Group website at www.qlg.org (accessed 2005).
Ring, Ray. 2005. “Strange Bedfellows Make a Grazing Deal in Idaho.”
High Country News 37, no. 18 (October 3): 6.
Rosenberger, Jack. 2004. “Wasting the West: How Welfare Ranchers and
Livestock Are Damaging Public Lands.” E Magazine 15, no. 4 (July–Au-
gust): 20–22.
Sellars, Richard W. 1997. Preserving Nature in the National Parks: A History.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sierra Club website at www.sierra.org (accessed October 18, 2006).
Smith, Duane. 1987. Mining America: The Industry and the Environment,
1800–1980. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Talhelm, Jennifer. 2005. “Report: Public Lands Grazing Costs $123 Mil-
lion a Year.” Environmental News Network website at www.enn.com (ac-
cessed November 1, 2005).
U.S. Department of the Interior. 2002. Recreational Fee Demonstration Pro-
gram. Report No. 2002-I-0045. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the
Interior.
U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service. 2003. National
Park Service Fees: An Examination of Public Attitudes, Technical Report.
Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University, Social Research Laboratory.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1998. National Park Service: Efforts to Iden-
tify and Manage the Maintenance Backlog. Report No. GAO-98-143. Wash-
ington, DC: General Accounting Office.
———. 2003. Recreation Fees: Information on Forest Service Management of
Timber and Forests
73

Revenue from the Fee Demonstration Program. Report No. GAO-03-470.
Washington, DC: General Accounting Office.
Vaughn, Jacqueline, and Hanna J. Cortner. 2006. George W. Bush’s Healthy
Forests: Reframing the Environmental Debate. Boulder: University Press of
Colorado.
Western Slope No-Fee Coalition website at www.sespewild.org (accessed
October 18, 2006).
Wilkinson, Charles F. 1992. Crossing the Next Meridian: Land, Water, and the
Future of the American West. Washington, DC: Island.
Williams, Ted. 2004. “The Mad Gas Rush.” Audubon (March): 38.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
T
here is a substantive body of research related to sustainability
when it comes to natural resources on a global scale. Political
scientists, economists, sociologists, and ecologists can point to
their studies of international agreements and treaties, scientific
assessments, and efficiency. There is little disagreement about the
basic goal: maintaining human security by respecting natural lim-
its and promoting economies by managing overconsumption.
The formula seems simple: improve, rather than degrade, the
environment, and all people will prosper. Unfortunately, many of
the scientific approaches to pollution have resulted in only mar-
ginal improvements. But increasingly, a second element has
gained support: transformational change that focuses on reduc-
ing consumption of natural resources, rather than increasing pro-
duction. This chapter looks at four issues that incorporate those
principles, examining whether current problems and crises can be
dealt with on a long-term basis, rather than by quick-fix solutions
that rarely result in substantive change. Each section begins with
an explanation of the scope of the problem, followed by an analy-
sis of the nature of the conflicts that have taken place, and lastly,
an overview of some of the attempts that have been made to
resolve those conflicts.
While optimists might believe that the same types of conflict
resolution strategies that work in the United States can be applied
everywhere, (the “Why can’t we all just get along?” approach), in
reality, cultural, economic, and political differences among indus-
trialized and developing countries make solutions much more
difficult to find. The types of corruption and civil/ethnic warfare
75

seen in some parts of the world limit how much cooperation and
consultation can be attempted. Institutional barriers sometimes
reduce the opportunities for public participation, as in the case of
governments not built on models of representative democracy.
Threats and intimidation have reduced the ability of some local
activists to work toward compromise when their lives are at
stake. But as is the case with any problem, building public aware-
ness is the first step toward finding solutions.
Diamonds and Precious Metals
In the United States, the history of mining is often romanticized,
from the Gold Rush in California in the mid-1800s to the hearty
prospectors looking for diamonds in the fields of Arkansas. The
image of the old prospector and his mule is ubiquitous, even at a
point in the twenty-first century when mechanized extraction is
highly sophisticated. Whether the resource is coal, oil, or potash,
the industry is regulated, and disputes are relatively small. Sel-
dom do these types of conflicts over natural resources go further
than the courtroom, and they definitely are no longer the source
of violence. When political leaders argue, it is more likely to be
over subsidies than ownership.
But in 2000, the World Bank called the struggle over dia-
monds and other mineral commodities the biggest cause of civil
war globally, overtaking even political disputes. In Africa, rebel
forces fight over mining areas and the trade in “hot rocks,” or
“conflict diamonds,” is plundering natural resources to finance
weapons and criminal activity (Masland 2000). Some analysts
have gone so far as to question whether mining companies “pro-
duce” or even encourage wars to gain easier access to a country’s
mineral resources, although conspiracy theories about these types
of conflicts are difficult to prove (Kennes 2005).
Somewhere between 4 and 15 percent of the world’s $7 bil-
lion annual diamond business is illegal, and trade in these valu-
able stones, along with other precious metals, is fueling civil war
in several African countries, including Angola, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Burkina Faso. In-
vestigators have found evidence that rebel groups in some na-
tions have used illicit diamonds, primarily those called “rough”
because they have not yet been cut and polished into stones, in
trade for weapons. Leaders in Sierra Leone’s Revolutionary
76
Worldwide Perspective

United Front (RUF) are alleged to have traded more than 2,000 di-
amonds over a ten-month period, and the gems found their way
into the marketplace. Local residents were often herded out of
their villages in diamond-rich areas, or used as slave labor so
rebel forces could mine the diamonds without interference. UN
peacekeeper forces have been attacked and driven out of rebel-
held areas, and Liberia has become one of the continent’s centers
for diamonds, drugs, arms, and money laundering, according to
one report (Masland 2000).
In Angola, groups such as the National Union for the Total
Independence of Angola (UNITA) rebel movement have battled
with the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA)
since the 1950s and 1960s, when the countries were considered es-
sential to maintaining the balance of power between the United
States and the Soviet Union. The Cold War caused the two coun-
tries to support different rebel factions in an attempt to gain allies,
but it had the effect of balkanizing nations, forcing them to com-
pete more aggressively in the international trade market. Sanc-
tions imposed against rebels have been ignored, and social disor-
der and the disruption of political authority have become the
norm, leading to cross-border armed conflicts.
The “blood diamond” conflict has been accompanied by hu-
manitarian tragedies and human rights abuses. Over time, the
rest of the world is beginning to pay more attention to post-
apartheid Africa, with the creation of international war tribunals,
with intervention by the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, and with assistance from the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees. Although the civil wars are
sometimes characterized as tribal or civil struggles, there is no
longer any doubt that the conflict is financed by the sale of a
major natural resource—diamonds (Orogun 2004).
There are many reasons why diamonds are the resource of
choice in these conflicts:
•
Diamonds are small, portable, and easy to conceal,
making transport by courier or other methods relatively
simple.
•
Even rough (that is, unpolished) diamonds are
extremely valuable.
•
Diamond trafficking can be conducted without benefit
of financial institutions, making it difficult to track the
coming and going of funds.
Diamonds and Precious Metals
77

•
Bartering is a common and socially acceptable practice
among rebel groups, who do not need to rely upon an
industry intermediary to sell stones.
•
Falsification of inventory records and transactions is
relatively easy.
•
Diamonds do not depreciate in value and are relatively
immune from market fluctuations.
One of the reasons why diamonds have been at the center of
so many conflicts is that most attempts to track them from mines
to market have been unsuccessful. The diamond industry has
tried to implement various strategies to make sure that blood di-
amonds are not traded openly, partially through labeling systems.
One method is by determining the source of rough diamonds,
commonly divided into the categories of “country of origin,”
meaning the place where the diamonds are taken from the
ground, and “country of provenance,” meaning the original loca-
tion from which a particular parcel of diamonds in the transaction
chain of reference came from. Experts believe that the immediate
and preceding country may not actually be the country of origin,
and that the critical link is finding out how the “provenance”
came about.
Some companies, such as De Beers, have tried to classify di-
amonds in their possession (through the firm’s Central Selling
Organization) as “nonconflict” diamonds, so that their sales are
not contaminated. But the company has also placed a date on ac-
quisitions as being before or after March 26, 2004, with minimal
accounting of where the rest of its current inventory originated.
The company has also said that it would require guarantees from
buyers that they were not dealing in conflict diamonds. However,
it is increasingly difficult for a company to verify such claims or
to authenticate where the diamonds may have traveled after they
were mined. “Diamond laundering” and the process of relabeling
gemstones to avoid detection and confiscation are not very diffi-
cult, since rough diamonds mined in different countries can be
combined in mixed parcels with legitimately purchased rough
stones (ibid.).
In the late 1990s, diamond-producing and -importing coun-
tries began their efforts to improve tracking of both rough and
polished stones through a voluntary system of identification and
inventory control. The industry began to realize that unless it was
willing to police its own members, international regulation was
78
Worldwide Perspective

likely to be more complicated and costly than they might want.
The United Nations, recognizing that diamonds were being used
for arms sales, successfully gained support for international sanc-
tions against Angola in 1998, prohibiting imports of any dia-
monds that were not controlled through a Certificate of Origin
program. Additional sanctions were later placed against Sierra
Leone.
The current method of tracking diamonds, called a scheme,
was launched in May 2000 after a meeting in Kimberley, South
Africa. The United Nations held multiple meetings and confer-
ences on conflict diamonds, and in December 2000 and again in
March 2002, after approval of the Interlacken Declaration, the UN
General Assembly passed resolutions calling for the development
of an international system to control all diamonds, to keep con-
flict diamonds out of the legitimate gemstone marketplace. Mem-
bers of the G-8 group of nations also called for an international
system in 2000, identifying the trade in conflict diamonds as a key
concern in conflict prevention. In June 2002, leaders also pledged
support for addressing the link between natural resource ex-
ploitation and conflict in Africa (Natural Resources Canada 2006).
In the meantime the diamond industry took action as well, in
part because of pressure from both governments and nongovern-
mental organizations (NGOs). On July 19, 2000, the World
Federation of Diamond Bourses and the International Diamond
Manufacturers Association issued a joint resolution in Antwerp,
Belgium, calling for control of diamonds when they are still
bought and sold as rough diamond parcels. The industry propos-
als called for all parcels to be sealed and registered in a univer-
sally standardized manner by an accredited export authority
from the exporting country. Individual countries would be held
responsible for creating diamond boards with the authority to
seal parcels and to register them in an international database.
Consuming countries would be prohibited from importing pol-
ished diamonds from any country that did not have a program in
place to deal with rough parcels. The “diamond net” would also
require countries, whether importers or exporters, to enact legisla-
tion to bring criminal charges against any individual or company
proven to be knowingly involved with illegal rough diamonds.
South Africa now chairs a consortium of forty-four countries
in the Kimberley Process International Certification Scheme. The
members are responsible for 98 percent of the rough diamonds
that are mined, produced, processed, imported, and exported in
Diamonds and Precious Metals
79

global trade. After intense and sometimes bitter negotiations, the
Kimberley Process was implemented simultaneously among the
participants on January 1, 2003. Since that time, the response from
participating nations has varied. South Africa, for instance, has
for years attempted to create an effective monitoring system, but
disputes with major diamond traders such as De Beers have
arisen over where diamonds will be made into parcels for export.
In July 2004, UN inspectors concluded that the Republic of Congo
was exporting diamonds at a rate about 100 times greater than its
estimated production. The conclusion was that most of the dia-
monds being exported by the country had been smuggled in ille-
gally in violation of the Kimberley Process. The Republic of
Congo was suspended from the scheme, and its diamonds were
barred from legitimate international markets.
In the United States, presidential executive orders have de-
clared a national emergency to restrict the importation of rough
diamonds into the country from Sierra Leone, followed by simi-
lar restrictions on diamonds from Liberia. Congress also re-
sponded with the 2003 Clean Diamond Trade Act, which requires
annual reviews of the standards, practices, and procedures of any
entity in the United States that issues Kimberley Process certifi-
cates for the export of rough diamonds.
Nongovernmental organizations have also been stakehold-
ers in this conflict. Amnesty International carried out a nation-
wide Day of Action on September 18, 2004, to determine what
steps communities were taking to keep conflict diamonds out of
stores. Surveys of retailers led the group to conclude that the di-
amond industry was still failing to deliver on the promises that
had been made by the World Diamond Council. The group also
determined that there is a lack of consumer awareness about
conflict diamonds: 83 percent of the jewelers who responded
said that their customers rarely or never inquired about the
source of the diamonds, often used as an excuse for not having a
policy in place. The survey also found that most retail salesper-
sons could not provide sufficient assurances to the public that
their diamonds were conflict-free, in the form of written policies
and warranties. Another NGO, Global Witness, estimated in
2002 that the terrorist group Al-Qaeda has laundered $20 million
using conflict diamonds (Amnesty International 2006). As a re-
sult, the issue has grown from being an African problem to one
that is tied to some of the most important issues for domestic se-
curity today.
80
Worldwide Perspective

Precious metals are also a major source of natural resource
conflicts, although the disputes have been going on for a much
longer time. Gold deposits that had been discovered in the 1980s
or earlier were placed on hold in the late 1990s, when gold prices
dropped to a twenty-year low of $350 per ounce or less, after
banks decided that they no longer needed to keep such large
stockpiles. By 2000, exploration and production had flattened out
and then went into a decline. But by 2006 gold prices were on the
rise again, approaching $550 per ounce and encouraging mining
companies to look to previously untapped sources in Ghana, Rus-
sia, Australia, and Latin America. From 2002 to 2005, the explo-
ration budgets for the world’s gold mining companies tripled
(Shore 2006).
The natural resources element of these conflicts is compli-
cated by a concern about the environmental degradation caused
by gold-mining operations and about the economics of war and
human rights. World Bank economist Paul Collier examined
forty-seven civil wars from 1960 to 1999 and found that nations
earning at least a quarter of their yearly gross domestic product
(GDP) from the export of unprocessed commodities face a far
higher likelihood of civil wars than countries whose economies
are more diversified (Collier 2001).
The No Dirty Gold Campaign is an example of how groups
are placing pressure on retailers by getting companies to agree to
the “Golden Rules.” In order to ensure that gold is mined re-
sponsibly, retailers must identify and disclose the source of the
gold they sell to make sure that their products do not include
gold mined at the expense of communities, workers, and the en-
vironment. The campaign also calls upon consumers to sign the
No Dirty Gold pledge so that mining companies will provide safe
working conditions, inform communities that may be affected by
mining practices, show respect for basic human rights, cover the
cost of closing down and cleaning up mining sites, and disclose
the social and environmental effects of their projects (No Dirty
Gold 2006).
The gold issue is different from the one involving conflict di-
amonds in the sense that it deals more directly with environ-
mental degradation, even though both resources involve mining.
Both problems still depend on building consumer awareness
about the sources of natural resources, and the willingness of
governments to regulate or otherwise control valuable minerals.
Both disputes must be dealt with on the international level, and
Diamonds and Precious Metals
81

nongovernmental organizations are taking the initiative to make
sure that the problems are addressed as quickly and comprehen-
sively as possible.
Oil and Natural Gas Development
“Black gold” is as valuable in many countries as diamonds or
other precious metals, especially industrialized nations that rely
upon gas and petroleum products to fuel their economies. Rising
demand and uncertain supplies have led to prolonged military
conflict, even undeclared war, among countries whose thirst for
oil and gas outstrips their own resources. As more developing
countries become industrialized, the finite supply of these natu-
ral resources makes them even more valuable, and for some, even
more worth fighting for. Unlike the more limited geographical
availability of gold and diamonds, oil and gas are found on every
continent except Antarctica, and even there, some experts believe
that there are potential reserves. The natural gas industry oper-
ates in sixty-seven countries; the World Energy Council has mem-
bers in more than ninety nations.
There are two primary problems that have led to conflicts
worldwide: the environmental impact of exploration, drilling,
and transporting oil and gas, and the effects of foreign govern-
ments and companies on a country’s political, economic, and so-
cial structure—what researchers call the “human dimension” of
environmental policy, especially in developing countries depend-
ent upon petroleum and gas products for economic survival.
These are not new conflicts; oil was discovered in the Middle East
in 1908, and battles over control have been going on ever since.
Environmental degradation can take many forms. There is a
considerable amount of research showing that the effects of oil on
marine life from offshore exploration and drilling, or on leaks
from damaged transport vessels, can be devastating, especially in
the short term. Oil can contaminate marine life and smother it, or
its toxic components and bioaccumulation can taint both animals
and plants. Cleanup efforts can also damage the environment
when certain types of chemicals are used, or surrounding reefs
and the ocean floor are disturbed. On land, runoff from pipelines
and wells can pollute groundwater and surface water, can pose a
hazard through exposure, and can contaminate soil. The use of
dynamite to build roads or as part of seismic surveys, burning
82
Worldwide Perspective

forest lands to open up drilling facilities, or even human en-
croachment into previously undeveloped areas can injure or kill
wildlife and disturb habitats. Gas flaring can result in deposits of
soot on the ground and on structures, and has been associated
with reduced crop yields.
Existing protective regulations and laws may not be suffi-
cient to prevent the environmental damage caused by oil explo-
ration and drilling in developing countries. In Ecuador, for in-
stance, the government owns all of the natural resources and
receives the benefits and profits of investment directly. A $1.3 bil-
lion oil pipeline built by a consortium of seven international cor-
porations was routed through protected areas, including national
parks and wildlife reserves. Other oil projects have been ap-
proved by the government on millions of hectares of forest that
are the ancestral territories of a half-dozen indigenous communi-
ties. According to Amnesty International, some of the communi-
ties have vowed that they will never permit oil drilling on their
lands, while others have been intimidated into believing that they
have no ability to resist government troops. The government has
also approved plans by Brazil’s state-owned oil company to begin
drilling in Yasuni National Park, even though the United Nations
declared the area a protected biosphere preserve in 1989. Other
U.S. and foreign-owned companies have also gained oil conces-
sions in the national park.
While the environmental damage may be visible, it is more
difficult to quantify or otherwise determine how drilling and ex-
ploration affect people and their way of life. In Ecuador, for in-
stance, an estimated 50 percent of the country’s budget is funded
by oil exploration and production, so that any disruption can se-
verely affect the country’s oil revenues. Groups such as the Rain-
forest Action Network have documented increases in toxic con-
tamination that have eventually led to disease and increased
health risks from exposure. In Nigeria, where vast oil reserves
were discovered during the 1950s, indigenous peoples in the oil-
rich delta region have been driven from their homes or had their
farms and crops ruined by pollution. The government has taken
little action against multinational corporations that have failed to
conduct cleanup operations, and those who have protested have
been threatened or even killed. Above-ground pipelines are often
subject to sabotage or rupture, and local authorities may lack the
expertise to stop leaks and the pooling of oil, creating an addi-
tional danger.
Oil and Natural Gas Development
83

In many regions where oil and gas are found, local residents
derive little or no economic benefit from extraction. In the
Caspian Sea region, the breakup of the former Soviet Union has
allowed Western companies, previously shut out of the area dur-
ing the communist regime, to make overtures to newly emerging
governments. The discovery of significant deposits in the 1990s
brought an influx of foreign investment, little of which has made
its way into the lives of those living in Azerbaijan or Kazakhstan.
The lack of regional cooperation, disputes over the legal status of
the Caspian Sea, and weak or nonexistent environmental laws
and regulations exacerbate the problem. Although some environ-
mental laws have been enacted in Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Rus-
sia, and Turkmenistan, corruption is rampant, and regulation of
oil and gas production is often considered a threat to the econ-
omy. Overlapping jurisdictions, the lack of regulations to imple-
ment statutes, and the uncertainty over the role of local and na-
tional authority continue to make the situation tense (U.S. Energy
Information Agency 2003).
Chad “signifies the worst of Africa,” according to the Inter-
national Crisis Group in Pretoria, South Africa. Many people are
aware of the humanitarian crisis in Darfur, in neighboring Sudan,
but few know that the country has been politically unstable since
independence in 1960. Much of the insurgency against the gov-
ernment is related to the nation’s huge wealth in oil. Although it
is the world’s fifth poorest country, Chad has recently discovered
oil fields where fuel can be transported 650 miles through a
pipeline to Cameroon on the African coast. The pipeline was par-
tially funded by the World Bank in a deal that was designed to
create a model of how natural resources could fund programs for
the poor. But in December 2005, Chad’s president altered the
poverty-reduction laws that were a part of the agreement, so the
World Bank froze $124 million in loans earmarked for the coun-
try. In turn, the president threatened to suspend oil exports at a
time in 2006 when the price was reaching record highs. The U.S.
State Department, concerned because Africa could supply as
much as one-fourth of U.S. oil imports by 2015, sent a negotiator
to try to end the stalemate (McLaughlin and Soares 2006).
The promise of oil and money have led to violence and ter-
rorism similar to that found in diamond and gold mining regions.
Marxist guerillas have bombed oil facilities and kidnapped oil
workers in Colombia, interrupting production and leading to
price hikes. Drug cartels and paramilitary groups have seized
84
Worldwide Perspective

upon oil and gas operations as sources of cash. Petroleum explo-
ration sometimes clashes with territory claimed by rebel groups
or for coca crops. In other politically volatile areas, such as central
Asia, government officials are unable to guarantee worker safety
or the protection of oil pipelines necessary to get products to pro-
duction facilities. Proposed pipeline routes must cross over hun-
dreds of miles of disputed territory, subject to sabotage or other
types of damage.
Sovereignty issues also play a role in political unrest when oil
and gas revenues are at stake. In the Spratly Islands, for example,
the Philippines made their first claim to the area in 1975. Malaysia
made several claims of its own in 1979, claiming that the islands
are part of its continental shelf under the Law of the Sea, a claim
also made by Brunei. China, which has maintained troops on one
of the islands since 1956, asserts that Chinese navigators discov-
ered the islands and that they have been under their control since
the fifteenth century. Vietnam claims that the territory is part of
the empire of Annam, having been so since the nineteenth cen-
tury. Each country has its own name for the region’s islands, and
from time to time there have been military skirmishes over own-
ership. None of this would be important were it not for the fact
that oil exploration and drilling began in the mid-1970s.
Iraq represents another type of sovereignty conflict over oil
resources. Western oil companies have battled for the right to drill
in Iraq since the early twentieth century, with increased demands
after World War I. Oil drilling and production facilities were na-
tionalized in 1972, leading to the exclusion of oil companies from
the United States and United Kingdom, although the Iraq Na-
tional Oil Company gave large contracts to France, Russia, and
China. In 2003 the United States invaded and overthrew the gov-
ernment of Saddam Hussein, assuming control over the country
as the Coalition Provisional Authority. Occupying forces have
faced armed resistance ever since, and violence has spilled over
to include Iraqi police and citizens as the country deals with civil
strife. Insurgents have repeatedly sabotaged or destroyed the
country’s infrastructure. The United Nations assumed a limited
role in August 2004 in an attempt to smooth the political transi-
tion and to assist in the reconstruction of the country, which is
burdened by debt. What Iraq does have, however, is the world’s
second largest proven reserves of high-quality oil.
Iraq had been subject to economic sanctions by the UN Se-
curity Council until after the U.S. invasion, when a May 2003
Oil and Natural Gas Development
85

resolution called for a development fund for the country. The idea
was to administer proceeds from the export sales of Iraqi oil,
along with other assets seized from the former regime, to help re-
build the country. After an oil-for-food scandal that rocked the
United Nations, the Iraqi people appear to have been cut out of
many of the decisions about their natural resources. The removal
of government subsidies, combined with the ongoing U.S. occu-
pation, has created disputes between foreign oil countries seeking
greater access to the valuable reserves and the country’s oil work-
ers, who are attempting to rebuild the industry without foreign
interference.
The newly written 2005 constitution gave the United States a
major role in production-sharing agreements, even though the
Iraqi oil workers’ union opposes denationalization. In 2006 polit-
ical change made the future of the oil fields—and who governs
their operation—increasingly uncertain. Within the semiau-
tonomous Kurdish parliament, for instance, leaders have begun
making plans for their own Ministry of Natural Resources to con-
trol oil and natural gas in three northern provinces, where a Nor-
wegian company has already received a contract to survey and
drill for oil. At issue is the fact that the Kurdish agreement was
made without the involvement of Iraq’s central government,
weakening its power (Global Policy Forum 2006).
Another dimension of oil and gas exploration is that of
human rights, especially in Latin America. Texaco began its ex-
ploration for oil in Ecuador in 1964, when environmental con-
cerns were just beginning to be voiced in the United States and
the major issues were water and air pollution and wilderness
preservation. The company entered into a partnership with
Petroecuador to conduct drilling operations, and one study al-
leges that between 1972 and 1992 more than 19 billion gallons of
toxic wastewater were intentionally dumped into the region,
with 16.8 million gallons of crude oil being spilled into the for-
est. The result, experts believe, is an increase in the number of
local people suffering from health problems, including higher
cancer rates and higher rates of spontaneous abortion. Texaco
(which became ChevronTexaco after merging with Chevron Oil
in 2001) has denied any correlation between public health haz-
ards and its drilling operations, and it has refused to offer com-
pensation to affected communities. A lawsuit was filed against
the company in 1993 on behalf of 30,000 Amazon residents af-
fected by the pollution and oil spill, and the matter is still mired
86
Worldwide Perspective

in the courts in both countries (Amnesty International USA
2006).
One of the lead organizations in the dispute is Amnesty In-
ternational, which has urged ChevronTexaco shareholders to
protest the company’s actions by calling for a report on new ini-
tiatives that address the health and safety concerns of communi-
ties affected by the contamination in Ecuador. Groups such as
Trillium Management (a socially responsible investment firm)
and the New York State Common Retirement Fund, which has in-
vested heavily in the company, have cofiled resolutions asking for
more information for its investors at the firm’s annual share-
holder meetings. Another group, Amazon Watch, has sent inves-
tigative teams to Ecuador, including representatives from share-
holder institutions, to determine claims against the company.
While in the country the representatives visited waste sites and
interviewed residents who described how the oil operations had
polluted local waterways, causing a 70 percent decline in agricul-
tural productivity and increasing rates of cancer, birth defects,
respiratory infections, and unclassifiable mysterious deaths
(ibid.).
Some environmental organizations have found that it is pos-
sible to work with international companies and state-run indus-
trial developers. In Venezuela, for example, the government’s oil
company, Petroleos de Venezuela, is prospecting in an area of
about 64,000 square miles off the Caribbean coast. Inasmuch as
oil and gas sales account for about a third of the country’s gross
domestic product, there is great interest in developing offshore
sites to bolster the struggling economy. The area is also eco-
logically sensitive, as the habitats for endangered sea turtles,
dolphins, and manatees, and its coral reefs, are among the
healthiest in the world. The government sought the Nature Con-
servancy’s assistance in identifying sensitive sites and ways to
minimize potential damage from drilling operations. Along with
the Institute of Technology and Marine Sciences at Simon Bolivar
University, the organization is sharing technology such as satel-
lite imagery and aerial photographs to identify areas potentially
susceptible to disturbance. The partnership is an unusual one,
but it could serve as a model for other oil and gas development
(Butvill 2005).
But some conflicts defy resolution. In Nigeria, for example,
militants have repeatedly sabotaged and attacked oil and gas
pipelines belonging to Royal Dutch Shell, Africa’s leading oil
Oil and Natural Gas Development
87

exporter and the fifth largest supplier to the United States. At-
tacks on facilities and workers in the Niger delta in early 2006
caused an increase in world oil prices after the disruptions be-
came more common, even though U.S. stockpiles had been
slowly increasing and energy needs traditionally drop in the mid-
dle of the year. Insurgents within Nigeria vowed to cut the output
of oil by 30 percent by March 2006 as part of their planned vio-
lence leading to national elections in 2007.
Civil strife like this, especially when oil and gas supplies are
insecure in other parts of the world, have led to questions about
whether prices will continue to increase to a point where con-
sumers have few choices for their energy sources. Both the United
States and the United Nations have been reluctant to interfere
when military resources are already stretched thin in the Middle
East, the major source of imported oil.
Timber and Forest Destruction
About 8,000 years ago, forests covered some 40 percent of the
earth’s landmass, or an estimated 6 billion hectares. Ever since
humans discovered fire, forested areas on the planet have been
burned or cut down as sources of fuel, building materials, road
materials, paper products, or to clear land for agriculture.
Human migration, and the accompanying clearing of forest
areas, affected the Middle East, the Mediterranean watershed,
South Asia, and the Far East for the next 7,500 years. About 500
years ago forests in North America began to disappear, as did
areas in coastal Brazil and in the Caribbean, where sugar planta-
tions took over from the trees. In Europe, the Industrial Revolu-
tion reduced forested areas as wood was used for furnaces and
factories, and by the late 1800s ancient forests were virtually
gone. Between 1850 and 1980, an estimated 15 percent of the
world’s forests and wooded areas were cleared (Chew 2001;
Roper and Roberts 1999).
Modern assessments of forest destruction are usually based
on satellite mapping and imagery that classifies the landscaped
area. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has con-
ducted one of the most comprehensive assessments of forests
every five to ten years since 1946. In its 2005 report the agency col-
lected and analyzed data from 229 countries and territories, ex-
amining about forty variables including the extent of forest re-
88
Worldwide Perspective

sources, forest health, biodiversity, the productive and protective
functions of forest resources, and their socioeconomic functions.
Both undisturbed primary forests and managed ones (including
plantation forests) were studied to provide information on world-
wide forest conditions.
Primary forests are those composed of native species where
there is no clearly visible indication of human activities and
where the ecological processes have not been significantly dis-
turbed—about one-third of the world’s forested area. Some
forests that have been disturbed can return to a primary forest
state over time if there is no human intervention, as has been the
case in several European countries and Japan. Plantation forests
are defined as those that consist primarily of introduced species;
they make up about 140 million hectares, or an estimated 3.8 per-
cent of the world’s forested areas. These forests are used prima-
rily for wood and fiber production, although about one-fifth of
the plantations are established for soil and water conservation.
Plantation forests have been increasing at the rate of about 2.8
million hectares per year from 2000 through 2005 (UN Food and
Agriculture Organization 2006).
The study notes that the world’s total forested area is just
under 4 billion hectares, but those lands are unevenly distributed.
For example, the FAO found that sixty-four countries with a com-
bined population of 2 billion (about one-third of the earth’s pop-
ulation) have less than 0.1 hectares of forest per capita. The ten
most forest-rich countries, in contrast, account for two-thirds of
the world’s total forest area. Seven countries or territories have no
forest at all, with fifty-seven other countries having forest on less
than 10 percent of their total land area (ibid.).
About 13 million hectares of forest are lost each year, al-
though efforts such as replanting have lowered the net loss to
about 7.3 million hectares each year between 2000 and 2005. That
figure compares with a net loss of 8.9 million hectares per year be-
tween 1990 and 2000, in part because of increased efforts at
restoration and natural landscape expansion. The greatest forest
loss is occurring in Africa and Latin America, while Europe’s
forests are expanding and Asia’s now show evidence of a slight
net gain (ibid.). However, forestry experts admit that it is nearly
impossible to get a precise number of hectares lost each year, be-
cause of difficulties in getting information from some developing
countries when land is logged illegally or because of widespread
forest fires.
Timber and Forest Destruction
89

In Brazil, for instance, the government announced in 2005
that the rates of deforestation had dropped by as much as 50 per-
cent because of new policies. But researchers from Stanford Uni-
versity believe that the figure may be inflated, and that the Brazil-
ian Amazon is being logged at more than twice the rate
previously thought. Their study, which included satellite images
of areas that had been selectively logged as well as clear cut,
showed that in the five states that make up about 90 percent of all
deforestation in the region, selective logging added 60 to 123 per-
cent more damage to forest areas than reported previously
(Mastny 2006).
Logging is one of the most visible and often damaging forest
practices, especially when all of the trees in a specific area are
cleared. About one-third of the world’s forests are used for wood
production, amounting to about 3.1 billion cubic meters in 2005.
Timber harvests are decreasing in Asia but increasing in Africa,
with about one-half of the removed wood used for fuel. Rogue
logging continues in countries such as Cambodia, Ecuador, In-
donesia, and Liberia.
In Canada, intensive logging in temperate rain forests has
been the focus of numerous controversies, especially in British
Columbia. While timber harvesting is anathema to many envi-
ronmental groups, it is especially contentious in areas where the
sovereignty of indigenous peoples is concerned. The Great Bear
Rainforest Campaign, working in conjunction with the leaders of
a dozen First Nations, continues its efforts to stop or defer log-
ging in the Mid-Coast region of the province. Organizations such
as the Forest Action Network and Greenpeace Canada have con-
ducted direct action protests, including tree sits and blockades
modeled on activism in the forests of the U.S. Pacific Northwest.
The Canadian “War in the Woods” has been going on since the
mid-1990s in an effort to protect 1,000-year-old cedar trees and
ancient spruce, as well as habitat for grizzly and black bears.
In February 2006, the British Columbian government agreed
to provide strict protection for one-third of the Great Bear Rain-
forest (an area of about 2 million hectares) and to require the log-
ging industry to implement an ecosystem-based management
system for the other two-thirds of the rain forest by 2009. Envi-
ronmental leaders counted the agreement as a victory, saying that
“common sense has prevailed. Today we celebrate a magnificent
victory with the thousands of activists who stood their ground in
British Columbia, every cyberactivist who ever sent an e-mail ac-
90
Worldwide Perspective

tion alert on this issue, and the millions of people worldwide who
have let it be known through their votes and their consumer
choices that the world’s remaining ancient forests need to be pre-
served” (Greenpeace 2006).
Forest cover is also destroyed by natural disasters such as
floods, hurricanes, fires, drought, and insect infestations, which
result in the loss of an estimated 104 million hectares of forest
each year. In 1997 and 1998, for instance, forest fires in Southeast
Asia, especially in Indonesia, burned an estimated 2 million
hectares.
The impacts of timber and forest destruction have varying
implications for humans and for biodiversity. There are tens of
millions of species on earth, and only about 1.5 million have been
discovered and named, with an estimated 137 species going ex-
tinct every year. On a positive note, however, considerable efforts
are being focused on increasing the amount of land classified as
protected areas as a way of slowing species loss. The FAO study
found that 11 percent of the world’s forests are now designated
for the conservation of biological diversity, having increased by
an estimated 96 million hectares since 1990.
Once the land has been cleared for agriculture or grazing,
farmers often use substantial amounts of fertilizer or pesticide,
and the runoff from the chemicals seeps into the soil and water
below. These substances weaken the ecosystem, making it diffi-
cult for trees to regrow. Gold mining in parts of Africa has a sim-
ilar effect on tree growth.
There is a human dimension to illegal logging as well. In Feb-
ruary 2006, an estimated 3,000 people died in a devastating land-
slide in Saint Bernard town in the Leyte province of the Philip-
pines. Representatives of the environmental group Greenpeace
echoed residents’ statements that illegal logging operations that
started in the 1970s above small villages had caused the rain-
soaked ground to give way. The area had received 27 inches of
rain—twice the normal amount—and past years’ chainsaw log-
ging on Mount Guinsaugon had weakened the soil. Although
logging is illegal, Greenpeace said that a combination of poor
governance and corruption has hampered enforcement of the
law. The combination of logging and extreme weather events
caused by climate change “should be taken seriously by the
Philippine government,” said a Greenpeace spokesman. “The
scale and frequency of similar tragedies in the past should have,
long before, already provoked the government into action to
Timber and Forest Destruction
91

address the seemingly perennial problems of floods and land-
slides at the source” (ABS-CBN News 2006).
Trade in illegal wood products creates a different kind of
problem. The United Kingdom is believed to be the largest im-
porter of illegal tropical timber in the world, undermining efforts
at protecting forests and leading to criminal activity.
Another problem associated with deforestation is the impact
on the global carbon cycle. When a forest is cut and burned to
make room for agriculture and grazing, for instance, the carbon
that was stored in the trunks of the trees joins with oxygen, re-
leased into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration (NASA) estimates that from
1850 to 1990, worldwide deforestation released 122 billion metric
tons of carbon into the atmosphere. Currently, about 1.6 billion
metric tons are being released each year, enhancing the green-
house effect that may contribute to an increase in global warming
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration 2006). Forests
become carbon sinks, sequestering carbon by storing it in litter
and soil as well as in the trees themselves.
Sustainable forestry is not a one-size-fits-all solution. An al-
ternative practice to clear-cutting, for example, is selective log-
ging, which requires marking and cutting specific trees, rather
than a whole area at one time. One study in Indonesia found that
when only 3 percent of the trees were cut, a logging operation
would actually damage nearly half of the surrounding forest. But
in tropical forests, selective logging still provides seeds for refor-
estation and shade for trees beginning to grow (ibid.).
Another management technique involves reduced-impact
logging, or RIL, which can be 10 to 15 percent less expensive than
conventional logging methods. RIL involves an array of harvest-
ing techniques that reduce damage from road building and skid-
trails, ensures faster recovery and better survival of residual trees,
shortens cutting cycles, and helps to establish inventory control.
According to the Tropical Forest Foundation (TFF), RIL tech-
niques can be adapted to fit individual biophysical systems and
economic conditions. The methods include careful tree felling
and machine use that increase worker safety and reduce wood
waste by more than 60 percent (Holmes et al. 2006).
Because tropical forests are often found in developing coun-
tries, it is often difficult to resolve disputes over the appropriate
use and protection of a nation’s trees. Western environmental or-
ganizations, for instance, have sought protection for tropical rain
92
Worldwide Perspective

forests. But key to any solution is finding alternative sources of
income for impoverished populations seeking to improve their
livelihoods, or those relying upon forest resources. In Liberia,
where the UN Security Council placed a sanction on timber ex-
ports, the halt in trade is said to have harmed ordinary citizens
who are dependent upon forests for economic survival.
Shade agriculture refers to the practice of not cutting the
original trees in the rain forest, providing shade for crops such as
coffee or chocolate. If a farm is abandoned and the crops are no
longer being harvested, much of the forest grows back very
quickly, sometimes within twenty years.
Protected area networks represent one form of direct action
to reduce deforestation, but funding is limited for long-term ef-
forts, especially research and training. Unless field staff are paid
reasonably well, the opportunity for corruption and illegal log-
ging is always present.
Water Resources and Scarcity
In 2006, a UN special investigator warned that 11 million people
in East Africa are faced with starvation because of a combination
of drought and conflict. In Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia,
and Tanzania, prefamine conditions were increasingly being re-
ported, and the World Meteorological Union warned that sub-
stantial rain was unlikely. The drought, reported to be the worst
in decades, along with poor governmental planning, exemplifies
the problems faced in many developing countries. Aid organiza-
tions such as Oxfam are unable to provide more than a token sup-
ply to remote areas, forcing families to make the choice between
allowing their animals, which are their life savings, to starve or to
die of thirst. Temperatures of over 100 degrees are common, and
the cracked earth is testament to how long it has been since the
last rains. Although some water is available from private ven-
dors, the prices have soared from about 3 cents for a 20-liter jug
in normal times to about a dollar, more than most people earn in
a day when work is available (Lacey 2006).
Water scarcity is more than just a question of availability. It is
a deeply divisive international issue that some, including the vice
president of the World Bank, have warned will be the source of
the world’s next deadly wars. Whether those projected conflicts
take place among military forces in the Middle East, or among
Water Resources and Scarcity
93

lines of refugees in Somalia hoping for a few liters of water that
must last a week, scarcity of this vital resource is pitting the have
nots against the have mores.
Water scarcity can be defined in numerous ways, depending
upon one’s needs. Generally, the term is applied to situations in
which the annual availability of water is less than 1,000 cubic me-
ters per person. To put this in context, in the Middle East, where
water scarcity is considered serious, Israel has available less than
300 cubic meters, Jordan around 100 cubic meters, and in Gaza
and the West Bank, well below 100 cubic meters of renewable
water per person each year (Worldwatch 2006). In terms of use, it
takes about 1,000 cubic meters to grow a ton of grain. In terms of
production, a proposed seawater desalination plant in Algiers can
produce 200,000 cubic meters of potable water a day, or about 53
million U.S. gallons. The world’s largest water reclamation plant,
the Sulaibiya facility in Kuwait, purifies municipal wastewater,
producing about 100 million gallons per day, mostly for indus-
trial and agricultural use.
Most of the world’s drinking water can be traced to ground-
water, such as rivers and streams, which flow into aquifers be-
neath the surface of the earth. According to one study, there are
263 international river basins, covering 45.3 percent of the earth’s
land surface, hosting about 40 percent of the world’s population
and accounting for about 60 percent of global river flow. Territory
in 145 nations falls within international basins, and thirty-three
countries are located almost entirely within those basins; seven-
teen nations, for instance, share the Danube River basin (Wolf et
al. 2005). Control of rivers and the basins where they flow is one
part of the reason for the differences in water availability from
one region to another.
Statistics on the magnitude of the problem vary, but they all
point to many developing countries that are in dire straits be-
cause of water scarcity. Some estimates indicate that by 2015,
some 3 billion people, or about 40 percent of the world’s popula-
tion, will find it difficult or impossible to mobilize enough water
to satisfy their food, industrial, and domestic needs. In addition,
there are spillover effects leading to poverty and refugee migra-
tion that place additional pressures on other nations and regions.
There is a sense, even among political leaders who have been told
otherwise, that water is an abundant and renewable natural re-
source. Few have recognized that the problem stems in large part
from overconsumption as the world’s population grows, as does
94
Worldwide Perspective

demand for agricultural products and growing industrialization.
Even more serious in some regions is the continuing deterioration
of drinking water quality, which often leads to disease. Current
international plans to address the issue are unlikely to be met by
the goal year of 2015 (Biswas 2005).
Another problem relates to what experts call problem dis-
placement. Countries such as Israel, where water is scarce, divert
their few liquid resources to cities and industries, where the
“value” per gallon is higher than it is for agricultural production,
which requires considerably more water at a greater “cost.” The
nation imports agricultural goods, which only transfers the prob-
lem to the exporting countries, where water may be just as scarce
(Princen 2003).
In northern Africa, several types of water crises are inter-
connected. Drinking water is often in short supply, rainfall is lim-
ited and unpredictable, and the existing infrastructure leads to
evaporation and immense losses of water. The residents in some
urban areas receive water only once every three days. The
United Nations estimates that, in other parts of the continent,
patterns of unsustainable use of water, poor management, pollu-
tion, increasing consumption, and rapid population growth are
responsible for numerous conflicts. The UN estimates that by
2025, one out of two Africans will be living in countries facing
water scarcity.
Researchers at the Pacific Institute for Studies in Develop-
ment, Environment, and Security have developed a chronology of
conflicts over water that dates back to 2500 B.C. and the border
wars between the city-states of Lagash and Umma. The timeline
identifies dozens of disputes from biblical times (1200 B.C., and
the accounts of Moses parting the Red Sea to save Jews trapped
by the Egyptian army) and multiple wars in Babylon to the early
history of the United States. In most of these instances the mili-
tary (or invading forces) used water strategically, destroying
dams, diverting rivers, flooding towns, creating liquid barri-
cades, or dynamiting canals. The control of water resources that
is the foundation of contemporary disputes over scarcity is traced
back to 1898, when Egypt, France, and Great Britain battled over
the headwaters of the Nile River, and to 1907, when Los Angeles
sought to divert water from the Owens Valley to satisfy the needs
of thirsty Southern Californians (Gleick 2004).
More recently, control of water resources has resulted in par-
titions dividing the Ganges River between Bangladesh and India
Water Resources and Scarcity
95

(1947); the partition of the Indus basin between India and Pakistan
(1947); disputed territory between Sudan and Egypt (1958); dis-
puted territory between Israel and Syria in 1962, in 1964, and
again in 1965–1966; disputed territory between Brazil and
Paraguay from 1962 to 1967; disputes among Argentina, Brazil,
and Paraguay in the 1970s over the Parana River; disputes be-
tween Angola and South Africa in 1975; tensions over the Blue
Nile between Egypt and Ethiopia since 1978; disputes between
Lesotho and South Africa in 1986; since 1991, disputes between
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu (India); problems over access to water
by Namibia, Botswana, and Zambia in 1999–2000; destruction of
water supplies in the West Bank settlement of Yitzhar by Palestin-
ian force in 2001; and, in 2001, disputes in Macedonia (ibid.). Most
of the disputes that have occurred since World War II are ongoing,
punctuated by only brief periods of calm before strife reoccurs.
The Worldwatch Institute estimates that, since World War II,
more than 45,000 dams have been built, and they generate about
one-fifth of the world’s electricity. The water from those projects
also provides irrigation water for agriculture that produces about
10 percent of the world’s food (ibid.). The conflict over dams and
water scarcity arises when the facilities are built near the ancestral
homes of indigenous people. Rural and ethnic minorities are
sometimes the interests that “lose” because dam building often
calls for such groups to be moved or evicted from land that has
been occupied for centuries. Resettlement may be poorly
planned, or may result in minimal if any compensation for those
forced to relocate. Cultural considerations are sometimes ignored,
and religious or spiritual sites might be destroyed behind reser-
voirs. Informed prior consent, while desirable, may not result in
acceptance.
Another form of conflict arises when one project affects com-
munities in another area. A good example of this can be found in
Mexico, where the Federal Electricity Commission is planning to
build a $1 billion hydroelectric dam on the Papagayo River. Offi-
cials say that the dam is needed to supply the tourist resort of
Acapulco, twenty miles away, and that the project would provide
water for the next fifty years. Acapulco is the top source of in-
come, and its population is expected nearly to double over the
next fifteen years. A second project, in the western state of Jalisco,
was planned but stalled because of protests.
The Papagayo project is being opposed by farmers who say
that the dam will cause water shortages that will dry up their
96
Worldwide Perspective

farms and fisheries. The government admits that water will be
scarce for one to two years as the dam fills, but they have prom-
ised to guarantee a minimum flow in the interim. Locals say that
water alone is not the issue. The dam would ruin a lifestyle of
farming and fishing that has existed for generations. Others sup-
port the project because it would bring higher-paying jobs to the
region. The conflict has become more heated because the group
has been advised by radical opposition movements. In opposing
another governmental project in 2002, radical leaders kidnapped
officials, tied them to a tanker truck, and threatened to blow it up.
In the region where the proposed dam would be built, hundreds
of machete-wielding farmers briefly seized a pumping plant, cut-
ting off water to Acapulco just before the resort opened for the
major spring tourist season. The protestors ended a two-day
blockade when the government provided them with compensa-
tion for some land and the release of one of their colleagues.
A similar dispute involves the proposed Siberia–Central Asia
Canal, which would divert Siberian rivers into the desert along a
2,225-kilometer corridor. The proposed dam was designed as a
source of valuable income for Russia, which had planned to sell
the water from the Ob and Irtysh rivers (less than 10 percent of
the flow would be diverted) at a cost between $12 and $20 bil-
lion. The excess water would be sold to downstream countries
where water is scarce by diverting the canal’s water into the Amu
Darya and Syr Darya rivers to serve the five Central Asian states
of Krygyzstan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Turk-
menistan. These nations rely upon water for irrigation of thirsty
crops such as cotton and rice; agricultural use and diversion are
already drying up the Aral Sea, which UN experts predict may
not exist by 2020.
Russia’s plans, which have been called exorbitantly expen-
sive and not feasible, would help its economy, but the impact of
the canal on the five beneficiary countries would potentially lead
to intense conflict in Central Asia. Competition is fierce for the al-
ready scarce local sources of water, about half of which are found
in Tajikistan. That country’s leaders admit that they do not have
the resources to maintain, repair, and operate its current irrigation
infrastructure, and many citizens still do not have access to clean
drinking water. The region’s use of water for irrigation is ineffi-
cient, since water is lost through evaporation and in its poorly
built canals. The Russian canal project looks promising, at least to
some (Blagov 2003).
Water Resources and Scarcity
97

Although conflicts relating to water resources have been
around for thousands of years, the global news media have
seized upon the issue by graphically illustrating the magnitude of
the problem in the regions affected, and the people who are dying
because they have no access to water. Some researchers, however,
argue that the apocalyptic warnings are unsubstantiated, since no
nations have specifically gone to war over water resources for
thousands of years. Instances of cooperation outnumbered con-
flicts by more than two to one between 1945 and 1999, according
to the Worldwatch Institute. Thirty of the thirty-seven disputes
within that period involved Israel and one of its neighbors. Non-
Mideast cases accounted for only five events, while during the
same period, 157 treaties were negotiated and signed. “Because
water is so important, nations cannot afford to fight over it. In-
stead water fuels greater interdependence. By coming together to
jointly manage their shared water resources, countries build trust
and prevent conflict” (Wolf et al. 2005).
Low-level water cooperation has occurred in some areas of
the Middle East, however, despite the extent of the bitterness and
hostility among affected nations. The United Nations has worked
since the early 1950s to build agreements between Israel and Jor-
dan, even when the two countries were officially at war. When a
peace agreement was reached in 1994, there were already stan-
dards and norms that had been informally reached years before,
providing a basis for trust.
The resolution of water conflicts has been hampered by the
lack of good governance—specifically, by corruption within na-
tional and local governments. But there are several strategies
that have been recommended to help end some of the disputes,
to bring about peaceful interaction among the affected parties.
The Worldwatch Institute has developed several ideas for future
initiatives:
•
Identify and utilize more experienced facilitators who
are perceived as truly neutral. Researchers cite the
example of the World Bank’s efforts to facilitate the Nile
Basin Initiative as a model for the types of skills that
could be used in other river basins.
•
Be willing to support a long process that might not
produce quick or easily measurable results. In some
cases, nations have had to make a decades-long
commitment to a project because of the length of a
98
Worldwide Perspective

project cycle. That has been the case with Sweden’s
agreement to commit resources to Africa’s Great Lakes
for twenty years.
•
Ensure that the riparians themselves drive the process.
Some of the failures in past conflict-resolution attempts
have been a result of negotiators perceived as outsiders
who have little stake in the outcome. Worldwatch
recommends that negotiations emphasize the role of
local interests, and that efforts be made to increase the
capacity of excluded, marginalized, or weaker groups to
ensure that their voices are heard.
•
Strengthen water resource management. There are
many water resource institutions already operating at
the local or regional level, but many of them lack the
necessary capability to analyze data, encourage public
participation, or develop long-term management
plans. The expertise of indigenous people can be
combined with modern technology and the
knowledge of nongovernmental organizations that
have already built relationships and could assist in
capacity building.
•
Balance the benefits of closed-door, high-level
negotiations with the benefits of including all
stakeholders—NGOs, farmers, indigenous groups—
throughout the process. This step involves explicitly
inviting and encouraging the participation of all relevant
parties in the dispute before any decisions are made.
Sometimes these groups will buy into a project that they
might otherwise reject because they have had an
opportunity to participate in decision-making (ibid.).
The ultimate goal of any of these strategies is to avoid con-
flict. Water resources are valuable, in some regions more so than
gold or precious minerals. But there is also evidence that the
water wars of the past are different today, and that new initiatives
will be needed to make sure that scarcity issues remain on the ne-
gotiating table rather than being exported to the killing fields.
References
ABS-CBN News. 2006. “Greenpeace: Logging, Climate Change Aggra-
vated S. Leyte Mudslide.” Website at www.abs-cbnnews.com (accessed
February 18, 2006).
Water Resources and Scarcity
99

Amnesty International USA. “Conflict Diamonds Update: Kimberley
Process and Industry Self-Regulation” at www.amnestyusa.org/
diamonds (accessed April 15, 2006).
Amnesty International USA. 2006. “Ecuador: Oil Rights or Human
Rights.” Website at www.amnestyusa.org (accessed April 17, 2006).
Biswas, Asit K. 2005. “An Assessment of Future Global Water Issues.” In-
ternational Journal of Water Resources Development 21, no. 2 (June): 229–237.
Blagov, Sergei. 2003. “Parched Central Asia Looks to Russia.” Asia Times
Online at www.atimes.com (accessed April 1, 2006).
Butvill, Dave Brian. 2005. “When Oil and Conservation Mix.” Nature
Conservancy 55, no. 4 (winter): 14.
Chew, Sing C. 2001. World Ecological Degradation: Accumulation, Urbaniza-
tion, and Deforestation, 3000 B.C.–A.D. 2000. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira.
Collier, Paul. 2001. “Economic Causes of Civil Conflict and Their Impli-
cations for Policy.” In Turbulent Peace: The Challenges of Managing Interna-
tional Conflict, edited by Chester A. Crocker, Fen Osler Hampson, and
Pamela Aall. Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press.
Gleick, Peter. 2004. “The World’s Water: Water Conflict Chronology.”
Website at www.worldwater.org (accessed April 1, 2006).
Global Policy Forum. 2006. “Oil in Iraq.” Website at www.globalpolicy
.org (accessed April 23, 2006).
Greenpeace. 2006. “Great Bear Rainforest: Saved.” Website at www
.greenpeace.org/usa (accessed February 18, 2006).
Holmes, Thomas P., et al. 2006. Financial Costs and Benefits of Reduced-Im-
pact Logging in the Eastern Amazon. Alexandria, VA: Tropical Forest Foun-
dation website at www.tropicalforestfoudnation.org (accessed February
14, 2006).
Kennes, Erik. 2005. “Footnotes to the Mining Story.” Minerals and Energy
20, no. 1 (March): 23–28.
Lacey, Marc. 2006. “Amid Deep Drought, Africans Are Dying.” Arizona
Republic, February 19, p. A28.
Masland,Tom, et al. 2000. “In Search of Hot Rocks.” Newsweek 136, no. 2
(July 10): 30.
Mastny, Lisa. 2006. “New Imaging Techniques Reveal Greater Amazon
Logging.” Worldwatch 19, no. 1 (January–February): 5.
McLaughlin, Abraham, and Claire Soares. 2006. “Oil Wealth and Cor-
ruption at Play in Chad’s Rebellion.” Christian Science Monitor (April 21)
at www.csmonitor.com (accessed April 22, 2006).
100
Worldwide Perspective

National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 2006. “Tropical Defor-
estation.” 
Website 
at 
www.earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Library/
Deforestation (accessed February 14, 2006).
Natural 
Resources 
Canada. 
“Kimberley 
Process 
for 
Rough
Diamonds–Background.” Website at http://mmsd1.mms.nrcan.gc.ca/
kimberleyprocess (accessed April 4, 2006).
No Dirty Gold website at www.nodirtygold.org (accessed October 18,
2006).
Orogun, Paul. 2004. “‘Blood Diamonds’ and Africa’s Armed Conflicts in
the Post–Cold War Era.” World Affairs 166, no. 3 (winter): 151–161.
Perlez, Jane, et al. 2005. “Tangled Strands in Fight over Peru Gold Mine.”
New York Times, October 25, A1.
Princen, Thomas. 2003. “Principles for Sustainability: From Cooperation
and Efficiency to Sufficiency.” Global Environmental Politics 3, no. 1: 33–50.
Roper, John, and Ralph W. Roberts. 1999. Deforestation: Tropical Forests in
Decline. Forestry Issue Paper (January) website at www.rcfa-cfan.org (ac-
cessed November 19, 2005).
Shore, Sandy. 2006. “Gold’s High Prices Boost Production, Global Explo-
ration.” Arizona Republic, January 17,  D2.
Stevenson, Mark. 2006. “Mexican Dam Project Faces Growing Farmer
Opposition.” Arizona Republic, April 7, A10.
Tamm, Ingrid J. 2004. “Dangerous Appetites: Human Rights Activism
and Conflict Commodities.” Human Rights Quarterly 26, no. 3: 687–704.
UN Food and Agriculture Organization. 2006. Global Forest Resources As-
sessment 2005. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization.
U.S. Energy Information Agency. 2003. Caspian Sea Region: Environmental
Issues. Website at www.eia.doe/gov (accessed April 17, 2006).
Wolf, Aaron T., et al. 2005. “Water Can Be a Pathway to Peace, Not War.”
Worldwatch Global Security Brief #5 (June) website at www.worldwatch
.org (accessed April 1, 2006).
Worldwatch Institute. “Water Conflict and Security Cooperation.” State
of the World 2005 Trends and Facts website at www.worldwatch.org/
features (accessed April 1, 2006).
Water Resources and Scarcity
101


4
Chronology
1626
Plymouth Colony in Massachusetts regulates cutting
and sale of timber on colony lands to control supply.
1631
Massachusetts Bay Colony passes ordinance provid-
ing penalties for setting destructive wood fires.
1781
Thirteen original colonies agree to cede the western
reserve lands back to the government, creating the
public domain lands.
1785
General Land Ordinance gives the federal govern-
ment the right to grant public lands to new states to
produce revenue, and initiation of a program of land
grants for schools upon designation of statehood. Sur-
veys conducted of the public lands were to conform to
a rectilinear system based on lines of longitude, estab-
lishing a pattern of land ownership in 24-by-24-mile
squares.
1787
Ordinance of 1787 provides that estates in the North-
west Territories could be bequeathed by wills and
conveyed by lease, bargain, and sale as part of the
transition to fee simple ownership.
1803
Louisiana Purchase doubles the size of the public do-
main by adding 530 million acres purchased from
France for $15 million. The acquisition opens up the 
103

heartland of the continent and provides new trade 
routes along the Mississippi River.
1832
George Catlin, a lawyer who traveled throughout the
frontier, writes of the benefits of preserving and pro-
tecting pristine wilderness, believed to be the first
mention of wilderness preservation.
1832
Congress reserves four sections of the area around
Hot Springs, Arkansas, for “future disposal” and sets
the precedent for reserving lands for future designa-
tion as national parks.
1841
Log Cabin Bill permits any head of household,
widow, or single man over age twenty-one, who is a
citizen, to acquire up to 160 acres of surveyed, unoc-
cupied, unreserved public land by settling upon it and
paying $1.25 per acre, provided that the individual
did not already own more than 320 acres within the
United States.
1848
Gold is discovered in California; miners establish their
own authority to create mining districts and property
rights in absence of a state or federal presence.
1862
Homestead Act formalizes the idea of allowing set-
tlers to claim sufficient public land to support a fam-
ily, usually up to 160 acres per head of household.
1864
Congress enacts legislation granting the Yosemite Val-
ley and Mariposa Big Tree Grove to the state of Cali-
fornia to protect the area from haphazard tourism and
land claims.
1865
Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted lays forth
the philosophical foundation for the preservation of
the Yosemite Valley in a report to California’s gover-
nor, providing the framework for future national park
policies.
1867
Purchase of Alaska marks the end of the period of ac-
quisition of public lands as part of the public domain.
104
Chronology

1869
Charles Cook, David Folsom, and William Peterson
journey to Yellowstone and confirm the accounts of
Jim Bridger, whose stories about the region were so
grandiose that most officials and the public disbe-
lieved them.
1869
John Wesley Powell completes the first successful
transit of the Grand Canyon, giving him a national
reputation for exploration and surveying of the
West.
1870
Washburn-Langford-Doane expedition discovers the
Upper Geyser Basin and Old Faithful geyser. Publicity
from the exploration encourages public interest in Yel-
lowstone, and Congress begins to consider establish-
ing some type of protective status for the area.
1872
General Mining Law establishes U.S. mineral policy
and regulations, including the rights of private citi-
zens to explore and purchase public lands.
1872
Legislation designates 3,400 square miles in Yellow-
stone as the country’s first national park as Congress
calls for the “preservation, from injury and spolia-
tion, of all timber, mineral deposits, natural curiosi-
ties or wonders, and their retention in their natural
condition.”
1873
Coal Lands Act requires development of a competi-
tive leasing system, with bids based on fair market
value. Coal is never included under the Mining Law
of 1872.
1878
Enactment of the Free Timber Act allows the logging
of timber within the public domain, whether for min-
ing development, agriculture, or domestic purposes.
1878
Public Lands Commission is created; the agency rec-
ommends that all public lands be withdrawn from
sale or disposal, but Congress disregards its recom-
mendations.
Chronology
105

1879
U.S. Geological Survey is established to investigate
and assess mineral resources and administer mineral
leases on public lands.
1879
John Wesley Powell’s Report on the Lands of the Arid Re-
gion of the United States becomes the basis for the re-
form of the corrupt General Land Office, transfer of
survey responsibilities to the Coast and Geodetic Sur-
vey, and the recommendation for the creation of com-
munities along bodies of water.
1883
Congress authorizes the secretary of war, upon re-
quest of the secretary of the Interior, to provide army
troops to prevent trespassers and intruders from en-
tering Yellowstone National Park to hunt or to destroy
objects.
1883
Division of Forestry is established by the secretary of
agriculture.
1889
Congress appropriates funding to repair the damage
at the Casa Grande ruins in Arizona, recognizing the
importance of the archaeological site that was being
vandalized and leading to the creation of the first na-
tional monument.
1890
Sagebrush Rebels introduce legislation to cede all un-
appropriated lakes and rivers to state or territorial
control.
1890
Legislation establishes the nation’s first national mili-
tary park at Georgia’s Chickamauga Battlefield and
Tennessee’s Chattanooga Park.
1891
Forest Reserve Act halts the sale of federal lands and
allows the president to set aside forest reserves by ex-
ecutive order.
1891
Maine creates the first state forest commission with a
fire suppression mission.
106
Chronology

1892
Sierra Club is founded in San Francisco as the first
major organization seeking to preserve wilderness
areas.
1894
Yellowstone Game Protection Act (Lacey Act) pro-
vides additional protection for the park’s wildlife and
makes it a crime to hunt, kill, wound, or capture any
bird or wild animal within the park’s boundaries, one
of the country’s first environmental crimes.
1894
North Carolina Press Association petitions Congress
for a national park, seeking to obtain protection for
the Appalachian Mountains.
1897
Organic Act gives the Department of Interior author-
ity to manage forest reserves to protect navigable wa-
terways, prohibits clear-cutting, and requires the
agency to secure a continuous supply of timber for
public use.
1902
Newlands Act provides that all sales of arid or semi-
arid public lands be deposited into a reclamation fund
from which irrigation projects benefiting both public
and private lands are to be financed. This becomes the
source of funding for the Reclamation Service.
1904
Southern Pacific Railroad completes El Tovar Hotel in
Grand Canyon National Park, further cementing rela-
tions between the railroads and tourism in the parks.
1905
U.S. Forest Service is created within the Department
of Agriculture, with Gifford Pinchot as its first chief,
with the mission of managing and protecting timber
supplies in what becomes the National Forest
System.
1906
Passage of the Antiquities Act gives the president the
authority to declare national monuments on public
lands in order to protect sites of historic or scientific
interest without congressional approval.
Chronology
107

1908
U.S. Supreme Court establishes the doctrine of a fed-
eral reserves water right in Winters v. United States.
1910
Bureau of Mines is created as a research-oriented
agency to collect information on supply and demand,
mine safety, and environmental issues.
1911
U.S. Supreme Court rules that the federal government
has the right to create a national forest on federal pub-
lic land without consent of the state within which the
forest is located in Light v. United States.
1911
Weeks Act gives specific legislative authority to the
Division of Forestry for forest protection, enhancing
the agency’s jurisdiction and power. The statute also
gives consent of Congress for states to enter into
agreements to conserve forests and the water supply.
1912
Federal officials debate the use of automobiles in na-
tional parks at a conference in Yosemite National
Park, and consider issues of roads, accidents, conflicts
with horse-drawn carriages, and limitations on where
automobiles should be allowed to travel.
1915
The Santa Fe and Union Pacific railroads spend
$500,000 to set up exhibits in national parks, encour-
aging Americans to ride the rails to the parks. The al-
liance is considered part of the efficient, economic,
and satisfactory management of the Forest Service as
advocated by Gifford Pinchot.
1916
National Park Service is established within Depart-
ment of the Interior to protect scenic areas, historic ob-
jects, and wildlife for future generations, providing a
management structure for the units that had previ-
ously been run independently.
1916
Congress amends Lacey Act to reduce penalties for
hunting, destroying timber, or removal of minerals in
Yellowstone National Park.
108
Chronology

1917
Congress gives secretary of agriculture the authority
to use a leasing system for hardrock minerals on ac-
quired lands.
1918
First National Park Service regulations are published,
and include maintaining the parks “in absolutely
unimpaired form for the use of future generations as
well as those of our own time.” Regulations also out-
law leasing for summer homes, cutting of trees except
for buildings and where it would not hurt the forests,
and requiring roads to harmonize with the landscape.
1919
Steven Mather, “father” of the national parks, com-
plains of too much development and commercializa-
tion in the park system.
1920
Mineral Leasing Act provides that federal lands con-
taining deposits of coal, phosphates, oil, and other min-
erals may be acquired only through a leasing system.
1920
Federal Power Act authorizes construction of dams on
federal lands.
1921
Congress hastily enacts amendments to the Federal
Power Act to forbid the building of dams in national
parks and monuments without its specific approval.
1921
Aldo Leopold envisions wilderness as a “continuous
stretch of country preserved in its natural state, open
to lawful hunting and fishing, devoid of roads or
other works of man.”
1922
National Park Service conference in Yosemite pro-
duces a resolution on development, stating that it is
undesirable and should be avoided, and that plans for
the development of each national park should be out-
lined as far in advance as possible.
1922
At the urging of Aldo Leopold, 574,000 acres in the
Gila National Forest in New Mexico are set aside for
wilderness recreation.
Chronology
109

1924
National Conference on Outdoor Recreation meets to
discuss the need for public use of forests and other
public lands for recreation, leading to expansion of
national park system.
1924
Clarke-McNary Act authorizes the secretary of the In-
terior to recommend systems of fire prevention and
suppression for each forest region, and increases fed-
eral fire-prevention funding authorization.
1926
U.S. Forest Service inventories public lands that are
roadless and manages them as wilderness areas.
1927
Financier John D. Rockefeller, Jr., offers $5 million in
matching funds to create Great Smoky Mountains Na-
tional Park. Sufficient matching funds are not raised
until 1934.
1928
Congress defines how concessions are to be managed
within the national parks.
1929
Forest Service begins to establish “primitive areas,”
wilderness-type areas managed under flexible rules
with little scientific study, and assumed to be with-
drawn from development only temporarily.
1930
Bob Marshall publishes his influential essay “The
Problem of the Wilderness” in Scientific American mag-
azine, beginning a decade-long crusade for wilder-
ness preservation.
1931
National Park Service approves a forestry policy
which states that the parks will be as completely pro-
tected as possible, including a fire protection plan,
control of insects, tree disease control, campground
protection, land and timber exchanges, cleanup of
dead and downed timber, and the elimination of graz-
ing as soon as practicable.
1932
Wildlife conservationist George Wright releases a re-
port that lays the ground rules for scientific wildlife
management and further research.
110
Chronology

1933
Civil War battlefields are added to the National Park
system, expanding the network of sites from scenic
and wild areas to historic resources.
1933
Creation of the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) by
Franklin D. Roosevelt leads to construction of an ex-
tensive infrastructure system within the national
parks, including roads, trails, and other public works
projects. CCC workers take on responsibility for fire
control and timber management.
1934
Congress enacts Taylor Grazing Act in response to
problems caused by severe overgrazing and damage
to soils, and creates Grazing Division.
1935
President Franklin Roosevelt establishes the National
Resources Board by executive order, to prepare and
present to the president a program for the develop-
ment and use of land, waters, and other national re-
sources.
1935
The Wilderness Society is founded to protect vast
tracts of public lands from natural resource extraction
and development. Its founders include the nation’s
foremost advocates for preservation Aldo Leopold,
Bob Marshall, Benton MacKaye, Harvey Broome,
Bernard Frank, Harold Anderson, Ernest Oberholtzer,
and Robert Sterling Yard.
1935
Congress declares that it is national policy to preserve
for public use historic sites, buildings, and objects of
national significance, greatly expanding the jurisdic-
tion of the National Park Service.
1935
National Park Trust is established to provide a mech-
anism for the private sector to donate land, gifts, and
funds to the parks.
1936
Congress enacts the Park, Parkway, and Recreational
Area Study Act to aid state and local agencies in recre-
ational planning.
Chronology
111

1939
Grazing Office is renamed the Grazing Service as part
of an expansion of federal regulation of public lands
grazing.
1942
Cooperative Forest Fire Prevention Campaign begins
as part of the patriotism fueled by the war effort, as-
sisted by the Wartime Advertising Council and pro-
fessional advertising agencies.
1942
Congress terminates the Civilian Conservation Corps
as national park attendance drops, and the nation’s at-
tention turns to World War II.
1945
Smokey Bear first appears as a symbol of the nation’s
fire prevention effort.
1946
Bureau of Land Management is created through the
merger of the General Land Office and the Grazing
Service, with responsibility for managing all remain-
ing “unreserved” public lands.
1950
National Park Service officials oppose the building of
Echo Park Dam in Dinosaur National Monument, a
position contrary to that of the Department of the In-
terior.
1950
Grand Teton National Park is established in
Wyoming, provided that no further extension or es-
tablishment of national parks or monuments occur
within the state without congressional approval.
1952
Chief of U.S. Forest Service tells Congress that with-
out funds being appropriated to build new roads,
many areas of valuable timber will remain undevel-
oped.
1953
Harper’s Magazine journalist Bernard DeVoto writes a
scathing article criticizing Congress for ignoring the
national park system and treating the National Park
Service like an “impoverished stepchild.” DeVoto
cites the deplorable conditions of the park system’s
112
Chronology

roads, campgrounds, and buildings, and complains
the parks are understaffed.
1954
Multiple Mineral Development Act enacted to deal
with hardrock mineral claims that are being leased for
oil.
1954
James B. Gilligan delivers a speech before the Society
of American Foresters warning that the country has
become complacent about wilderness preservation,
and that congressional action is necessary. The speech
reignites the wilderness preservation advocacy
groups, which had been almost dormant during
World War II.
1955
Surface Resources Act restricts the surface use of min-
eral claims to uses required for mining purposes.
1956
National Park Service director Conrad Wirth presents
Mission 66 to President Dwight D. Eisenhower, a ten-
year program to prepare a plan for an estimated 80
million visitors by 1966, with the paramount goal of
preserving wilderness areas in the parks.
1956
Proposal to dam the Green River in Dinosaur National
Monument prompts Howard Zahniser of the Wilder-
ness Society to draft a wilderness protection law.
1957
Senator Hubert Humphrey formally introduces a
wilderness bill, which will not receive sufficient sup-
port for passage until 1964.
1960
Multiple Use and Sustained Yield Act widens access
and use of public lands by requiring that they be man-
aged for a variety of uses that best meet the needs of
the American people, a theme that guides future de-
velopment of natural resources in the United States.
1962
President John F. Kennedy, addressing the White
House Conference on Conservation, emphasizes the
importance of the role of government in maintaining
environmental quality and natural beauty.
Chronology
113

1963
Interior Secretary Stewart Udall proposes a “New
Conservation” that would make national parks “spa-
cious areas of superior scenery to be preserved for-
ever,” with a doubling of the acreage under National
Park Service control by 1970.
1963
Leopold Report, initially designed to comment on
wildlife issues in the national parks, includes recom-
mendations on a basic management philosophy and
calls for a permanent staff of scientists to oversee the
maintenance or restoration of parks to the conditions
that existed prior to European settlement.
1963
Recreation Advisory Council recommends that
greater efforts be made to fulfill the increasing de-
mand for outdoor-recreation areas.
1964
Congress enacts the Wilderness Act and calls for des-
ignation of undeveloped federal lands to be kept in
their natural state for the use and enjoyment of the
public. More than 9 million acres are immediately des-
ignated as wilderness areas.
1964
Classification and Multiple Use Act gives the Bureau
of Land Management temporary authority to manage
public rangelands.
1964
U.S. Bureau of the Budget publishes a study, Natural
Resource User Charges, which shows that the federal
government should receive a fair price from public
land resource use, including livestock grazing.
1964
Public Land Law Review Commission is established
to provide a comprehensive review and evaluation of
public land policies.
1964
Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas wins presidential cam-
paign as the only candidate to recognize the political
value of the environmental movement, using the con-
cepts of the “New Conservation” and “natural
beauty” to appeal to middle-class Americans.
114
Chronology

1965
Land and Water Conservation Fund Act is enacted to
provide the federal government with funds to pur-
chase additional public lands. Funds are generated
through receipts from oil and gas leases.
1965
Concessions Policy Act establishes long-term, renew-
able monopoly contracts for building and commer-
cialism in national parks, addressing the controversial
issue of private enterprise in the parks.
1966
National Historic Preservation Act authorizes the sec-
retary of the Interior to create and maintain a national
register of historic districts, sites, and structures, and
to establish programs of matching grants, with the
National Park Service becoming the coordinating
agency for the designated areas.
1966
Department of Transportation Act declares that it is
national policy to preserve the natural beauty of the
countryside, park and recreation lands, wildlife and
waterfowl refuges, and historic sites. The law expands
responsibility for resource conservation to a non–land
management federal agency.
1967
National Park Foundation is established by Congress
as the successor to the National Park Trust Fund, with
assets of $784,387.
1968
U.S. departments of Interior and Agriculture propose
a grazing fee schedule that would require the cost of
grazing on public lands to equal that of private lands,
to be phased in over a ten-year period.
1968
National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act and the National
Trails System Act greatly expand and diversify the na-
tional park system and create complicated manage-
ment problems.
1968
Atlantic Richfield Company discovers superfield of
oil on the North Slope in Alaska.
Chronology
115

1968
National Park Service develops a policy for the use of
fire as part of the ecosystem management plan for Se-
quoia and Kings Canyon national parks, establishing
prescribed fire as a tool for restoring areas to their nat-
ural condition, and the acceptance of active manage-
ment of the natural environment.
1970
First observance of Earth Day becomes the peak event
for the environmental movement, as an estimated 20
million citizens participate in marches and protests,
educational events, and public outreach.
1970
Public Land Law Review Commission issues recom-
mendations on existing public land laws in One Third
of the Nation’s Land.
1970
Passage of National Environmental Policy Act re-
quires that all federal projects be reviewed to assess
the potential environmental impact, including alter-
natives to the proposed federal action, with a require-
ment for public participation. It also establishes a
Council on Environmental Quality to assist and ad-
vise the president on environmental policies. The leg-
islation is neither extensively lobbied nor thoroughly
debated as timber, mining, and other industry interest
groups understand the implications of the law.
1970
Grazing fee increase moratorium goes into effect, pro-
hibiting any increase over the fees charged in 1969.
1970
Passage of the Clean Air Act provides incentives for
increased production of Western coal, which is lower
in sulfur and does not produce as much air pollution
as Illinois basin coal.
1970
Congress enacts the General Authorities Act and spec-
ifies that all units be administered by the National
Park Service as part of the same system, to be man-
aged according to the provisions of the Organic Act of
1916.
116
Chronology

1970
A riot in Yosemite’s Stoneman Meadows by counter-
culture youth spurs the National Park Service to begin
a comprehensive law enforcement training program,
broadening the responsibilities of park rangers.
1970
Bolle Report calls for changes in management of U.S.
forest management practices and criticizes clear-cut-
ting.
1971
President Richard Nixon uses the presidential power
of executive order to strengthen the process of historic
preservation by expanding and maintaining the Na-
tional Register of Historic Places. The provisions of
the executive order are subsequently included in the
1980 National Historic Preservation Act amendments.
1971
Environmental groups challenge the U.S. Forest Ser-
vice’s liquidation of old growth forests in Alaska’s
Tongass National Forest in Sierra Club v. Hardin.
1971
Forest Service establishes policy to allow lightning-
caused fires in wilderness areas to burn under specific
conditions, adopting term “prescribed fires of natural
origin.”
1971
Council on Environmental Quality intervenes in the
controversy over a proindustry Timber Supply Act
and attempts by the Forest Service to accelerate log-
ging and road building in potential wilderness areas,
thereby disqualifying them from wilderness designa-
tion.
1972
Study of Northern spotted owl and Pacific Northwest
forests conducted by Oregon student initiates conflicts
over harvests of old growth forests.
1972
U.S. Forest Service conducts Roadless Area Review
and Evaluation (RARE) to survey areas for possible
inclusion in the National Wilderness Preservation
System.
Chronology
117

1972
Two specifically urban recreation areas are added to
the profile of the national parks with the addition of
the Gateway National Recreation Area in New York
and the Golden Gate National Recreation Area in San
Francisco.
1972
An activist group, the Conservation Foundation, is-
sues a blueprint of how national parks should be man-
aged to best preserve the resources they were de-
signed to protect, addressing issues such as park
concessions, visitor capacity, and research.
1973
Arab nations angry at U.S. support of Israel in 1973
war institute oil embargo against the United States
and Holland. Organization for Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) decreases production, and six
months later, world crude oil prices triple to $12 per
barrel. OPEC is firmly established as being in control
of world oil market.
1973
OPEC imposes a sixfold increase in prices for crude
oil, triggering widespread shortages and price goug-
ing. President Nixon announces a sixty-day freeze on
gasoline prices.
1973
Izaak Walton League, U.S. environmental organiza-
tion, sues U.S. Forest Service over clear-cutting.
1973
Eastern Wilderness Act allows areas that have recov-
ered, or are in the process of recovering, from past use
to be included in the National Wilderness Preserva-
tion System, providing coverage for areas in the East
that are no longer pristine.
1974
Federal court decision in Natural Resources Defense
Council v. Morton requires Bureau of Land Manage-
ment to conduct site-specific environmental impact
statements instead of one covering its entire grazing
program.
1974
Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
Act requires agencies to assess conditions in all forests
118
Chronology

and grazing areas, and to develop a strategic plan for
their management.
1974
President Richard Nixon resigns after Watergate scan-
dal; President Gerald Ford pushes Project Indepen-
dence to make the United States independent of pe-
troleum imports by 1985.
1974
Final RARE report recommends that 12.3 million acres
of U.S. Forest Service lands be designated for wilder-
ness protection.
1975
A second moratorium on grazing fee increases is im-
posed by the U.S. departments of agriculture and in-
terior.
1975
Energy Policy and Conservation Act establishes price
incentives, establishes Strategic Petroleum Reserve,
and creates Corporate Average Fuel Economy Stan-
dards (CAFE) in an attempt to insulate the United
States against world oil-production fluctuations.
1975
Congress enacts the Eastern Wilderness Act, designat-
ing sixteen additional wilderness areas, expanding the
area of advocacy concerns from the West to the East.
1976
Federal Land Policy and Management Act gives Bu-
reau of Land Management mandate to implement
multiple use principles, and extends Wilderness Act
provisions to public domain lands managed by the
agency. Grazing fees are frozen at 1969 levels.
1976
Federal Coal Leasing Amendments Act provides for
systematic study of energy sources and calls for com-
petitive leasing of lands for mining and energy
prospecting.
1976
National Forest Management Act calls for develop-
ment of a strategic plan for each of the national
forests, which eventually limits controversial logging
practices such as clear-cutting.
Chronology
119

1977
Congress enacts the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act, giving additional funding to pro-
ducers, and establishes the Office of Surface Mining
and Reclamation to deal with surface mining of coal.
1977
Department of Energy is created under President
Jimmy Carter to develop a comprehensive energy
plan by consolidating many of the functions and re-
sponsibilities of other federal agencies. Department of
the Interior loses most of its jurisdiction relating to en-
ergy policy.
1978
Interior secretary Cecil Andrus temporarily with-
draws 110 million acres of Alaska public lands from
development in response to pressure from environ-
mental groups.
1978
McClure Amendment to the Public Rangelands Im-
provement Act limits grazing reductions in the West
to 10 percent per grazing permit.
1978
Uranium Mill Tailings Reclamation Act provides
funds to identify and move or bury uranium waste
near residences.
1978
Congress places moratorium on grazing fee increases
for the fourth time since 1969.
1978
Revolution in Iran results in a major drop in crude oil
production, and the United States considers options
for drilling on the North Slope area of Alaska.
1978
Congress expands the boundaries of California’s Red-
wood National Park to protect stands of coastal red-
woods, the watershed, and the ecosystem, agreeing to
compensate those unemployed by the loss of timber-
related jobs.
1978
Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act rewrites provi-
sions of the 1924 Clarke-McNary Act, emphasizing
rural fire prevention and control rather than forest fires.
120
Chronology

1980
Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
transfers federally held land to the state of Alaska and
to Native American tribes, and moves responsibility
for land management from the Bureau of Land Man-
agement to the Fish and Wildlife Service and National
Park Service. The statute more than doubles the land
managed by the National Park Service.
1980
President Ronald Reagan appoints James Watt as sec-
retary of Interior in an attempt to reorient range man-
agement decision-making to favor resource produc-
tion goals over environmental protection.
1980
New Bureau of Land Management director Robert
Burford promises to adopt a “good neighbor” policy
that places greater emphasis on the economic health
of extractive industries.
1980
Congress enacts National Materials and Minerals Pol-
icy, Research and Development Act, advocating a
more coherent and coordinated minerals policy.
1980
National Park Service’s State of the Parks report identi-
fies specific threats that endanger park resources, and
calls for a comprehensive inventory of the natural and
cultural resources of each park, monitoring programs,
and an expansion of the research and resource man-
agement staff, which the reports says are “inadequate
to respond to the needs” of the agency.
1980
President Jimmy Carter supports Synthetic Fuels Act
to offer substantial incentives and subsidies to indus-
try to encourage the development of domestic fuels.
1980
General Management Plan for Yosemite National Park
calls for removal of all automobiles and redirection of
development to the periphery of the park and beyond.
1982
Minerals Management Service is created to administer
leases on the outer continental shelf and manage roy-
alty and revenue functions on the public lands.
Chronology
121

1982
Concerns about natural resource management make
their way to the ballot box, as two-thirds of the candi-
dates endorsed by the League of Conservation Voters
are elected. The Reagan administration admits that it
may have misread the previous election’s mandate on
environmental issues.
1982
Nuclear Waste Policy Act is enacted to find two suit-
able sites, one in the East and one in the West, as per-
manent repositories for high-level radioactive waste.
1984
National Security Minerals Act passes, to coordinate
mineral policy related to national defense.
1985
Food Security Act establishes the Conservation Re-
serve Program, to expand federal subsidies for forest
reforestation, including funding for private owners of
farms and ranches.
1985
Iran-Iraq War causes a major drop in crude oil pro-
duction and an increase in price from $14 a gallon to
$35.
1987
Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund opens new offices in
Seattle to challenge governmental policies relating to
old growth forests.
1987
Congress amends Nuclear Waste Policy Act to restrict
the search for a nuclear waste storage facility to a sin-
gle site.
1987
Federal government’s General Accounting Office is-
sues a report which states that little progress has been
made in documenting and mitigating threats to the
national parks, including threats to parks’ aesthetic
qualities, cultural resources, air and water quality,
plants, and wildlife.
1988
Former Secretary of Interior Stewart Udall and others
found the Mineral Policy Center, with a goal of re-
forming the 1872 General Mining Law.
122
Chronology

1988
Massive fires burn 1 million acres in Yellowstone Na-
tional Park and 600,000 acres in adjacent national
forests, leading to controversy over park management
and wildfire practices. National Park Foundation es-
tablishes Yellowstone Recovery Fund to raise funds to
help the park recovery effort.
1988
Wise use conference in Reno, Nevada, brings together
mineral prospectors, ranchers and livestock owners,
motorized vehicle owners, and property rights advo-
cates to coalesce around land use issues.
1988
Oregon and Washington list Northern spotted owl as
a threatened species, putting pressure on the federal
government to follow suit.
1989
Association of Forest Service Employees for Environ-
mental Ethics is established to challenge agency ac-
tions such as timber harvests.
1989
U.S. District Court judge William Dwyer rules that
U.S. Forest Service plans to protect the Northern spot-
ted owl, designated as a threatened species, are inad-
equate, issuing injunctions against timber sales in
Oregon and Washington.
1989
Contentious hearings in Congress debate the natural
burn policy used in Yellowstone National Park, con-
demning the economic impact during the tourist sea-
son.
1990
Congress enacts Tongass Timber Reform Act as the en-
vironmental lobby battles timber industry proposals.
1990
General Accounting Office report on changes in fed-
eral fire management made after the Yellowstone fires
is taking longer than expected, citing interagency co-
operation as a problem.
1991
Polls taken by the Roper Organization indicate that
the National Park Service has the highest approval
rating of all government agencies.
Chronology
123

1991
Saddam Hussein invades Kuwait to gain control of
the country’s oil resources; the United States becomes
involved to maintain strategic access to Middle East
oil reserves. Iraqi forces set fire to nearly 800 Kuwaiti
oil wells, irrevocably damaging the country’s ecologi-
cal landscape.
1991
Catron County, New Mexico, passes an ordinance re-
quiring all federal and state agencies to comply with
its own land-use policy plan in an effort to diminish
federal control over public lands.
1991
Federal judge halts all timber sales until the federal
government complies with forest legislation.
1991
Dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
opens up the region to scrutiny, revealing unimagin-
able environmental degradation, including contami-
nated soil and water, a lack of security near nuclear
power facilities, and uncontrolled well fires in the
Caspian region. The changes also lead to heightened
interest by Western energy companies that previously
had been shut out of the area.
1992
President Bill Clinton appoints Bruce Babbitt as secre-
tary of Interior. Babbitt identifies public land reform
as his top policy priority.
1992
Chief Forester Dale Robertson announces that ecosys-
tem management is the new concept guiding U.S. For-
est Service decision-making.
1992
U.S. District Court judge William Dwyer rules that in
the U.S. Forest Service Thomas Report, the agency did
not address issues relating to species other than the
spotted owl.
1992
Passage of the Energy Policy Act imposes a drilling
ban in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in exchange
for easing restrictions on the licensing of nuclear
power plants.
124
Chronology

1992
Vail Agenda outlines the state of conditions in the Na-
tional Park Service after seventy-five years and makes
recommendations for the reform and rejuvenation of
the agency, including a need for additional resources,
an extensive training program, more use of exhaustive
scientific research, and the use of park unit surveys in
the management of programs.
1992
Office of Technology Assessment report finds that
multiple-use and sustained-yield issues are inherently
conflicting, incompatible, or exclusive.
1993
Shell Oil shuts down its operations in Nigeria as a re-
sult of protests over pollution, poor clean-up efforts,
and increasing violence. A class action suit is filed in
New York against ChevronTexaco under the Alien
Tort Claims Act on behalf of an estimated 30,000
Amazon residents for alleged pollution of their envi-
ronment.
1993
Nye County, Nevada, passes an ordinance to overturn
federal authority over public lands within the county
by attempting to reopen a road closed by the U.S. For-
est Service in the Toiyabe National Forest.
1993
President Bill Clinton convenes the Northwest Forest
Summit in Portland, Oregon, to bring together stake-
holders in the debate over Northwest forest policies
and the fate of the Northern spotted owl, a threatened
species.
1993
Under an executive order, the Clinton administration
establishes the National Biological Survey (later re-
named the National Biological Service), to foster an
ecosystem management approach to address land
management issues.
1993
British Petroleum locates oil beneath the eastern
plains in the Andes Mountains of Colombia, predict-
ing millions of dollars in exports for the country.
Chronology
125

1994
Secretary of the Interior Babbitt abandons legislative
strategy in favor of administrative regulations with
Rangeland Reform ’94. Babbitt later announces that he
is ending his effort to change the formula by which
grazing fees are calculated.
1994
Republicans gain control of Congress in midterm elec-
tions and select supporters of existing rangeland poli-
cies to chair major natural resource committees.
1994
U.S. Forest Service cancels two timber sale contracts in
Alaska’s Tongass National Forest, ending long-term
agreements originally designed in the 1950s to stimu-
late economic development.
1994
Government officials in Azerbaijan agree to allow con-
sortium of foreign oil companies to invest $8 billion
for oil production over a thirty-year period.
1995
Western Republican members of Congress unsuccess-
fully attempt to pass legislation to establish livestock
grazing as the dominant use of federal lands.
1995
Rescissions Act (also known as the Timber Salvage
Rider) is developed under the Clinton administra-
tion, opening up areas of old growth forest that had
previously been protected by exempting timber sal-
vage sales from legal challenges, insulating many
timber sales from citizen appeals and environmental
reviews.
1995
Congress abolishes the Bureau of Mines.
1995
National Coal Association and American Mining Con-
gress merge to create the National Mining Associa-
tion, to oppose changes in mining laws.
1995
Senate passes a bill to designate livestock grazing as a
dominant use of the public lands, but the legislation
fails to get sufficient support in the House of Repre-
sentatives.
126
Chronology

1995
Wolves are reintroduced to Yellowstone National Park
as part of the restoration of an “endangered species.”
1996
President Bill Clinton uses the 1906 Antiquities Act to
establish the 1.7-million-acre Grand Staircase-Es-
calante National Monument by executive order, by-
passing Congress and public participation.
1996
Congress authorizes a three-year Recreational Fee
Demonstration Program to test new or increased en-
trance and user fees in units managed by the National
Park Service, Bureau of Land Management, Forest
Service, and Fish and Wildlife Service. At least 80 per-
cent of fees are to be retained at the site where they are
collected, supplementing agency funds rather than
offsetting appropriations.
1997
Antilogging activist Julia “Butterfly” Hill begins a
two-year “tree sit” in northern California to protest
the harvesting of old growth trees.
1997
Forest Service appoints a committee of scientists to re-
view land and resource management planning
processes.
1997
Wyoming Farm Bureau files suit in federal district
court to halt wolf reintroduction in Yellowstone Na-
tional Park and loses in the appeal process.
1997
U.S. General Accounting Office tells Congress that the
U.S. Forest Service’s decision-making process is “bro-
ken and in need of repair.”
1998
China bans logging but timber imports skyrocket,
much of it from illegal logging in Indonesia.
1998
California gubernatorial candidate Gray Davis
pledges that if he is elected, “all old growth trees will
be spared from the lumberman’s axe.” Davis wins the
election, but as governor, does not keep his electoral
promise. He is subsequently recalled from office and
loses a special election to Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Chronology
127

1998
Western Governors’ Association initiates Enlibra
model, to give those living near natural resources
more influence on land management decisions.
1999
UN Security Council acts to enforce sanctions in dia-
mond sales by rebel groups during the civil war in
Angola.
1999
Report by the National Research Council concludes
that better enforcement and coordination of existing
mining regulations are better than new regulations.
1999
Clinton administration proposes an eighteen-month
ban on new road building in roadless areas to protect
national forests and ecosystems.
1999
Yana Curi Report details the impact of oil develop-
ment on the health of the people in the Ecuadorian
Amazon who live close to oil fields.
2000
Public Lands Council, a trade organization represent-
ing ranchers, loses a U.S. Supreme Court case chal-
lenging Department of Interior rangeland regulations.
2000
Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries
tightens exports, leading to soaring prices for oil and
gasoline. In 1999, a barrel of oil sells for $10; the price
triples in 2000.
2001
Ecuadorian government grants approval for the start
of construction of a new $1.3 billion, 298-mile oil
pipeline through the rain forest that is expected to
double the country’s oil production.
2001
Tengizchevroil, the ChevronTexaco-led international
consortium developing an oil field in western Kaza-
khstan, is fined $75 million for causing ecological
damage.
2002
President George W. Bush announces his Healthy
Forests Initiative, to protect communities from wild-
128
Chronology

fires, but environmental groups contend that it allows
for increased logging.
2003
Twenty-six Tagaeri tribesmen in Ecuador are massa-
cred, allegedly by Colombian logging interests in-
volved in the illegal timber trade.
2003
President Bush signs the Healthy Forests Restoration
Act to broaden Forest Service authority to remove
hazardous fuels and open timber sales in wildfire-
prone areas.
2004
U.S. Forest Service releases a new rule allowing forest
managers to use an Environmental Management Sys-
tem approach for deciding the best use of forests on a
case-by-case basis.
2004
Bolivian voters support a referendum endorsing the
development of the country’s gas reserves; the indige-
nous population doubts that they will see the benefits
of development.
2004
United Nations reports that by 2025, one out of two
Africans will be living in countries facing water
scarcity.
2004
Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act extends
Recreational Fee Demonstration Program and author-
izes implementation for ten additional years.
2004
A forest activist is arrested three hours after climbing
up a China fir tree on the grounds of the state capitol
in Sacramento, California, as part of a protest against
the logging of old growth forests.
2004
Ecuador approves plans by Brazil’s state oil company
to drill in Yasuni National Park, designated as a UN-
protected biosphere reserve in 1989.
2005
Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma devastate the
Gulf Coast and Florida, leading to soaring gas and
home-heating-oil prices throughout the United States.
Chronology
129

2005
Court decision in Earth Island Institute v. Ruthenbeck re-
quires Forest Service to allow for public notice, com-
ment, and appeal of all categorical exclusions in na-
tional forests, voiding previous regulations.
2006
Oil prices top $70 per barrel in response to uncertainty
in the Middle East, political uprisings in Venezuela
and Nigeria, and concerns about growing consump-
tion in China.
130
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
Ansel Adams (1902–1984)
The policy-making process is affected by a number of factors,
from political leadership and public opinion to news media cov-
erage and protests. What is not often recognized, however, is the
impact of artists, regardless of the tools they use. Ansel Adams’s
photography, often spare black and white images, has had a pro-
found effect on Americans’ attitudes about wilderness and pro-
tected areas that in some ways reaches a broader audience than
most organizations.
Adams’s father was an entrepreneur who started several
businesses but who also homeschooled his only son, who was
born in 1902, just before the San Francisco earthquake. At age
fourteen Adams and his parents took a vacation in Yosemite Na-
tional Park, a trip that would from then on become a yearly one.
The experience was life changing, giving Adams an appreciation
of the Sierra Nevada that would transform into advocacy later in
his life. In 1919 he got a job as a custodian at the Sierra Club’s Le
Conte Memorial Lodge in Yosemite, and nine years later he mar-
ried the daughter of the owner of a store and studio there.
The work at Yosemite was not included in Adams’s original
career plans. He had studied to become a professional pianist, a
dream he did not abandon until age twenty-eight. He also be-
came an apprentice to the owner of a photofinishing plant in San
Francisco, learning the intricacies of photography and gaining
the use of a professional darkroom. He visited Yosemite, which
he considered a holy place, bringing along his bulky camera
131

equipment and developing his own images of the park. In 1927
he became the Sierra Club’s official trip photographer, and his
work was published regularly in the organization’s publications.
He was elected to the group’s board of directors in 1934 and re-
mained on the board for thirty-seven years.
His primary contribution was the memorable imagery of his
photographs, which showed the country a beauty that had never
been captured on film or by other artists. He lobbied presidents in
person and wrote passionately about the need to protect natural
areas. For his devotion to preserving the country’s pristine
wilderness, he was awarded the Conservation Service Award by
the Department of the Interior in 1968, and the Presidential Medal
of Freedom in 1980. When he died of a heart attack at age eighty-
two, his ashes were scattered on the slope of Mount Ansel Adams,
located on the boundary of Yosemite, his spiritual home.
Bruce Babbitt (b. 1938)
In Arizona, the Babbitt name is as close to a founding family as
one could get. The Babbitts settled northern Arizona in the 1880s,
building a ranching and mercantile business and operating trad-
ing posts on the Navajo Reservation. Bruce Babbitt was one of six
children, leaving home to attend college at the University of
Notre Dame, graduating in 1960 with a major in geology. He con-
tinued his education in England, where he received a master’s de-
gree in geophysics in 1963. He then went to Harvard Law School,
and after graduation worked with civil rights and antipoverty
programs, returning to Arizona in 1968 and joining a law firm.
Babbitt’s political career began in 1975, when he became Ari-
zona attorney general, and then, in 1978, became governor when
his predecessor resigned. The position allowed Babbitt to create
the state’s Department of Environmental Quality to spearhead
land reform, and to write a comprehensive groundwater code. His
commitment to social justice and environmental protection drew
praise from national Democratic Party leaders, and a brief candi-
dacy for president in 1988. For the next five years he served as the
director of the League of Conservation Voters and worked toward
passage of a state ballot initiative that earmarked lottery funds to
acquire and maintain parks and wilderness areas in the state.
His environmental experience garnered the attention of
newly elected president Bill Clinton, who appointed Babbitt
132
Biographical Sketches

secretary of the Department of the Interior in 1993, a position that
he held until Clinton left office in January 2001. Babbitt’s tenure
within the agency was controversial from the beginning. Envi-
ronmental group leaders who expected him to be an advocate for
the preservation of public lands were disappointed at initiatives
they considered too oriented toward the concept of multiple use.
Supporters point to his ability to bring together coalitions that re-
sulted in the signing of the California Desert Protection Act,
restoration of the Florida Everglades, and his efforts to establish
more than 6 million acres of land for national monuments. He re-
ceived positive feedback for programs to restore wolves and the
California condor to their natural habitat, although the reintro-
duction angered ranchers. He was less successful in lobbying for
the creation of the National Biological Survey, designed to bring
additional scientists into land management, and his Rangeland
Reform ’94 program, which would have significantly raised graz-
ing fees.
When Clinton left office, Babbitt continued to work as a con-
sultant and writer, promoting his book Cities in the Wilderness. He
continues to live in Washington, D.C., although he frequently re-
turns to northern Arizona, still home to many members of the
Babbitt family after more than a century.
David Ross Brower (1912–2000)
When David Brower died at age eighty-eight, he left behind a
legacy of environmental crusades that inspired, encouraged, and
angered activists throughout the United States. But he was also a
central figure in the evolution of the environmental movement,
shaping policies that would last long after his death.
From his home in Berkeley, California, Brower was intro-
duced to hiking and nature as a child. He started as a student at
the University of California but dropped out in 1929 without
finishing a degree. His antipathy toward academia was lifelong,
and he frequently railed against scholars who spent too much
time in their offices instead of in the field. Brower was first
known as a mountaineer who developed climbing routes across
many of the nation’s top sites in the 1930s. His interest in moun-
taineering drew him to the Sierra Club, which he joined in 1933.
At the time, it was a hiking club without a political agenda. He
wrote articles for the group’s newsletter, campaigned for the
Biographical Sketches
133

inclusion of Kings Canyon as a national park, and in 1941 be-
came a member of the Sierra Club’s board of directors. He be-
came its first executive director in 1952, and saw its membership
grow from 2,000 to 77,000 by the time he left the organization in
1969. He helped form the Sierra Club Foundation in 1960, and
successfully managed the fight to block the building of a pro-
posed dam in Dinosaur National Monument. He once said that
his life’s major disappointment was a compromise agreement he
made with the federal government to allow a dam to be built in
Glen Canyon in exchange for the demise of the dam proposed at
Dinosaur.
Working in conjunction with the Wilderness Society, Brower
expanded the Sierra Club’s efforts to preserve wild places, lobby-
ing in support of the 1964 Wilderness Act. The speed at which he
sought change proved too rapid for many of the members of the
Sierra Club’s board of directors, who forced him to leave the or-
ganization. He founded a new group, Friends of the Earth, in
1969, expanding the environmental agenda even more by includ-
ing international issues. He also helped found the League of Con-
servation Voters, another vehicle for mobilizing the public by an-
alyzing the environmental voting records of members of
Congress. Once again his vision was not shared by the group’s
leadership, and he was fired. Moving on, he served as chair of the
board of directors of another new group he founded, Earth Island
Institute.
Brower left behind dozens of markers of his influence, and
he was twice nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize. The biennial
Fate and Hope of the Earth Conferences, the Global Conserva-
tion, Preservation, and Restoration (CPR) Service, plans for the
creation of a National Biosphere Reserve System, and numerous
parks, seashores, recreation areas, and wilderness lands are a re-
sult of his tireless efforts.
Robert Marion Clawson (1905–1998)
Marion Clawson, one of the nation’s preeminent forest policy ex-
perts, grew up in a part of the West where trees and timber were
considered less important than ranching and mining. He was
born in Elko, Nevada, and attended high school there, later re-
ceiving his bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the University
134
Biographical Sketches

of Nevada, Reno. His interests in agriculture led him to study the
economics of Nevada’s farms while in college, and from 1929 to
1946 he worked for the Bureau of Agricultural Economics within
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). He coordinated re-
search for the USDA and for the Bureau of Reclamation within
the Department of the Interior, conducting an investigation of the
Columbia Basin in Washington and the Central Valley Project in
California. In 1943 he was awarded a Ph.D. in economics from
Harvard.
Clawson served as the second administrator of the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM), from 1948 to 1953. He often bragged
that he was fired from his job at the BLM when a new Republican
administration was elected. He later served as a consultant and
economic adviser in several other countries, including Israel,
Venezuela, Chile, Pakistan, and India. In the United States, he
joined Resources for the Future (RFF) in Washington, D.C., and
served in a consultant capacity for the United Nations and the
Rockefeller and Ford foundations. His academic career included
short-term appointments at the University of California, Berkeley,
the University of Washington, and at Duke University. He was a
member, director, or founder of a wide range of organizations, in-
cluding the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Forest
History Society, the Range Management Society, and the Soil Con-
servation Society.
His professional affiliations and prolific career as a writer did
not begin to focus on forestry and forest policy until the early
1970s, when he served as a member of the President’s Advisory
Panel on Timber and the Environment. Clawson became both a
critic of the U.S. Forest Service (FS) and a proponent of economic
efficiency in forest management—what might be called a “wise
use conservationist”—along the model of the chief of the FS, Gif-
ford Pinchot. His first books, from the late 1940s and early 1950s,
were about agriculture; his last book, written in 1987, was his
memoirs, and he continued to work at RFF on a regular basis
until his death in 1998 at age ninety-two. As one colleague notes,
“Marion never really retired.” Clawson ended his career as both
a researcher and public servant, having testified before Congress,
taught university students, advised foreign governments, and re-
organized one of the government’s major environmental agen-
cies—major accomplishments for the son of a Nevada rancher
and miner.
Biographical Sketches
135

Bernard DeVoto (1897–1955)
Although DeVoto is considerably less well known than many of
the other environmental leaders of his time, Benny DeVoto
deserves a special place in U.S. history as one of the preeminent
writers of his time who focused attention on the federal govern-
ment’s management (or mismanagement, as he termed it) of pub-
lic lands.
DeVoto was born in Ogden, Utah, just after the region had of-
ficially been given statehood. His parents were of mixed religious
persuasion: his father was from a family of Catholics, while his
mother’s family were Mormons. He spent only one year at the
University of Utah, quitting in disgust when two members of the
faculty were fired and the school was censured. He applied to
Harvard, becoming what one biographer has called “one of the
most Eastern Westerners who ever was.” His stay at Harvard was
interrupted when he enlisted in the infantry, but he returned to
finish his degree in philosophy in 1920 and gained a reputation
there as a talented and confident writer. DeVoto returned to
Ogden, suffering from severe depression and insomnia for a year
before accepting a position teaching English at Northwestern
University. He married in 1923 and moved to Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts, to write novels and essays that appeared in many pres-
tigious national publications, including the Saturday Review of Lit-
erature, where he was asked to serve as editor.
DeVoto moved on to Harper’s magazine and took responsi-
bility for the oldest running column in U.S. journalism, “The Easy
Chair,” and became a champion of consumers and eventually a
crusader for numerous causes. After his 1946 tour of the West, he
became an expert on land use and resource management, and be-
tween 1947 and the time of his death wrote more than forty arti-
cles about the region. He devoted articles and columns to con-
demning the excesses of overgrazing on public lands and the
political power of the livestock industry. He told his readers how
self-interested leaders were attempting to have public lands
transferred to thirteen Western states with the right to dispose of
them however they wanted. He called this the greatest land grab
in history, with a few groups “hellbent on destroying the West.”
A journalist used the Freedom of Information Act to discover
that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had put together a 197-
page file on DeVoto, much of it devoted to the writer’s conserva-
tion work and as an “environmental agitator.” Conservation
136
Biographical Sketches

groups, many of which were just beginning their role as wilder-
ness advocates, distributed reprints of his columns; Secretary of
Agriculture Clinton Anderson credited the author with single-
handedly stopping the land grab. The author was awarded the
Pulitzer Prize and the Bancroft Prize in 1947 for his book Across
the Wide Missouri, and the National Book Award in 1952. DeVoto
died of a heart attack at age fifty-eight in New York City, far from
the West that had been the subject of so much of his journalistic
venom.
Wayne Hage (b. 1936)
Hage’s name is synonymous with the phrase “Range War,” and
he is considered to be one of the leaders in the battle over grazing
and private property rights in the West. Wayne Hage has waged
a war against the federal government for decades, taking his case
to the federal courts in a challenge to federal grazing laws and
regulations.
What makes Hage unique among many of the sagebrush
rebels who have fought against government regulation of public
lands is that Hage has earned a reputation as a writer and self-
taught historian. His book Storm over Rangelands, first published
in 1989, has gained a cult following among wise-use advocates.
He meticulously documents what he calls “the incessant attack
on the western range livestock industry” that he says began as an
assault by the conservation movement in the 1890s.
Hage’s family had been involved with ranching for genera-
tions before he was born in Nevada, and he says that he always
planned to continue the tradition. He attended the University of
Nevada, Reno, and received several degrees there, including a
master’s degree in biological science. In 1978 he and his wife Jean
(now deceased) purchased the Pine Creek Ranch in Nye County,
Nevada, to graze cattle. He claims that the ranch is part of the
“leftover land” that is too dry for farming but was conveyed to
private individuals through a series of federal, state, and local
laws, along with Western ranching customs.
In 1991, Hage filed suit in the Federal Court of Claims in
Washington, D.C., against the U.S. Forest Service (FS), alleging
that the agency had suspended and canceled his grazing permits,
depriving him of grazing and water rights. The original complaint
has been amended three times, and more than 200 pleadings have
Biographical Sketches
137

been filed in the case. The Bureau of Land Management (BLM)
was later added to the suit as a codefendant; the suit said that the
regulation of Hage’s grazing activities resulted in a taking of a
752,000-acre surface estate, which he alleges includes the FS and
BLM grazing allotments. Stewards of the Range, a nonprofit group
founded in 1992 to pursue the Hage case, called this a violation of
the constitutional prohibition against a “taking” without compen-
sation guaranteed under the Fifth Amendment.
In 2002, the court ruled on the first of two issues: Hage was
the rightful owner of certain water rights and ditch rights-of-way,
with some associated forage rights. But the court rejected his
claims regarding ownership of grazing permits and the surface
estate, legally held by the federal government. The trial continued
in 2004 to determine whether the government’s actions are a tak-
ing, and if so, what compensation he is owed. It is still in litiga-
tion; the outcome will determine future controversies over graz-
ing rights in the West.
Julia Hill (b. 1974)
The 60,000-acre Headwaters Forest has been the site of bitter dis-
putes over the logging of old growth redwood forests for
decades. The area is home to the last stand of ancient trees, and is
believed to represent about 3 percent of the original old growth
forest that once stretched from the Big Sur coast in California to
southern Oregon.
On December 10, 1997, a twenty-three-year-old activist
climbed up a 200-foot-tall, 14-foot-diameter, 1,000-year-old coast
redwood as part of a nonviolent “tree-sit.” Protesters had often
used the strategy of occupying trees that were in the path of log-
gers. Julia Hill, who would take the “forest name” Butterfly, sat
on a tarp-covered platform about 180 feet above the ground, with
food and other provisions hauled up and down by a series of
ropes. She stayed in touch with supporters using a cell phone,
balancing within the branches of the tree, which activists had
called “Luna,” for 738 days, climbing down on December 18,
1999.
Julia Hill was born on February 18, 1974, in Mount Vernon,
Missouri, the daughter of a traveling evangelist minister who
later brought his family to Jonesboro, Arkansas. She began at-
138
Biographical Sketches

tending high school there and later worked as a bartender in
Fayetteville, Arkansas. In 1996 she was severely injured in an au-
tomobile accident, undergoing a year of treatment and recovery.
Afterward, she considered various options and decided to travel
with friends in the summer of 1997, winding up among other
young people in the redwood forests of Humboldt County, Cali-
fornia. She was so moved by the stories she heard about the log-
ging of the old growth trees that she briefly returned to Arkansas,
bought camping gear, and went back to California in November
of 1997. She contacted the radical environmental group Earth
First! and made her way to a base camp where other protesters
were staying, where she heard about a planned tree-sit.
The protest began after the Pacific Lumber Company in-
creased the amount of timber it was cutting on the 200,000 acres
of land owned by MAXXAM Corporation. Earth First! had made
the Headwaters Forest the focus of many of its activities, espe-
cially after the California Department of Forestry had approved a
clear-cutting operation on steep slopes owned by MAXXAM.
During the time she was involved in her protest, she endured
harsh weather, attempts by timber company employees to get her
to climb down, and criticism from those who believed that she
was becoming a distraction to the environmental movement’s
broader goals. She was interviewed by the news media (some of
whom climbed up the tree to question her), visited by supportive
celebrities, and considered an inspiration to other activists. 
In December 1999 an agreement was reached with Pacific
Lumber Company that created a 200-foot buffer zone around the
tree, and assurances were given that Luna would not be cut. Hill
and her supporters agreed to pay $50,000, which the company
pledged to forestry research at Humboldt State University in
nearby Arcata, California.
Since her record tree-sit, Julia Hill has become an environ-
mental celebrity. Her book, The Legacy of Luna, recounts her expe-
riences as a protester, and she coauthored a second book, One
Makes the Difference. She has formed a nonprofit organization, Cir-
cle of Life, to promote sustainability, spoken on college campuses
and at high schools, and has become involved in numerous other
protests on environmental and social justice issues.
Since then, the tree at the center of the protest has been van-
dalized with a chainsaw that made deep cuts into its core, al-
though no individual or group has claimed responsibility.
Biographical Sketches
139

Andy Kerr (b. 1955)
Creswell, Oregon, referred to by Andy Kerr as a “recovered tim-
ber town,” is located in Oregon’s Willamette Valley. Large logging-
industry towns like Medford and Roseburg may be better known,
but in the upper Willamette, where he was born, the timber in-
dustry was the heart of the town. A fifth-generation Oregonian,
Kerr’s migration away from the Creswell norm began in high
school, where at age seventeen he joined the group Zero Popula-
tion Growth. He attended Oregon State University in Corvallis,
studying forestry, political science, economics, history, and, as he
puts it, “beer,” but did not graduate.
In 1976 he started working with the Oregon Natural Re-
sources Council, one of the state’s strongest and most influential
environmental advocacy groups. He rose to the position of ex-
ecutive director and spent two decades embroiled in the timber
wars that typified the Pacific Northwest in the 1980s and 1990s.
During his tenure with the organization, the region’s timber
companies battled environmental groups over the fate of the
Northern spotted owl, a bird that was eventually declared a
threatened species. He was invited to participate in the 1993
Northwest Forest Conference in Portland, convened by Presi-
dent Bill Clinton in an effort to bring the various stakeholders to
the table.
He now serves in a triad of positions: as director of the Na-
tional Public Lands Grazing Campaign (NPLGC), as a board
member and treasurer of the North American Industrial Help
Council, and as self-described “czar” of his own firm, the Larch
Company, which is named after a coniferous tree. He has also
served as a consultant for the Wilderness Society and as an ad-
viser to the Soda Mountain Wilderness Council, and has a lengthy
list of venues in which he has lectured or been interviewed. Kerr
is the author of two books, Oregon Desert Guide: 70 Hikes and Ore-
gon Wild: Endangered Forest Wilderness.
Kerr also is recognized for his dedication to natural resource
issues, and he has been given awards and accolades from a vari-
ety of sources. He has been compared to Ralph Nader in his tire-
less work to preserve old growth forests. One New York Times re-
porter notes: “He has a talent for speaking in such loaded sound
bites that it was said by reporters that if Andy Kerr did not exist,
someone would have to invent him.”
In his position with the NPLGC, Kerr has now targeted sub-
140
Biographical Sketches

sidies given to ranchers that allow them to graze livestock on
public lands at below-market prices. Kerr has proposed a gov-
ernment buyout program that would pay ranchers to stop graz-
ing cattle in exchange for “generous” compensation. Although
the proposed buyout has been criticized for being too costly, Kerr
argues that the long-term expense is outweighed by the environ-
mental benefits to fish, wildlife, watersheds, and recreation. “I’m
not conflict averse,” he once said. “Nobody got anywhere by
being nice.”
J. Horace McFarland (1859–1948)
Gifford Pinchot is perhaps the best-known natural resource
leader to hail from Pennsylvania, and he has often overshadowed
another native son whose work was also important in the devel-
opment of national parks and protected areas.
J. Horace McFarland was born in McAlisterville, Pennsylva-
nia, on September 29, 1859, and has often been called the forgot-
ten hero of the preservation movement. His first name was John,
but he always went by Horace. His parents operated the McAlis-
terville Academy, where he was born. His father, Lt. Col. George
F. McFarland, was severely wounded during the Civil War at the
battle of Gettysburg, but he survived and moved the family to
Harrisburg in 1865. McFarland went to private schools from 1867
to 1871, but, unlike Pinchot, that was the only formal schooling he
ever received.
His father purchased the Riverside Nurseries Company in
Harrisburg, and his son quickly learned the horticulture business,
becoming a master gardener. McFarland established his printing
business, J. Horace McFarland Co., in 1878, which was known for
its progressive work environment and policies. The plant was
clean and workers’ health concerns were important; he offered a
benefits package to his employees that included vacations, insur-
ance, and assistance in purchasing a home, and he assigned
women management responsibilities in his business.
McFarland was a strong believer in civic duty, and worked
for forty-five years with the Municipal League of Harrisburg. He
also served as president of the American League for Civic Im-
provement, the American Park and Outdoor Art Association, and
as a founding leader of the American Civic Association. His “Har-
risburg Plan” became a model of municipal reform, emphasizing
Biographical Sketches
141

clean water, sewage systems, and the preservation of city parks.
He traveled across the United States, crusading against civic
blight and encouraging citizens to write to Congress about envi-
ronmental issues and what would become the City Beautiful
movement.
From 1909 until 1913, McFarland joined with John Muir and
the Sierra Club in the battle to prevent the building of a dam in
Yosemite’s Hetch Hetchy Valley. They were unsuccessful, and
while Muir retreated from the defeat, McFarland contacted two
of the men who had championed the Hetch Hetchy legislation
about an idea he had been considering. While in Washington,
D.C., McFarland had discovered that there was not “a single
desk” in the city devoted to the administration of the nation’s
parks, and he was among the first to call for a unified federal
agency to manage monuments and parks. His idea gained sup-
port from San Francisco’s city attorney and from the congressman
who had persuaded President Woodrow Wilson to sign the Hetch
Hetchy legislation. As a result of his efforts, the National Park
Service was established in 1916. In 1920 he joined the fight to save
Yellowstone Lake, and in 1924 he received an honorary degree
from Dickinson College. McFarland served on the Department of
the Interior’s Educational Advisory Board and as a member of the
National Park Trust Fund until his death.
Chico Mendes (1944–1988)
Chico Mendes was born in a small village in Brazil’s western
Amazon rain forest, the son of a poor family of rubber tappers,
called seringueiros. Although he was illiterate during his child-
hood, he would become one of the first guardians of the Amazon
forests, helping to bring an end to governmental grazing subsi-
dies that had caused the destruction of thousands of acres of land
in the fragile ecosystem.
At age nine, Mendes joined his family in the tradition of gen-
erations of poor Brazilians who made a meager living collecting
the white, milky latex from the trees in the Amazon. At the time,
landowners did not allow their workers to build or attend
schools, so his education was an informal one. A friend who was
a political refugee taught him how to read and write, using old
magazines and a short-wave radio.
142
Biographical Sketches

In the 1970s, Mendes became a leader in a nonviolent resist-
ance movement to defend their homes from cattle ranchers, who
demanded that they leave. Along the western border of Brazil the
government had begun its National Integration Program, hoping
to colonize the region with cattle ranchers and forcing the native
people to relocate. Over the next fifteen years the ancient forests
were intentionally burned to make way for farms and ranches, re-
sulting in massive erosion and a loss of jobs. Mendes organized
his fellow rubber tappers to protest the relocation, organizing
blockades against bulldozers. He founded a trade union in Acre,
Brazil, in 1975 and the Workers’ Party four years later. In 1985 he
expanded the movement by creating the National Council of
Rubber Tappers. He sought the assistance of environmental
groups in the United States to build rubber tree preserves that
would provide the local people with a source of income by prac-
ticing sustainable agriculture. He built a coalition between the
rubber tappers and the indigenous peoples, and his leadership
and power became a threat to the local ranchers.
Throughout 1988, Mendes and his family received numerous
death threats. He was murdered just outside his home while his
wife and children watched nearby. Guards who had been hired
by the family for protection had suddenly disappeared, and it
was not until the international environmental community mobi-
lized that the Brazilian government began to investigate his as-
sassination. Two local ranchers were eventually arrested and
charged with  Mendes’s death; his wife became president of the
Chico Mendes Foundation.
Milford Muskett (b. 1967)
Life in a rural community often influences those who work in the
field of natural resources. For Milford Muskett, who was born
and raised on the Navajo Reservation, rural is perhaps an under-
statement. The nearest town was Tohatchi, New Mexico, hardly a
familiar name even to those who know the U.S. Southwest. How-
ever, Muskett says that life on the reservation had very little in-
fluence on his desire to go into the field of environmental research
and teaching. “I was drawn to the environmental field through
stories from Aldo Leopold,” the co-founder of the Wilderness So-
ciety and author of The Sand County Almanac.
Biographical Sketches
143

He left the reservation to pursue an education, receiving a
bachelor’s degree in biology and geography at Calvin College in
Grand Rapids, Michigan, in 1990. From there he moved to West-
ern Michigan State University at Kalamazoo, obtaining a mas-
ter’s degree in geography in 1993. Moving to the University of
Oklahoma, he attended several other graduate programs before
earning his Ph.D. in land resources in 2003 at the Gaylord Nelson
Institute for Environmental Studies at the University of Wiscon-
sin, Madison. The institute is named for Senator Gaylord Nelson,
who is considered the “father” of the first Earth Day on April 22,
1970.
While in Wisconsin, Muskett studied under the tutelage of
historian William Cronon, who became his academic adviser.
“His work and his mentorship have helped me understand the
need for storytelling and the need for creating good history about
the environment and people interaction,” he says. Although he
had started his Ph.D. work with an emphasis in conservation bi-
ology, at Wisconsin he shifted gears to Indian environmental his-
tory. He taught history at Marquette University and joined the
faculty at Cornell University as a visiting assistant professor in
2004, teaching in the Department of Natural Resources and the
American Indian Studies program. He also served as an adviser
to the American Indian Science and Engineering Society. His re-
search interest is the conflicts between the cultural and political
aspects of traditional societies and Western societies around nat-
ural resources development and environmental regulations. More
specifically, he examines how storytelling and traditional ecolog-
ical knowledge are used to define and teach ecological relation-
ships. On a personal level, he likes to bake and calls himself “a
Jack of All Trades.”
Muskett’s career has a pragmatic policy side as well. He has
worked with the Navajo Nation’s Environmental Protection
Agency, which motivated him to understand and learn more
about environmental issues on the reservation, and also worked
as a cartographer for the International Crane Foundation. He
has been selected as a fellow of the Environmental Leadership
Program’s (ELP) Class of 2006–2007. Each year, ELP selects
about twenty top environmentalists from across the nation to
participate in a two-year program that supports talented emerg-
ing leaders from academia, government, business, and non-
profit organizations through retreats, networking, and training
opportunities.
144
Biographical Sketches

Joan Norman (1933–2005)
“I would rather go out in a blaze, defending the world I love. I
will be on the front lines someday and my soul will know the
time to go and I will just leave.” Activist Joan Norman made
those comments in March 2005, just months before she was killed
in a head-on car collision on Highway 199 near the California bor-
der. Her death, on July 23, 2005, stunned forest defense advocates
who had depended on Norman for her contagious resolve and
humble nobility, which challenged those around her to take a
stand for what they hold most dear.
Her comments appeared in newspapers around the United
States, along with a photograph of Norman seated in a walker
and with a cane on the Green Bridge in southern Oregon, beneath
a U.S. flag and a banner protesting the Biscuit Fire Recovery Pro-
ject. She was arrested twice that month and voluntarily spent sev-
eral weeks in jail in protest of illegal logging, refusing to post bail.
While in jail she helped other inmates by offering legal support,
even though she had never before had a lawyer herself. What
makes Joan Norman stand out among forest activists is that when
she was arrested, she was seventy-two years old.
Norman was born in Oklahoma in 1933 into what she called
“a culture that trashed the earth, enslaved the earth to extract
wealth.” She had come from a family of Republicans, and she her-
self married into wealth. “I did my wifely duties so that we could
keep our money.” She was inspired when John F. Kennedy, Jr., ran
for president in 1960 because she felt that he spoke directly to the
people. The stereotype of antilogging activists is a young man
with long hair or dreadlocks, wearing a tie-dyed shirt, torn jeans,
and sandals, chained to an old growth redwood tree. Norman
represented an entirely different generation, arrested more than
100 times during her life for various civil rights and environmen-
tal issues. She was not a newcomer to civil disobedience or con-
troversy when she was arrested in Oregon.
She began her civil rights activism in California, joining
members of a church headed to Alabama. “I walked with Martin
Luther King, Jr. The thing we wanted to stand up to then was the
destruction of the diversity of people in this nation. The slavery,
racism, and violence toward people of color.” She joined in the
growing anti–Vietnam War movement, later participating in
demonstrations at the School of the Americas in Ft. Benning,
Biographical Sketches
145

Georgia. She lived in a motor home for twelve years, traveling
from one demonstration to another. Norman joined members of
the Western Shoshone tribe in an effort to stop the mining of ura-
nium in New Mexico. Her journey led her to Seattle and Wash-
ington, D.C., to protest against the World Trade Organization. “I
had my own kitchen, my own first aid station, my few books and
my passion for freedom and justice.”
Norman had gone from Selma, Alabama, to Selma, Oregon,
joining the Siskiyou Forest Defenders in a peaceful resistance
campaign to protest logging of timber burned in the Biscuit Fire.
The U.S. Forest Service had authorized a logging operation en-
compassing about 20,000 acres, with a goal of 372 million board
feet—the largest in the agency’s history. She sat in her walker on
a bridge used by the Silver Creek Logging Company, trying to
block access to what protesters said was an illegal old growth log-
ging sale on Fiddler Mountain. She was joined by twenty other
women wearing black, “in solidarity with the trees.” In August
2005, protesters joined together in the Joan Norman Memorial
Road Blockade near the site of the Hobson old growth timber sale
in remembrance of their friend.
William Penn (1644–1718)
The son of an English admiral, William Penn was born in England
and grew up in the Essex countryside, attending the Puritan
Chigwell Grammar School, whose theological foundations would
later affect his attitudes toward religious toleration. In 1655 the
family moved back to London and then to Ireland, and in 1660 he
entered the University of Oxford. He was expelled in 1662, not for
his academic work but for his religious beliefs. He had heard a
Quaker, Thomas Loe, preach while in Ireland and had rejected the
dominant Anglican faith. To put his son back on the traditional
track, Admiral Penn sent William on a European tour, and after-
ward, he entered the Protestant College at Saumur, France, far
from the religious upheaval he had become involved with in
Great Britain. He then returned to England and spent a year read-
ing law before his father sent him back to Ireland in 1666 to man-
age the family’s estates.
He is less well known for his influence on early American
conservationism. He served as a trustee for one of the two
146
Biographical Sketches

Quaker proprietors of West New Jersey, and in 1681, Penn and
eleven other Quakers purchased East New Jersey. At age thirty-
seven, he was also given land on the west bank of the Delaware
River as payment for a large debt owed by Charles II, and he
called the province Pennsylvania (Penn’s woods) after his father,
who had died in 1670. He sought to create a refuge for his fellow
Quakers, who were being persecuted, creating what he called “a
holy experiment.”
As the colony’s new governor, Penn came to North America
and established treaties with the Delaware Indians based on mu-
tual trust. The experiment included an elaborate plan for the
growth of a new city, Philadelphia, which was laid out in a grid
pattern surrounded by farming land. He interpreted the name as
“the city of brotherly love” but also referred to it as Greene Coun-
try Towne. By 1700 the settlement had become the second largest
city in the New World, but Penn preferred to stay at his wilder-
ness home, Pennsbury, in the thick woods across the river from
what is now Trenton, New Jersey. He loathed the crowded, dirty
cities of Europe, and told his surveyors to make sure that the
town was made up of evenly spaced streets with wide boule-
vards. He insisted that there be five public squares of greenery,
and that each plot of land within the town was at least an acre,
with room for gardens, orchards, or fields.
He wrote: “Here, the air is sweet and clear, the heavens
serene. The woods are adorned with lovely flowers for colour and
variety. I have seen the gardens of London with that sort of
beauty, but think they may be improved by our woods.” To make
sure that the woods survived the growing population, he decreed
that for every tree cut, five would be left untouched—one of the
colony’s first environmental laws. Pennsylvania was to be gov-
erned by stewards of the lands, even though the colony was ex-
porting large amounts of timber, furs, hemp, tobacco, iron, and
copper in exchange for British goods.
Penn made only two visits to North America; from 1682 to
1684 he focused on boundary disputes with Lord Baltimore, and
during his second trip, from 1899 to 1701, he met with officials to
establish an internal government and the adoption of a new form
of government under the Charter of Privileges. Returning to Eng-
land, he believed that the stewardship concept would protect the
resources of the New World. In 1712 he suffered a severe stroke,
and he died at the age of seventy-three in 1718. He never really
Biographical Sketches
147

had an opportunity to enjoy Pennsbury or his deep woods, but he
set a precedent for the protection of the land that would be fol-
lowed by other colonies through the time of the Revolutionary
War.
Sandra Postel (b. 1956)
Historically, the field of natural resources research has been
dominated by men, with a few women in government agencies,
academia, or nongovernmental organizations. Sandra Postel, di-
rector of the Global Water Policy Project in Amherst, Massachu-
setts, is notable for both the breadth of her work and research
and the contributions she has made to understanding key con-
servation problems and solutions. She is considered one of the
world’s leading authorities on international water policies and
sustainability.
She grew up on Long Island, New York, and her academic
training began at Wittenberg University, where she received her
bachelor of arts degree in geology and political science. In 1980
she was awarded a master’s degree from Duke University with
an emphasis on resource economics and policy, and she has also
received two honorary doctor of science degrees. She has an ex-
tensive list of both scholarly and popular articles, ranging from
op-ed pieces in the New York Times to Scientific American, and ap-
pears on radio and television programs as a commentator and an-
alyst. Postel’s awards are evidence of her continuing role in the
field; she was named one of the Scientific American 50 in 2002 for
her contributions to science and technology, and for promoting
sweeping changes aimed at preserving the world’s dwindling
supplies of fresh water. In addition to serving as a member of sev-
eral editorial boards and boards of directors, she is an adviser to
the Division on Earth and Life Studies of the U.S. National Re-
search Council. She has been awarded the Duke University
School of Environment’s Distinguished Alumni Award, a Pew
Scholars Award in Conservation and the Environment (1995), and
a lifetime chair with the International Water Academy in Oslo,
Norway. Prior to founding the Global Water Policy Project, she
served as vice president for research for the Worldwatch Institute
from 1988 to 1994, and she continues her research there as a sen-
ior fellow. In Pillar of Sand, she calls water scarcity the single most
important threat to global food production. As the population
148
Biographical Sketches

increases, and the world’s supply of fresh water decreases, there
is both a need for better water allocation and a need to make irri-
gation more effective. Her most recent book, Rivers for Life: Man-
aging Water for People and Nature, explores the disruption of natu-
ral river flows by more than 45,000 large dams blocking the
world’s rivers. Postel explains why restoring and preserving
more natural river flows are key to sustaining freshwater biodi-
versity and healthy river systems.
By emphasizing the finite nature of water, and humanity’s ef-
forts to control it and manage it as a natural resource, Postel
sounds an important alarm for the world’s policy-makers. But
she also believes that today’s youth will bring a heightened
awareness and appreciation of the environment to the genera-
tions that follow. In addition to her expertise and ability to un-
derstand scientific processes, she brings optimism to water re-
source issues at a time when scarcity is more serious than ever.
Ken Saro-Wiwa (1941–1995)
There is a historical tradition that many of the world’s most in-
fluential environmental activists began as writers and poets, as is
the case with Nigerian author Ken Saro-Wiwa. He was born
Kenule Benson Tsaro-Wiwa in Bori, Rivers State, and was consid-
ered a child prodigy. At age thirteen he was awarded a scholar-
ship to Government College in Umuahia, Nigeria, and later grad-
uated from the University of Ibadan. In 1985 he published his first
novel, the first of more than fifty he would write during his life-
time. His legacy includes a children’s television series, radio
plays, political columns, and essays.
How does a writer become an environmental activist? In
1958, the oil company Royal Dutch Shell began drilling in the
Niger Delta on coastal land inhabited by more than a half-million
Ogoni people. Over the years the fertile farmland was turned into
an oil dump, killing wildlife and  fish, and ruining the lives of the
farmers and fishers. The area was Saro-Wiwa’s homeland, and he
was outraged at the human and environmental cost to the region.
More than 5,000 workers had been hired by Shell, but fewer than
100 were Ogoni. Almost none of the revenue from the oil opera-
tions had trickled back down to the local residents, and the com-
pany refused to take any responsibility for the cleanup when it
stopped drilling in 1993.
Biographical Sketches
149

In 1990, Saro-Wiwa founded the Movement for the Survival
of the Ogoni People (MOSOP); he was also alleged to have started
a radical youth group engaged in sabotage against the oil com-
pany. In 1991–1992 he wrote two books that criticized the corrup-
tion of the Nigerian government in its relations with Shell Oil and
British Petroleum, laying the blame for the environmental dam-
age on the British government. He and his supporters sought
compensation for the Ogoni people and intervention to clean up
the environmental damage, actions that brought threats and in-
timidation from the Nigerian government and military leaders.
On January 4, 1993, Saro-Wiwa organized more than 300,000
Ogoni, who marched in protest of the government’s complicity in
the oil pollution scandal; the date is now celebrated as Ogoni Day.
Nigerian military forces began attacking Ogoni villages,
killing thousands of people and leaving villagers homeless. In
May 1994, Saro-Wiwa was taken from his home and arrested,
along with eight other activists, and charged with the murder of
four Ogoni leaders. The human rights group Amnesty Interna-
tional named him a prisoner of conscience, and other groups
complained that the arrests were based on trumped up charges.
After a brief show trial, Saro-Wiwa and his codefendants were
hanged by the military on November 10, 1995. Shell Oil made no
official comment on the execution.
Maurice Strong (b. 1929)
Often there are unsung leaders whose behind-the-scenes efforts
are overshadowed by those in positions of power, even though
they have worked tirelessly to resolve conflicts. Such is the case
with Maurice Strong of Canada, who is less known than others
who are credited with the world’s first Earth Summit in 1972.
Strong was born in 1929 and became determined to improve
his fortune despite his childhood in a poor family in rural Mani-
toba. He completed his secondary education and ran away from
his family at age fourteen to join the Canadian merchant marine.
His father found him in Vancouver, British Columbia, and he
soon left home again to become an apprentice to a fur trader in
the Arctic. His new family would consist of the Inuit, the indige-
nous people of the region. In 1947 he turned eighteen years old
and met a UN official at a dinner party who helped him to get a
position with the UN Security Department in New York. He left
150
Biographical Sketches

the job after two months, although he was able to make contacts
with many prominent leaders. He tried to join the Canadian air
force but failed to qualify; he then obtained employment with
Dome Petroleum as an analyst.
In another job shift, he left the company and took a world
cruise, ending up in Nairobi, Kenya, where he worked for an-
other oil company looking for sites for new gas stations in Africa.
As had been the case in the Arctic, Strong gained close ties with
the native people and began working with local organizations
until he returned to Canada and Dome Petroleum in 1955. From
there he leapfrogged up the corporate ladder to the Power Cor-
poration of Canada, and received a political appointment as di-
rector general of Canada’s International Development Agency.
The UN secretary-general, U Thant, met Strong and asked him to
organize the world’s first international environmental confer-
ence. From November 1970 until December 1972, Strong served
as the secretary-general of the UN Conference on the Human En-
vironment in Stockholm, Sweden. He moved to Geneva to make
arrangements for the meeting and was met by leftover Cold War
resistance. Many communist leaders refused to participate, al-
though he was able to convince China of the benefits of attending.
He also bridged the gap between developed and developing
countries that had not yet been given a seat at the international
table in environmental matters. A total of 113 UN members sent
delegates, although the Soviet Union refused to participate and
most heads of state did not attend. Still, the Stockholm Declara-
tion produced by the delegates was the first international agree-
ment on environmental goals, including acceptance that clean air
and water are human rights.
Strong was named the first director of the UN Environment
Programme, based in Nairobi, where he served from January
1973 to December 1975. He returned to Canada to serve as the
head of the country’s national oil company, and from 1985 to 1986
he returned to the United Nations as undersecretary-general and
as a member of the World Commission on Environment and De-
velopment. Twenty years after Stockholm, he served as secretary-
general of the UN Conference on Environment and Development,
also known as the Earth Summit, in Rio de Janeiro. There, the
issue of sustainability took center stage and nongovernmental or-
ganizations became major participants for the first time.
After the conference, Strong was named chief executive offi-
cer and chairman of Ontario Hydro, the largest utility company
Biographical Sketches
151

in North America, where he worked from 1992 to 1995. He joined
the World Bank as senior adviser to the president in June 1995. He
returned to the United Nations again to serve as the envoy to
North Korea, where he became embroiled in scandal over al-
legedly serving as an unregistered agent for the Iraqi govern-
ment. He stepped down from his UN position in April 2005 as the
investigation continued.
Strong has many supporters as well as many detractors,
largely because of the many career changes he has gone through,
switching back and forth between the private sector and public
service. But even those who oppose some of his policies admit
that he was one of the world’s most influential environmental
leaders, even when he was backstage, riding a bicycle painted in
the UN’s characteristic blue and white colors.
Nicola Temple (b. 1973)
“In my very limited experience in environmentalism, I would
say there are two types: the environmentalist who turns to sci-
ence to provide fact for their arguments and the scientist who
turns to environmentalism because what they set out to study is
threatened by human activities. I would say that I fall into the
latter category.”
How do environmentalists get started in their careers? How
do they feel they can make a difference? In British Columbia,
where controversies over timber harvests have taken center stage,
a young Canadian woman, Nicola Temple, got her start at a young
age.
She grew up in the Ottawa Valley in Canada, where her fam-
ily grew all of their own food, and she spent hours exploring
under logs, digging around in ponds, and canoeing the local
rivers. She obtained a degree in biology from the University of
Victoria in 1998 and then took time off to travel. She returned to
UVic and received a master’s degree in 2003, researching func-
tional morphology. Her specialization was the function of the adi-
pose fin in salmon and the hydrodynamic implications of its re-
moval, a common practice in fish hatcheries.
While working on her master’s degree, she met graduate stu-
dents who were approaching the environment from a different
perspective. “They were researching various aspects of how
salmon enrich and increase diversity in an area by bringing
152
Biographical Sketches

marine-derived nutrients to terrestrial ecosystems when they re-
turn to their natal rivers to spawn and then die. This was my ‘aha’
moment with respect to the connectivity of ecosystems,” she says.
Seeking work that would be meaningful and would translate
directly into the improved management of resources, she applied
for a position with the Raincoast Conservation Society in Victoria,
where she has worked since 2004. Her responsibilities often in-
volve working in remote areas along British Columbia’s coast,
being on the ground and conducting fieldwork, and working
closely with coastal communities. Temple also meets with other
environmental group leaders and governmental officials to im-
prove policy options. She now works on studying salmon popu-
lations in small streams throughout the coast, which, when com-
bined, contribute substantially to the fishery and the number of
fish returning to coastal systems annually. The small salmon pop-
ulations are also extremely important to the local communities
that depend upon them for food and cultural purposes.
“Though being in the midst of [the salmon] debate and con-
troversy often wears on the emotions, I can’t imagine being any-
where else. Salmon need a voice . . . many voices. Perhaps it is my
naivete, but I think we can solve this issue.”
Courtney White (b. 1960)
The tagline “Restoration, innovation, and education, one acre at a
time” describes the work of the Quivira Coalition, based in Santa
Fe, New Mexico. The group’s executive director, Courtney White,
is part of the “New Ranch” movement in the western United
States, which seeks to save ranching operations while employing
tools such as stream restoration, high-intensity rotational grazing,
and collaboration.
White did not grow up on a ranch, and even now he lives in
the suburbs rather than in cattle country. Growing up in Phoenix,
he graduated from Reed College, a small liberal arts school in
Portland, Oregon, as an anthropology major. He decided to go to
film school at the University of California, Los Angeles, and then
worked as an archaeologist for the National Park Service in Santa
Fe. White says that his interest in environmental activism began
in 1994 with the election of a Republican majority in Congress,
and Newt Gingrich’s Contract with America. “I couldn’t be a pas-
sive observer any more,” he says, and so he contacted the local
Biographical Sketches
153

chapter of the Sierra Club. He began by serving as a volunteer
tracking legislation, and became a member of the executive com-
mittee in the summer of 1995.
As part of his work with the statewide Sierra Club, White
met rancher Jim Winder, who gave him a tour of his ranch near
Deming, New Mexico, in January 1996. Winder had grown disil-
lusioned with the Sierra Club; he and White started a nonprofit
“alternative” group, the Quivira Coalition, with a $1,000 donation
from Winder as seed funding. The name comes from the Spanish
term used to describe uncharted territory.
As executive director of the coalition, White works with gov-
ernmental agencies such as the U.S. Forest Service and the New
Mexico Environment Department, along with university re-
searchers and ecologists. He is best known for bringing together
the broad range of grassroots organizations that represent stake-
holders in grazing controversies, creating in 2003 the Southwest
Grassfed Livestock Alliance, which seeks to educate consumers
about the benefits of eating beef raised on the open range. As part
of the “radical center,” White and others have called for a truce
among those who have been arguing over grazing for decades.
He believes that sustainable ranching is possible in the West,
contending that there is sufficient scientific study available to
show that grazing can be done in a rest-rotation pattern that al-
lows vegetation to regrow. As part of a shift toward progressive
cattle management, White believes that the Quivira Coalition
provides a neutral place for discussion and the exchange of ideas.
The group now focuses its efforts on large landscape restoration,
and White plans to continue his work as an active participant in
the rangeland debate.
Terry Tempest Williams (b. 1955)
“I write through my biases of gender, geography, and culture. I
am a woman whose ideas have been shaped by the Great Basin
and Colorado Plateau.” As one of the nation’s foremost nature
writers, Terry Tempest Williams has played an important role in
awakening Americans to the need to protect wild places. In 1991,
Newsweek named her someone likely to make “a considerable im-
pact on the political, economic, and environmental issues facing
the western states this decade.”
154
Biographical Sketches

Such an accolade might seem improbable for a woman
whose family was part of the original Mormon migration from
Nauvoo, Illinois, to arrive in Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1846. She had
a traditional Mormon upbringing, living with several generations
of family members, and at age seventeen she had a religious vi-
sion that she says confirmed her faith in the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Although a believer, however, she
would also develop a rebellious streak that caused her to declare
that she was not an “orthodox Mormon.”
Where do concerns about the environment begin in some-
one’s life? For Williams, it was the trips that she took as a child
with her maternal grandmother to the Bear River Migratory Bird
Refuge. She grew up in Salt Lake City, and the visits to the open
land of Utah’s deserts led her to pursue a dual degree in biology
and English at the University of Utah. She also received a mas-
ter’s degree in education with a specialization in environmental
education. She worked on the Navajo Reservation while working
on her graduate degree, and wrote her first set of essays, Pieces of
White Shell, in 1984. She had intended the work to be her master’s
thesis, but her graduate committee rejected it. “That is,” she says,
“until Scribner accepted it for publication. Then they reversed
their decision.” In 2003 she received an honorary doctorate from
the University of Utah, and a similar award was made by Saint
Mary-of-the-Woods College in 2004.
Williams has been honored in numerous ways for her tena-
cious dedication to preserving the West. She has been included in
the Rachel Carson Honor Roll, has received the National Wildlife
Federation’s Conservation Award for Special Achievement, was
named one of the Utne Reader’s Utne 100 Visionaries, was named
a fellow of the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation,
and received a Lannan Literary Fellowship in Creative Non-Fic-
tion. She was also honored as the Annie Clark Tanner Scholar at
the University of Utah and recipient of the 2005 Wallace Stegner
Award by the Center for the American West.
While she may be best known for her writing, Williams has
also been an environmental activist. She organized twenty other
writers to contribute their essays on why it is important to protect
wildlands. Testimony: Writers Speak on Behalf of Utah Wilderness,
which she edited and was published in 1996, had an impact that
reached all the way to the White House. When President Bill Clin-
ton dedicated the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument
Biographical Sketches
155

on September 18, 1996, he held up a copy of the book at the cere-
mony on the North Rim of the Grand Canyon. “This,” he said,
“made a difference.”
Howard Zahniser (1906–1964)
The background of one of the great leaders of the U.S. wilderness
preservation movement, Howard Zahniser, provides a handful of
clues to his professional activism and interests. He was born in
Pennsylvania to a minister whose wife was a Seneca tribe de-
scendant, and he joined the Audubon Society in the fifth grade.
As editor of the student newspaper at Greenville College, where
he received a degree in English literature, his skills translated into
a career in journalism and as a high school teacher. Later he
would work as an editorial assistant with the agency that would
become the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
At age twenty-four his career in the federal government was
typical, as he transferred from one agency to another. Along the
way he met a series of influential writers, biologists, and natural-
ists who uniquely molded his view of the world. He worked
briefly with Rachel Carson and with Aldo Leopold; he was men-
tored by Edward Preble and J. “Ding” Darling. He joined the
Wilderness Society, which had been founded in 1935 by Robert
Marshall, as a charter member. By 1942, his expanding interests in
natural resource management led to a position as the publicist for
the government’s Victory Gardens campaign during World War II
and as a writer for several nature-oriented publications.
Marshall died in 1939, and the Wilderness Society’s new di-
rector, Olaus Murie, died in 1945. Zahniser was asked to serve as
executive secretary of the organization, and he assumed respon-
sibility for its magazine, The Living Wilderness; he also wrote a cur-
rent events section. Along with David Brower, director of the
Sierra Club, he led a coalition of environmental groups in the
1950s in successfully opposing the building of Echo Park Dam in
Colorado’s Dinosaur National Monument. Their combined ac-
tivism led to federal legislation which provided that no dam or
reservoir would subsequently be constructed within a national
park or monument.
He is most remembered, though, for his leadership in advo-
cating for national wilderness legislation: between 1956 and 1964,
Zahniser wrote sixty-six drafts of a bill, and steered the proposals
156
Biographical Sketches

through eighteen congressional hearings. As a writer, he sought
to convince the members of Congress that certain pristine lands
needed protection, but wanted language that would convey just
what kind of land was being discussed. A friend remarked that
she enjoyed the “untrammeled” seashores of Olympic National
Park, and Zahniser had found the word he wanted.
After years of failing health, he died in May 1964 at age fifty-
eight at his home in Maryland. Just four months later his wife,
Alice, was an honored guest in the White House Rose Garden
when President Lyndon Johnson signed the Wilderness Act that
Zahniser had fought for. It established the 9-million-acre National
Wilderness Preservation System, giving Congress the power to
recommend and designate future lands that would be added. In
1998, Greenville College dedicated the Zahniser Institute for En-
vironmental Studies in honor of its most distinguished alumnus.
Biographical Sketches
157


6
Documents and Data
Legislation
I
n the United States, legislation enacted by Congress provides a
revealing look at the intent of legislators dealing with natural
resource conflicts. In most cases, the statutes passed have pro-
vided protection, such as for national parks, but in some instances
legislation has been designed to advance the agenda of extractive
resource industries, such as fossil fuels or timber. This section
contrasts approaches by providing the text or excerpts from some
of the key public laws over which conflicts have occurred.
Considered one of the most important statutes in the devel-
opment of the U.S. park system, the National Park Service Or-
ganic Act, signed in 1916, brought together for the first time the
independent units of protected areas that had been under three
cabinet agencies. The legislation passed by Congress recognized
the importance of scenic areas to the cultural heritage of the
United States, as well as the need for official protection to pre-
serve identified sites. In contrast, the Taylor Grazing Act, enacted
in 1934, exemplifies the concept of multiple use, as Congress pro-
vided a mechanism for allowing ranchers to graze their livestock
on public lands. A third key statute, the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA), provides a more contempo-
rary statement of congressional intent toward management of the
public lands, incorporating the issues of disposal and with-
drawal, public participation in natural resource policy-making,
the protection of values as defined in the law, and conflicting uses
for mining, recreation, wildlife, and human occupancy.
159

National Park Service Organic Act
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That there is
hereby created in the Department of the Interior a service to be
called the National Park Service, which shall be under the charge
of a director, who shall be appointed by the Secretary and who
shall receive a salary of $4,500 per annum. There shall also be ap-
pointed by the Secretary the following assistants and other em-
ployees at the salaries designated: One assistant director, at $2,500
per annum; one chief clerk, at $2,000 per annum; one draftsman,
at $1,800 per annum; one messenger, at $600 per annum; and in
addition thereto, such other employees as the Secretary of the In-
terior shall deem necessary: Provided, That not more than $8,100
annually shall be expended for salaries of experts, assistants, and
employees within the District of Columbia not herein specifically
enumerated unless previously authorized by law. The service
thus established shall promote and regulate the use of the Federal
areas known as national parks, monuments, and reservations
hereinafter specified by such means and measures as conform to
the fundamental purposes of the said parks, monuments, and
reservations, which purpose is to conserve the scenery and the
natural and historic objects and the wildlife therein and to pro-
vide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such
means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future
generations.
SEC. 2. That the director shall, under the direction of the Sec-
retary of the Interior, have the supervision, management, and
control of the several national parks and national monuments
which are now under the jurisdiction of the Department of the In-
terior, and of the Hot Springs Reservation in the State of
Arkansas, and of such other national parks and reservations of
like character as may be hereafter created by Congress: Provided,
That in the supervision, management, and control of national
monuments contiguous to national forests the Secretary of Agri-
culture may cooperate with said National Park Service to such ex-
tent as may be requested by the Secretary of the Interior.
SEC. 3. That the Secretary of the Interior shall make and pub-
lish such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary or
proper for the use and management of the parks, monuments,
and reservations under the jurisdiction of the National Park Ser-
vice, and any violations of any of the rules or regulations author-
160
Documents and Data

ized by this Act shall be punished as provided for in section 50 of
the Act entitled, “An Act to codify and amend the penal laws of
the United States,” approved March fourth, nineteen hundred
and nine, as amended by section six of the Act of June twenty-
fifth, nineteen hundred and ten (Thirty-sixth United States
Statutes at Large, page eight hundred and fifty-seven). He may
also, upon terms and conditions to be fixed by him, sell or dispose
of timber in those cases where in his judgment the cutting of such
timber is required in order to control the attacks of insects or dis-
eases or otherwise conserve the scenery or the natural or historic
objects in any such park, monument, or reservation. He may also
provide in his discretion for the destruction of such animals and
of such plant life as may be detrimental to the use of any of said
parks, monuments, or reservations. He may also grant privileges,
leases, and permits for the use of land for the accommodation of
visitors in the various parks, monuments, or other reservations
herein provided for, but for periods not exceeding thirty years;
and no natural curiosities, wonders, or objects of interest shall be
leased, rented, or granted to anyone on such terms as to interfere
with free access to them by the public; Provided, however, That
the Secretary of the Interior may, under such rules and regula-
tions and on such terms as he may prescribe, grant the privilege
to graze live stock within any national park, monument, or reser-
vation herein referred to when in his judgment such use is not
detrimental to the primary purpose for which such park, monu-
ment, or reservation was created, except that this provision shall
not apply to the Yellowstone National Park: And provided fur-
ther, That the Secretary of the Interior may grant said privileges,
leases, and permits and enter into contracts relating to the same
with responsible persons, firms, or corporations without adver-
tising and without securing competitive bids: And provided fur-
ther, That no contract, lease, permit or privilege granted shall be
assigned or transferred by such grantees,  permitees, or licensees,
without the approval of the Secretary of the Interior first obtained
in writing: And provided further, That the Secretary may, in his
discretion, authorize such grantees,  permitees, or licensees to ex-
ecute mortgages or bonds, shares of stock, and other evidences of
interest in or indebtedness upon their rights, properties, or fran-
chises, for the purposes of installing, enlarging or improving
plant and equipment and extending facilities for the accommoda-
tion of the public within such national parks and monuments.
SEC. 4. That nothing in this Act contained shall affect or
Legislation
161

modify the provisions of the Act approved February fifteenth,
nineteen hundred and one, entitled “An Act relating to rights of
way through certain parks, reservations, and other public lands.”
Excerpts, Taylor Grazing Act of 1934
Title 43, Chapter 8A, Subchapter I
Section 315. In order to promote the highest use of the public
lands pending its final disposal, the Secretary of the Interior is au-
thorized, in his discretion, by order to establish grazing districts
or additions thereto and/or to modify the boundaries thereof, of
vacant, unappropriated, and unreserved lands from any part of
the public domain of the United States (exclusive of Alaska),
which are not in national forests, national parks and monuments,
Indian reservations, revested Oregon and California Railroad
grant lands, or revested Coos Bay Wagon Road grant lands, and
which in his opinion are chiefly valuable for grazing and raising
forage crops; Provided That no lands withdrawn or reserved for
any other purpose shall be included in any such district except
with the approval of the head of the department having jurisdic-
tion thereof. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed in any
way to diminish, restrict, or impair any right which has been
heretofore or may be hereafter initiated under existing law validly
affecting the public lands, and which is maintained pursuant to
such law except as otherwise expressly provided in this subchap-
ter nor to affect any land heretofore or hereafter surveyed which,
except for the provisions of this subchapter, would be a part of any
grant to any State, nor as limiting or restricting the power or au-
thority of any State as to matters within its jurisdiction.
Whenever such grazing district is established pursuant to
this subchapter, the Secretary shall grant to owners of land adja-
cent to such district, upon application of any such owner, such
rights-of-way over the lands included in such district for stock-
driving purposes as may be necessary for the convenient access
by any such owner to marketing facilities or to lands not within
such district owned by such person or upon which such person
has stock-grazing rights . . .
Before grazing districts are created in any State as herein pro-
vided, a hearing shall be held in the State, after public notice
thereof shall have been given, at such location convenient for the
attendance of State officials, and the settlers, residents, and live-
stock owners of the vicinity as may be determined by the Secre-
162
Documents and Data

tary of the Interior. No such district shall be established until the
expiration of ninety days after such notice shall have been given,
nor until twenty days after such hearing shall be held. . . . Noth-
ing in this subchapter shall be construed as in any way altering or
restricting the right to hunt or fish within a grazing district in ac-
cordance with the laws of the United States or any State, or as
vesting in any permitee any right whatsoever to interfere with
hunting or fishing within a grazing district.
Section 315A. The Secretary of the Interior shall make provi-
sion for the protection, administration, regulation, and improve-
ment of such grazing districts as may be created under the au-
thority of Section 315 of this title, and he shall establish such
service, enter into cooperative agreements, and do any and all
things necessary to accomplish the purposes of this subchapter
and to insure the objects of such grazing districts, namely, to reg-
ulate their occupancy and use, to preserve the land and its re-
sources from destruction or unnecessary injury, to provide for the
orderly use, improvement and development of the range; and the
Secretary of the Interior is authorized to continue the study of
erosion and flood control and to perform such work as may be
necessary amply to protect and rehabilitate the areas subject to
the provisions of this subchapter, through such funds as may be
made available for that purpose, and any willful violation of the
provisions of this subchapter or such rules and regulations there-
under after actual notice thereof shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $500.
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, as
Codified
Title 43, Chapter 35, Subchapter I, Section 170. Congressional
Declaration of Policy
(A) The Congress declares that it is the policy of the United States
that
1. The public lands be retained in Federal ownership,
unless as a result of the land use planning procedure
provided for in this Act, it is determined that disposal of
a particular parcel will serve the national interest;
2. The national interest will be best realized if the public
lands and their resources are periodically and
Legislation
163

systematically inventoried and their present and future
use is projected through a land use planning process
coordinated with other Federal and State planning
efforts;
3. Public lands not previously designated for any specific
use and all existing classifications of public lands that
were effected by executive action or statute before
October 21, 1976, be reviewed in accordance with the
provisions of this Act;
4. The Congress exercise its constitutional authority to
withdraw or otherwise designate or dedicate Federal
lands for specified purposes and that Congress delineate
the extent to which the Executive may withdraw lands
without legislative action;
5. In administering public land statutes and exercising
discretionary authority granted by them, the Secretary
be required to establish comprehensive rules and
regulations after considering the views of the general
public; and to structure adjudication procedures to
assume adequate third party participation, objective
administrative review of initial decisions, and
expeditious decision making;
6. Judicial review of public land adjudication decisions be
provided by law;
7. Goals and objectives be established by law as guidelines
for public land use planning, and that management be
on the basis of multiple use and sustained yield unless
otherwise specified by law;
8. The public lands be managed in a manner that will
protect the quality of scientific, scenic, historical,
ecological, environmental, air and atmospheric, water
resource, and archaeological values; that, where
appropriate, will preserve and protect certain public
lands in their natural condition; that will provide food
and habitat for fish and wildlife and domestic animals;
and that will provide for outdoor recreation and human
occupancy and use;
9. The United States receive fair market value of the use of
the public lands and their resources unless otherwise
provided for by statute;
10. Uniform procedures for any disposal of public land,
acquisition of non-Federal land for public purposes, and
164
Documents and Data

the exchange of such lands be established by statute,
requiring each disposal, acquisition, and exchange to be
consistent with the prescribed mission of the
department or agency involved, and reserving to
Congress review of disposals in excess of a specified
acreage;
11. Regulations and plans for the protection of public land
areas of critical environmental concern be promptly
developed;
12. The public lands be managed in a manner which
recognizes the Nation’s needs for domestic sources of
minerals, food, timber, and fiber from the public lands
including implementation of the Mining and Minerals
Policy Act of 1970 as it pertains to the public lands; and
13. The Federal Government should, on a basis equitable to
both the Federal and local taxpayers, provide for
payments to compensate States and local governments
for burdens created as a result of the immunity of
Federal lands from State and local taxation.
Reports
When a conflict arises, one of the ways that policy-makers seek
resolution is by looking at various types of information that
might help inform the debate. The Government Accountability
Office (GAO), formerly known as the General Accounting Office,
produces reports for Congress, the executive branch, and the
public on topics of current political interest. Most of the reports
deal with how well (or how poorly) a policy is working, and the
studies they conduct provide information that might not other-
wise be available. The reports are also valuable because they
begin with a neutral statement of the issues at hand, a brief sum-
mary of the methodology used, and comments from the affected
agencies on a draft of the report before it is released. In Septem-
ber 2005, the GAO produced a report on rangeland management,
and more specifically, on the purpose of grazing fees and how
much the federal government receives in income. Although the
GAO generally provides only its appraisal of program opera-
tions, in this case it does so in a way that points out financial con-
siderations that Congress potentially needs to consider.
Reports
165

Abstract, U.S. General Accounting Office Report, GAO-
05–869, Livestock Grazing: Federal Expenditures and
Receipts Vary, Depending on the Agency and the
Purpose of the Fee Charged (September 30, 2005)
Ranchers pay a fee to graze their livestock on federal land. Graz-
ing occurs primarily on federal land located in the Western states
managed by ten federal agencies. Generally, the fee is based on
animal unit months (AUM)—the amount of forage that a cow
and her calf can eat in one month. For most federal land, the fee
per AUM is established by a formula. Advocates argue that graz-
ing uses federal land productively and that the grazing fee is fair.
Opponents argue that grazing damages public resources and
that grazing fees are too low. The GAO was asked to determine
(1) the extent of, and purposes for, grazing in fiscal year 2004 on
lands that ten federal agencies manage; (2) the amount that fed-
eral agencies spent in fiscal year 2004 to manage grazing; (3) total
grazing receipts that the ten agencies collected in fiscal year 2004
and amounts disbursed; and (4) fees charged by the ten federal
agencies, Western states, and ranchers, and reasons for any dif-
ferences. In commenting on a draft of this report, the Department
of the Interior and the Forest Service neither agreed nor dis-
agreed with the findings. The Forest Service stated that the re-
port accurately described the purpose of the grazing fee. The
Army and Air Force and the Department of Energy provided
technical comments, which we incorporate as appropriate. The
departments of Commerce and of Justice responded that they
did not have comments.
The ten federal agencies managed more than 22.6 million
AUMs on about 235 million acres of federal lands for grazing and
land management in fiscal year 2004. Of that total, the Depart-
ment of the Interior’s Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and
the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service managed
more than 98 percent of the lands used for grazing. The agencies
manage their grazing programs under different authorities and
for different purposes. For BLM lands and Western Forest Service
lands, grazing is a major program; the other eight agencies gen-
erally use grazing as a tool to achieve their primary land man-
agement goals. In fiscal year 2004, federal agencies spent a total of
at least $144 million. The ten federal agencies spent at least $135.9
million, with the Forest Service and the BLM accounting for the
166
Documents and Data

majority. Other federal agencies have grazing-related activities,
such as pest control, and spent at least $8.4 million in fiscal year
2004. The ten federal agencies’ grazing fees generated about $21
million in fiscal year 2004—less than one-sixth of the expendi-
tures to manage grazing. Of that amount, the agencies distributed
about $5.7 million to states and counties in which grazing oc-
curred, returned about $3.8 million to the Treasury, and deposited
at least $11.7 million in separate Treasury accounts to help pay for
agency programs, among other things. The amounts that each
agency distributed varied, depending on the agencies’ differing
authorities. Fees charged in 2004 by the ten federal agencies, as
well as state land agencies and private ranchers, varied widely.
The grazing fee that the BLM and the Forest Service charge,
which was $1.43 per AUM in 2004, is established by formula, and
is generally much lower than the fees charged by the other fed-
eral agencies, states, and private ranchers. The other agencies,
states, and ranchers generally established fees to obtain the mar-
ket value of the forage. The formula used to calculate the BLM
and Forest Service grazing fee incorporates ranchers’ ability to
pay; therefore the current purpose of the fee is not primarily to re-
cover the agencies’ expenditures or to capture the fair market
value of forage. As a result, the BLM’s and the Forest Service’s
grazing receipts fell short of their expenditures on grazing in fis-
cal year 2004 by almost $115 million. The BLM and Forest Service
fee also decreased by 40 percent from 1980 to 2004, while grazing
fees charged by private ranchers increased by 28 percent during
the same period. If the purpose of the fee were to recover expen-
ditures, BLM and the Forest Service would have had to charge
$7.64 and $12.26 per AUM, respectively; alternatively, if the pur-
pose were to gain a fair market value, the agencies’ fees would
vary depending on the market. Differences in resources and legal
requirements can cause fees to vary; however, the approaches
used by other agencies could close the gap in expenditures and
receipts or more closely align BLM and Forest Service fees with
market prices. The purpose of the grazing fee is, ultimately, for
Congress to determine.
Resolutions
Unlike legislation, resolutions are statements of intent or planned
action, and they usually are an expression of sentiments or opinion,
Resolutions
167

rather than direction. The first example, directed to the president
of the United States, is a memorial (another term for a resolution)
by a professional organization, the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. This excerpt deals with the manage-
ment of timber resources, resulting from an 1887 Department of
Agriculture decision to create a division of forestry to collect in-
formation on the value and significance of forest cover. The asso-
ciation argues that timber lands have been poorly managed, with
insufficient attention to the role of forest cover as part of the wa-
tershed. The members approach the problem, they note, from a
scientific perspective, with specific recommendations on the need
for forest reserves. Also of importance is the recommendation
that existing departments and bureaus within the federal govern-
ment cooperate on the development of a commission to study for-
est management, and the withdrawal of forest lands until the data
is collected and analyzed.
The second resolution also comes from a professional organ-
ization; it deals with the problems associated with the sale of di-
amonds acquired illegally or as a result of civil unrest. The dia-
mond industry, composed of businesses handling rough
diamonds, processing, exporting, and importing, has tried to po-
lice its own members. Diamond industry members issued a joint
resolution on July 19, 2000, as part of their international meeting
in Antwerp, Belgium. An excerpt from the resolution illustrates
the perspective of the industry in nine separate proposals.
The United Nations and individual states have attempted to
resolve problems on a political level, which is often difficult given
the uncertainty of power in individual countries. In May 2000, di-
amond-producing states in southern Africa met in Kimberley,
South Africa, to try to develop a long-term proposal that would
ensure consumers that diamonds they purchase were not associ-
ated with violent conflict. Two years later, after discussions and
negotiations that were sometimes bitter, the UN General Assem-
bly adopted a resolution supporting an international certification
process for diamonds, the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
(KPCS). The preamble to the agreement identifies the rationale
behind the system, which calls for voluntary self-regulation.
Lastly, the Bonn Ministerial Declaration is a statement by in-
ternational water leaders who met at the International Confer-
ence on Freshwater in Bonn, Germany, prior to the 2002 World
Summit for Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg,
South Africa. Meetings like this one are examples of international
168
Documents and Data

efforts to deal with water scarcity in a formal, international
forum. Previous meetings had been held in Dublin, Paris, France,
and The Hague, and subsequent efforts to create an international
agreement on water and sustainability have been held periodi-
cally since then.
Excerpt, Memorial of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science in Behalf of a Proper Forest
Policy
Resolved, That it is the sense of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science that immediate action should be taken
looking to the establishment of a proper administration of the re-
maining timber lands in the hands of the Governments of the
United States and Canada, for the purpose of insuring the perpe-
tuity of the forest cover on the western mountain ranges, pre-
serving thereby the dependent favorable hydrological conditions.
Resolved further, That a committee of five be, and is hereby,
appointed to present this resolution, and to urge the importance
thereof to the President and the Congress of the United States,
and to the premier and Parliament of Canada and of the provin-
cial governments, and that such committee be instructed to pre-
pare in proper form any data necessary, and to use every honor-
able means to accomplish the purpose herein set forth, and that
the president of this association be hereby appointed chairman of
such committee, together with four others whom he shall ap-
point.
The administration of the timber lands has been unsatisfac-
tory for lack of proper legislation and of provisions sufficient to
protect this property against material loss and deterioration. Tim-
ber thieving and destruction by fire have been allowed to unnec-
essarily waste this national property, while the officers in charge
were powerless to protect it. The pioneer legislation, which may
have been sufficient twenty-five years ago, has long outlived its
usefulness and should make way for such administration as will
meet the demands of civilized existence in settled communities.
A vast empire, considered useless not long ago, has been
found capable of human occupancy and agricultural production
if the means for its development, water, can be brought upon it,
and the extent to which this land may be utilized depends upon
the amounts of water available.
Resolutions
169

The opinions of our greatest climatologists have been di-
vided as to the influence of forests on precipitation. But evidence,
carefully and scientifically scrutinized, is accumulating which
tends to show that, under certain conditions at least, such influ-
ence may not be improbable. However this may be, overwhelm-
ing evidence can be brought to show that a potent influence upon
the distribution of available water supplies from rain and snow is
exerted by a forest cover, so that a government having to deal
with the problem of cultural development of a part of its domain
by agriculture, cannot compass the water question without at the
same time giving attention and proper regard to the forestry
question.
Removal of the mountain forest means invariably distur-
bance of the natural “run off”; favorable sometimes, unfavorable
mostly.
It may be difficult to devise at once such a plan for the ad-
ministration of these forests, with a view to their continuity, as
can be put into practice under the present social and political con-
ditions of that part of our country in which this timbered area is
situated; and a special investigation of these conditions and care-
ful adjustment between the present needs of the population for
wood material and the future needs of a forest cover for hydro-
logic purposes appears desirable, although various measures for
a forest administration which seem capable of practical applica-
tion have been proposed.
We, therefore, the undersigned committee, in the conserva-
tive and scrutinizing spirit that should characterize the proposi-
tion of the scientific body which we represent respectfully recom-
mend:
That a joint committee of the Senate and House of Represen-
tatives of the United States be appointed to consider the needs of
legislation in behalf of the public timber domain with a view of
providing for the appointment of a commission of competent
men, salaried and employed for this service alone, for the pur-
pose of investigating the necessity of preserving certain parts of
the present public forest area as requisite for the maintenance of
favorable water conditions, and to devise a practical plan for the
permanent administration of such parts of it as shall appear de-
sirable to be retained under government control.
The committee further recommends that, pending such in-
vestigation, all timber lands now in the hands of the United States
be withdrawn from sale and provision be made to protect the said
170
Documents and Data

lands from theft and ravages by fires and to supply in a rational
manner the local needs for wood and lumber until a permanent
system of forest administration be had.
It is also suggested that inasmuch as the various Depart-
ments and Government bureaus, namely the Department of Agri-
culture in its Forestry Division, the Department of the Interior in
its Land Office and Geological Survey, the Department of War in
its Signal Office, the Treasury Department in its Coast and Geo-
detic Survey, are more or less closely interested in this matter and
have collected data useful in the work of such a commission,
these Departments should cooperate and act as advisers of said
Commission.
Joint Resolution, World Federation of Diamond Bourses
(WFDB) and International Diamond Manufacturers
Association (IDMA)
WFDB and IDMA, representing all the principal diamond manu-
facturing and trading centers of the world, have consistently been
aware of and been involved in combating the conflict diamonds
problem. Particularly, they point to the numerous resolutions
passed by themselves and their members.
We believe that more can and should be done to limit, if not
eliminate, this problem entirely. We believe that the solution to
the conflict diamonds problem is a moral imperative above all
others. However, we do not believe that the solution necessarily
entails damage or limitation to the 96+% of the world’s diamond
trade which is legitimate. On the contrary, we believe that an en-
lightened and effective approach to the problem can lead to the
improvement of the diamond market overall.
It is our understanding that all concerned parties are aware
of the positive benefits of diamonds as well as their potential role
in providing prosperity, a key ingredient of peace, in countries
currently experiencing strife. Over the past year, various solu-
tions have been proposed. We have analyzed these proposals,
some of which we have found to be ineffective, others more prac-
tical and some impractical. All of the proposals have had ele-
ments that we believe are logical and should be incorporated into
an effective solution.
As diamond manufacturers and traders primarily responsi-
ble for the conversion of rough diamonds into polished and the
Resolutions
171

marketing of those polished diamonds, we are proposing a num-
ber of concrete steps to be taken by all parties concerned which
we believe will lead to a more effective and immediate resolution
of the problem.
While our proposal may be subject in the future to any num-
ber of improvements, we believe it is, in the first instance, practi-
cally implementable in the short term, and it does not preclude
further steps from being taken as and when the means and re-
quirement arise.
Specifically, and most importantly, we are mindful that the
next phase of solution must start sooner rather than later and that
if this is to be done in a nondestructive manner, the most practi-
cally implementable steps must be taken first, in order that the
process not be delayed with theoretical concepts and technologies.
1. We recognize that rough diamonds individually are not
sufficiently determinable as to source and origin.
However, with the correct system, rough diamond
parcels can be monitored with a net.
2. There is no implementable means of tagging, tracking
and identifying finished polished diamonds.
3. All legitimate diamonds in the rough form can travel
within an identifiable net.
Accordingly, we propose:
1. Each accredited rough diamond importing country,
whether a producer, manufacturing or dealing center
enacts “redline” legislation. As such, no parcel of rough
may be imported unless such parcel of rough has been
sealed and registered in a universally standardized
manner by an accredited export authority from the
exporting country.
2. Each exporting country, which can either be a producer
country or accredited dealing/manufacturing center,
will establish accredited export officers or diamond
board which will seal parcels of rough diamonds to be
exported and registered in an international database. If
the country is a producer country, it will be accredited
only if it has control mechanisms in place to determine
the flow of rough and legitimate ownership of rough
presented to the export authority.
172
Documents and Data

3. Polished diamond consuming countries will enact
legislation forbidding importation of polished
diamonds from any manufacturing/dealing country
that does not have “redline” legislation as regards the
importation of rough.
4. Each and every country, as part of the diamond net, be
they rough exporters, importers, or polished
consuming countries enacts legislation bringing
criminal penalties on any individual and/or company
proven to be knowingly involved in illegal rough
diamonds.
5. Each and every diamond organization adopts an
ethical code of conduct as regards conflict diamonds,
labor practices and good business practices in general,
the failure to adhere to which would lead to expulsion
from WFDB, IDMA and all other relevant
organizations.
6. As a positive measure of compliance, all relevant and
interested parties promote adherence to the code of
conduct as a positive consumer choice in the
marketplace.
7. We enlist the support of banks, insurance, shipping
companies and other pertinent providers of goods and
services to our industry to expose and cease business
relations with any entity that is found knowingly to
violate these principles.
8. That there is a continual analysis of relevant
technologies and investment by the industry in
developing them further for implementation leading to
greater compliance.
9. That compliance with the above be monitored and
controlled by an international Diamond Council
comprised of producers, manufacturers, traders,
governments and relevant international organizations.
That this process be fully verified and audited.
Preamble to the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
PARTICIPANTS,
RECOGNISING that the trade in conflict diamonds is a mat-
ter of serious international concern, which can be directly linked
Resolutions
173

to the fueling of armed conflict, the activities of rebel movements
aimed at undermining or overthrowing legitimate governments,
and the illicit traffic in, and proliferation of, armaments, espe-
cially small arms and light weapons;
FURTHER RECOGNISING the devastating impact of con-
flicts fueled by the trade in conflict diamonds on the peace, safety,
and security of people in affected countries and the systematic
and gross human rights violations that have been perpetrated in
such conflicts;
NOTING the negative impact of such conflicts on regional
stability and the obligations placed upon states by the United Na-
tions Charter regarding the maintenance of international peace
and security;
BEARING IN MIND that urgent international action is im-
perative to prevent the problem of conflict diamonds from nega-
tively affecting the trade in legitimate diamonds, which makes a
critical contribution to the economies of many of the producing,
processing, exporting and importing states, especially of devel-
oping states;
RECALLING all of the relevant resolutions of the United Na-
tions Security Council under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, including the relevant provisions of Resolutions 1173
(1998), 1295 (2000), 1306 (2000), and 1343 (2001), and determined
to contribute to and support the implementation of the measures
provided for in these resolutions;
HIGHLIGHTING the United Nations General Assembly
Resolution 55/56 (2000) on the role of the trade in conflict dia-
monds in fueling armed conflict, which called on the interna-
tional community to give urgent and careful consideration to de-
vising effective and pragmatic measures to address this problem;
FURTHER HIGHLIGHTING the recommendation in United
Nations General Assembly Resolution 55/56 that the interna-
tional community develop detailed proposals for a simple and
workable international certification scheme for rough diamonds
based primarily on national certification schemes and on interna-
tionally agreed minimum standards;
RECALLING that the Kimberley Process, which was estab-
lished to find a solution to the international problem of conflict
diamonds, was inclusive of concerned stakeholders, namely pro-
ducing, exporting and importing states, the diamond industry,
and civil society;
174
Documents and Data

CONVINCED that the opportunity for conflict diamonds to
play a role in fueling armed conflict can be seriously reduced by
introducing a certification scheme for rough diamonds designed
to exclude conflict diamonds from the legitimate trade;
RECALLING that the Kimberley Process considered that an
international certification scheme for rough diamonds, based on
national laws and practices and meeting internally agreed mini-
mum standards, will be the most effective system by which the
problem of conflict diamonds could be addressed;
ACKNOWLEDGING the important initiatives already taken
to address this problem, in particular by the governments of An-
gola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea, and Sierra
Leone and by other key producing, exporting and importing
countries, as well as by the diamond industry, in particular by the
World Diamond Council, and by civil society;
WELCOMING voluntary self-regulation initiatives an-
nounced by the diamond industry and recognising that a system
of such voluntary self-regulation contributes to ensuring an effec-
tive internal control system of rough diamonds based upon the
international certification scheme for rough diamonds;
RECOGNISING that an international certification scheme for
rough diamonds will only be credible if all Participants have es-
tablished internal systems of control designed to eliminate the
presence of conflict diamonds in the chain of producing, export-
ing and importing rough diamonds within their own territories,
while taking into account that differences in production methods
and trading practices as well as differences in institutional con-
trols thereof may require different approaches to meet minimum
standards;
FURTHER RECOGNISING that the international certifica-
tion scheme for rough diamonds must be consistent with interna-
tional law governing international trade;
ACKNOWLEDGING that state sovereignty should be fully
respected and the principles of equality, mutual benefits and con-
sensus should be adhered to;
RECOMMEND THE FOLLOWING PROVISIONS . . .
Bonn Ministerial Declaration (2001)
We, ministers with responsibilities for water affairs, environment
and development from 46 countries throughout the world, have
Resolutions
175

assembled in Bonn to assess progress in implementing Agenda 21
and to discuss actions required to increase water security and to
achieve sustainable management of water sources.
We consider that the World Summit for Sustainable Devel-
opment, scheduled for August 2002 in Johannesburg, needs to
demonstrate renewed commitment to sustainable development
and political will to action.
We consider the equitable and sustainable use and the pro-
tection of the world’s freshwater resources a key challenge facing
governments on the road to a safer, more peaceful, equitable and
prosperous world. Combating poverty is the main challenge for
achieving equitable and sustainable development, and water
plays a vital role in relation to human health, livelihood, eco-
nomic growth as well as sustaining ecosystems. The outcome of
the World Summit on Sustainable Development must include de-
cisive action on water issues.
We express our deep concern that at the beginning of the 21st
century 1.2 billion people live a life in poverty without access to
safe drinking water, and that almost 2.5 billion have no access to
proper sanitation. Safe and sufficient water and sanitation are
basic human needs. The worldwide struggle to alleviate poverty
must bring safe and decent living conditions to those who are de-
prived of these basic requirements.
We confirm our resolve to reach the International Develop-
ment Targets agreed by the U.N. Millennium Summit, in particu-
lar the target to halve, by the year 2015, the proportion of people
living in extreme poverty and to halve the proportion of people
who suffer from hunger and are unable to reach or afford safe
drinking water. We also confirm our resolve to stop the unsus-
tainable exploitation of water resources by developing water
management strategies at regional, national and local levels.
Water is needed in all aspects of life. For sustainable devel-
opment, it is necessary to take into account water’s social, envi-
ronmental, and economic dimensions and all of its varied uses.
Water management therefore requires an integrated approach.
We emphasize that ten years after the U.N. Conference on
Environment and Development and the Dublin Conference, and
several years after the global water conferences in Paris and The
Hague, there is still a need for greater commitment to implement
commonly agreed principles on water resource management.
Pressures on the world’s scarce freshwater resources and aquatic
systems have increased. Water pollution and unsustainable pat-
176
Documents and Data

terns of water consumption are among the causes. Water use effi-
ciency needs to improve.
We agree that governments, the international community, the
private sector, the nongovernmental organizations and all other
stakeholders need to base their actions on the following:
Governance: The primary responsibility for ensuring the sus-
tainable and equitable management of water resources rests with
the governments. Each country should have in place applicable
arrangements for the governance of water affairs at all levels and,
where appropriate, accelerate water sector reforms. We urge the
private sector to join with government and civil society to con-
tribute to bringing water and sanitation services to the unserved
and to strengthen investment and management capabilities. Pri-
vately managed service delivery should not imply private own-
ership of water resources. Service providers should be subject to
effective regulation and monitoring. We encourage riparian states
to cooperate on matters related to international watercourses.
Funding Gap: There is an enormous gap in funding invest-
ments in water infrastructure, maintenance, training and capacity
building, research, and data generation. It is urgent to close this
gap using existing resources more efficiently and with additional
financial resources from all sources: public investment budgets,
capital markets, and community based finance, user and polluter
charges; as well as increased international development financing
from public and private sources, particularly for developing
countries to reflect the acute needs in the water sector. The lack of
financial resources for water infrastructure investment, opera-
tions and maintenance is particularly hurting the poor in Least
Developed Countries and in other countries with people living in
extreme poverty. Critical actions for closing the financial gap are
poverty alleviation and the improvement of opportunities for
trade and income generation for developing countries. Resources
also need to be made available to assist developing countries to
mitigate the effects of natural disasters and to assist in adapting
to the impacts of climate change. Water development programs,
to be successful, should be based on a good understanding of the
negative impact of desertification causes to people living in af-
fected areas.
Role of the International Community: We call on the interna-
tional community to strengthen its commitment and its efforts to
enable developing countries to manage water sustainably and to
ensure an equitable sharing of benefits from water resources. We
Resolutions
177

call upon the Secretary General of the United Nations to
strengthen the coordination and coherence of activities within the
U.N. system on water issues in an inclusive manner. We recall the
agreed U.N. target for official development assistance to 0.7% of
GDP. Developed countries which have not yet reached the target
should exert their best efforts to do so.
Capacity Building and Technology Transfer: We recognize
that capacity building and innovative technologies are needed to
efficiently utilize water, control pollution and develop new and
alternative water sources in water stressed countries. We will
support capacity building programs and information exchange to
ensure the effective use of human, financial, and technical re-
sources for water management. We will facilitate technology
transfer initiatives to enable technologically less developed coun-
tries to acquire capacity to manage water with the best available
knowledge and equipment. We need improved assessments of
state and trends in the world water situation.
Gender: Water resources management should be based on a
participatory approach. Both men and women should be involved
equally in managing the sustainable use of water resources and
sharing of benefits. The role of women in water related areas
needs to be strengthened and their participation broadened.
Next Steps: We urge the World Summit on Sustainable De-
velopment to take account of the outcome of this International
Conference on Freshwater. We expect that the International Year
of Freshwater in 2003, and the 3rd World Water Forum in Japan
will be a good opportunity to further discuss the role and actions
for all players in international society on the issues of sustainable
development of freshwater.
Facts and Data
U.S. Natural Resource Agencies
In the nation’s infancy, the government was concerned about
natural resources and how best to use them to help the country
grow, become settled, and later, industrialized. The executive
branch has grown considerably in its oversight of natural re-
sources, with dozens of agencies and bureaus assigned the task
of dealing with problems and solutions. Table 6.1 shows how
fragmented natural resource management has become in the
twenty-first century.
178
Documents and Data

National Landscape Conservation System
Some of the reasons why many of the conflicts over protected
areas are centered in the West are the number of sites, the acreage,
and the mileage included in the National Landscape Conserva-
tion System (NLCS). As Table 6.2 indicates, the majority of units
are concentrated in just twelve states, with California and Utah
ranked the highest in terms of acreage. Of particular interest are
the wilderness areas and wilderness study areas, which receive
the most protected status. Three wilderness boundaries cross
state lines; national scenic and historic trails also cross state lines.
Some of the acreage figures represent significant overlaps, such as
Wild and Scenic Rivers located within Wilderness Areas. The Bu-
reau of Land Management (BLM) has responsibility for a vast
amount of landscape, making it one of the more powerful agen-
cies in the federal government when it comes to range and pro-
tected area management.
Facts and Data
179
TABLE 6.1
U.S. Natural Resource Agencies (Partial listing)
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Bureau of Land Management
Office of Conservation and Renewable Energy
Bureau of Reclamation
Office of Environmental Justice
Council on Environmental Quality
Office of Environmental Policy
Council on Sustainable Development
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Management and Budget
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
Government Accountability Office
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Materials Transportation Bureau
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Minerals Management Service
U.S. Department of Commerce
Mine Safety and Health Administration
U.S. Department of Energy
National Bureau of Standards
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Center for Environmental Economics
U.S. Department of State
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
U.S. Geological Survey
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
National Park Service
U.S. Forest Service

180
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.2
NLCS Sites, By State (As of July 2005)
State
Number
BLM Acres
National Conservation Areas
Alaska
1
1,208,624
Arizona
3
112,542
California
2
10,728,368
Colorado
2
185,144
Idaho
1
484,034
Nevada
3
1,043,422
New Mexico
1
339,100
Total
13
14,101,234
National Monuments
Arizona
5
1,775,007
California
3
291,390
Colorado
1
163,892
Idaho
1
273,847
Montana
2
375,027
New Mexico
1
4,124
Oregon/Washington
1
52,947
Utah
1
1,870,800
Total
15
4,807,034
Cooperative Management and Protection Areas
Oregon/Washington
1
428,156
National Recreation Areas
Alaska
1
998,702
Outstanding Natural Areas
Oregon/Washington
1
100
Forest Reserves
California
1
7,472
Wilderness Areas
Arizona
47
1,396,586
California
76
3,577,796
Colorado
4
139,524
Idaho
1
802
Montana
1
6,000
Nevada
38
1,758,606
New Mexico
3
139,281
(continues)

Facts and Data
181
TABLE 6.2 (cont.)
NLCS Sites, By State (As of July 2005)
State
Number
BLM Acres
Wilderness Areas (continued)
Oregon/Washington
5
193,863
Utah
3
27,720
Total
178
7,240,178
Wilderness Study Areas
Alaska
1
784,238
Arizona
2
63,930
California
77
974,769
Colorado
54
621,737
Idaho
66
1,341,709
Montana
40
450,823
Nevada
71
2,877,917
New Mexico
60
970,532
Oregon/Washington
98
2,343,279
Utah
99
3,255,490
Wyoming
42
575,841
Total
610
14,260,265
National Historic Trails
Alaska
1
418 miles
Arizona
2
89 
California
3
423
Colorado
1
85
Idaho
4
439
Montana
2
347
Nevada
3
1,065
New Mexico
2
156
Oregon/Washington
2
24
Utah
3
569
Wyoming
5
1,262
Total
10*
4,877
National Scenic Trails
California
1
189 miles
Colorado
1
1
Idaho
1
13
Montana
1
11
(continues)

National Park Visitation
It has been said that America’s national parks are “being loved to
death” because of their popularity, and that is certainly the case
with specific sites. Increased visitation has put pressures on the
system in terms of infrastructure, congestion, air quality, noise,
and staff resources. A look at the statistics (see Table 6.3) compiled
by the National Park Service (NPS) shows that the total number
of visits between 1980 and 2005 has grown considerably, but there
have been some years when recreational and nonrecreational vis-
its have actually declined in number. The period from 1999 to
2005 shows declining visitation, which has been attributed to re-
luctance by visitors to travel after the terrorist attacks on the
World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001.
Ten Most Endangered Birds in America
The National Audubon Society has worked since the late 1800s to
protect birds and their habitats. As one of the nation’s oldest en-
vironmental organizations, the society is known for its efforts to
protect endangered species both in the United States and around
182
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.2 (cont.)
NLCS Sites, By State (As of July 2005)
State
Number
BLM Acres
National Scenic Trails (continues)
New Mexico
1
172
Oregon/Washington
1
42
Wyoming
1
180
Total
2*
608 miles
Wild and Scenic Rivers
Alaska
6
952 miles
California
6
78
Montana
1
149
New Mexico
2
71
Oregon/Washington
23
802
Total
38
2,052
Source: U.S. Bureau of Land Management, Office of Public Affairs at www.blm.gov/nlcs (accessed February 14, 2006). 
*National Historic and Scenic Trails cross state lines. There are a total of 10 Historic and 2 Scenic Trails in the
National Trails System administered by the Bureau of Land Management.

the world. One of its successful strategies has been to identify
birds that are in need of special protection and to focus public and
media attention on the factors leading toward extinction. In 2006,
attempts within Congress to weaken the provisions of the En-
dangered Species Act led to the publication of a National
Audubon Society Report that names the country’s most endan-
gered birds (see Table 6.4). The report cites pressure from devel-
opment, invasive species, and global warming as the primary
threats to these species, moving them closer to extinction.
U.S. Most Endangered Wildlife Refuges
One of the nation’s most influential environmental organizations,
Defenders of Wildlife, works to protect both wildlife and their
habitats, including the nation’s system of National Wildlife
Refuges. These 545 protected areas, initially established by Presi-
dent Theodore Roosevelt, are considered endangered because of
a lack of adequate resources, proposed encroachment by devel-
opment, and plans for oil and natural gas drilling. Two hundred
Facts and Data
183
TABLE 6.3
National Park System Visitation, By Year (1980–2005)
Year
Total Visits
Year
Total Visits
1980
300,324,082
1993
387,707,068
1981
329,663,300
1994
380,156,046
1982
334,448,015
1995
387,803,913
1983
335,646,331
1996
399,826,439
1984
332,671,283
1997
418,161,349
1985
346,190,110
1998
435,660,070
1986
364,551,499
1999
436,295,878
1987
372,951,134
2000
429,853,123
1988
367,989,781
2001
424,302,551
1989
351,911,180
2002
421,279,444
1990
335,162,737
2003
413,865,726
1991
355,868,408
2004
427,706,748
1992
360,351,945
2005
423,387,198
Source: National Park Service at www2@nature.nps.gov/NPstats (accessed November 15, 2005).

of the refuges have no staff at all, and others are operating on a
fraction of their previous budgets.
In its October 2005 report, Refuges at Risk: America’s Ten Most
Endangered National Wildlife Refuges 2005, the group identified the
ways in which complex political and environmental issues are
changing both the operations and health of these protected areas.
While not nearly as well known as the national parks, wildlife
refuges protect areas that otherwise might not be appropriate for
designation under existing policies. The 2005 list, in alphabetical
order, identifies the ten most endangered refuges, representing
ten states in regions throughout the United States (see Table 6.5).
U.S. Gold Prices
Conflicts over gold are not new, but they have escalated since the
1970s. Gold has been valuable since antiquity, but a uniform price
for gold was first established by Sir Isaac Newton, as master of
the United Kingdom Mint, in 1717. In U.S. dollars, the average
price of gold changed by only a few dollars from 1792 to 1930.
Initially, the price was $19.75 per troy ounce in 1792; it had risen
to $18.96 by 1892, and to $20.66 in 1922. Real fluctuations rarely
occurred, except in 1931, when the price dropped to $17.06;
throughout the rest of the 1930s and into the 1960s, the price of
gold remained at about $35. A two-tiered pricing system was cre-
ated in 1968, and after that, the market price for gold has been free
to fluctuate (see Table 6.6).
184
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.4
Ten Most Endangered Birds in America (2006)
Ivory-billed Woodpecker
California Condor
Whooping Crane
Gunnison Sage-Grouse
Kirtland’s Warbler
Piping Plover
Florida Scrub-Jay
Ashy Storm-Petrel
Golden-Cheeked Warbler
Kittlitz’s Murrelet
Source: “National Audubon Society Report Lists America’s 10 Most Endangered Species,” news release (March 27,
2006) at www.audubon.org/news/press (accessed April 9, 2006).

TABLE 6.5
Ten Most Endangered National Wildlife Refuges (2005)
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, AK
Drilling proponents have resorted to years of legislative maneuvering to allow for drilling, even though there
is strong public opposition because of threats to wildlife and the pristine wilderness..
Browns Park National Wildlife Refuge, CO
Livestock grazing has degraded the riparian area along the Green River, home to thousands of migratory
birds, elk, and deer.
Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge, AZ
Thousands of migrant border crossings and government enforcement agent activities have severely damaged
the fragile desert and its wildlife, including the endangered masked bobwhite quail.
Florida Panther National Wildlife Refuge, FL
One of the world’s most endangered species is at risk as roads and other developments encroach upon the
habitat of the Florida panther.
McFaddin National Wildlife Refuge, TX
The expansion of oil and gas drilling near Texas’s largest freshwater marsh threatens the wintering and
resting area for migrating birds.
Mingo National Wildlife Refuge, MO
A proposed power plant scheduled to be built upwind of the refuge will send pollutants through a pristine
bottomland hardwood forest.
Moapa National Wildlife Refuge, NV
As Las Vegas and its suburbs have grown, groundwater pumping is reducing water sources, including desert
springs and the species that depend upon them.
Oyster Bay National Wildlife Refuge, NY
Sewage discharges from motorized pleasure boats and storm water runoff are damaging this estuary, located
near the home of Theodore Roosevelt, the father of the nation’s wildlife refuge system.
Pocosin Lakes National Wildlife Refuge, NC
A proposed landing field will endanger the home of more than 100,000 birds, while also endangering
military aircraft and pilots.
Sonny Bono Salton Sea National Wildlife Refuge, CA
Unless the government embarks immediately on a habitat restoration plan, a proposed water transfer will
destroy bird habitat along the important Pacific Flyway.
Source: Defenders of Wildlife, “Refuges at Risk: America’s Ten Most Endangered National Wildlife Refuges 2005”
(October 2005) at www.defenders.org/refugesatrisk (accessed November 19, 2005).
Facts and Data
185

186
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.6
Historic Average Gold Prices 1968–2005 (In U.S. dollars per troy ounce)
Year
US$
Year
US$
1968
39
1987
447
1969
41
1988
437
1970
36
1989
381
1971
40
1990
384
1972
58
1991
362
1973
97
1992
344
1974
154
1993
360
1975
161
1994
384
1976
125
1995
384
1977
148
1996
388
1978
193
1997
331
1979
306
1998
294
1980
615
1999
279
1981
460
2000
279
1982
376
2001
271
1983
424
2002
310
1984
361
2003
363
1985
317
2004
410
1986
368
2005
445

Extent of Worldwide Forest and Wooded Land
The salience, or importance, of a problem depends in large part
on how much a segment of the population is affected. Exposure
to a natural resource conflict, for example, will increase the inter-
est of the public and political officials because there is more
knowledge, media coverage, and impact on those involved. In the
case of controversies over forests, statistics alone do not tell the
complete story. As Table 6.7 shows, there are more hectares of for-
est and wooded land in Europe, which has the second largest per-
centage of total land area as forest. However, most of that land is
second-, third-, or even fourth-growth trees, rather than ancient
Facts and Data
187
TABLE 6.7
Extent of Worldwide Forest and Wooded Land By Region (2005)
Region
1000 hectares
% of land area
Eastern and Southern Asia
226,534
27.8
Northern Africa
131,048
8.6
Western and Central Africa
277,829
44.1
Total: Africa
635,411
21.4
East Asia
244,862
21.3
South and Southeast Asia
283,127
33.4
Western and Central Asia
43,626
4.0
Total: Asia
571,615
18.5
Total: Europe
1,001,394
44.3
Total: Caribbean
5,974
26.1
Total: Central America
22,411
43.9
Total: North America
677,454
32.7
Total: Oceania
206,252
24.3
Total: Latin America
831,540
47.7
Total: World
3,952,052
30.3
Source: UN Food and Agriculture Organization, at www.fao.org/forestry (accessed February 1, 2006).

forest. Conflicts over logging are modest in comparison to regions
such as North America, where controversy is unrelenting. Parts of
the Pacific Northwest and Canada are home to old growth trees,
the most valuable from both a resource perspective and an eco-
logical one. Yet less than a third of the land mass is forested. In re-
gions such as Latin America, tropical forests make up almost half
of the land area, yet efforts to stop logging, particularly in the
Amazon, are relatively recent and often at the urging of non-na-
tive groups. Numbers can provide background, but not always
the political context of an issue.
Gas and Oil Supplies
Fossil fuels, especially natural gas and petroleum products, drive
international development, whether the fuel is used to provide
power and electricity for industry, to light our homes at night, to
power our cars, trucks, and other vehicles, or to be made into
other products we rely upon as consumers. Supplies of gas and
oil are not evenly distributed on the planet, nor is the demand for
them. Some countries, such as the United States, have a huge de-
mand that is not met by domestic sources, requiring massive im-
ports (see Table 6.8). Some developing nations have supplies that
exceed their current demands, and so they export huge amounts
to others. The top sources of U.S. crude oil have varied slightly
from month to month but usually include five countries: Mexico,
Canada, Saudi Arabia, Nigeria, and Venezuela. The top five ex-
porting countries account for 75 percent of U.S. crude oil imports,
with similar figures for petroleum (see Table 6.9).
One of the major concerns raised by analysts is the projected
increase in energy demand at a time when resources are dwin-
dling, especially for some fossil fuels. What concerns many policy-
makers is the fact that several countries that regularly provide
the United States with crude oil and natural gas are also areas
with a high level of political instability. In recent years, conflicts
in the Middle East (especially Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the United
Arab Emirates) have led to jumps in prices that have been passed
along to consumers in the United States and Japan. Even coun-
tries such as Venezuela, which produces about 4 percent of the
world’s total, have undergone upheaval that has threatened sup-
plies for the United States.
188
Documents and Data

Facts and Data
189
TABLE 6.8
Top Fifteen Crude Oil and Petroleum Exporting Countries to U.S.
(In thousands of barrels per day, February 2006)
Exporting Country Crude Oil Imports
Rank
Petroleum Imports
Rank
Mexico
1,774
1
1,878
2
Canada
1,700
2
2,249
1
Saudi Arabia
1,418
3
1,451
4
Nigeria
1,342
4
1,377
5
Venezuela
1,175
5
1,472
3
Angola
464
6
478
6
Iraq
444
7
444
8
Ecuador
222
8
234
11
Brazil
164
9
200
13
Algeria
163
10
446
7
Kuwait
152
11
158
15
Colombia
108
12
n/a
n/a
United Kingdom
82
13
205
12
Chad
77
14
n/a
n/a
Equatorial Guinea
73
15
n/a
n/a
Virgin Islands
n/a
n/a
318
9
Russia
n/a
n/a
304
10
Norway
n/a
n/a
199
14
Source: Figures derived from Energy Information Agency, at www.eia.doe.gov (accessed April 15, 2006).

190
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.9
Top Ten Producers of Crude Oil, Petroleum Products, and Natural Gas (2002)
(In million tons, as percentage of world total)
Country
oil
% of total
petroleum
% of total
gas
% of total
Saudi Arabia
470
12.7
n/a
n/a
60,262
2.2
Russia
419
11.3
184
5.2
608,332
22.4
United States
348
9.4
816
23.2
541,779
19.9
Iran
194
5.2
n/a
n/a
77,923
2.9
Mexico
189
5.1
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
PR China
165
4.4
207
5.9
n/a
n/a
Norway
151
4.1
n/a
n/a
76,832
2.8
Venezuela
149
4.0
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Canada
138
3.7
99
2.8
182,205
6.7
UAE
120
3.2
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Japan
n/a
n/a
203
5.8
n/a
n/a
Germany
n/a
n/a
114
3.2
n/a
n/a
India
n/a
n/a
112
3.2
n/a
n/a
Korea
n/a
n/a
111
3.2
n/a
n/a
Italy
n/a
n/a
96
2.7
n/a
n/a
Brazil
n/a
n/a
85
2.4
n/a
n/a
UK
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
108,438
4.0
Algeria
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
86,553
3.2
Indonesia
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
79,832
2.9
Netherlands
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
73,128
2.7
Source: International Energy Agency, Key World Energy Statistics (2004), at www.iea.org (accessed April 15, 2006).

Facts and Data
191
TABLE 6.10
Projected Trends in U.S. Energy Demand, 2004–2030
Trend
Projection
Average Energy Use, Per Person
Increasing faster than in recent years
Total Primary Energy Consumption
Increasing by 1.1 percent per year
Delivered Energy Consumption, by Fuel
Petroleum and electricity lead growth in consumption
U.S. Primary Energy Use
Increase by one-third, led by commercial sector consumption
Residential Energy Use, Per Person
Increase in electricity use, with slight declines in use of natural gas and
petroleum
Household Energy Use
Energy for space heating decreases by 20 percent; increases slightly for
space cooling and lighting; decreases slightly for water heating and
refrigeration; fastest increase is for electronics and small appliances
Energy Efficiency
Increases in efficiency highest in Texas, California, Arizona, and Nevada,
accounting for two-thirds of energy efficient home completions
Commercial Energy Use
Increases by 1.6 percent per year
Commercial Energy Demand
Decreases for space heating, space
Cooling, water heating, and lighting; increases for use of office equipment,
telecommunications equipment, medical imaging equipment, and other
miscellaneous uses
Commercial Energy Use per Square Foot Increases by 6 percent
Source: Derived from Energy Information Agency, Annual Energy Outlook 2006.
Energy Use and Trends
From time to time, the Worldwatch Institute uses statistics from
various sources to try to put various environmental indicators
into perspective. It is often difficult for scientists and researchers
to put their data into formats that will provide the public with
the information that they and policy-makers need, unless they
can see those figures in relation to one another. Tables 6.10 and
6.11 provide a context for understanding energy trends and why
they are important.

Water Use
Most people think of water as an abundant natural resource that
is always available in a never-ending stream of supply. That view
is less common in developing and arid countries, where scarcity
is a very real problem, both for sanitation and drinking. In the
United States, organizations such as the American Water Works
Association Research Foundation have tried to put water in per-
spective by explaining how residential water use varies (see Table
6.12) and using models to forecast rates for future water demand.
192
Documents and Data
TABLE 6.11
Energy: Matters of Scale
World energy production from oil, 2003
148 quadrillion Btu*
Energy production from “new” renewable sources (excludes large hydroelectric plants)
6 quadrillion Btu 
Energy production from all renewables (includes large hydro)
33 quadrillion Btu
World annual growth in wind generating capacity, 2000–2004
+28 percent
Annual average growth in solar photovoltaic generating capacity
+32 percent
Annual average growth in biofuels (ethanol, biodiesel) production
+18 percent
Annual average growth in oil production
+1.6 percent
Total increase in oil production (1970–2003)
+52 percent
Total increase in renewable energy production (excluding large hydro)
+269 percent
Annual government subsidies for renewables (European Union and U.S.)
$10 billion
Annual subsidies for fossil energy (global)
$150–250 billion
Estimated number of jobs in new renewable manufacturing, operations, and maintenance, 2004
1.7 million
Jobs in oil and natural gas extraction (U.S. only), 2002
123,000
Source: Worldwatch Institute, www.worldwatch.org, World Watch, Jan./Feb. 2006: 32.
* British thermal units

Facts and Data
193
TABLE 6.12
Residential End Uses of Water (U.S.)
Households use approximately 146,000 gallons of water annually.
About 42 percent of water is used indoors, and 58 percent is used outdoors.
In households not utilizing water-efficient fixtures, toilets used the most water on a daily basis, averaging 20.1
gallons per person per day.
The largest residential users of water are clothes washers (15 gallons per person per day).
Taking a shower uses approximately 10 gallons of water.
The most water used is between the hours of 5:00 A.M. and 11:00 A.M.
The least water used is between the hours of  11:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M.
The presence of teenagers tends to increase a household’s water usage; the presence of adults working full-time
decreases water usage.
Source: Reprinted from American Water Works Association website, www.awwa.org, by permission. Copyright 2006,
American Water Works Association.


7 
Directory of Organizations,
Associations, and Agencies
N
atural resources issues and conflicts cross international
boundaries, cultures, and politics, as this directory illustrates.
Some of the nongovernmental organizations focus on specific
resources, such as timber or precious metals, while others have a
broad range of environmental problems on their agenda.
Included are trade associations and groups that represent indus-
try interests, along with information clearinghouses that tend to
be more neutral and objective. There are a growing number of
local and regional grassroots groups that deal with specific prob-
lems, and only a handful are included here, to serve as examples.
Professional associations represent individuals with common
educational credentials, such as experts in range management,
forestry, and hydrology. The last two sections provide contact and
background information for the major U.S. resource agencies at
the federal level, followed by the UN programs.
Because names alone do not always represent what an or-
ganization does, there is a brief synopsis of the group’s history,
mission, or membership along with contact information. A brief
word of caution: The Internet is a useful tool for research, but it
does have limitations. As quickly as a website can be created, it
can disappear, sometimes taking an organization with it. Other
times, groups change their names, or are subsumed under an-
other related interest. The information provided in this chapter is
current as of publication, but it may not be accurate when at-
tempts are made to contact an organization.
195

Many of the nongovernmental organizations and research
institutes dealing with natural resources in countries outside the
United States are new, and they often face budget shortfalls that
limit their ability to respond to inquiries. For that reason, the con-
tact information includes a mailing address and, where available,
a website. Telephone contact information for international organ-
izations is not included because of differences in access codes.
Adirondack North Country Association
28 St. Bernard Street
Saranac Lake, NY 12983
(518) 891–6200
www.adirondack.org
Contact: Executive Director
Founded in 1954, the organization works for the development of
the Adirondack region, opposing the creation of an Adirondack
National Park because it would restrict the industrial and busi-
ness potential of the area.
African Diamond Council
2800 Post Oak Boulevard
Houston, TX 77056
(832) 623–5923
www.africandiamondcouncil.org
Contact: Director
In an attempt to remove the negative stigma of the African dia-
mond-producing countries (Democratic Republic of Congo,
Botswana, South Africa, Angola, Namibia, Ghana, Central
African Republic, Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Zimbabwe), this
council was formed in 2000. It represents the diamond trade in-
dustry and addresses issues such as environmental degradation,
uncontrolled mining, diamond labeling, and political turmoil on
the African continent related to diamonds.
Alaska Rainforest Campaign
122 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 544–0475
www.akrain.org
Contact: Manager
196
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

The Alaska Rainforest Campaign (ARC) is a coalition of national
and Alaskan conservation groups working to protect the remain-
ing wildlands of the Tongass and Chugach national forests from
clear-cutting and other harmful development.
Aldo Leopold Foundation
PO Box 77
Baraboo, WI 53913
(608) 355–0279
www.aldoleopold.org
Contact: Director
The author of the influential book A Sand County Almanac,
Leopold was among the first to conceive of a land ethic of eco-
logical awareness and stewardship of natural resources. After his
death, his children established the foundation in 1982 to foster an
ethical relationship between the people and the land. The organ-
ization manages the original Leopold Farm and serves as a clear-
inghouse for information on Leopold and his legacy of ideas.
Alliance for Energy and Economic Growth
PO Box 1200
Washington, DC 20013–1200
(202) 463–3130
www.yourenergyfuture.org/index.htm
Contact: Executive Director
With more than 1,200 members representing companies that de-
velop, deliver, or consume energy, this organization’s mission re-
lates to maintaining energy security, renewing and expanding the
energy infrastructure, and ensuring appropriate consideration of
the impact of regulatory policies on energy companies.
Alliance to Save Energy
1200 Eighteenth Street, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 857–0666
www.ase.org
Contact: President
The ASE was founded in 1977 as a nonprofit coalition of business,
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
197

governmental, environmental, and consumer leaders focused on
the role of energy efficiency as a cost-effective strategy. The al-
liance has an energy-efficient headquarters building with ad-
vanced technologies to make it 50 percent more efficient than the
typical office suite.
Amazon Conservation Association
1731 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20009
(202) 234–2356
www.amazonconservation.org
Contact: Executive Director
Since 1999, the Amazon Conservation Association has imple-
mented field-based scientific and socioeconomic programs to in-
tegrate research with natural resources and conservation. The
group also collaborates with forest users and communities to im-
prove their resource management practices, encouraging and fa-
cilitating sustainable development.
Amazon Conservation Team
4211 N. Fairfax Drive
Arlington, VA 22203
(703) 522–4684
www.amazonteam.org
Contact: Executive Director
By working in partnership with indigenous people, ACT’s mis-
sion is to conserve biodiversity, health, and culture in the Amazon
and other ecosystems of tropical and subtropical America. The or-
ganization also supports the creation of nature reserves to ensure
the protection of critical habitat areas.
American Coal Foundation
101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Suite 525E
Washington, DC 20001–2133
(202) 463–9785
www.teachcoal.org
Supported by the coal industry, the foundation is a nonprofit or-
ganization providing educational materials on how coal can be
used in an environmentally sensitive manner as a part of the na-
tion’s fuel sources.
198
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

American Conservation Association
1200 New York Avenue, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 289–2431
(no website)
Contact: Executive Director
This is an educational and scientific research organization whose
goal is to advance the cause of conservation of natural resources
and to ensure that these resources are available for public use.
American Forage and Grassland Council
PO Box 94
Georgetown, TX 78627
(800) 944–2342
www.afgc.org
Contact: Director
The council supports the idea that livestock can be raised eco-
nomically and in an environmentally sustainable manner
through stewardship and sound agricultural practices.
American Forest Foundation
1111 Nineteenth Street, NW, Suite 780
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 463–2462
www.affoundation.org
Contact: Staff
Chartered in 1982, AFF is a nonprofit organization whose pur-
pose is to encourage long-term stewardship of natural resources.
It coordinates environmental education and a national habitat
conservation program, supported by grants from foundations,
government agencies, and corporations.
American Forests
PO Box 2000
Washington, DC 20013
(202) 955–4500
www.americanforests.org
Contact: Director
Forest restoration and urban forestry are two of the major projects
undertaken by the group, which also advocates positions on
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
199

issues relating to national forests, community forest activities,
and ecosystems.
American Gas Foundation
400 N. Capitol Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 824–7270
www.gasfoundation.org
Contact: Chairman of the Board
As the voice of the gas industry, this trade association strives to
be an independent source of information, research, and pro-
grams on energy and environmental issues, with a particular em-
phasis on natural gas. Founded in 1989, the group conducts ex-
ecutive-level forums and events for its 195 local energy utility
companies serving more than 56 million homes, businesses, and
industries.
American Grassfed Association
PO Box 400
Kiowa, CO 80117
(877) 774–7277
www.americangrassfed.org
Contact: President
Through research, outreach, communication, and marketing, the
association promotes the use of grass as a source of nutrition for
livestock, identifying the benefits of grassland for animals, con-
sumers, and the environment.
American Hiking Society
1422 Fenwick Lane
Silver Spring, MD 20910
(301) 565–6704
www.americanhiking.org
Contact: Staff
The AHS represents the interests of thousands of trail users, and
cooperates with federal, state, and local agencies and organiza-
tions to maintain trails throughout the nation. Much of the work
is done by volunteers who repair trails and pathways for AHS
members and for other users. AHS lobbies to protect existing trail
networks and to expand trails on public lands.
200
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

American Land Conservancy
250 Montgomery Street, Suite 210
San Francisco, CA 94104
(415) 912–3660
www.alcnet.org
Contact: President
As a private, nonprofit organization, the conservancy supports
the development of partnerships to link land trusts, public lands
agencies, and private land owners to protect natural resources
and provide strategies for effective conservation solutions.
American Land Rights Association
PO Box 400
Battle Ground, WA 98604
(360) 687–3087
www.landrights.org
Founded in 1978 as a grassroots organization comprised of na-
tional park inholders, the group now works to maintain access to
public lands, protect private property rights, and advocate the
wise use of resources in the United States.
American Lands Alliance
726 Seventh Street, SE
Washington, DC 20003
(202) 547–9400
www.americanlands.org
Contact: Executive Director
American Lands’ programs are designed to protect and restore
functioning ecosystems and address the underlying threats to
them. Its programs rely on science-based solutions for healing na-
tive forests, grasslands, and wetlands by providing a clearing-
house on information and facilitating partnerships among
groups.
American Water Resources Association
4 West Federal Street
Middleburg, VA 20118–1626
(540) 687–8390
www.awra.org
Contract: President
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
201

The AWRA is a nonprofit professional association founded in
1964 with a multidisciplinary membership of engineers, educa-
tors, foresters, biologists, ecologists, managers, and regulators. It
offers a balanced, professional approach to solving water re-
source challenges, including research, establishment of a common
meeting ground, and the collection and dissemination of ideas
and information.
American Wildlands
PO Box 6669
40 East Main Street, Suite 2
Bozeman, MT 59771
(406) 586–8175
www.wildlands.org
Contact: Executive Director
For more than twenty-five years American Wildlands, a science-
based regional conservation organization, has worked for on-
the-ground change and has successfully led numerous wilder-
ness and wild & scenic river initiatives throughout the American
West.
American Wind Energy Association
1001 14th Street, NW, 12th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
www.awea.org  
The 1,000 members of this trade association represent wind
power-plant developers, wind turbine manufacturers, utilities,
consultants, insurers, financial investors, researchers, and others
who advocate on behalf of wind energy projects around the world.
American Wood Council
1111 Nineteenth Street, NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 463–2766
www.awc.org
Contact: President
Part of the American Forest & Paper Association (formerly the
National Forest Products Association), the AWC is a trade group
whose mission is to increase the use of wood by ensuring the
broad regulatory acceptance of wood products, and influencing
public policies affecting the use of wood products.
202
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Ancient Forest International
PO Box 1850
Redway, CA 95560
(707) 923–3015
www.ancientforest.org
Contact: Director
This conservation alliance has conducted protection and preser-
vation projects in several countries, including Mexico, Ecuador,
Chile, and in the ancient forests of the United States. It fosters
awareness and study of critical forest ecosystems and habitats.
Appalachian Trail Conservancy
799 Washington Street
PO Box 807
Harpers Ferry, WV 25425–0807
(304) 535–6331
www.appalachiantrail.org
Contact: Staff
As a volunteer-based, private nonprofit organization, the ATC is
dedicated to conserving the Appalachian National Scenic Trail.
The organization’s mission is to ensure that future generations
enjoy the clean air and water, scenic vistas, wildlife, and oppor-
tunities for recreation along the Appalachian Trail corridor.
Argentina People and Nature Foundation
668 San Martin Avenue
Huerta Grande, Cordoba 5174
Argentina
www.argentinapeopleandnature.org
Contact: President
To safeguard the cultural and natural heritage of Argentina,
this group promotes the exchange of information, technology,
and financial support for natural resource protection for future
generations.
BIOCAPE
Kumaraperumal Vilai
South Tamarai Kulam, K.K. District
Tamil Nadu 629502
India
Contact: Secretary
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
203

The Biologists Association for Conservation and Public Education
has as its motto “Heal the World.” It is a nonprofit organization
in India that works to protect natural resources by establishing
rules for environmental protection and public education.
Blue Ribbon Coalition
1540 N. Arthur
Pocatello, ID 83204
(208) 233–6570
www.sharetrails.org
Contact: Executive Director
The group, founded in 1987, opposes the designation of addi-
tional protected wilderness areas, and is committed to defending
the right to use public lands for recreation.
Bluewater Network
300 Broadway, Suite 28
San Francisco, CA 94133
(415) 788–3666
www.bluewaternetwork.org
Contact: Director
Working in opposition to the use of personal watercraft and other
two-stroke engine-motored snowmobiles and off-highway vehi-
cles, this organization attempts to keep motorized vehicles out of
protected areas such as national parks.
Boreal Forest Network
3rd Floor, 303 Portage Avenue
Winnipeg, Manitoba R3B 1E7
Canada
(204) 947–3081
www.borealnet.org
Contact: Director
BFN is the North American affiliate of the Taiga Rescue Network.
By working with indigenous people living in the Boreal Forest of
North America, the organization’s aim is to protect primary intact
boreal forests.
204
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

California Wilderness Coalition
1212 Broadway, Suite 1700
Oakland, CA 94612
(510) 451–1450
Contact: Executive Director
The California Wilderness Coalition is the only organization ded-
icated to protecting California’s wild places and native biodiver-
sity on a statewide level. Through advocacy and public educa-
tion, CWC builds support for threatened wild places, from oak
woodlands to ancient forests and deserts, coordinating its efforts
with community leaders, businesses, local organizations, and
policy-makers.
Ceiba Foundation for Tropical Conservation
2319 N. Cleveland
Chicago, IL 60614
(773) 871–3798
www.ceiba.org
Contact: Director
Ceiba, a name taken from a giant tree found in tropical forests,
was founded in 1997 to protect tropical habitats and to conserve
their plants and animals in South and Central America. They
sponsor scientific research, provide public education, and em-
phasize community-based projects to empower landowners and
to encourage them to participate actively in sustainable land
management. 
Center for Biological Diversity
PO Box 710
Tucson, AZ 85702–0710
(520) 623–5252
www.biologicaldiversity.org
Contact: Executive Director
Although known primarily for its efforts to protect threatened
and endangered species, the Center for Biological Diversity
(CBD) considers the monitoring of public lands grazing one of its
top priorities because of its impact on wildlife. The group
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
205

opposes what it calls corporate welfare for the ranching industry
—subsidies given to livestock owners that allow them to graze on
public lands at rates considerably below the fees charged for pri-
vate land grazing.
Center for Science in Public Participation
224 North Church Avenue
Bozeman, MT 59715
(406) 585–9854
www.csp2.org
Contact: Director
The center provides technical support, resources, and advice to
grassroots organizations, nongovernmental organizations, regu-
latory agencies, businesses, and indigenous communities on nat-
ural resource issues, especially those relating to mining. Its goal is
to give citizens information so they can make informed and
proactive decisions on natural resource protection and develop-
ment issues, and to ensure that extractive industry practices fol-
low the highest standards.
Coal Operators and Associates
PO Box 3158
Pikeville, KY 41502
(606) 432–2161
www.miningusa.com/coa
Contact: President
Working for the welfare of the coal industry, the organization
serves as a source of information for owners and operators, and
provides representation in policy-making for its members.
Colorado Environmental Coalition
1536 Wynkoop Street # 5C
Denver, CO 80202
(305) 534–7066
www.ourcolorado.org
Contact: Executive Director
The Colorado Environmental Coalition’s goal is to protect the
state’s natural heritage and quality of life. Every year, the coali-
tion mobilizes thousands of organizations and individuals who
care deeply about Colorado.
206
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Conservation Fund
1655 N. Ft. Meyer Drive, Suite 1300
Arlington, VA 22209–2156
(703) 525–4610
www.conservationfund.org
Contact: Executive Director
Established in 1985, this organization works as a partner to pub-
lic agencies and nonprofit groups to acquire property from
landowners to provide protection to natural resources, wildlife
habitat, historical sites, recreation areas, and open space.
Conservation International
1919 M Street, NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20036
(800) 406–2306
www.conservation.org
Contact: Chief Executive Officer
Although based in the United States as a nonprofit organization,
Conservation International works in more than forty countries on
four continents to preserve the earth’s natural heritage. Its staff
work in areas termed “biodiversity hot spots” in which animals,
plants, and habitats are most at risk. These hot spots also include
marine regions.
Conservation Northwest
1208 Bay Street #201
Bellingham, WA 98225–4301
(360) 671–9950
www.conservationnw.org
Contact: Executive Director
Conservation Northwest (formerly Northwest Ecosystem Al-
liance) was founded in 1988 and now has more than 8,000 mem-
bers. In the last decade, Conservation Northwest has fought to
maintain the ecological integrity of the Northwest’s wildland, es-
tablishing itself as one of America’s major regional conservation
forces, combining organizing, mass media, and science skills with
innovative strategy and fieldwork.
Crude Accountability
PO Box 2345
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
207

Alexandria, VA 22301
(703) 299–0854
www.crudeaccountability.org
Contact: Staff
The U.S.-based organization works with grassroots activists in
the Caspian region to ensure environmental justice for local com-
munities affected by oil development. Its focus is on bringing
skills, training, and resources to small communities that have lit-
tle access to the global environmental movement.
Diamond High Council
Hovenierstraat 22
BE–2018 Antwerp Belgium
www.hrd.be
Contact: Director
This industry organization provides training and certification on
diamond grading, gemstone reports, research, and policy direc-
tion.
Domestic Petroleum Council
101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20001–2133
(202) 742–4300
www.dpcusa.org
Contact: President
The nation’s twenty-four largest independent natural gas and
crude oil exploration and production companies are represented
by this trade association. The group encourages responsible ex-
ploration, development, and production to meet consumer needs,
and are leaders in developing technology for offshore production.
Earth Island Institute
300 Broadway, Suite 28
San Francisco, CA 94133
(415) 788–3666
www.earthisland.org
Contact: Executive Director
Founded by noted conservation activist David Brower after he
left the Sierra Club, the institute promotes citizen action through
a worldwide network of projects, from logging alerts and endan-
208
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

gered species trafficking to encouraging public participation in
environmental activism.
Earthjustice Legal Defense Fund
426 17th Street, Sixth Floor
Oakland, CA 94612–2820
(510) 550–6700
www.earthjustice.org
Contact: Executive Director
Earthjustice is the nonprofit law firm for the environment, repre-
senting—without charge—hundreds of public interest clients,
large and small. Earthjustice works through the courts to safe-
guard public lands, national forests, parks, and wilderness areas;
to reduce air and water pollution; to prevent toxic contamination;
and to preserve endangered species and wildlife habitat.
Earthstewards Network
Box 10697
Bainbridge Island, WA 98110
(206) 842–7986
www.earthstewards.org
Contact: Program Director
This international nongovernmental organization is dedicated to
providing the resources for conflict resolution of environmental
disputes on a global level. It works on issues such as forest pro-
tection, urban forestry, and the rights of indigenous peoples to
forest resources.
Earthworks
1612 K Street, NW, Suite 808
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 887–1872
www.mineralpolicy.org
Contact: Staff
This organization focuses on the impacts of mining and oil and
gas development both in the United States and on an interna-
tional level. Whether protesting cyanide contamination resulting
from the processing of gold or efforts to expand corporate own-
ership of public lands, Earthworks monitors and publicizes activ-
ities it perceives as detrimental uses of natural resources.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
209

Ecological Society of America
1707 H Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 833–8773
www.esa.org
Contact: President
This nonpartisan nonprofit organization was founded in 1915 to
promote ecological science and infuse ecological knowledge into
environmental decision-making. Its 9,000 members work to sup-
port the Sustainable Biosphere Initiative, founded in 1992, to
work with governmental agencies and the private sector in natu-
ral resource management, restoration, and sustainability.
Energy Future Coalition
1225 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 463–1947
www.energyfuturecoalition.org
Contact: Executive Director
The coalition works to reduce the world’s dependence on oil
through a partnership of stakeholders representing business,
labor, and nongovernmental organizations to take practical steps
to replace petroleum and gas used in the production of fuels,
chemicals, and plastics.
Environmental Defense
257 Park Avenue, South
New York, NY 10010
(212) 505–2100
www.environmentaldefense.org
Contact: Staff
By linking science, economics, and law, Environmental Defense
works to protect the environmental rights of citizens to clean air,
water, safe food, and a flourishing ecosystem.
Environmental Working Group
1436 U Street, NW, Suite 100
Washington, DC 20009
(202) 667–6982
www.ewg.org
Contact: Director
210
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Since 1993, the organization has consisted of a team of scientists,
engineers, policy experts, lawyers, and computer analysts who
review government reports and data relating to science and reg-
ulations.
Forest Action Network
Box 625
Bella Coola
Nuxalk Territory
British Columbia Canada V0T 1C0
www.fanweb.org
Contact: Staff
FAN is a network of activists working to protect the forested coast
of British Columbia, Canada, especially the Great Bear Rainforest.
The group coalesced in 1993 with a direct action protest against
road building in a pristine valley, and since then has attempted to
stop raw log exports. An emphasis has now been placed on work-
ing with leaders of a dozen First Nations.
Forest Guardians
312 Montezuma
Santa Fe, NM 87501
(505) 988–9126
www.fguardians.org
Contact: Executive Director
Often considered one of the most contentious environmental or-
ganizations in the United States, Forest Guardians focuses on the
preservation and restoration of native wildlands and wildlife in
the American Southwest. Specific programs address the issues of
forests, river restoration, endangered species, deserts and grass-
lands, and grazing reform.
Forest Guild
PO Box 519
Santa Fe, NM 87504
(505) 983–8992
www.foreststewardsguild.org
Contact: Director
A passion for forests and land stewardship is the common bond
of the members of this nonprofit organization. Its aim is to pro-
mote economically, ecologically, socially responsible forestry as a
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
211

way of maintaining the integrity of forest ecosystems and the
human communities dependent upon them. It provides training,
policy analysis, and research for its members in the United States
and Canada.
Forest Service Employees for Environmental Ethics
PO Box 11615
Eugene, OR 97440
(541) 484–3170
www.fseee.org
Contact: Executive Director
The government employees and concerned citizens of FSEEE
focus on holding the U.S. Forest Service accountable to the pub-
lic, working toward an ecologically and economically sustainable
value system for the nation’s land management.
Forests and the European Union Resource Network
1C Fosseway Business Center
Stratford Road, Moreton-in-Marsh
Gloustershire GL56 9NQ
United Kingdom
www.fern.org
Contact: Staff
FERN works to create changes in policies and practices that im-
pact forests and forest peoples’ rights globally. It focuses on the
European Union’s policies dealing with the underlying causes of
forest loss, conducting research, analysis, facilitation, coordina-
tion, support, education, and advocacy.
Forests Forever
50 First Street, Suite 401
San Francisco, CA 94105
(415) 974–3636
www.forestsforeever.org 
Contact: Executive Director
The organization’s major campaign is to save California’s na-
tional forest lands by opposing logging. Its strategies include ed-
ucation outreach, legislative monitoring and lobbying, and elec-
toral activities.
212
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Freshwater Action Network
Prince Consort House, Seventh Floor
27–29 Albert Embankment
London SE1 7UB
United Kingdom
www.freshwateraction.net
Contact: Director
The purpose of the network is to assist community-based organ-
izations to strengthen civil society participation in international
water policy formulation. It works with a global network of non-
governmental organizations providing training and advocacy.
Friends of the Environment for Development and
Sustainability
56-B Quezon Street, Don Domingo Maddela
Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya
Philippines
Contact: Staff
FRIENDS, formed in 1999, works to implement conservation ac-
tivities in the Palali-mamparang Mountain Range in the province.
It also deals with environmental management within the Sierra
Madre Biodiversity Corridor, part of the Philippine Biodiversity
Conservation Priority Project.
Fundacion Ambiente y Recursos Naturales
Monroe 2142 1 B (1428)
Buenos Aires, Argentina
www.farn.org.ar
Contact: Director
FARN is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to promote
sustainable development through policy, law, and institutional
organization. Through projects such as Sea and Sky, the group co-
ordinates conferences and workshops on natural resources and
development.
Gas Processors Suppliers Association
6526 E. 60th Street
Tulsa, OK 74145
(918) 493–3872
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
213

www.gasprocessors.com
Contact: President
As a forum for the exchange of information about global gas pro-
cessing, this group expands technical knowledge, provides infor-
mation about best practices for the industry, analyzes legislation
and regulations, and works to enhance perspectives on the market.
Global Forest Watch
10 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 729–7600
www.globalforestwatch.org
Contact: Director
An initiative of the World Resources Institute, this project pro-
vides technical assistance and support for preserving forest
ecosystems around the world. One of its primary resources is the
use of global satellite imagery that assists planners and policy-
makers in identifying current forest cover and remaining frontier
forests, especially in remote areas.
Global Policy Forum
777 United Nations Plaza, Suite 3D
New York, NY 10017
(212) 557–3161
www.globalpolicy.org
Contact: Executive Director
This nongovernmental organization monitors policy-making at
the United Nations, promotes accountability of global decisions,
educates and mobilizes for global citizen participation, and advo-
cates on vital issues of international peace and justice.
Global Water
3600 S. Harbor Boulevard #514
Oxnard, CA 93035
(805) 985–3057
www.globalwater.org
Contact: Staff
By helping people to help themselves, the organization links the
need for adequate supplies of water with disease, hunger, and
poverty on a global level.
214
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Global Water Research Coalition
Alliance House
12 Caxton Street
London SW1H 0QS
United Kingdom
www.globalwaterresearchcoalition.net
Contact: Director
As its name implies, this group promotes international coopera-
tion and collaboration on water issues. The coalition was organ-
ized in 2002 in association with numerous nongovernmental as-
sociations and researchers to disseminate information and
sponsor meetings.
Grazing Lands Conservation Initiative
501 W. Felix Street, Building 23
Ft. Worth, TX 76115
(817) 509–3318
www.glci.org
Contact: National Coordinator
Established in 1991, this group seeks to provide technical assis-
tance to livestock owners on privately owned land to increase the
awareness of grazing land resources. It implements its mission
through coalitions at the local, state, and national levels including
livestock owners, scientists, environmental groups, and state and
federal agencies.
Great Old Broads for Wilderness
PO Box 2924
Durango, CO 81302
(970) 385–8303
www.greatoldbroads.org
Contact: Staff
Although this group’s goal is to preserve the wilderness for fu-
ture generations, its activities center around livestock grazing, en-
couraging the voluntary buyout and retirement of grazing per-
mits to potentially heal public lands that have been degraded.
They support the use of sound scientific research to guide public
agencies in enforcing grazing management plans.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
215

Greater Yellowstone Coalition
PO Box 1874
Bozeman, MT 59771
(406) 686–1593
www.greateryellowstone.org
Contact: Executive Director
The Greater Yellowstone Coalition (GYC) focuses on protecting
the land, water, and wildlife of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosys-
tem. GYC was founded in 1983 on the premise that an ecosystem
will remain healthy and wild only if it is kept whole. Since that
time the organization has emerged as a nationally known advo-
cate for the idea that ecosystem-level sustainability should guide
the management of the region’s public and private lands.
Heritage Forests Campaign
1200 Eighteenth Street, NW, Fifth Floor
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 887–8800
www.ourforests.org
Contact: Executive Director
The Heritage Forests Campaign is an alliance of conservationists,
wildlife advocates, clergy, educators, scientists, and other Ameri-
cans working together to uphold protection of the national forests.
Heritage Forests Campaign’s partners include the Alaska Rainfor-
est Coalition, American Hiking Society, Earthjustice, National En-
vironmental Trust, National Audubon Society, Natural Resources
Defense Council, U.S. PIRG, and the Wilderness Society.
High Country Citizens’ Alliance
PO Box 1066
Crested Butte, CO 81224
(970) 349–7104
www.hcaonline.org
Contact: Executive Director
This group works with stakeholders to improve rangeland
health, seeking agency enforcement of existing grazing stan-
dards, encouraging education, supporting intensive management
and voluntary retirement of grazing allotments.
Idaho Conservation League
PO Box 844
216
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Boise, ID 83701
(208) 345–6933
www.wildidaho.org
Contact: Program Director
The Idaho Conservation League seeks to preserve Idaho’s clean
water, wilderness, and quality of life through citizen action, pub-
lic education, and professional advocacy.
Independent Petroleum Association of America
1201 Fifteenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 857–4722
www.ipaa.org
Contact: Director
Thousands of independent oil and natural gas producers are rep-
resented by this trade association, which was founded in 1929 in
Colorado. They represent 85 percent of the wells in the United
States and produce 65 percent of the country’s natural gas and 40
percent of its oil. The group serves as a national advocate for its
members and compiles information about the domestic explo-
ration and production industry.
Institute for Problems of Natural Resource Use and Ecology
10 Starabarysauski Trakt
Minsk BY–220114
Republic of Belarus
www.ecology.ac.by
Contact: Director
Founded in 1932, this research institute develops ecologically safe
and resource-saving technologies for mining and processing.
Instituto Terra
Fazenda Bulcao-CX Postal–005
CEP 35200–000
Almores, MG, Brazil
www.institutoterra.org
Contact: Director
Created in 1998 in the Rio Doce Valley of Brazil, the institute is
committed to creating long-term environmental and social
change to return the land and resources to its once-rich diversity.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
217

It is a leading center for environmental education, sustainable de-
velopment, and social mobilization in Brazil.
International Association of Oil and Gas Producers
209–215 Blackfriars Road
London SE1 8NL
United Kingdom
www.ogp.org.uk
Contact: Director
This international trade association represents the producers of
more than half of the world’s oil and about one-third of global
natural gas production.
International Gas Union
PO Box 550
Agern Alle 24–26
2970 Hoersholm Denmark
www.igu.org
Contact: Director
Founded in 1931, the IGU is registered in Switzerland and oper-
ates its secretariat in Denmark. The organization promotes the
technical and economic progress of the natural gas industry
through associations in sixty-seven countries, and it deals with
the exploration and production of gas, gas storage, distribution
and transmission, sustainable development, and developing mar-
kets for natural gas.
International Tropical Timber Organization
International Organizations Center, 5th Floor
1–1–1 Minato-Mirai, Nishi-ku
Yokahama, 220–0012 Japan
www.itto.org
Contact: Director
Nearly fifty governments participate in the activities of the ITTO,
which works to formulate and implement various treaties and
agreements among countries that produce or import tropical
timber.
International Water Resources Association
4535 Faner Hall, MC 4516
Southern Illinois University
218
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Carbondale, IL 62901–4516
(618) 453–5138
www.iwra.siu.edu/worldwater
Contact: Executive Director
The IWRI is a nonprofit, nongovernmental organization hosted
by Southern Illinois University to promote sustained water use
on an international scale. More than 110 countries are represented
as part of the group’s efforts to promote water resources educa-
tion and networking, and to provide an international forum on
water resources.
Izaak Walton League
707 Conservation Lane
Gaithersburg, MD 20878
(301) 548–0150
www.iwla.org
Contact: Executive Director
The 50,000 members of the IWL belong to one of the nation’s old-
est conservation organizations. Its grassroots approach to the sus-
tainability of natural resources brings together hunters, photog-
raphers, anglers, birders, and other outdoor enthusiasts.
Jewelers Vigilance Committee
25 West 45th Street, Suite 1406
New York, NY 10036
(212) 997–2002
www.jvclegal.org
Contact: President
As a nonprofit trade association representing the jewelry indus-
try, this organization, founded in 1912, serves as a resource for
consumers and dealers, providing compliance information relat-
ing to diamond issues.
Lifewater International
3765 S. Higuera Street #120
San Luis Obispo, CA 93401
(805) 541–6634
www.lifewater.org
Contact: Staff
Since 1979, the volunteers and trainers in this nongovernmental
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
219

organization have served more than 1 million people in develop-
ing countries by teaching local communities how to improve their
drinking water systems in areas in which clean water is a scarce
resource.
Lignite Energy Council
1016 Owens Avenue
PO Box 2277
Bismarck, ND 58502
(701) 258–7177
www.lignite.com
Contact: Director
The LEC represents coal and natural gas producers in an effort to
enhance resources and mining by-products for use in electricity
generation in the United States.
Mineral Information Institute
501 Violet Street
Golden, CO 80401
(303) 277–9190
www.mii.org
Contact: Director
The MII is focused on educational programs relating to natural
resources that provide an understanding of the role of minerals
and energy in society, and how they can be produced in an envi-
ronmentally and socially responsible way.
National Association of State Foresters
444 N. Capitol Street, NW, Suite 540
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 624–5415
www.stateforesters.org
Contact: Executive Director
Working with nonindustrial private forest landowners, this
group provides technical assistance, develops outreach and edu-
cation programs, and assists in urban and community forestry.
National Audubon Society
700 Broadway
New York, NY 10003
(212) 979–3000
220
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

www.audubon.org
Contact: Executive Director
Audubon’s mission is to conserve and restore natural ecosystems,
with a focus on birds, wildlife, and their habitats for the benefit of
humanity and the earth’s biological diversity. The group’s na-
tional network of community-based nature centers and chapters
and scientific and educational programs provide advocacy in be-
half of areas sustaining important bird populations.
National Cattlemen’s Beef Association
444 North Michigan Avenue, Suite 1800
Chicago, IL 60611
(312) 467–5520
www.beefusa.org
Contact: Executive Director
Organized in 1898, this is one of the oldest and most established
industry groups, representing more than 1 million cattle farmers
and ranchers. It seeks a profitable beef industry through state beef
councils, an extensive research program, and political advocacy
to advance its members’ interests.
National Commission on Science for Sustainable Forestry
1707 H Street, NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 207–0007
www.ncseonline.org
Contact: Director
The NCSSF’s mission is to improve the research and scientific
basis relating to sustainable forestry. It sponsors workshops and
symposia but maintains a position of nonadvocacy in represent-
ing forest managers.
National Energy Foundation
3676 California Avenue, Suite A117
Salt Lake City, UT 84104
(800) 616–8326
www.nef1.org
Contact: President
The foundation is a tax-exempt, publicly supported education
group that provides curriculum, training, and other support to
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
221

facilitate an understanding of energy, natural resources, and the
environment.
National Environmental Trust
1200 Eighteenth Street, NW, Fifth Floor
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 887–8800
www.net.org
Contact: President
The National Environmental Trust (NET) is a nonprofit, nonpar-
tisan organization established in 1994 to inform citizens about en-
vironmental problems and how they affect health and quality of
life. NET’s public education campaigns use modern communica-
tion techniques and the latest scientific studies to translate com-
plex environmental issues for citizens to localize the impacts of
national problems, as well as to highlight opportunities for Amer-
icans to engage in the policy-making process.
National Forest Foundation
Building 27, Suite #3
Fort Missoula Road
Missoula, MT 59804
(406) 542–2805
www.natlforests.org
Contact: Director
This group’s focus on building partnerships to protect and restore
grasslands and national forests makes it both an advocate for
change and a resource for other organizations.
National Mining Association
101 Constitution Avenue, NW
Suite 500 East
Washington, DC 20001-2133
(202) 463–2600
www.nma.org
Contact: President
Representing more than 325 corporations involved in the mining
industry, this nonprofit group was formed in 1995 with the
merger of the National Coal Association and the American Min-
ing Congress. Its purpose is to develop political support for the
mining industry to utilize the nation’s mineral resources.
222
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

National Park Trust
51 Monroe Street, Suite 110
Rockville, MD 20850
(301) 279–PARK
www.parktrust.org
Contact: Director
This private citizen organization works in cooperation with the
National Park Service to protect the resources within and around
national parks, historic sites, and natural areas.
National Parks Conservation Association
1300 Nineteenth Street, NW, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
(800) 628–7275
www.npca.org
Contact: President
One of the nation’s oldest and largest conservation organizations,
the association is dedicated to providing support for the national
park system, advocating for designations, infrastructure develop-
ment and maintenance, preservation, and lobbying members of
Congress.
National Public Lands Grazing Campaign
1213 Iowa Street
Ashland, OR 97520
(541) 201–0053
www.publiclandsranching.org
Contact: Executive Director
This organization has served at the forefront of efforts to end live-
stock grazing on public lands by educating the public about how
livestock affect the ecological, economic, and fiscal environment,
seeking enforcement of existing grazing management laws, and
calling for the amendment of federal law to allow the voluntary
buyout of grazing permits.
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190–5362
(703) 438–6000
www.nwf.org
Contact: President
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
223

Founded in 1936, the NWF is one of the early mainstream envi-
ronmental organizations in the United States. Over the years it
has expanded its agenda from protection of species and habitats
to dozens of programs in forty-seven states and territories, in-
cluding efforts to stop oil development in the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge and other public lands.
Native Forest Network
PO Box 8251
Missoula, MT 59807
(406) 251–2385
www.nativeforest.org
Contact: Director
The NFN is a collaborative partnership of organizations working
to protect native forests throughout the world. It serves as an ad-
vocacy group, and provides resources for organizations to help
them promote forest resources.
Native Habitat
PO Box 100671
Ft. Worth, TX 70185
www.nativehabitat.org
Contact: President
Composed of livestock managers, students, environmental group
members, wildlife biologists, and scientists, this grassroots group
supports the development of healthy rangelands to protect natu-
ral resources from degradation through sustainable practices.
Natural Resources Defense Council
40 W. Twentieth Street
New York, NY 10011
(212) 727–2700
www.nrdc.org
Contact: Executive Director
NRDC is considered by many to be the nation’s most effective en-
vironmental action organization. The group uses law, science,
and the support of more than 1 million members and online ac-
tivists to protect the planet’s wildlife and wild places and to en-
sure a safe and healthy environment for all living things.
224
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Nature Conservancy
4245 N. Fairfax Drive, Suite 100
Arlington, VA 22203
(877) 812–3698
www.nature.org
Contact: Chairman, Board of Directors
TNC’s mission is to preserve the plants, animals, and natural
communities that represent the diversity of life on earth by pro-
tecting the lands and waters they need to survive. The primary
mechanism for doing so is through community engagement.
New Forests Project
731 Eighth Street, SE
Washington, DC 20003
(202) 547–3800
www.newforestsproject.com
Contact: Director
By stressing the importance of trees to the Earth’s ecosystems, the
program provides information about forest resources, seeks to
provide rural communities in Central America with clean drink-
ing water, and sets up seed banks around the world.
Oil & Gas Accountability Project
863 Main Avenue
Durango, CO 81301
(970) 259–3353
www.ogap.org
Contact: Executive Director
This organization works with communities across the Rocky
Mountain West to reduce the social, economic, and environmen-
tal problems caused by oil and gas development. With offices in
both Colorado and Montana, OGAP works as a watchdog citi-
zens’ group to inform communities about toxic chemicals associ-
ated with industry activities.
Oregon Natural Desert Association
16 Kansas Avenue
Bend, OR 97701
(541) 330–2638
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
225

www.onda.org
Contact: Executive Director
One of the few organizations devoted to the protection of native
deserts, this group was organized in the mid-1980s to oppose the
Bureau of Land Management’s plans to designate wilderness
study areas in eastern Oregon. A nonprofit organization, the as-
sociation monitors livestock grazing, mining, and geothermal de-
velopment.
Oregon Natural Resources Council
5825 North Greeley Avenue
Portland, OR 97217–4145
(503) 283–6343
www.onrc.org
Contact: Executive Director
Founded in 1974, the ONRC has a mission of aggressively pro-
tecting and restoring Oregon’s wildlands, wildlife, and waters as
an enduring legacy. ONRC has been instrumental in securing per-
manent legislative protection for some of Oregon’s most precious
landscapes, including nearly 1.5 million acres of wilderness, 1,700
miles of wild and scenic rivers, and more than 58 million acres of
roadless areas across the country. 
Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment,
and Security
654 13th Street, Preservation Park
Oakland, CA 94612
(510) 251–1600
www.pacinst.org
Contact: President
Founded in 1987, the institute hosts a website that provides a
chronology describing ways in which water has been fought over,
used as a weapon, or targeted in violent conflict.
Partners in Parks
PO Box 130
Paonia, CO 81428
(970) 527-6675
www.partnersinparks.org
Contact: Staff
226
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

By forging relationships with professionals involved in public
land management, this organization focuses on the study and in-
terpretation of natural resources in cooperation with the National
Park Service.
Partnership Africa Canada
323 Chapel Street
Ottawa, Ontario
K1N 7Z2 Canada
(613) 237–6768
www.pacweb.org
Contact: Executive Director
The partnership was created in 1986 to work with organizations
in Africa, Canada, and internationally to promote sustainable use
of natural resources and development in Africa. It funds innova-
tive projects and conducts policy research relating to human
rights and human security, including the diamond trade.
Pinchot Institute for Conservation
1616 Park Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 797–6580
www.pinchot.org
Contact: Director
Named after the first chief of the U.S. Forest Service, the Pinchot
Institute brings together the nation’s leading land managers,
foresters, conservationists, and researchers to forge new forest
policy directions.
Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility
2001 S Street, NW, Suite 570
Washington, DC 20009
(202) 265–4192
www.peer.org
Contact: Executive Director
Local, state, and federal employees working for resource man-
agement agencies are represented in this national, nonprofit or-
ganization that serves as a watchdog for the public. It supports
public employees who speak out about issues relating to natural
resource management, and provides legal representation to whis-
tle blowers bringing attention to environmental enforcement.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
227

Quincy Library Group
159 Lawrence Street
PO Box 11500
Quincy, CA 95971
(530) 283–7769
www.qlg.org
Contact: Project Manager
The timber wars of the late 1980s and early 1990s were the impe-
tus behind the formation of the Quincy Library Group, founded in
1992. The organization focuses on three counties in northeastern
California, and began with recommendations on how best to man-
age the national forests while maintaining community stability.
Rainforest Foundation USA
32 Broadway, Suite 1614
New York, NY 10004
(212) 431–9098
www.rainforestfoundation.org
Contact: Director
Based in New York, the Rainforest Foundation has sister organi-
zations in the United Kingdom and in Norway, dedicated to pro-
tecting the rights of rain forest groups in their efforts to protect
their environment. Founded in 1989, RF assists local grassroots
organizations with current projects in Colombia, Guyana, Suri-
name, Brazil, and Ecuador.
RangeNet
2850 SW Cedar Hills Boulevard
Beaverton, OR 97005
www.rangenet.org
Contact: Staff
This network of individuals working to improve the ecological con-
ditions of America’s public rangelands is associated with the West-
ern Watersheds Project, based in Hailey, Idaho. RangeNet serves as
a communications and information link for rangeland activists;
membership is available through nomination and invitation.
Resource Renewal Institute
Fort Mason Center, Building D
San Francisco, CA 94123
(415) 928–3774
228
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

www.rri.org
Contact: Executive Director
The institute develops innovative solutions for long-term conser-
vation and a sustainable future through programs such as De-
fense of Place, designed to create a principle in the minds of
Americans that protected lands will be protected forever.
Rocky Mountain Mineral Law Foundation
9191 Sheridan Boulevard, Suite 203
Westminster, CO 80031
(303) 321–8100
www.rmmlf.org
Contact: Staff
Founded in 1955 as an educational organization dedicated to pro-
viding scholarly research on the laws and issues affecting both
domestic and global minerals and water resources, the founda-
tion works with law schools, oil and gas companies, mining in-
terests, water and public land users, conservation groups, and
representatives of environmental protection agencies. It sponsors
short courses and publications by volunteers with specific ex-
pertise in natural resource law.
Saguaro Juniper Corporation
5707 E. Sixth Street
Tucson, AZ 85711
(520) 745–6025
www.saguaro-juniper.com
Contact: Staff
Founded in 1988, this small group of Arizona cattle ranchers
pooled their financial resources to purchase land along the San
Pedro River where they practice the protection of riparian areas,
grazing on a rotational basis, the humane treatment of animals,
and the resting of the land.
San Juan Citizens Alliance
PO Box 2461
10221⁄2 Main Avenue
Durango, CO 81302
(970) 259–3583
www.sanjuancitizens.org
Contact: Executive Director
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
229

With offices in both Colorado and New Mexico, the 500-member
group, founded in 1984, was established to provide a voice for en-
vironmental, economic, and social justice in the region. The group
is engaged in an effort to restore more than 2 million acres of wild
habitat in the San Juan Mountains, is opposing efforts for new gas
wells in the area near Farmington, New Mexico, and has success-
fully opposed development of the last wild valley in the San Juans.
Seacology
2009 Hopkins Street
Berkeley, CA 94707
(510) 559–3505
www.seacology.org
Contact: Staff
The staff and members of Seacology are dedicated to preserving
the endangered natural resources and biodiversity of the world’s
islands. An effort is made to conduct community-based projects
such as building schools in exchange for protection of the local
environment.
Sierra Club
85 Second Street, Second Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
(415) 977–5500
www.sierraclub.org
Contact: Executive Director
Founded in 1892, the Sierra Club promotes the protection of the
nation’s wilderness areas, including forests, national parks, recre-
ation areas, and natural resources. It is one of the major environ-
mental organizations in the United States, with a history of out-
reach and advocacy on key issues.
Society for Range Management
10030 West 27th Avenue
Wheat Ridge, CO 80215–6601
(303) 986–3309
www.rangelands.org
Contact: President
This membership-based organization develops policies and posi-
tion statements on issues relating to rangeland assessment and
230
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

monitoring, and provides training and technical assistance for
professional certification and leadership development.
Society of American Foresters
5400 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, MD 20814–2198
(301) 897–8720
www.safnet.org
Contact: President
Gifford Pinchot founded the SAF in 1900 as part of an effort to
professionalize forestry in the United States. Since that time the
organization has worked to promote the conservation ethic
through training, advocacy, outreach, and technology develop-
ment to ensure the availability of forest resources for future gen-
erations.
Soil and Water Conservation Society
945 SW Ankeny Road
Ankeny, IA 50023–9723
(515) 289–2331
www.swcs.org
Contact: Executive Director
Through research, education, and advocacy, this group seeks to
improve the practice of natural resource conservation, and repre-
sents the interests of ranchers, policy-makers, educators, plan-
ners, farmers, and students.
Southeast Alaska Conservation Council
419 Sixth Street, Suite 200
Juneau, AK 99801
(907) 586–6942
www.swcs.org
Contact: Executive Director
Founded in 1970, SEACC is a coalition of eighteen member
groups in fourteen communities, stretching along the coast from
Ketchikan to Yakutat, whose goal is to safeguard the sustainable
use of the region’s natural resources. Together with allied groups
and individuals, the organization tries to reduce clear-cutting on
the Tongass National Forest. 
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
231

Southern Appalachian Forest Coalition
46 Haywood Street, Suite 323
Asheville, NC 28801
(828) 252–9223
www.safc.org
Contact: Staff
The Southern Appalachian Forest Coalition (SAFC) is a nonprofit
organization formed in 1994 to address the increasing threats fac-
ing Southern Appalachian public lands. The objectives of the
coalition are to create a unified and compelling regional conser-
vation vision; to achieve greater representation in Washington,
D.C.; and to strengthen grassroots groups with the tools and lead-
ership needed to protect forests.
Southern Pine Council
2900 Indiana Avenue
Kenner, LA 70065–4464
(504) 443–4464
www.southernpine.com
Contact: Staff
The council is a joint promotional body coordinated and sup-
ported by manufacturers of southern pine lumber who are also
members of the Southern Forest Products Association and South-
eastern Lumber Manufacturers Association. The group works to
provide product information, lumber applications, and technical
assistance to domestic and international buyers.
Southern Rockies Conservation Alliance
1660 Wynkoop Street, Suite 850
Denver, CO 80202
(303) 650–5818
www.southernrockies.org
Contact: Staff
The SRCA is a coalition of conservation and recreation organiza-
tions focusing on the development and implementation of coor-
dinated, comprehensive, and effective campaigns to protect
wilderness quality lands, conserve and restore biodiversity, en-
sure responsible management of motorized recreation, promote
healthy forest ecosystems, and restore natural fire regimes.
232
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Stewards of the Range
PO Box 490
Meridian, ID 83680–0490
(208) 855–0707
www.stewards.us
Contact: Executive Director
Incorporated as a nonprofit organization, Stewards was created
in 1992 to litigate on behalf of landowners and protect private
property rights. It works with property owners, ranchers, and
others seeking to challenge environmental regulations that result
in a taking of private land or property without compensation.
Trees for the Future
PO Box 7027
Silver Spring, MD 20907
(301) 565–0630
www.treesftf.org
Contact: Staff
After land has been degraded, technicians from this organization
provide assistance by introducing environmentally sustainable
management projects, providing planting materials, and educat-
ing the public about deforestation in areas such as the Amazon.
Tropical Forest Foundation
2121 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite 200
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 518–8834
www.tropicalforestfoundation.org
Contact: Executive Director
The foundation is a nonprofit education institution that is widely
recognized for developing model programs and teaching the
principles of sustainable forest management. Its emphasis is on
encouraging the major international timber companies to incor-
porate reduced-impact logging as a more environmentally sensi-
tive alternative to conventional logging.
Washington Wilderness Coalition
123 NW 36th Street, Suite 220
Seattle, WA 98107
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
233

(206) 633–1992
www.wawild.org
Contact: Executive Director
The group works to preserve and restore wild areas in Washing-
ton State through citizen empowerment, support for grassroots
community groups, advocacy, and public education.
Western Clean Energy Campaign
2260 Baseline Road, Suite 205
Boulder, CO 80302
(303) 440–7517
www.westernresources.org
Contact: Director
Formed to oppose two dozen coal-fired power plants proposed in
the West, the group organizes local communities, builds coali-
tions, and uses the news media and legal challenges to stop
power plant expansion.
Western Forestry and Conservation Association
4033 SW Canyon Road
Portland, OR 97221
(503) 226–4562
www.westernforestry.org
Contact: Staff
The association works with professional foresters providing con-
tinuing education workshops and seminars throughout the Pa-
cific Northwest. It emphasizes the use of best practices for refor-
estation, management, and conservation.
Western Land Exchange Project
PO Box 95545
Seattle, WA 98145
(206) 325–3503
www.westlx.org
Contact: Staff
Research and outreach are the two primary strategies used by this
group, which monitors federal land exchanges, conveyances, and
sales so that the public interest is served and environmental laws
are upheld in the eleven Western states. The organization advo-
cates policy reform against agencies that undervalue public lands
234
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

or fail to protect the environment, by applying pressure for re-
form.
Western Resource Advocates
2260 Baseline Road, Suite 200
Boulder, CO 80302
(303) 444–1188
www.westernresourceadvocates.org
Contact: Executive Director
Since 1989, the WRA has served as a nonprofit environmental law
and policy organization dedicated to restoring and protecting the
natural environment of the American West. The group works to
develop strategic programs in three areas: water, energy, and
lands, collaborating with other environmental and community
groups, and by developing solutions that are appropriate to the
unique environmental, economic, and cultural framework of the
region.
Western Wood Products Association
522 SW Fifth Avenue, Suite 500
Portland, OR 97204–2122
(503) 224–3930
www.wwpa.org
Contact: President
This trade association represents softwood lumber manufacturers
in the twelve Western states and Alaska. Members have access to
information and technical assistance relating to timber produc-
tion, quality control, international trade, and support for sawmill
owners and lumber product users.
Wild Wilderness
248 NW Wilmington Avenue
Bend, OR 97701
(541) 385–5261
www.wildwilderness.org
Contact: Executive Director
In 1991, the organization started as local residents began partici-
pating in local Forest Service meetings and learned of a plan to
turn a local winter recreation area into a snowmobile park. Since
that time, the group has focused on opposition to the Forest Ser-
vice’s Fee Demonstration Program.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
235

Wilderness Society
1615 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
(800) THE–WILD
www.wilderness.org
Contact: Staff
The Wilderness Society, founded in 1935, advances its agenda
through a combination of science, advocacy, and education. Their
mission is to deliver to future generations an unspoiled legacy of
wild places, focusing on biological diversity; clean air and water;
and forests, rivers, and deserts. The staff brings together scientific
expertise, analysis, and advocacy at the highest levels to save,
protect, and restore America’s wilderness areas.
Wildlands Project
PO Box 455
Richmond, VT 05477
(802) 434–4077
www.twp.org
Contact: Director
With the motto “Reconnect, Restore, Rewild,” the Wildlands Pro-
ject seeks to create linkages to tie natural places together using
mosaics of public and private lands and voluntary partnerships.
Winrock International
2101 Riverfront Drive
Little Rock, AR 72202
(501) 280–3000
www.winrock.org
Contact: Staff
As a nonprofit organization, Winrock works with individuals and
communities worldwide to match innovative approaches in agri-
culture, natural resources management, and clean energy with
technology and ideas to benefit the poor and disadvantaged of
the world.
Woodland Trust
Autumn Park, Dysart Road
Grantham, Lincolnshire NG31 6LL
United Kingdom
236
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

www.woodland-trust.org.uk
Contact: Director
The trust is the United Kingdom’s leading conservation charity
dedicated to the protection of the native woodland heritage. Its
members are attempting to have the oak tree declared a national
icon, and working toward reforestation and restoration on both
the large and small scales.
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars:
Environmental Change and Security Project
1 Woodrow Wilson Plaza
1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20004-3027
(202) 691–4000
wwics.si.edu
Contact: Director
The Wilson Center studies the linkages among natural resources,
conflict, human health, and foreign policy, and provides links to
news, events, and publications, including scholarly research.
World Conservation Union
Rue Mauverney 28
Gland 1196
Switzerland
www.iucn.org
Contact: Director General
The World Conservation Union, also known as the International
Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources,
was founded in 1948 as a network of more than 1,000 representa-
tives of national governments and agencies, nongovernmental or-
ganizations, and scientists and experts from 181 countries. Its
mission is to encourage and assist stakeholders to make the use of
natural resources equitable and ecologically sustainable.
World Diamond Council
52 Vanderbilt Avenue, 19th Floor
New York, NY 10017
www.worlddiamondcouncil.org
Contact: Chairman
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
237

Meeting in Antwerp, Belgium, in July 2000, the members of the
International Diamond Manufacturers Association and the World
Federation of Diamond Bourses created the WDC to track the ex-
port and import of rough diamonds.
World Energy Council
Regency House, Fifth Floor
1–4 Warwick Street
London W1B 5LT UK
www.worldenergy.org
Contact: Director
For more than eighty years, the WEC has represented multi-
energy corporations in ninety countries, covering coal, oil, natu-
ral gas, nuclear, hydro, and renewable energy. The group is ac-
credited by the United Nations as a nongovernmental,
noncommercial, and nonaligned registered charity.
World Gold Council
45 Pall Mall
London SW1Y 5JG
United Kingdom
www.gold.org
Contact: Director
As an association limited to industry members, the World Gold
Council represents large companies dealing with gold production
in Australia, Canada, India, Japan, Peru, South Africa, Tanzania,
and the United States.
World Resources Institute
10 G Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 729–7600
www.wri.org
Contact: Executive Director
WRI describes itself as an environmental think tank whose mis-
sion is to move human society to live in ways that protect the
earth’s environment for current and future generations. Its goal is
to reverse damage to ecosystems, expand participation in envi-
ronmental decisions, avert dangerous climate change, and
238
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

increase prosperity while improving the environment by building
bridges between ideas and action. WRI was launched in 1982
with a $15 million grant from the MacArthur Foundation.
World Stewardship Institute
409 Mendocino Avenue, Suite A
Santa Rosa, CA 95401–8513
(707) 573–3160
www.ecostewards.org
Contact: Director
The organization was established to cultivate stewardship on an
international level, linking groups involved with cooperative
problem solving. Its major programs deal with worldwide
forestry, biodiversity, and a Latin American alliance.
World Wildlife Fund
Avenue du Mont Blanc 1196
Gland, Switzerland
www.panda.org
Contact: Director
The WWF’s mission sounds simple: to stop the degradation of
the planet’s environment and to build a future in which humans
live in harmony with nature. But since its founding in 1961, that
mission has led to programs in 100 countries and 2,000 conser-
vation projects with a staff of 4,000. Its field-based projects work
with indigenous peoples and seek to avoid unnecessary con-
frontation.
U.S. Government Agencies
Bureau of Indian Affairs
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240
(202) 208–5116
www.doi.gov/bureau-indian-affairs
Under the Department of the Interior, the BIA is responsible for
protection of tribal lands across the United States and the
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
239

conservation of resources on those lands. The agency works with
Native American leaders to retain cultural ties to the land and
the management of natural resources.
Bureau of Land Management
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240
(202) 452–5125
www.blm.gov
Contact: Director
Under the Department of the Interior, the BLM administers 262
million acres of public lands, primarily in twelve Western states,
representing one-eighth of the land surface in the United States.
Programs cover energy and mineral resources, wilderness areas,
fish and wildlife habitat, wild horses and burros, and natural re-
source development and protection.
Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
1400 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20250–2201
(202) 720–7441
www.reeusda.gov
Contact: Director
The Cooperative Extension Service supports university-based re-
search and leadership programs focusing on timber and logging
practices. It offers education programs and technical information
through field offices covering the entire United States.
Forest Service
PO Box 96090
Washington, DC 20090–6090
(202) 205–8333
www.fs.us.gov
Contact: Chief
Founded by Gifford Pinchot, the nation’s first professional
forester, the agency manages the national forests and grasslands
through ranger districts and regional offices. Its primary mission
is to ensure the productivity of forests on public lands, and to
provide for sustainable management for current and future gen-
erations.
240
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Geological Survey
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
(888) 275–8747
www.usgs.gov
Contact: Director
With a staff of over 10,000 scientists, technicians, and support em-
ployees, the USGS has more than 400 offices throughout the
United States. Its purpose is to provide scientific information and
research relating to the nation’s natural resources and scientific
phenomena. The agency was established in 1879.
Minerals Management Service
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240
(202) 208–3985
www.mms.gov
Contact: Chief, Public Affairs
The MMS is a bureau in the Department of the Interior responsi-
ble for managing the nation’s natural gas, oil, and other mineral
resources. It also collects, monitors, and disburses revenues from
federal offshore mineral leases and from onshore mineral leases
on Indian lands.
National Park Service
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240
(202) 208–6843
www.nps.gov
Contact: Director
As part of the U.S. Department of the Interior, the National Park
Service has had oversight of the nation’s cultural and natural re-
sources since its founding in 1916. The agency holds responsibil-
ity for a variety of sites including national monuments, park-
ways, battlefields, and historic sites.
National Petroleum Council
1625 K Street, NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 393–6100
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
241

www.npc.org
Contact: Executive Director
Established in 1946, the NPC acts as an oil and natural gas advi-
sory committee to the secretary of the Department of Energy. The
council’s sole purpose is to represent the views of the oil and gas
industries in advising, informing, and making recommendations
on any matter relating to oil and natural gas.
Natural Resources Conservation Service
PO Box 2890
Washington, DC 20013
(202) 720–7246
www.nrcs.usda.gov
Contact: Executive Director
Originally called the Soil Conservation Service, this federal
agency provides technical assistance and leadership to land
users, communities, state and local governments, and other fed-
eral agencies planning and implementing conservation systems.
Office of Fossil Energy
1000 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20585
(800) DIAL–DOE
www.fe.doe.gov
Contact: Director
As part of the Department of Energy, this bureau deals with fed-
eral regulations for clean coal, natural gas, hydrogen and other
clean fuels, oil, and strategic petroleum reserves. It provides
funding for innovative projects, technical assistance, and pro-
vides research information and project data.
Office of Surface Mining
1951 Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20240
(202) 208–2719
www.osmre.gov
Contact: Director
An agency under the Department of the Interior, the OSM imple-
ments the Surface Mining Law, regulates active and abandoned
242
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

mines, conducts research on reclamation and technology, and col-
lects fees from industries engaged in surface mining activities.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
1400 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20250
(202) 720–3631
www.usda.gov
Contact: Secretary
This agency includes several resource divisions, including the Bu-
reau of Land Management, Cooperative Extensive Service, Nat-
ural Resource Conservation Service, and Forest Service. These di-
visions are listed separately in this directory.
U.S. Department of Energy
1000 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20585
(800) DIAL–DOE
www.doe.gov
Contact: Public Information Officer
The DOE deals with both domestic and international issues relat-
ing to science and technology, energy efficiency, and the environ-
ment. The agency hosts numerous programs focused on the oil
and natural gas industry, including the National Petroleum
Council and Office of Fossil Energy.
U.S. Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240
(202) 208–3100
www.doi.gov
Contact: Secretary
The department is responsible for the administration of eight bu-
reaus and offices relating to natural resources: the Bureau of In-
dian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclama-
tion, Minerals Management Service, National Park Service, Office
of Surface Mining, U.S. Geological Survey, and U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
243

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
(292) 272–0167
www.epa.gov
Contact: Administrator
EPA has ten regional offices that provide technical assistance, re-
search and development, monitoring and enforcement, and im-
plementation of federal legislation and regulations relating to air
and water pollution, toxic and hazardous waste, indoor pollu-
tion, and other environmental concerns.
UN Organizations
UN Department for Economic and Social Affairs
Commission on Sustainable Development
Two United Nations Plaza, Room DC2–2220
New York, NY 10017
(212) 963–8102
www.un.org/esa/sustdev
Contact: Secretary
Established by the UN General Assembly in December 1992, fol-
lowing the UN Conference on Environment and Development,
the Commission on Sustainable Development reviews the imple-
mentation of international agreements, provides policy guidance,
and supports innovative strategies for sustainability through
two-year cycles focusing on specific themes.
UN Environment Programme
PO Box 67578
Nairobi, Kenya 00200
www.unep.org
Contact: Secretariat Executive Director
The UNEP is the only major UN agency headquartered in a Third
World nation as part of an effort to globalize the importance of
environmental protection. It provides leadership and encourages
partnerships in caring for the environment through scientific ad-
visory groups, a committee of permanent representatives, re-
gional offices, and field programs.
244
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

UN Food and Agriculture Organization
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
www.fao.org/UNFAO
Contact: Secretariat
Since its founding in 1945, the FAO has led international efforts to
defeat hunger, serving both developed and developing nations. It
is a neutral forum for negotiation and policy debate. One of the
FAO’s major initiatives is to improve forestry practices by putting
information within reach, sharing policy expertise, providing a
meeting place for nations, and bringing knowledge to the field.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
245


8
Selected Print and
Nonprint Sources
Books
Adams, Jonathan. 2002. The Future of the Wild: Radical Conservation
for a Crowded World. Boston: Beacon. 296 pp.
North America’s wilderness is under attack, and the author uses
the stories behind the Northern spotted owl, grizzly bear, moun-
tain lion, and other species to illustrate how effective conserva-
tion strategies can provide wildlife corridors to connect the larger
landscape.
Alverson, William S., Walter Kuhlmann, and David M. Waller.
1994. Wild Forests: Conservation Biology and Public Policy. Washing-
ton, DC: Island. 300 pp.
Forest conservation goes far beyond the protection and sustain-
ability of a single natural resource. Management includes forest
ecology, the conservation of biological diversity, and agency per-
formance measures.
Anderson, Anthony B., and Clinton N. Jenkins. 2006. Applying
Nature’s Design: Corridors as a Strategy for Biodiversity Conservation.
Irvington, NY: Columbia University Press. 256 pp.
247

Biological corridors, areas of land set aside to facilitate the move-
ment of species, are gaining attention from ecologists as a way of
maintaining landscape connectivity. Through the use of case
studies in Costa Rica, Florida, the Canadian Rockies, Malaysia,
and other examples, the authors identify the political and socioe-
conomic issues that must be considered.
Anderson, Terry L., and Donald R. Leal. 2001. Free Market Envi-
ronmentalism. New York: Palgrave. 241 pp.
The author looks at a wide spectrum of potential solutions to nat-
ural resource issues, from reducing red tape and bureaucracy
that tie up production, to marketing the by-products of waste
management, to taking a free market approach to global con-
flicts.
Baden, John A., and Donald Snow, eds. 1997. The Next West: Pub-
lic Lands, Community, and Economy in the American West. Washing-
ton, DC: Island. 272 pp.
Nearly a dozen leading writers offer an insightful vision of the fu-
ture of the American West in a compilation of their views on what
has gone wrong in the region, highlighting various methods of
environmental stewardship.
Barlow, Maude. 1999. Blue Gold: The Global Water Crisis and the
Commodification of the World’s Water Supply. Sausalito, CA: Inter-
national Forum on Globalization. 50 pp.
The term “blue gold” refers to the value of water as a natural re-
source, and this book explores the ways in which freshwater is
being exploited through privatization. Water has become a com-
modity that can be sold and traded, leaving local populations out
of the decision-making process altogether.
Bock, Carl E., and Jane H. Bock. 2000. The View from Bald Hill:
Thirty Years in an Arizona Grassland. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press. 197 pp.
One of the best ways to understand the issues involved in range-
land management is to understand the role of grassland ecology,
and this book explores what happens when grazing is banned
from an 8,000-acre plot that is restored naturally.
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Bonnicksen, Thomas M. 2000. America’s Ancient Forests: From the
Ice Age to the Age of Discovery. New York: Wiley. 594 pp.
In order to understand the dynamics of forest controversies, it is
useful to have the historical context provided in this book, which
begins with the ice age forests and continues on through periods
when forests were managed by indigenous peoples, the use of
fire, Spanish explorers, forests of the colonies, and the role of
trappers.
Bowles, Ian A., and Glenn T. Prickett, eds. 2001. Footprints in the
Jungle: Natural Resource Industries, Infrastructure, and Biodiversity
Conservation. New York: Oxford University Press. 332 pp.
By exploring how growing demands of resource extractive in-
dustries have affected conservation and development in the trop-
ics, the authors presented in this volume review how oil and gas
development, international trade, expanding markets, and min-
erals extraction have changed the world’s view toward corporate
responsibility.
Brick, Phillip D., and R. McGreggor Cawley, eds. 1996. A Wolf in
the Garden: The Land Rights Movement and the New Environmental
Debate. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 323 pp.
This balanced and objective book explores how government pol-
icy has changed with the advent of the wise use movement,
county supremacy groups, and property rights organizations. It
covers the major conflicts and the strategies being used by vari-
ous stakeholders to influence the outcome of conflicts over na-
tional parks, old growth forests, and rangelands.
Brick, Phillip D., Donald Snow, and Sarah Van de Wetering, eds.
2001. Across the Great Divide: Explorations in Collaborative Conserva-
tion and the American West. Washington, DC: Island. 286 pp.
This edited volume represents the work of some of the country’s
preeminent scholars on environmental history and collaborative
conservation, exploring how collaboration has influenced ranch-
ing interests and the culture of the West, and uses case studies
from the well-known Quincy Library Group and Applegate Part-
nership to illustrate disputes over grizzly bear reintroduction and
open space planning.
Books
249

Browder, John O., and Brian J. Godfrey, eds. 1997. Rainforest Cities:
Urbanization, Development, and Globalization of the Brazilian Ama-
zon. New York: Columbia University Press. 424 pp.
Since the 1970s, the Brazilian Amazon has undergone significant
changes and has been transformed into a frontier of new cities
and regional development. The editors view the tropical rain for-
est from a unique perspective, exploring what they term “disar-
ticulated urbanization” and its impact on the ecosystem.
Brunner, Ronald D., et al. 2005. Adaptive Governance: Integrating
Science, Policy, and Decision Making. Irvington, NY: Columbia Uni-
versity Press. 368 pp.
Using five case studies from the West, this book examines differ-
ent ways of making decisions about natural resource planning.
Adaptive governance, unlike scientific management, emphasizes
the need for open decision-making, the recognition of multiple in-
terests, community-based initiatives, and an integrative science in
addition to traditional science.
Brunner, Ronald D., et al. 2002. Finding Common Ground: Gover-
nance and Natural Resources in the American West. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press. 303 pp.
Using five case studies, the authors examine water management
in Colorado, wolf recovery in the northern Rockies, bison man-
agement in Yellowstone, fisheries disputes, and forest policy in
California.
Bryner, Gary C. 1998. U.S. Land and Natural Resources Policy: A
Public Issues Handbook. Westport, CT: Greenwood. 292 pp.
This overview of the history and development of natural resource
policies looks at the political factors that have shaped public land
issues and how resources are valued.
Buckles, Daniel, ed. 2000. Cultivating Peace: Conflict and Collabora-
tion in Natural Resource Management. Ottawa: International Devel-
opment Research Center. 300 pp.
The competition for natural resources is a global one, as case
studies from Africa, Asia, and Latin America illustrate, and new
strategies, such as community-based natural resource manage-
250
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

ment, are essential for a movement that emphasizes collaboration
rather than conflict.
Bunnell, Fred L., and Jacklyn F. Johnson, eds. 1998. Policy and
Practices for Biodiversity in Managed Forests: The Living Dance. Van-
couver: University of British Columbia Press. 162 pp.
This edited volume uses the metaphor of the forest as a con-
stantly, rapidly changing living dance to describe the complex
ecological processes, changing values, and forces of time that af-
fect life. At both the landscape level and in managed forests, bio-
diversity is affected by modification and adjustments from the
scientific as well as political worlds.
Campari, João S. 2005. The Economics of Deforestation in the Ama-
zon: Dispelling the Myths. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar. 242
pp.
Within Brazil’s Amazon River region, deforestation has been mas-
sive and recent, resulting in some of the most substantial envi-
ronmental degradation in the world. While environmentally con-
troversial, logging has also been criticized for the economic effect
on the region’s indigenous peoples, who depend on these re-
sources for numerous uses.
Campbell, Greg. 2002. Blood Diamonds: Tracing the Deadly Path of
the World’s Most Precious Stones. Boulder, CO: Westview. 288 pp.
A journalist tells the story of the dark side of the diamond trade
in Sierra Leone, where illegal smuggling and civil war have gone
on virtually unnoticed by most of the rest of the world.
Carle, David. 2003. Water and the California Dream: Choices for a
New Millennium. Berkeley: University of California Press. 255 pp.
One of the major conflicts in the West is the question of where
water will come from in the future. This book explores this defin-
ing element of history, and the pressures of limitless growth on a
limited source of supply.
Caviglia, Jill L. 1999. Sustainable Agriculture in Brazil: Economic De-
velopment and Deforestation. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar. 160
pp.
Books
251

Using case studies within the Ouro Preto region of Brazil, the au-
thor looks at economic issues rather than scientific ones, noting
that market failure and the adoption of technology have com-
peted with sustainable agriculture as reasons for the loss of trop-
ical forest.
Chew, Sing C. 2001. World Ecological Degradation: Accumulation,
Urbanization, and Deforestation, 3000 B.C.–A.D. 2000. Walnut
Creek, CA: AltaMira. 217 pp.
The nine chapters in this book provide a comprehensive survey of
historical periods and how the environment has been damaged
over time. Starting with the Third Millennium and the Bronze
Age, the author traces human impact in early Greece through the
rise of the city-states and the Roman Empire to the growth of the
Eastern Empire, the emerging economies of Europe, and the de-
velopment of environmental consciousness.
Clarke, Jeanne Nienaber, and Daniel McCool. 1985. Staking Out
the Terrain: Power Differentials among Natural Resource Management
Agencies. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 189 pp.
Although this book is best used for historical analysis, the authors
provide a comprehensive background on the power of natural re-
source agencies, how expertise and the control of information af-
fect policy, and the role of political and constituency support.
Cleuren, Herwig. 2001. Paving the Road for Forest Destruction: Key
Actors and Driving Forces of Tropical Deforestation in Brazil, Ecuador,
and Cameroon. Leiden, The Netherlands: Research School of
Asian, African, and Amerindian Studies. 261 pp.
The author looks at three case studies of deforestation, identify-
ing how stakeholders in each nation have increased the opportu-
nities for commercial logging and illegal timber trade. The focus
is on economic issues rather than the scientific reasons for
changes in forest policy.
Collier, Paul, and Ian Bannon, eds. 2004. Natural Resources and Vi-
olent Conflict: Options and Actions. Washington, DC: World Bank.
428 pp.
This collection of essays seeks to explain the relationship between
countries that regularly experience conflict and those whose
252
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

economies are heavily dependent upon natural resources, using
measures such as population, rebel financing, corruption, and re-
source reporting procedures.
Dagget, Dan, and Jay Dusard. 1995. Beyond the Rangeland Conflict:
Toward a West that Works. Layton, UT: Gibbs Smith. 104 pp.
By arguing that the West’s grazing conflicts must begin with a
change in attitude among ranchers, environmental group mem-
bers, and government range managers, the authors contend that
the time, money, and effort being spent on arguments could be
better used on more collaborative discussions.
Dana, Samuel T., and Sally K. Fairfax. 1980. Forest and Range Pol-
icy: Its Development in the United States. 2d ed. New York: Mc-
Graw-Hill. 458 pp.
This is one of the classic works in natural resources, covering both
forests and grazing lands and the historical development of gov-
ernmental agencies and regulations.
Daniels, Steven E., and Gregg B. Walker. 2001. Working through
Environmental Conflict: The Collaborative Learning Approach. West-
port, CT: Praeger. 299 pp.
The basis for most collaborative approaches to conflict manage-
ment is public participation, and the authors show how, when
combined with techniques like team building, citizen involve-
ment can be used to deal with environmental problems at the
local level.
Darley, Julian. 2005. High Noon for Natural Gas: The New Energy
Crisis. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green. 266 pp.
This hard-hitting look at natural gas as an energy source outlines
the implications of increased dependence and why it has the po-
tential to cause serious environmental, political, and economic
consequences.
d’Estrée, Tamara Pearson, and Bonnie B. G. Colby. 2004. Braving
the Currents: Evaluating Environmental Conflict Resolution in the
River Basins of the American West. New York, NY: Springer. 424 pp.
Using twenty-eight “success criteria,” this is a systematic assess-
ment of the elements that are needed for successful environmental
Books
253

conflict resolution, using disputes that have been resolved as case
studies.
Devall, Bill, ed. 1995. Clearcut: The Tragedy of Industrial Forestry.
San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. 291 pp.
The startling photographs that accompany the essays in this vol-
ume provide ample evidence of the visual impact of clear-cutting
in both the United States and Canada, while authors call for a
recognition of the intrinsic value of forests as well as their com-
modity value.
DeVilliers, Marq. 2001. Water: The Fate of Our Most Precious Re-
source. Boston: Mariner. 368 pp.
Although the author’s tone is optimistic, the book provides an in-
ternational perspective on both water quality and water scarcity.
He calls for most of the usual changes to resolve the problems,
from conservation and technological innovation to international
cooperation and the reduction of wastefulness.
DeVoto, Bernard A. 2005. DeVoto’s West: History, Conservation, and
the Public Good. Athens: Ohio University Press. 275 pp.
A collection of essays that originally were published in Harper’s
from one of the nation’s preeminent social commentators and ad-
vocates for the stewardship of American public lands. DeVoto
was one of the most prolific and respected writers who com-
mented on the evolution and change of the American West.
Dilsaver, Lary M., ed. 1994. America’s National Park System: The
Critical Documents. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 470 pp.
This book provides a compilation of the key documents that have
punctuated the development of the national parks from the early
beginnings in 1864 through the policies of the current system. It
explores how various reports, proclamations, legislation, and ex-
ecutive orders have shaped the management and expansion of
the parks over time.
Dobkowski, Michael N., and Isidor Wallimann, eds. 2002. On the
Edge of Scarcity: Environment, Resources, Population, Sustainability,
and Conflict. 2d ed. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. 296
pp.
254
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

From an economics perspective, there is a business application to
natural resource conflicts that can explain problems such as sus-
tainability and supply, the authors in the edited volume contend.
Each essay explores these issues from a perspective that includes
various geographic regions and problems.
Dolatyer, Mostafa, and Tim S. Gray. 2000. Water Politics in the Mid-
dle East: A Context for Conflict or Cooperation? New York: Palgrave
Macmillan. 271 pp.
A controversial view of Middle Eastern water conflicts in which
the authors argue that water scarcity is too important an issue to
lead to warfare among competing water users. Still, there is little
promise for the resolution of disputes that have divided the re-
gion for generations.
Dombeck, Michael P., Christopher A. Wood, and Jack E. Williams.
2003. From Conquest to Conservation: Our Public Lands Legacy.
Washington, DC: Island. 232 pp.
The authors identify the key natural resource issues that have
shaped U.S. environmental policy, including timber harvesting,
water scarcity, grazing on public lands, and the efforts that have
been made to resolve long-term conflicts.
Donahue, Debra L. 1999. The Western Range Revisited: Removing
Livestock from Public Lands to Conserve Native Biodiversity. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press. 352 pp.
By examining scientific evidence of the aridity of the West and
the ecological impact of cattle grazing, this book argues that
there is an advantage to eliminating grazing that holds greater
potential for benefiting biodiversity than any other single land
use measure.
Elhance, Arun P. 1999. Hydropolitics in the Third World: Conflict and
Cooperation in International River Basins. Washington, DC: U.S. In-
stitute of Peace Press. 309 pp.
Shared river basins constitute nearly 50 percent of the world’s
landmass, leading to intense competition over water resources.
Case studies of six river basins explain the reasons behind water
conflict in the developing world.
Books
255

Elmusa, Sharif S. 1998. Water Conflict: Economics, Law and Palestin-
ian-Israeli Water Resources. Beirut, Lebanon: Institute for Palestine
Studies. 408 pp.
This neutral and objective view of the major water conflict in the
Middle East explains the policy issues from the perspective of
both parties, outlining how each side supports its arguments for
dealing with the control of the water supply.
Franke, Mary Ann. 2005. To Save the Wild Bison: Life on the Edge in
Yellowstone. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 368 pp.
Changing attitudes about wildlife, and their place in protected
areas, are examined in this book, which examines the ecological
and political aspects of the controversy over bison management
policies.
Gale, Fred P. 1998. The Tropical Timber Trade Regime. New York: St.
Martin’s. 287 pp.
The author begins with an overview of the tropical rain forest cri-
sis, and then explains how international regimes, including the
International Tropical Timber Agreement of 1983 and subsequent
conflicts over its enforcement, have led to forest degradation.
Gausset, Quentin, Michael A. Whyte, and Torben Birch-Thomsen,
eds. 2005. Beyond Territory and Scarcity: Exploring Conflicts over
Natural Resource Management. Uppsala, Sweden: Nordic Africa In-
stitute. 218 pp.
Written by geographers and anthropologists, this collection of es-
says deals with the attainment of sustainable natural resource
management in sub-Saharan Africa, examining issues in the con-
text of rapid population growth within the region.
Gedicks, Al. 2001. Resource Rebels: Native Challenges to Mining and
Oil Corporations. Cambridge, MA: South End. 241 pp.
This review of how indigenous peoples have attempted to deal
with multinational corporations seeking to develop mineral and
oil resources also explores the successes and failures of native
peoples facing legal and financial giants.
Gorte, Ross W., ed. 2003. National Forests: Current Issues and Per-
spectives. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science. 181 pp.
256
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

The author questions how the United States can develop a bal-
ance between the protection of timberland in the national forests
and the growing problems of diminishing federal resources, the
need for a steady timber supply, the legacy of a massive system of
forest roads, and legislative mandates for stewardship contract-
ing.
Grafton, R. Quentin, et al. 2004. The Economics of the Environment
and Natural Resources. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 503 pp.
Using models, systems, and dynamics, the authors examine the
bioeconomics of natural resources, including fisheries, forests,
water, and the environmental valuation of nonrenewable re-
sources.
Grusin, Richard A. 2004. Culture, Technology, and the Creation of
America’s National Parks. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 232 pp.
The author investigates how the establishment of the national
parks helped lead to an American national identity after the Civil
War.
Halvorson, William L., and Gary E. Davis, eds. 1996. Science and
Ecosystem Management in the National Parks. Tucson: University of
Arizona Press. 362 pp.
The chapters in this edited volume approach natural resources
from the perspective of conservation and ecosystem manage-
ment, identifying how government policies have often conflicted
with science.
Hart, Matthew. 2003. Diamond: A Journey to the Heart of an Obses-
sion. New York: Walker and Company. 288 pp.
The author traces the diamond frenzy that struck Canada in the
1990s, with a background on the history of the South African di-
amond cartel, the role of Brazilian dealers, polishing rooms in
New York, and sorting rooms in London.
Hartzog, George B., Jr. 1988. Battling for the National Parks. Mt.
Kisco, NY: Moyer Bell. 284 pp.
For those looking for a comprehensive history of both the Na-
tional Park Service and the development of parks and reserves,
Books
257

this book provides both excellent biographical information and
objective analysis.
Harvey, Mark. 2005. Wilderness Forever: Howard Zahniser and the
Path to the Wilderness Act. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
328 pp.
If one person were said to be responsible for the passage of the
1964 Wilderness Act, it would undoubtedly be Howard Zahniser,
an outdoorsman who pulled together the fragmented factions of
the early American environment movement to lobby tirelessly for
a law that is the foundation for contemporary wilderness preser-
vation.
Hays, Samuel P. 1959. Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The
Progressive Conservation Movement 1890–1920. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. 297 pp.
Hays, one of the country’s most noted environmental historians,
focuses on Gifford Pinchot, the turn of the twentieth century, and
the utilitarian view of natural resources, contrasting those views
with the reforms brought on by the progressive movement,
preservationists like John Muir, and the scientific management
revolution.
Heinberg, Richard. 2003. The Party’s Over: Oil, War, and the Fate of
Industrial Societies. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society. 288 pp.
Heinberg predicts chaos unless the United States is willing to join
other countries to implement a global program of resource con-
servation and sharing, and explains what it will take to reduce the
world’s reliance upon fossil fuels.
Holechek, Jerry L., et al. 2003. Natural Resources: Ecology, Econom-
ics, and Policy. 2d ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 761
pp.
This is a detailed history of natural resource management in the
United States, natural resources, and international development.
The authors advocate an integrated approach from an economic
perspective.
Holechek, Jerry L., Rex D. Pieper, and Carlton H. Herbel. 2003.
258
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Range Management: Principles and Practices. 5th ed. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 624 pp.
The science of range management includes a variety of topics, in-
cluding the ecology of plants and wildlife, choosing an appropri-
ate form of grazing, the characteristics of rangeland, inventory
and monitoring, and livestock production, each of which is cov-
ered in this introductory book.
Holmes, Thomas P., et al. 2000. Financial Costs and Benefits of Re-
duced Impact Logging relative to Conventional Logging in the Eastern
Amazon. Alexandria, VA: Tropical Forest Foundation. 48 pp.
This short report, produced under the sponsorship of a non-
governmental organization, proposes innovative techniques that
can be used as an alternative to traditional logging methods while
still returning a profit for local economies.
Hunt, Constance E. 2004. Thirsty Planet: Strategies for Sustainable
Water Management. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 256 pp.
The author suggests that nature is the source of water and only by
making the conservation of nature an absolute priority will we
have water in the future for human use. The book looks at the
complexity of the problem, providing an array of ideas, informa-
tion, case studies, and ecological information.
Jackson, Donald C. 2005. Building the Ultimate Dam: John S. East-
wood and the Control of Water in the West. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press. 352 pp.
Much of the water policy of the West was built around the idea
that “bigger is better,” and the author outlines how changes in en-
gineering and attitudes led to new policies and designs.
Jeffery, Roger, and Bhaskar Vira, eds. 2002. Conflict and Cooperation
in Participatory Natural Resource Management. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan. 264 pp.
Historically, natural resources have been managed by centralized
government institutions with the belief that this increases equity
and efficiency. This volume questions whether those goals can be
met at lower cost and more democratically through the use of col-
laborative management agreements.
Books
259

Jensen, Derrick, and George Draffan. 2003. Strangely Like War: The
Global Assault on Forests. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
185 pp.
With a foreword by environmental leader Vandana Shiva, this
book provides both a historical account of deforestation and an
analysis of the environmental impact of clear-cutting on forest
ecology.
Johnson, Elizabeth A., and Michael W. Klemens, eds. 2005. Nature
in Fragments: The Legacy of Sprawl. Irvington, NY: Columbia Uni-
versity Press. 400 pp.
While sprawl is usually considered in an urban context, the es-
says in this book focus on the role of development and biological
diversity. Topics include land use and freshwater wetlands, bees
and pollination, disease, wide-ranging species, and the role of
public awareness.
Just, Richard E., and Sinaia Netanyahu, eds. 1998. Conflict and Co-
operation on Trans-Boundary Water Resources. Boston: Kluwer Aca-
demic. 432 pp.
The book examines the nature of intrastate, interstate, and inter-
national disputes over water quality and quantity from a global
perspective, noting that transboundary water resources are often
a cause of conflict worldwide.
Kamieniecki, Sheldon. 2006. Corporate America and Environmental
Policy: How Often Does Business Get Its Way? Palo Alto, CA: Stan-
ford University Press. 348 pp.
The six cases in the book outline the way in which private com-
panies involved in disputes over natural resource management
were able to influence environmental policy in all three branches
of government. A conceptual framework is offered, as well as ar-
guments about the ability of business interests to influence pol-
icy-making.
Klare, Michael T. 2001. Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global
Conflict. New York: Metropolitan. 289 pp.
The author contends that in the coming decades, wars will be
fought over increasingly scarce natural resources, especially over
260
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

oil and water. The book also explores conflicts over timber, gems,
and minerals from an international perspective.
Klyza, Christopher McGrory. 1996. Who Controls Public Lands?:
Mining, Forestry, and Grazing Policies, 1870–1990. Chapel Hill: Uni-
versity of North Carolina Press. 211 pp.
Klyza’s history of policy in these three areas provides an
overview of the context in which laws have been enacted, social
and cultural paradigms have been changed, and entire industries
have changed through governmental regulation.
Koontz, Tomas M. 2002. Federalism in the Forest: National versus
State Natural Resource Policy. Washington, DC: Georgetown Uni-
versity Press. 232 pp.
The strengths and weaknesses of forest policy in the United States
balance between federal agency control and management by state
government. Comparing four forest pairs, the book examines rev-
enue sharing, public participation, and environmental protection
as measures of policy performance differences.
Larmer, Paul, ed. 2003. Give and Take: How the Clinton Administra-
tion’s Public Lands Offensive Transformed the American West. Paonia,
CO: High Country News. 230 pp.
Focused on the eight years of public lands policy under President
Bill Clinton, this book highlights the issues of rural land use, na-
tional parks and reserves, and the conservation of natural re-
sources.
Lee, Robert G., and Donald R. Field, eds. 2005. Communities and
Forests: Where People Meet the Land. Corvallis: Oregon State Uni-
versity Press. 320 pp.
As forest science changes, so too do the values that influence for-
est policy-making. The authors identify four major types of
forestry: managing solely for wood, managing for benefits rang-
ing from watersheds to food crops, protecting natural forests, and
urbanizing forests.
Lewicki, Roy J., Barbara Gray, and Michael Elliott, eds. 2003. Mak-
ing Sense of Intractable Environmental Conflicts: Frames and Cases.
Washington, DC: Island. 469 pp.
Books
261

By examining case studies dealing with natural resources, water,
toxics, and growth management, the authors show how disputes
can be interpreted or framed to explain what the conflict is about,
who is involved, the motivations of the parties, and how it should
be solved.
Lindholdt, Paul, and Derrick Knowles, eds. 2005. Holding Com-
mon Ground: The Individual and Public Lands in the American West.
Spokane: Eastern Washington University Press. 152 pp.
This is an anthology of thirty Western writers who provide an in-
sight into their perspectives on public lands, ranging from Car-
olyn Kremer’s essay on civil disobedience in the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge to Bruce Eilerts’s “War among the Saguaros.”
Lowenthal, David. 2002. George Perkins Marsh: Prophet of Conser-
vation. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 632 pp.
Considered one of the first to recognize the dangers of human
degradation of the environment, and possible reforms, Marsh
sounded the clarion call for change in 1864. This biography iden-
tifies Marsh’s broad scholarship, his political and diplomatic ca-
reer, and his ominous warnings about the future if humans fail to
exercise stewardship over the earth.
Mateo, Rony, ed. 2004. American National Parks: Current Issues and
Developments. Hauppauge, NY: Novinka. 122 pp.
While the original goal of the U.S. national park system may have
been to preserve scenic beauty and provide opportunities for
learning, solace, and recreation, today’s protected areas, adminis-
tered by the National Park Service, face numerous challenges.
The authors of this edited volume explore how national parks
deal with reduced funding, a crumbling infrastructure, and issues
such as mining in the parks.
Mayer, Kenneth R. 2001. With the Stroke of a Pen: Executive Orders
and Presidential Power. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
293 pp.
Very few researchers have examined the role of the executive
order in U.S. history, and this book is especially timely in ex-
plaining how President Bill Clinton, among others, used his pow-
ers to establish new environmental policies.
262
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

McKinney, Matthew, and William Harmon. 2004. The Western
Confluence: A Guide to Governing Natural Resources. Washington,
DC: Island. 297 pp.
This contemporary overview of water disputes in the West looks
at the historical principles of water rights, the role of citizen
groups, and the need for dialog among stakeholders such as
snowmobile users, the U.S. Forest Service, environmental organi-
zations, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Mittermeier, Russell A., et al. 2005. Transboundary Conservation: A
New Vision for Protected Areas. Washington, DC: Conservation In-
ternational. 372 pp.
The authors of this book note that there are now 818 protected re-
gions in 112 countries that make up 188 transboundary areas that
straddle international boundaries. Focusing on 28 of these areas
spanning the globe (including Antarctica), they point out the po-
tential for new types of management that may reduce interna-
tional conflict while protecting biodiversity.
Moran, Emilio F., and Elinor Ostrom, eds. 2005. Seeing the Forest
and the Trees: Human-Environment Interactions in Forest Ecosystems.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 442 pp.
Using an interdisciplinary approach, the editors have selected
more than a dozen themes relating to the ways in which data on
deforestation is collected, the processes of forest change, land-
cover change information, the use of geographic information sys-
tems, and cross-continental comparisons.
Mutz, Kathryn M., Gary C. Bryner, and Douglas S. Kenney, eds.
2002. Justice and Natural Resources: Concepts, Strategies and Applica-
tions. Washington, DC: Island. 368 pp.
By using the theme of environmental justice, the editors look at
conflicts over water, mineral development, and tribal sovereignty.
They expand on the research relating to environmentally haz-
ardous facilities to provide a more expansive view of natural re-
source decisions.
Nielsen, John. 2005. Condor: To the Brink and Back—The Life and
Times of One Giant Bird. New York: HarperCollins. 257 pp.
The California condor represents, symbolically and practically,
Books
263

one of the most important examples of humanity’s efforts to con-
trol nature. From the time when the last wild condor was cap-
tured in 1987 to now, when there are more than 200 birds living in
the wild, the species has been mired in controversy over whether
it was better to allow the bird to go extinct, or manipulate nature
by keeping some in zoos and preserves in the hope of helping it
to recover.
O’Leary, Rosemary, and Lisa Bingham, eds. 2003. The Promise and
Performance of Environmental Conflict Resolution. Washington, DC:
Resources for the Future Press. 400 pp.
This book provides empirical research along with insights from
some of the most experienced practitioners in environmental con-
flict resolution, beginning with concepts and methods used by
scholars in political science, public administration, regional plan-
ning, psychology, anthropology, and law.
Owen, Oliver, Daniel D. Chiras, and John P. Reganold. 1998. Nat-
ural Resource Conservation: Management for a Sustainable Future.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 594 pp.
While many of the books dealing with natural resources ap-
proach the topic from the perspective of conflict, these authors
use sustainability as the measurement of success and failure.
Palm, Cheryl L., et al., eds. 2006. Slash-and-Burn Agriculture: The
Search for Alternatives. Irvington, NY: Columbia University Press.
480 pp.
Estimating that more than 80,000 square miles of tropical rain for-
est are destroyed each year, a consortium of international institu-
tions attempts to address the problems of conducting this form of
agriculture in sensitive areas. Site-specific examples are included
for the Brazilian Amazon, Cameroon, Indonesia, Peru, and Thai-
land.
Palo, Matti, and Heidi Vanhanen, eds. 2000. World Forests from De-
forestation to Transition? Boston: Kluwer Academic. 216 pp.
This global survey of deforestation covers forest transition in var-
ious regions, from China and New England to the Brazilian Ama-
zon and Indonesia. The authors cover both the scientific perspec-
264
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

tive and the sociopolitical view, including agricultural expansion
and cultural histories.
Pearce, Fred. 2005. When the Rivers Run Dry: Water, the Defining
Crisis of the Twenty-First Century. Boston: Beacon. 336 pp.
The author analyzes the prediction that, by 2025, water scarcity
will cut global food production by more than the current U.S.
grain harvest. Pearce traveled to more than thirty countries to re-
search this book, and he identifies the key rivers that are part of
the water crisis. He believes that the picture is dire, but not with-
out solutions.
Pinchot, Gifford. 1937. The Training of a Forester. Philadelphia: J.B.
Lippencott. 129 pp.
America's first chief of the U.S. Forest Service shares his views on
the need for reform.
Posey, Darrell A., and Michael J. Balick, eds. 2006. Human Impacts
on Amazonia: The Role of Traditional Ecological Knowledge in Conser-
vation and Development. Irvington, NY: Columbia University
Press. 368 pp.
This series of essays represents the work of environmental scien-
tists, anthropologists, and botanists who document the role of
human development in this sensitive ecosystem. Local knowledge
and values are seen as one of the best ways to learn how to protect
the Amazon and avoid further degradation of the tropical forest.
Postel, Sandra. 1999. Pillar of Sand: Can the Irrigation Miracle Last?
New York: W. W. Norton and Co. 313 pp.
Calling water scarcity now the single most serious threat to
global food production, Postel, director of the Global Water Pol-
icy Project, shows how the combination of an increase in popu-
lation to 8 billion by 2030, coupled with the fact that the earth’s
freshwater supply is not where that population is living, de-
mands new ways of allocating water, such as making irrigation
more efficient.
Postel, Sandra. 1997. Last Oasis: Facing Water Scarcity. New York:
W. W. Norton. 191 pp.
Books
265

The editors challenge the commonly held notion that water is in
endless supply, arguing that we have entered an era of water
scarcity. Shortages will impact economics, the world’s ecology,
and politics, but there are many technological solutions that can
reduce conflict over water.
Postel, Sandra, and Brian Richter. 2003. Rivers for Life: Managing
Water for People and Nature. Washington, DC: Island. 253 pp.
This global perspective on the challenges of water management
focuses on the disruption of rivers by diverting water through
45,000 large dams worldwide, altering the natural flow of hydro-
logic cycles, and destroying wildlife habitat.
Pynn, Larry. 2000. Last Stands: A Journey through North America’s
Vanishing Ancient Rainforests. Corvallis: Oregon State University
Press. 212 pp.
The Northwest coast of North America has a different type of old
growth forest than those traditionally associated with the Pacific
Northwest. This book deals primarily with the ecology of ancient
rain forests but also explains their role in forest conservation.
Renner, Michael. 2002. The Anatomy of Resource Wars. Washington,
DC: Worldwatch Institute. 91 pp.
This book explores how natural resource abundance may fuel vi-
olent conflict, whether to control resources (such as diamonds or
oil), and how those conflicts are being used by corrupt regimes to
bankroll further violence at the expense of the environment.
Righter, Robert W. 2005. The Battle over Hetch Hetchy: America’s
Most Controversial Dam and the Birth of Modern Environmentalism.
New York: Oxford University Press. 328 pp.
Considered by many to be the first major environmental battle of
the twentieth century, the flooding of California’s Hetch Hetchy
Valley to provide drinking water for San Francisco epitomizes the
struggle between conservationists and preservationists. This
book is unique because it includes coverage from the completion
of the dam in 1934 to the 1998 movement to restore the valley.
Roberts, Janine. 2004. Glitter and Greed: The Secret World of the Di-
amond Cartel. New York: Disinformation Company. 352 pp.
266
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Roberts, an Australian investigative journalist, provides an ex-
pose of the De Beers diamond operations, the diamond industry,
and the conflicts created by diamond traders and miners with
aboriginal people.
Robinson, John, and Elizabeth Bennett, eds. 1999. Hunting for Sus-
tainability in Tropical Forests. New York: Columbia University
Press. 1,000 pp.
This extensive volume presents the results of numerous studies
conducted by biological and social scientists. The emphasis is on
the role of hunting of wildlife and native peoples, challenges to
resource management, and the economic issues associated with
sustainability in a resource-rich area.
Roddick, Anita, and Brooke S. Biggs. 2005. Troubled Water: Saints,
Sinners, Truth and Lies about the Global Water Crisis. White River
Junction, VT: Chelsea Green. 138 pp.
A global perspective on the politics of water, including problems,
solutions, and resources offered for the general reader as a way of
becoming actively involved.
Sabatier, Paul, et al., eds. 2005. Swimming Upstream: Collaborative
Approaches to Watershed Management. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
328 pp.
Historically, watershed management in the United States has
been based on a traditional, top-down hierarchical management
model. This book examines collaborative projects from a social,
political, and economic perspective, and the role of negotiation in
solving watershed problems.
Satterfield, Terre. 2003. Anatomy of a Conflict: Identity, Knowledge,
and Emotion in Old-Growth Forests. Vancouver: University of
British Columbia Press. 198 pp.
While the timber wars of the Pacific Northwest are usually de-
scribed as a dispute between jobs and the environment, this
ethnographic study shows that the debate is centered on cultural
patterns and social movements.
Schroth, Gotz, ed. 2004. Agroforestry and Biodiversity Conservation
in Tropical Landscapes. Washington, DC: Island. 523 pp.
Books
267

This lengthy volume is composed of twenty chapters that cover
the entire spectrum of tropical forest resources. The authors ex-
amine fragmented tropical landscapes, the ecological economics
of agroforestry, specific crops such as cocoa and coffee, tools such
as live fences and windbreaks, and biodiversity as both burden
and natural capital.
Sellars, Richard W. 1997. Preserving Nature in the National Parks.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 380 pp.
This book analyzes how the National Park Service faces the
dilemma of how and what to preserve—scenery, landscapes,
mammals, trees and plants, or the entire ecosystem, and how the
emphasis on recreational tourism has been reflected in the
agency’s organizational power structure.
Sherman, Martin. 1999. The Politics of Water in the Middle East: An
Israeli Perspective on the Hydro-Political Aspects of the Conflict. New
York: St. Martin’s. 106 pp.
The author notes that while water is an enduring conflict in the
Middle East, little attention has been paid to the controversies
over which nations would control Israel’s water supplies should
the peace accords be finalized.
Simmons, Matthew R. 2005. Twilight in the Desert: The Coming
Saudi Oil Shock and the World Economy. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
and Sons. 448 pp.
This controversial analysis of Saudi oil supplies poses the ques-
tion of how long the countries in the Middle East can meet world
demand for oil, and how countries will adapt to oil scarcity. The
research and statistics have been called into question by some re-
viewers, although many agree that the questions about supplies
need to be asked.
Smith, Duane A. 1987. Mining America: The Industry and the Envi-
ronment, 1800–1980. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. 210
pp.
This book covers the mining industry’s development from a
number of perspectives, from the scars resulting from the nine-
teenth-century mining districts to the environmental impacts of
contemporary extractive resource industries.
268
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Sponsel, Leslie E., Thomas N. Headland, and Robert C. Bailey.
1996. Tropical Deforestation: The Human Dimension. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press. 365 pp.
Part of a series in conservation science, this book looks at the so-
cial aspects of forest ecology and management in tropical forests.
While based on biological principles, the book covers various re-
source management issues.
Stegner, Wallace. 1974. The Uneasy Chair: A Biography of Bernard
DeVoto. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 464 pp.
One of the West’s most respected environmental historians writes
about a fellow historian and conservationist, “Benny” DeVoto,
whose columns in The Saturday Review of Literature and Harper’s
became a platform for the acclaimed writer’s views on manage-
ment of public lands.
Sterner, Thomas. 2003. Policy Instruments for Environmental and
Natural Resource Management. Washington, DC: Resources for the
Future. 504 pp.
An examination of governmental policy for the conservation of
natural resources, with an extensive list of bibliographical refer-
ences.
Strohmeyer, John. 1993. Extreme Conditions: Big Oil and the Trans-
formation of Alaska. New York: Simon and Schuster. 287 pp.
This analysis of the petroleum industry looks at the role of inter-
nal demand and international trade, identifying many of the en-
vironmental impacts of oil on the Alaskan people and their re-
sources.
Struhsaker, Thomas T. 1997. Ecology of an African Rain Forest: Log-
ging in Kibale and the Conflict between Conservation and Exploitation.
Gainesville: University Press of Florida. 434 pp.
Most of the attention to tropical forests has centered on Latin
and Central America, but this author uses the case study of the
Kibale Forest Reserve in Uganda. The book covers the effects of
logging on both trees and biodiversity, with concluding recom-
mendations on tropical rain forest management policy and
practice.
Books
269

Susskind, Lawrence, and Jeffrey Cruikshank. 1987. Breaking the
Impasse: Consensual Approaches to Resolving Public Disputes. New
York: Basic. 276 pp.
One of the first major books on the emerging tools of conflict
management, this volume explores the role of consensus as a way
of dealing with some of the most difficult political and social sit-
uations and issues now being faced.
Sutter, Paul S. 2002. Driven Wild: How the Fight against Automobiles
Launched the Modern Wilderness Movement. Seattle: University of
Washington Press. 343 pp.
Sutter explains how the conflict to do as one wishes and the
freedom to experience solitude developed in the United States.
He notes the connection between our love for nature and our
love for cars and how that led to a perception that cars were the
enemy of wilderness, disassociating us from the peace of the
outdoors.
Tal, Alon. 2006. Speaking of Earth: Environmental Speeches that
Moved the World. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
277 pp.
The author notes that the one thing that environmental activists
around the world have in common is their voices. This collection
of twenty speeches includes background and biographical infor-
mation on Rachel Carson and David Brower in the United States
and global leaders such as Mostafa Tolba and the Dalai Lama.
Vallentine, John F. 2001. Grazing Management. 2d ed. San Diego,
CA: Academic. 560 pp.
Defined as the manipulation of animal grazing to achieve desired
results based on plant, land, and economic responses, grazing
management goes beyond simply maximizing the amount and
quality of forage needed by livestock, as this somewhat technical
manual explains.
Vaughn, Jacqueline, and Hanna J. Cortner. 2005. George W. Bush’s
Healthy Forests: Reframing the Environmental Debate. Boulder: Uni-
versity Press of Colorado. 231 pp.
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

The signing of the 2003 Healthy Forests Restoration Act is a case
study in understanding how the political process can be used to
move an administration’s agenda forward. In this instance,
President George W. Bush and his appointees used the legislative
and regulatory processes, along with fortuitous natural events, to
change the direction of policy and public participation in the
decision-making process.
Ward, Diane Raines. 2003. Water Wars: Drought, Flood, Folly, and
the Politics of Thirst. New York: Riverhead. 320 pp.
The author contends that the public does not understand the
complicated nature of the world’s water wars, whether the con-
flict is in the Indus Basin or the Arabian Sea. She examines the
role of dams, levees, rivers, and irrigation systems to show how
difficult it is to find solutions that match the unique aspects of
each type of problem.
Wescoat, James L., and Gilbert F. White. 2003. Water for Life: Water
Management and Environmental Policy. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 322 pp.
This book explores the role of water in ecosystems, from ground-
water, lakes, and wetlands to river channels and floodplains, ex-
plaining that water can be managed through a variety of govern-
mental and nongovernmental structures and policies.
Whiteman, Michael R. 1994. An Assessment of Management Strate-
gies for Public Natural Resource Conflict. Moscow: University of
Idaho. 134 pp.
This Ph.D. thesis explores the possibilities and pitfalls of using
environmental mediation as a way of resolving public and pri-
vate conflicts over natural resources.
Wondolleck, Julia M., and Steven L. Yaffee. 2000. Making Collabo-
ration Work: Lessons from Innovation in Natural Resource Manage-
ment. Washington, DC: Island. 277 pp.
Using more than 200 case studies, the authors explain the role of
collaboration in natural resource management conflicts, the barri-
ers that must be understood and overcome, and eight themes that
characterize successful efforts.
Books
271

Wood, Charles H., and Roberto Porro, eds. 2002. Deforestation and
Land Use in the Amazon. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.
385 pp.
The Amazon is one of the most studied regions in the world for
understanding tropical deforestation, and the editors provide a
unique perspective by identifying not only the loss of natural re-
sources but also the ways in which land is subsequently used.
Wuerthner, George, ed. 2006. Wildfire: A Century of Failed Forest
Policy. Washington, DC: Island. 340 pp.
The book views wildfire from the perspective of its ecological,
economic, and social/political impact, with essays from twenty-
five fire ecology experts who contend that the twentieth century’s
policies of fire suppression have resulted in fuel overload. The
major recommendation is to return fire to the landscape so that it
will continue to be a natural part of ecological processes.
Wuerthner, George, and Mollie Yoneko Matteson, eds. 2002. Wel-
fare Ranching: The Subsidized Destruction of the American West.
Washington, DC: Island. 346 pp.
This series of essays portrays the economic and ecological impact
of livestock ranching on the 300 million acres of public lands,
with extensive photographs of natural resource damage, erosion,
and spreading invasive species.
Yaffee, Steven L. 1994. The Wisdom of the Spotted Owl: Policy Lessons
for a New Century. Washington, DC: Island. 430 pp.
This classic case study of the spotted owl controversy provides an
in-depth history of the conflict, the strategies used by stakehold-
ers, and how various groups used litigation and other tools to
produce a controversial outcome for all involved.
Young, Herbert C. 2003. Understanding Water Rights and Conflicts.
Denver, CO: BurgYoung. 275 pp.
The law of water rights is sometimes difficult to comprehend, but
it is key to understanding the complexities of legal precedents
and rulings that have often led to conflict over water scarcity.
272
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Monographs, U.S. and International
Government Publications
National Research Council. 2000. Committee on Environmental
Issues in Pacific Northwest Forest Management, Board on Biol-
ogy, Commission on Life Sciences. Environmental Issues in Pacific
Northwest Forest Management. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emy Press. 259 pp.
This committee, primarily composed of research scientists, takes
a different look at old growth forests in its examination of rural
communities, sustainability, fire, and landscape dynamics. More
valuable to some are the committee’s conclusions and recom-
mendations.
UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization. 2004. Be-
yond Tropical Deforestation: From Tropical Deforestation to Forest
Cover Dynamics and Forest Development. Paris: UNESCO. 488 pp.
The editor of this volume has placed an emphasis on the role of
international cooperation as a mechanism for reducing deforesta-
tion in tropical areas, examining both scientific and political
methods to resolve problems.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Committee of Scientists. 1999.
Sustaining the People’s Lands: Recommendations for Stewardship of the
National Forests and Grasslands into the Next Century. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture. 193 pp.
This widely heralded report became the basis for much of the fed-
eral government’s forest policies for the twentieth century, even
though it was considered controversial by stakeholders on all
sides of the forest resource debate.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Forest Service. 2005. 100
Years of Conservation: For the Greatest Good. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture. 9 pp.
Part of the centennial celebration of the U.S. Forest Service, this
document outlines the development of forest policy from a his-
torical perspective.
Monographs and Government Publications
273

U.S. Department of the Interior. 2004. Cooperative Conservation:
Success through Partnerships. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
the Interior. 45 pp.
Examines the role of citizen participation in the conservation of
natural resources, and the role of communication and volunteers.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2005. Wildland Fire Man-
agement: Progress and Future Challenges, Protecting Structures, and
Improving Communications. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Accountability Office. 23 pp.
The report recommends that although significant progress has
been made in responding to wildland fires, federal agencies still
need to develop a strategic plan that identifies options and the
funding needed to deal with risks.
United States. Congress. House. Committee on Agriculture. Sub-
committee on Forests, Family Farms, and Energy. 1989. Manage-
ment of Old-Growth Forests of the Pacific Northwest: Joint Hearings
before the Subcommittee on Forests, Family Farms, and Energy of
the Committee on Agriculture and the Subcommittee on National
Parks and Public Lands of the Committee on Interior and Insular
Affairs, House of Representatives, 101st Cong., 1st Sess., June 20
and 22. 593 pp.
This lengthy volume of congressional testimony focuses on the
impact of changes in old growth forest management on small
communities, employment, and the economy of the Pacific
Northwest.
United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Environment and
Public Works. Subcommittee on Environmental Protection. 1992.
Conservation of the Northern Spotted Owl: Hearing before the Sub-
committee on Environmental Protection of the Committee on En-
vironment and Public Works, United States Senate, 102nd Cong.,
2d. Sess., May 13. 157 pp.
This Senate hearing explains many of the key issues and identi-
fies the major stakeholders in the spotted owl controversy.
274
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Articles
Albers, Heidi J., Amy W. Ando, and Daniel Kaffine. 2004. “Land
Trusts in the United States: Analyzing Abundance.” Resources
(spring): 10–13.
Land trusts have emerged as a way of protecting tracts of valu-
able watersheds and wildlife habitat, open space in highly devel-
oped areas, and recreational use areas. The authors question
whether this strategy is a sound mechanism for preserving land
in addition to existing programs administered by agencies such
as the National Park Service.
Barringer, Felicity. 2004. “Judge’s Ruling on Yellowstone Keeps It
Open to Snowmobiles.” New York Times, October 16, p. A9.
Despite the Clinton administration’s efforts to phase out snow-
mobiles in Yellowstone National Park, a federal judge in
Wyoming ruled that the public had not been properly consulted
and that the government had not followed proper procedures.
Biswas, Asit K. 2005. “An Assessment of Future Global Water Is-
sues.” International Journal of Water Resources Development 21, no. 2
(June): 229–237.
The author contends that the global emphasis on water scarcity is
misdirected, even though some countries may have difficulty
managing water supplies. Instead, the more serious problem is
rapid water quality deterioration, which is not being addressed in
resource debates.
Borod, Jed. 2005. “Fools Gold: Illegal Mining Linked to Conflict in
the Democratic Republic of Congo.” International Enforcement Law
Reporter 21, no. 10 (October): 410.
Natural resource exploitation has been the focus of numerous
nongovernmental organizations, with increased attention paid to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where there have been
more than 3 million deaths since 1998. Many of these deaths co-
incide with the development of militias protecting illegal gold
mining and smuggling operations.
Articles
275

Breslau, Karen. 2004. “Working to Save the West.” Newsweek (Oc-
tober 18): 56.
Groups like the Conservation Fund are working with ranchers to
save endangered landscapes from builders through conservation
easements and land purchases.
Campbell, Greg. 2002. “Blood Diamonds.” Amnesty Magazine
(fall): 4–7.
This story of a fifteen-year-old boy, a soldier in Sierra Leone’s
Revolutionary United Front, shows the underlying violence that
is part of the attempts to control the trade in raw diamonds that
has paralyzed the region since 1991.
Cockburn, Andrew. 2002. “Diamonds: The Real Story.” National
Geographic 201, no. 3 (March): 2–35.
The trail of diamonds from the ground to jewelry is not a simple
one, as the author explains in this narrative about the complica-
tions of the diamond industry.
Davis, Charles. 1998. “Gold or Green? Efforts to Reform the Min-
ing Law of 1872.” Natural Resources and Environmental Administra-
tion 19 (February): 2–4.
Davis looks at one of the oldest natural resource statutes in the
United States, and the ways in which the original plan to settle
the West by granting mineral rights patents is no longer relevant.
Despite more than 125 years of attempts to reach agreement on
change, the original law is still intact.
Davis, Phillip. 1991. “Cry for Preservation, Recreation Changing
Public Land Policy.” Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (Au-
gust 3): 2151.
Although grazing policy was never a key element of the presi-
dential campaign, the author argues that more candidates are tak-
ing a second look at priorities for the use of public land as a reac-
tion to the Reagan administration’s policies.
Feitelson, Eran. 2000. “The Ebb and Flow of Arab-Israeli Water
Conflicts: Are Past Confrontations Likely to Resurface?” Water
Policy 2, nos. 4–5: 343–363.
276
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

This article is a useful look back at the confrontations over the di-
version of water in the Jordan River basin, which are often cited
as resource-based conflicts. The author suggests that water may
increasingly be a basis for confidence-building cooperation rather
than confrontation.
Flora, Gloria. 2000. “Toward a Civil Discourse: The Need in Pub-
lic Management.” Public Land and Resources Law Review 21: 23–32.
One of the key elements of dealing with natural resource conflicts
is the ability to communicate our views with civility and respect,
the author contends, and failure to do so exacerbates conflict and
shifts attention away from the real issues.
Garvin, Cosmo. 2004. “Old Growth Trees to Fall in the Sierra.”
High Country News, March 1, p. 4.
Among the most contentious issues relating to timber management
is the protection of old growth timber, and nowhere is that conflict
better represented than in efforts to log big trees in California.
Gleick, Peter H. 1993. “Water and Conflict: Fresh Water Resources
and International Security.” International Security 18: 79–112.
This is one of the classic, original articles dealing with the issue of
water scarcity. The problem of international security is closely
tied to the availability of natural resources, and may be at the
heart of many conflicts.
Goble, Dale D. 1994. “Introduction: Public Lands and Agricul-
tural Pollution.” Idaho Law Review 30: 433.
This special symposium issue from the University of Idaho
School of Law examines the role of grazing on public lands, with
highly critical assessments of the Bureau of Land Management
despite what the author contends is clear congressional intent.
Gonzalez, George A. 2001. “Ideas and State Capacity, or Business
Dominance? A Historical Analysis of Grazing on the Public
Grasslands.” Studies in American Political Development 15, no. 2
(fall): 234–244.
This historical overview of grazing on public lands traces key leg-
islation and policies, contending that current regulations benefit
Articles
277

the livestock industry, which has controlled federal agencies for
decades.
Hatfield, Craig. 1997. “Oil Back on the Global Agenda.” Nature
(May 8): 121.
This brief article examines the ways in which oil drilling has once
again become an issue of international proportions, and the po-
tential for conflict.
Hawthorne, Peter. 2000. “Striking at the Root of Civil War.” Time
155, no. 12 (March 27): 41.
The United Nations has compiled numerous reports on the civil
wars that plague Africa and the role of the diamond industry in
fostering conflict throughout the continent, especially in Angola.
Kearns, Ethan. 2005. “After Burn: Wildfire Has Destroyed Forests
across the West.” American Forests 111, no 1 (March 22): 26–30.
Rather than dwelling on the damage caused by wildfires, and the
way they have changed the country’s landscape, the author calls
for a massive restoration effort to plant more trees that will
cleanse watersheds, provide wildlife habitat, and clean the air.
Kennes, Erik. 2005. “Footnotes to the Mining Story.” Minerals and
Energy 20, no. 1 (March): 23–28.
The author contends that the reason why mining activities and
civil war seem to be connected is not because it allows easy access
to a country’s mining resources but because there are often no
other available options for particular resources. He urges compa-
nies to work more closely with locally existing networks for more
productive outcomes.
Leonard, Bruce. 2005. “Returning the Land to the Giants.” Na-
tional Parks 79, no. 1 (winter): 18–22.
After John Muir’s visit to the sequoias in 1875, there was public
outrage at the possibility that the giant trees might be cut down.
Fifteen years later the area was made a national park, and tourist
accommodations, such as cabins, stores, and parking lots, began
to destroy the trees’ delicate root systems. The removal of com-
mercial enterprises from the park did not begin until 1974, at a
cost of $70 million.
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Limerick, Patricia Nelson. 2005. “Hope and Gloom Out West.”
New York Times, June 22, p. A19.
The author contends that although the West was once seen as the
native home of hope because of its natural resources, those same
assets are now the second home of tension, conflict, regret, dis-
may, gloom, and bitterness. The key battlegrounds are over en-
ergy production, water, wildfires, and growth.
Lowery, William. 2001. “The Impact of Reinventing Government on
State and Federal Parks.” Journal of Policy History 13, no. 4: 405–428.
This historical view shows how park management has been af-
fected by the need to “reinvent” the relationship between the vari-
ous levels of government in order to make programs more efficient.
Masland, Tom, et al. 2000. “In Search of Hot Rocks.” Newsweek
136, no. 2 (July 10): 30–32.
Although much of the attention dealing with the illegal trade in
diamonds in Africa has focused on cash sales, this investigative
article spotlights the trading of diamonds for guns by rebels of
the Revolutionary United Front in Sierra Leone.
Motavalli, Jim. 2005. “Catching the Wind: The World’s Fastest
Growing Energy Source Is Coming of Age.” E Magazine (Janu-
ary–February): 26–37.
Offshore wind developments, such as those being built along the
East Coast of the United States, are facing stiff opposition from
local groups in an uncertain political climate. The author asks
whether wind power is a politically acceptable form of renewable
energy for the United States.
National Parks Conservation Association. 2005. “Creating Nat-
ural Parks.” National Parks 79, no. 4 (fall): 14–15.
The question and answer format of this article provides an easy-
to-understand explanation of how parks are initially proposed
and created, the development of park units, and how the appro-
priations process works in providing funding for national parks.
Nie, Martin. 2004. “A Rule to Sue By.” Headwaters News (Septem-
ber 30), available at www.headwatersnews.org (accessed January
23, 2006).
Articles
279

The contentious Roadless Rule proposed by the Bush administra-
tion would set aside nearly 59 million acres of land from addi-
tional road building, an action the author believes will put an
enormous responsibility on governors while using rulemaking as
a way of solving public lands conflicts.
Nijhuis, Michelle. 2004. “BLM’s Crown Jewels Go Begging.” High
Country News, October 25, p. 6.
The National Landscape Conservation Service was intended to
serve as an additional source of protection for managing public
lands, but the author notes that its role has been steadily declin-
ing because of competition over financial resources and jurisdic-
tional battles.
Orogun, Paul. 2004. “‘Blood Diamonds’ and Africa’s Armed Con-
flicts in the Post–Cold War Era.” World Affairs 166, no. 3 (winter):
151–161.
The author contends that the end of the Cold War has failed to lead
to any peace dividend for the postcolonial African countries. The
struggles for control over financial revenues and territories of the
diamond industry have led to a catastrophic humanitarian tragedy.
Paskus, Laura. 2005. “The Winds of Change.” High Country News,
May 2, pp. 9–13.
Although many states have enacted a renewable energy portfolio
that requires the development of new or expanded sources of
power, efforts to implement energy policies are going slowly be-
cause of concerns by environmentalists and others over the im-
pact of wind turbines.
Pizer, William A. 2005. “Setting Energy Policy in the Modern
Era.” Resources (winter): 8–10.
As part of a collection of articles, the author contends that re-
source scarcity is no longer as salient an issue as energy security
and environmental challenges that now require government in-
tervention.
Postel, Sandra. 2001. “Growing More Food with Less Water.” Sci-
entific American 284: 46–51.
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

While many researchers have proposed ways of dealing with in-
ternational water scarcity, the author contends that one solution
that is being overlooked is finding technology that reduces water
loss from evaporation in agricultural production.
Princen, Thomas. 2003. “Principles for Sustainability: From Co-
operation and Efficiency to Sufficient.” Global International Politics
3, no. 1: 33–50.
Although there is considerable scientific research on trends in
freshwater availability, there have been thousands of water-re-
lated treaties signed, many of which the author believes have
shown creativity in dealing with this valuable resource. Coopera-
tion has become the norm, but it is important to consider options
such as improving water productivity, regulating groundwater,
and preempting conflicts.
Ring, Ray. 2005. “Gold from the Gas Fields.” High Country News,
November 28, pp. 8–13, 19.
Western states are reaping a windfall in tax revenues from oil and
gas production, along with thousands of jobs, as part of an energy
boom that has both economic and environmental consequences.
Rosenberger, Jack. 2004. “Wasting the West: How Welfare Ranch-
ers and Their Livestock Are Damaging Public Land.” E Magazine
15, no. 4 (July–August): 20–21.
The San Pedro River area in southeastern Arizona is an example
of how a moratorium on livestock grazing on federal lands can
benefit the ecology of an area, although the author notes that such
success stories are rare because cattle ranchers are heavily subsi-
dized by taxpayers’ dollars at well-below-market prices.
Rundle, S. L. 2004. “The Once and Future Federal Grazing
Lands.” William and Mary Law Review 45, no. 4 (March):
1803–1839.
U.S. Supreme Court decisions such as Public Lands Council v. Bab-
bitt are typical of the newer conflicts over public lands grazing,
especially the changes in regulations under the Clinton adminis-
tration and unsuccessful attempts at reform to reduce grazing
management conflicts.
Articles
281

Schulman, Bruce J. 2005. “Governing Nature, Nurturing Govern-
ment: Resource Management and the Development of the Amer-
ican State.” Journal of Policy History 17, no. 4: 375–403.
For a historical background of natural resource management, this
article provides a comprehensive analysis of the creation of the
administrative bureaucracies that reversed the trend of distribut-
ing lands into private hands and instead created a centralized
management system in Washington, D.C.
Simon, Bernard. 2002. “Adding Brand Names to Nameless
Stones.” New York Times, June 27, p. W1.
The issue of blood diamonds is causing businesses such as BHP
Billiton and De Beers to take a new look at the sources of the gems
they use, including new ones in northern Canada from the Ekati
mine.
Talheim, Jennifer. 2005. “Report: Public Lands Grazing Costs $123
Million a Year.” Casper Star Tribune (November 1), at www.casper
startribune.net (accessed November 6, 2005).
Examines the results of a Government Accountability Office
study showing that grazing fees cover only about one-sixth of the
costs of managing the nation’s programs that allow livestock to
graze on public lands.
Wald, Matthew. 2005. “Power Producers Seek Latest Models of
Nuclear Reactors.” New York Times, March 15, p. F3.
After decades of controversy, power companies are taking a new
look at nuclear power as a source of additional energy produc-
tion, despite public fears over waste and radiation.
Waterman, Ryan. 2001. “Supreme Court Rules against Ranchers,
Upholds Grazing Regulations.” Ecology Law Quarterly 28, no. 2:
552–554.
This 2000 decision preserved the regulatory authority of the De-
partment of the Interior to maintain federal rangeland to both
protect the environment and safeguard grazing privileges for
ranchers.
Wiebe, Keith, Abebayehu Tegene, and Betsey Kuhn. 1999. “Find-
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

ing Common Ground on Western Lands.” Rural Development Per-
spectives 14, no. 2 (August): 52–56.
Although there are numerous disputes taking place over the
ownership of land in the West, the authors contend that voluntary
acquisition and conveyance of partial interests in Western land
can offer common ground on which to balance competing social,
economic, and environmental objectives.
Wolf, Aaron T., et al. 2005. “Water Can Be.” Worldwatch Global Se-
curity Brief 5 (June).
This optimistic view of water scarcity issues downplays doom
and gloom scenarios that portray a world in which nations will
go to war over water, and argues instead that nations can come
together and make rational decisions over international water
disputes. Water can be used as a negotiating tool and a commu-
nication lifeline connecting countries in time of crisis.
Wuerthner, George. 1991. “How the West Was Eaten.” Wilderness
(spring): 28–37.
An antigrazing activist, Wuerthner examines how the livestock
industry has been responsible for the massive degradation of the
West, and how political officials have allowed and subsidized cat-
tle grazing on the public lands.
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos
2005 Guide to Wildfires and Forest Fires
Type:
DVD-ROM
Date:
2005
Source:
Privately Compiled by Amazon.com.
New technology allows companies like Amazon to develop mas-
sive (76,000 pages, in this instance) compilations of government
documents. This is an electronic book containing both informa-
tion, illustrations, and maps that provides a comprehensive re-
source on wildfires.
21st Century Complete Guide to the Healthy Forests Initiative
Type:
DVD-ROM
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos
283

Date:
2005
Source:
Privately compiled by Amazon.com.
The Bush administration’s Healthy Forests Initiative is covered in
depth, with additional information about federal wildfire pro-
grams, regulations, and policies, along with photographs of fires,
profiles of Hotshot crews, and statistics from the National Intera-
gency Fire Center.
An American Nile 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
55 minutes
Date:
1997
Source:
Home Vision Cinema: Public Media Incorporated,
Chicago, IL.
Charts the dramatic transformation of the Colorado River from a
wild desert waterway, including the construction of Hoover Dam
and environmental battles over potential damming of the Grand
Canyon.
Cadillac Desert
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
55 minutes
Date:
1997
Source:
Home Vision Cinema: Public Media Incorporated,
Chicago, IL.
Traces the fierce political and environmental battles that raged
around the transformation of California’s Central Valley and the
recent trend of diverting water away from agriculture and toward
cities and wildlife.
Can Tropical Forests Be Saved?
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
120 minutes
Date:
1991
Source:
Richter Productions.
The demise of tropical rain forest has resulted in barren land
covering much of a belt along the equator. Now, thirty-three
countries must look for solutions that are cooperative and cost
effective.
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

End of the Road 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
18 minutes
Date:
2000
Source:
High Plains Films, Missoula, MT.
Short documentary on the half-million miles of roads already
constructed in the national forests and the controversy over the
nation’s roadless rules.
Fate of the Forest
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
30 minutes
Date:
1996
Source:
Television Trust for the Environment, London,
UK.
Indigenous peoples have been at the forefront of developing
strategies for preserving tropical rain forests, using their own re-
sources to avoid conflict with loggers and timber companies.
Fires of the Amazon 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
44 minutes
Date:
2002
Source:
Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA.
Documents the destruction of the Amazon rain forest, explaining
the rapid rate of logging and burning, and the growing political
clout of local residents.
The God Squad and the Case of the Northern Spotted Owl
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
57 minutes
Date:
2001
Source:
Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA.
Chronicles the controversial actions of the Endangered Species
Committee and proposed timber sales in southwest Oregon that
mirror the debate over old growth forests.
Good Wood
Type:
VHS Videocassette
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos
285

Length:
45 minutes
Date:
1999
Source:
Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA.
Asks whether it is possible to stop deforestation while still sus-
taining communities that depend upon the forest for their liveli-
hood, with coverage of communities in Honduras, British Co-
lumbia, and Mexico.
Grand Canyon
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
95 minutes
Date:
2002
Source:
Firstlight Pictures, Maplewood, NJ.
Documents the human history of the Grand Canyon, including
discovery and exploration, environmental conditions, recre-
ational use, and history.
The Great Forest
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
104 minutes
Date:
2003
Source:
High Plains Films, Missoula, MT.
Identifies the conflict between conservationists and the wood
products industry in three short documentaries that examine the
loss of virgin forests in the East.
The Greatest Good
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
120 minutes
Date:
2005
Source:
U.S. Forest Service, Washington, DC.
U.S. Forest Service centennial film traces the agency’s history
throughout the twentieth century, examining conflicts over tim-
ber, grazing, fire, wilderness, and recreation.
Hoover Dam
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
60 minutes
Date:
1999
Source:
PBS Video, Alexandria, VA.
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Describes the making of a national monument and the environ-
mental conflicts involved, using archival footage and photographs.
Human Faces behind the Rain Forest 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
30 minutes
Date:
2001
Source:
First Run Icarus Films, Brooklyn, NY.
Documents the dramatic events surrounding the harvest of the
opium poppy crop in the Colombian rain forest through the ex-
periences of the indigenous peoples involved.
Last Oasis
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
55 minutes
Date:
1997
Source:
Home Vision Cinema: Public Media Incorporated,
Chicago, IL.
The story of how America’s large dams became examples for
water projects in developing countries, and the conflicts that have
arisen in those nations.
The Last Stand: Ancient Redwoods and the Bottom Line
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
57 minutes
Date:
2002
Source:
University of California Extension Center for
Media, Berkeley, CA.
Examines the destruction of the ancient redwoods in northern
California, with testimony from economists, scientists, forest ac-
tivists, and local residents.
Logs, Lies, and Videotape 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
12 minutes
Date:
1996
Source:
Green Fire Productions, Eugene, OR.
Looks at the impact of a logging measure passed by Congress that
directs the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management to ac-
celerate salvage logging.
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos
287

Motor 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
38 minutes
Date:
1999
Source:
High Plains Films, Missoula, MT.
Shows how recreational use by off-highway vehicles, personal
watercraft, and other motorized vehicles is affecting wilderness
areas and the nation’s lakes, deserts, and forests.
Mulholland’s Dream
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
85 minutes
Date:
1997
Source:
Home Vision Cinema: Public Media Incorporated,
Chicago, IL.
Tells of William Mulholland’s search for water for the people of
Los Angeles and the building of the aqueduct 250 miles from the
Owens Valley to Southern California.
Oil on Ice 
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
90 minutes
Date:
2004
Source:
Sierra Club Productions, San Francisco, CA.
Investigates the possible environmental and cultural effects of
proposed drilling in Alaska’s Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The film emphasizes the impact on the native Gwich’in people,
caribou herds, and global climate.
Powder River Country
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
34 minutes
Date:
2005
Source:
High Plains Films, Missoula, MT.
Shows the transformation of Wyoming’s Bighorn Mountains
area, which is a potential new source of natural gas, during a time
of energy debates.
Razing Appalachia
Type:
VHS Videocassette
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Length:
54 minutes
Date:
2003
Source:
Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA.
Portrays the struggle of the people of Blair, West Virginia, against
a mining company whose jobs in local coal mines are a major
source of employment for the region.
Restoring the Everglades
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
15 minutes
Date:
1998
Source:
National Parks and Conservation Association,
Washington, DC.
Reviews issues of wetland conservation, agricultural pollution,
and efforts to restore the national park.
Save the Sungmi Mountain
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
36 minutes
Date:
2003
Source:
Diffusion Films, Korea.
Documents the efforts of the municipal government in Seoul,
Korea, to build a reservoir on top of a mountain, and the struggle
between politicians and villagers who oppose the project.
Since the Company Came
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
52 minutes
Date:
2000
Source:
First Run Icarus Films, Brooklyn, NY.
Story of a remote village in the Solomon Islands that invites a
Malaysian company to log their tribal land, and then faces dis-
putes over logging royalties and the preservation of forests and
native traditions.
Taking Stock: Living with Change in the American Southwest
Type:
VHS videocassette
Length:
52 minutes
Date:
2004
Source:
Grand Canyon Association, Flagstaff, AZ.
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos
289

Covers a presentation by Colorado Plateau experts Rose Houk and
Michael Collier about the nature of ecological change in the South-
west, focusing on public lands, water, and conservation issues.
Tales of the San Joaquin
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
27 minutes
Date:
2004
Source:
Christopher Beaver Films, Sausalito, CA.
Explores this California river’s history and the issues of water
rights that developed after the building of the Friant Dam in the
1940s.
Thirst
Type:
DVD
Length:
62 minutes
Date:
2004
Source:
Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA.
Without narrative, shows how the debate over water rights be-
tween communities and corporations can serve as the catalyst for
resistance to globalization.
Treasuring Our Natural Heritage: Biodiversity Science Games
Type:
CD-ROM
Date:
2003
Source:
Boise, Idaho Public Television
Computer games that deal with natural resources, human ecol-
ogy, and biological diversity, such as Habitat Hike, Nature’s
Kitchen, and Linked to the Land.
Trees Are the Answer
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
30 minutes
Date:
2000
Source:
Greenspirit, Ltd., Vancouver, BC.
Based on the book of the same name, this controversial film con-
tends the environmental movement's current thinking about
forests is on the wrong track. The film proposes that rather than
reducing our consumption of wood, we should be planting more
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

trees and using more renewable wood to reduce our reliance on
non-renewable fuel sources.
Tree Sit: The Art of Resistance
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
120 minutes
Date:
1998
Source:
Earth Films, Redway, CA.
In documentary format, this film chronicles the protests of the
Redwood Summer that were aimed at stopping logging in the
Headwaters Forest, one of the last stands of old growth forest in
the United States.
Trinkets and Beads
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
53 minutes
Date:
1996
Source:
First Run Icarus Films, Brooklyn, NY.
Documents the lives of the Huaorani, a small tribe of Ecuadorian
Indians, who after pressure from foreign oil companies, agreed to
allow oil drilling on their land.
Troubled Waters: The Dilemmas of Dams
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
53 minutes
Date:
2003
Source:
The Video Project, San Francisco, CA.
Looks at the controversies over dams from the perspectives of en-
vironmental, cultural, economic, and spiritual issues, using per-
sonal interviews and archival footage.
Water for the Fields
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
27 minutes
Date:
2003
Source:
DW-TV, Germany.
Explores the issue of agricultural irrigation throughout the world,
showing innovative ideas and the destruction caused by defor-
estation.
CD-ROMs/DVD-ROMs/DVDs/Videos
291

Water, Land, People and Conflict
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
29 minutes
Date:
1998
Source:
Center for Defense Information, Washington, DC.
Argues that the idea of a healthy environment is just as vital to
national security as military strength.
Whose Home on the Range?
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
55 minutes
Date:
1999
Source:
Bullfrog Films, Oley, PA.
Covers the opposition to federal land management policies in
Catron County, New Mexico, and conflicts among ranchers, log-
gers, environmental groups, and the U.S. Forest Service.
Wildland
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
35 minutes
Date:
2000
Source:
High Plains Films, Missoula, MT.
Expresses the importance of retaining untouched wilderness, fea-
turing the nation’s most prominent natural spaces.
Wind River
Type:
VHS Videocassette
Length:
34 minutes
Date:
1999
Source:
High Plains Films, Missoula, MT.
Describes how water rights are awarded to Wyoming farmers on
a seniority basis, examining core community values and concerns
over fairness.
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Sources

Glossary
Acre: An acre of land measures about 43,560 square feet, with a square,
one-acre plot measuring about 209 feet by 209 feet.
Acre Foot: The amount of water needed to cover an acre of land, one foot
deep. An acre foot is equivalent to 325,851 gallons of water.
Adaptive Management: A process for adjusting management and re-
search decisions to better achieve management objectives, recognizing
that knowledge about natural resource systems is uncertain.
Alternative Energy: Energy that is not popularly used and is usually en-
vironmentally sound, such as solar or wind energy.
Alternative Fuels: Transportation fuels other than gasoline or diesel, in-
cluding natural gas, electricity, methanol, and biofuels.
Ancient Forest: A forest that is typically older than 200 years with large
trees, dense canopies, and an abundance of diverse wildlife.
ANWR: Alaska National Wildlife Refuge. A controversial protected area
that is under consideration as a source of oil for the United States.
Aquifer: An underground source of water, often pooled beneath the sur-
face.
AUM: Animal Unit Month. The amount of forage that a cow and her calf
can eat in one month, used by the U.S. government to calculate the fed-
eral grazing fee.
Biodiversity: A large number and wide range of species and animals,
plants, fungi, and microorganisms. Ecologically, wide biodiversity is
conducive to the development of all species.
Biomass: The total woody material in a forest, both merchantable and
material, such as small branches and leaves, that results from a logging
operation. Biomass can also consist of other types of vegetation that can
be burned, including rotting fruits and vegetables, lawn clippings, and
landscape debris. Some types of biomass are used as fuel.
Biosphere: The part of the earth and atmosphere in which living organ-
isms exist or that is capable of supporting life.
293

Biosphere Reserve: A part of an international network of preserved
areas designated by the UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Orga-
nization (UNESCO). Biosphere reserves are vital centers of biodiversity
in which research and monitoring activities are conducted to preserve
healthy natural systems threatened by development.
Blood Diamonds (see conflict diamonds).
Board Foot: A unit of wood measuring 144 cubic inches, used as a meas-
urement in timber harvesting.
Boreal Forests: The forests found in the areas of the far north latitudes,
below the treeless tundra of the polar region. Boreal forests are the
biggest terrestrial ecosystem in the world, almost completely intact, free
of roads and industrial development.
Bourse: A stock exchange–type institution that is typically a corporation
that provides for trade through a centralized system of pooled goods.
BTU: British thermal unit. A unit of energy used primarily in the United
States, calculated as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature
of one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit.
Carbon Sinks: Areas where carbon is stored and not released into the at-
mosphere, such as forests and wetlands.
Clear-cutting: In logging, the practice of cutting down all the trees in a
designated parcel of land, leaving only the stumps or other debris.
Collaboration: A process involving two or more groups or interests who
agree to cooperate to solve an identified problem.
Commodity: Treating a resource as if it were a crop available for harvest,
such as trees considered as a product of the forest.
Conflict Diamonds: Diamonds, in either rough or polished form, ex-
tracted from or traded in areas where there is ongoing armed warfare,
such as Sierra Leone or Liberia.
Crude Oil: Composed of natural gas liquids, refinery feedstocks, and ad-
ditives as well as other hydrocarbons.
Custodial Management: The concept that the government is not just the
owner of land but also the steward of it for future use.
Ecology: A branch of science concerned with the interrelationship of or-
ganisms and their environment.
Ecoregion: An area defined by environmental conditions and natural
features, or defined by its ecology.
Ecosystem: All of the living organisms (animals, plants, and microbes) in
a given area, and the processes of life cycles, usually described by the
predominant form of life, such as a marine ecosystem.
294
Glossary

Ecoterrorism: The intentional sabotage or destruction of buildings, vehi-
cles, or activities by persons or groups opposed to a controversial envi-
ronmental project, agency, or company.
Endangered Species: In generic use, plants or animals in danger of going
extinct; in the United States the term is applied under the Endangered
Species Act to species when the total number remaining may not be suf-
ficient to reproduce enough offspring to guarantee survival of the
species.
Extinction: The state of a species no longer existing throughout its entire
range.
First Nations: The original people inhabiting an area, often synonymous
with Indian, aboriginal, or indigenous people. The term is often applied
to the governments, although there is no legal standing for these groups
under international law.
Forage: Vegetation such as grasses, small shrubs, and other plants used
for grazing by livestock or wildlife, or the act of eating these types of
plants.
Geographic Information System: Technology that provides data on a
specific plot of land or space, usually through satellite imagery.
Grazing Fee: An amount charged by the government or by a private
owner to allow a rancher to let livestock forage on designated parcels of
land.
Gross Domestic Product: A measure of the size of a nation’s economy,
defined as the market value of all final goods and services produced
within a country in a given period of time.
Groundwater: Water that accumulates below the surface in pools or
aquifers.
Habitat: The natural area in which plants and animals grow and repro-
duce.
Headright: A policy allowing an immigrant 50 acres of land upon set-
tling it himself, used to encourage colonization.
Hectare: A unit of area equal to 10,000 square meters, commonly used for
measuring land areas in the fields of agriculture, forestry, and public
planning.
Homesteading: The acquisition of up to 160 acres of land by any head of
a family over twenty-one years of age, upon proof that the person had
resided upon and cultivated the land for at least five years.
Hydrology: The scientific study of the properties, distribution, and ef-
fects of water on the earth’s surface, in the soil and underlying rocks, and
in the atmosphere.
Glossary
295

Indigenous: Native to a region or place. There are an estimated 370 mil-
lion people considered indigenous to about seventy countries world-
wide. Indigenous people are the inheritors and practitioners of unique
cultures and ways of relating to other people and the environment.
Kimberley Process: An international initiative established to develop
practical approaches to tracing the origin of diamonds through certifica-
tion and regulations, named after Kimberley, South Africa, where the
first major conference on diamond certification was held.
Multiple Use: Term coined by Gifford Pinchot to refer to the manage-
ment of land for more than one purpose, including recreation, commer-
cial production, or aesthetics.
Natural Resources: The land, water, and atmosphere, and the compo-
nents upon or within them, such as minerals, and animal and plant life.
NGO: Nongovernmental organization, or a group not affiliated with a
formal institution of government, such as a trade association, charitable
group, or collective interest.
Old Growth: Forests that are distinguished by old trees representing the
last stage of stand development, with age dependent on the type of veg-
etation and climate.
OPEC: Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, made up of
eleven member countries.
Organic Act: The initial legislation used to establish an agency within the
U.S. government.
PETA: People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, an animal rights or-
ganization.
Plenary: A business meeting or session held during a conference.
Problem Displacement: Describes a situation in which a problem is
passed along to another party, rather than seeking a solution to the prob-
lem.
Public Domain: Lands acquired by the United States from other coun-
tries through purchase or other forms of acquisition.
Rangeland: Areas of vegetation where livestock or wildlife graze openly,
including shrub land and some barren areas. Rangeland is usually con-
sidered less valuable than farmland.
RARE: Roadless Area Review Evaluation. The U.S. Forest Service con-
ducted an evaluation of wilderness areas to determine which parcels
should be declared off-limits to road building through two inventories in
the late 1970s.
Reservation: Under Article IV of the U.S. Constitution, Congress has the
power to reclassify a given area of land from being available for sale or
296
Glossary

other form of disposal to one in which it is committed to a specific pub-
lic use. The first major reservation occurred in 1872, when land for Yel-
lowstone National Park was set aside by Congress.
Reserve: An area that has been designated for a specific use, such as a
forest reserve or a wildlife reserve. It may also be afforded some kind of
protected status.
Riparian: The areas adjacent to a stream, river, lake, or wetland that are
distinct from the water and uplands, such as the banks of a river or its
flood plain.
Rough: Diamonds in rocks before they are converted into polished
stones.
Sagebrush Rebellion: A movement started by ranchers and miners dur-
ing the late 1970s in response to efforts of the federal government to im-
prove the management of public lands.
Salvage Logging: The logging of dead or diseased trees in order to im-
prove overall forest health.
Scheme: A systematic way of accomplishing a task; a mechanism for im-
plementing a policy.
Second Growth Forests: Forests that have grown back after being
logged.
Slash: The leafy debris that is left on the ground after a forest is logged.
Slash is usually gathered into piles and then burned, rather than being
used as biomass fuel.
Soot: A fine, sticky powder, composed mostly of carbon, formed by the
burning of fossil fuels.
Species: A group of related organisms having common characteristics.
Squatter: A person who obtained possession of land simply by staying
on it without formal title.
Sulfur Dioxide: A heavy, odorous gas that can be condensed into a clear
liquid. It is used to make sulfuric acid, bleaching agents, preservatives,
and refrigerant, and is a major contributor to acid rain in industrial areas.
Surface Water: Water located above the ground, usually in rivers, lakes,
and other bodies of water.
Sustainability: Maintenance of the resource to produce or maintain a rel-
atively constant supply or number, such as sustainable agriculture.
Tenure: In land use, ownership conferred upon an individual on the
basis of military service, or issued by a legal authority.
Third World: Countries that are in the developing stage of building an
economy infrastructure.
Glossary
297

Threatened Species: In the United States, under the Endangered Species
Act, a plant or animal that is not yet endangered but that requires pro-
tection to reduce the potential for extinction.
Tree Spiking: The process of hammering nails into trees about to be cut
down as a way of ruining the saw blades, potentially injuring loggers.
The practice is alleged to be one of the major tactics used by groups as-
sociated with ecoterrorism and sabotage, such as Earth First!
298
Glossary

Index
299
Acadia National Park, 48
Adams, Ansel, 131–132
Adirondack North Country
Association, 196
Africa
diamond trade and civil
wars, 76–78
East African drought, 93
water scarcity, 95
African Diamond Council, 196
African Union, 77
Alaska National Interest Lands
Conservation Act of 1980,
26, 39
Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act of 1971, 39
Alaska Public Interest Coalition,
38
Alaska Purchase, 9–10
Alaska Rainforest Campaign,
196–197
Aldo Leopold Foundation, 197
Alliance for Energy and
Economic Growth, 197
Alliance to Save Energy, 197–198
Amazon Conservation
Association, 198
Amazon Conservation Team, 198
Amazon Watch, 87
American Association for the
Advancement of Science,
resolution on forest policy,
168, 169–171
American Coal Foundation, 198
American Conservation
Association, 199
American Forage and Grassland
Council, 199
American Forest Foundation, 199
American Forestry Association,
54–55
American Forests, 199–200
American Gas Foundation, 200
American Grassfed Association,
200
American Hiking Society, 47,
200
American Land Conservancy,
201
American Land Rights
Association, 201
American Lands Alliance, 57,
201
American Water Resources
Association, 201–202
American Water Works
Association Research
Foundation, 192
American Wildlands, 202
American Wind Energy
Association, 202
American Wood Council, 202

Americans with Disabilities Act,
44
Amnesty International
and conflict diamonds, 80
and Ecuadorean oil industry,
83, 87
Ancient Forest International, 203
ANCSA. See Alaska Native
Claims Settlement Act of
1971
Angola, 77, 79
ANILCA. See Alaska National
Interest Lands
Conservation Act of 1980
Animal unit month, 54, 55
Antiquities Act of 1906, 13, 18
ANWR. See Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge
Appalachian Trail Conservancy,
203
Applegate Partnership, 71
Arctic National Wildlife Range,
39
Argentina People and Nature
Foundation, 203
Articles of Confederation, 6
Atlantic Richfield Oil Company,
37
AUMs. See Animal unit months
Azerbaijan, 84
Babbitt, Bruce, 132–133
BIOCAPE, 203–204
Biodiversity, 68
Bioluminescent Bay, 52
Birds, endangered, 182–183,
184t.
Blackfoot Challenge, 60–61
BLM. See Bureau of Land
Management
Blood diamonds. See Diamond
mining and trade
Blue Ribbon Coalition, 204
Bluewater Network, 204
Boreal Forest Network, 204
Brazil
deforestation rate, 90
and oil industry, 83
Brower, David Ross, 133–134
Bryce, James, 41
Bureau of Indian Affairs,
239–240
Bureau of Land Management,
179, 240
and Classification and
Multiple Use Act of 1964,
23
and Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement
Act, 46
and fee demonstration
program, 43
and grazing policies, 20, 21,
23, 27, 55
Bureau of Reclamation, 17
and Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement
Act, 46
Bush, George W., 29, 40, 45, 52
Butz, Earl, 64
California Board of Forestry, 70
California Wilderness Coalition,
205
Campaign for Old Growth,
69–70
Canadian logging controversy,
90–91
Carson, Rachel, 22–23
Carter, Jimmy, 27, 52
Cattle ranching. See Livestock
industry
CCC. See Civilian Conservation
Corps
Ceiba Foundation for Tropical
Conservation, 205
Center for Biological Diversity,
205–206
300
Index

Center for Science in Public
Participation, 206
Center for the Defense of Free
Enterprise, 27
Chad, 84
ChevronTexaco, 86–87
Christianity, 4
Civilian Conservation Corps, 19
Classification and Multiple Use
Act of 1964, 23
Clawson, Robert Marion,
134–135
Clean Air Act (1963, 1970), 25
Clean Diamond Trade Act of
2003, 80
Clean Water Act of 1972, 25
Cleveland, Grover, 66
Clinton, Bill, 42, 52, 69
Coal, 33
reserves, 34
Coal Operators and Associates,
206
Coalition for American Energy
Security, 39
Colombia, 84–85
Colorado Environmental
Coalition, 206
Common Varieties Act of 1955,
22
Conflict management
and forests, 70–71
and international differences,
75–76
and rangelands, 59–62
Conservation
and Pinchot, 14–18, 25
redefinition after 1960, 25
Conservation Fund, 207
Conservation International, 207
Conservation Northwest, 207
Cooperative State Research,
Education, and Extension
Service, 240
Crater Lake, 42
Custodial management era, 3,
16–21
De Beers, 78, 80
de Stoeckl, Edouard, 9
Death Valley National Park, 48
Defenders of Wildlife, list of
endangered wildlife
refuges, 183–184, 185t.
DeVoto, Bernard, 136–137
Diamond High Council, 208
Diamond mining and trade
as cause of civil war, 76–78
country of origin, 78
country of provenance, 78
excerpt from WFDB and
IDMA joint resolution on
illegal sale of diamonds,
168, 171–173
Kimberley Process (tracking
scheme), 79–80
measures against illegal
diamond exporting, 80
preamble to Kimberley
Process Certification
Scheme, 168, 173–175
tracking schemes, 78–80
Domestic Petroleum Council, 208
Earth Day, 25
Earth First!, 69
Earth Island Institute, 208–209
Earth Summit, 150, 151
Earthjustice Legal Defense
Fund, 209
Earthstewards Network, 209
Earthworks, 209
Ecological Society of America,
210
Economic Community of West
African States, 77
Economic conditions
and sunbelt growth, 26
and westward expansion, 9
Index
301

Ecuador
economic dependence on oil,
83
oil industry and
environmental impact, 83,
86–87
Elk River Timber Company, 70
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 12
Endangered Species Act of 1973,
28, 183
Energy
policy, 21–22
projected trends in U.S.
demand, 191, 191t.
use, costs, and jobs related to
various sources, 191, 192t.
Energy Future Coalition, 210
Environmental Defense, 210
Environmental movement,
22–23
and Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge, 39
and cattle ranchers, 27–28,
56–57
cooperation from Venezuelan
oil industry, 87
cooperative efforts with
livestock industry, 59–62
fragmentation of, 29
and governmental policy
changes, 23–24
and legislation, 25, 28–29
local groups, 24
and old growth forests,
68–70
and rainforests, 90–91, 92–93
and redefinition of
conservation, 25
and Santa Barbara oil spill
(1969), 37–38
and Trans-Alaska Pipeline
System, 38–39
Environmental Protection
Information Center, 69
Environmental Working Group,
210–211
Exxon Valdez oil spill (1989), 40
Federal Land Policy and
Management Act of 1976,
26, 159
text, 163–165
Federal Lands Recreation
Enhancement Act of 2004,
45–46
Federal Water Pollution Control
Act of 1961, 25
Fee demo program. See
Recreational Fee
Demonstration Program
Flagstaff, Arizona, 24
Flight 93 memorial site, 52
FLPMA. See Federal Land
Policy and Management
Act of 1976
Forest Action Network, 90, 211
Forest and Rangeland
Renewable Resources
Planning Act of 1974, 65
Forest Guardians, 59, 211
Forest Guild, 211–212
Forest Reserve Act of 1891, 12
Forest Service. See U.S. Forest
Service
Forest Service Employees for
Environmental Ethics,
212
Forest Service Organic Act of
1897, 64
Forests, 62–63
clear-cutting, 63–65
colonial New England, 3–4
conflict management, 70–71
deforestation and global
carbon cycle, 92
destruction over 8,000 years,
88
effects of losses, 91
302
Index

and Endangered Species Act
of 1973, 28
excerpt from American
Association for the
Advancement of Science
resolution on policy, 168,
169–171
extent of worldwide forest
and wooded land by
region, 187–188, 187t.
logging, 90–91
logging and Philippine
landslide, 91–92
maintaining sustainable
timber supply, 63–66
managed, 89
Middle Ages, 5
multiple use, 65–66
and natural disasters, 91
net losses and gains, 89–90
old growth, 66–70, 187–188
plantation, 89
primary, 89
protected area networks, 93
protection and resistance to,
19
reserves, 12–13
shade agriculture, 93
sustainability, 63
sustainable forestry, 92–93
thinning, 24–25
and timber industry, 67
timber vs. recreation, 26
trade in illegal wood, 92
UN assessments, 88–89
world’s total forested area,
88, 89
Forests and the European Union
Resource Network, 212
Forests Forever, 69–70, 212
Fossil fuels, 32–33. See also Coal;
Natural gas; Oil
Freshwater Action Network, 213
Friends of the Environment for
Development and
Sustainability, 213
Fundacion Ambiente y Recursos
Naturales, 213
GAO. See General Accounting
Office; Government
Accountability Office
Gas Processors Suppliers
Association, 213–214
Gasoline prices, 34
General Accounting Office, 44
General Land Office, 20, 53
General Land Ordinance of
1785, 10
Global Forest Watch, 214
Global Policy Forum, 214
Global Water, 214
Global Water Policy Project,
148–149
Global Water Research
Coalition, 215
Global Witness, 80
Gold, 33
and environmental
degradation, 81–82
prices, 81, 184
prices (1968–2005), 186t.
Gore, Al, Jr., 42
Government Accountability
Office, 44, 45, 165
abstract of report on
rangeland management
and grazing fees, 166–167
Grand Canyon, 24
Grand Canyon National Park,
49
Grand Canyon National Park
Foundation, 49
Grand Canyon Trust, 49, 61
Grazing Division (Grazing
Service), 55. See also
Bureau of Land
Management
Index
303

Grazing Lands Conservation
Initiative, 215
Grazing policies, 20, 21, 23, 27,
165
abstract of GAO report on
fees, 166–167
agencies overseeing, 55
buyout of leases, 61–62
and environmental impacts
of grazing, 58–59
fees, 54–55
See also Rangelands; Taylor
Grazing Act of 1934
Grazing Service, 20
Great Bear Rainforest
Campaign, 90
Great Klondike Gold Rush, 10
Great Old Broads for
Wilderness, 215
Great Smoky Mountains
National Park, 18
Greater Yellowstone Coalition,
216
Greenpeace
on First Nations and
Canadian logging, 90–91
on logging and Philippine
landslide, 91–92
Hage, Wayne, 56, 137–138
Harrison, Benjamin, 13, 18
Headwaters Forest, 69–70
Healthy Forests Restoration Act
of 2003, 24–25
Heritage Forests Campaign, 216
Hetch Hetchy Valley and dam,
15–16
Hickel, Walter, 37, 38
High Country Citizens’
Alliance, 58, 216
Hill, Julia “Butterfly,” 69,
138–139
Homestead Act of 1862, 11, 53
Hot Springs, Arkansas, 12
Hot Springs Canyon, Arizona, 60
Idaho Conservation League,
216–217
IDMA. See International
Diamond Manufacturers
Association
Independent Offices
Appropriation Act of
1952, 55
Independent Petroleum
Association of America,
217
Institute for Problems of
Natural Resource Use and
Ecology, 217
Instituto Terra, 217–218
Interlacken Declaration, 79
International Diamond
Manufacturers
Association, 79
International Gas Union, 218
International Tropical Timber
Organization, 218
International Water Resources
Association, 218–219
Inupiat Eskimos, 39
Iraq
large oil reserves, 85–86
oil-for-food scandal, 85–86
U.S. occupation, 85, 86
Izaak Walton League, 64, 219
Jarbridge Resource Area, Idaho,
59–60
Jefferson, Thomas, 8
Jewelers Vigilance Committee,
219
Johnson, Andrew, 9–10
Johnson, Lyndon, 23
Kazakhstan, 84
Keep, Charles, and Keep
Commission, 17
304
Index

Kennedy, John F., 23
Kerr, Andy, 68, 140–141
Kimberley Process International
Certification Scheme, 79
preamble, 168, 173–175
Land management, 2
and Articles of
Confederation, 6
colonial America, 5–6
eras (U.S.), 2–3
patents (claims), 6
and regional conflicts of
1970s, 26–27
and U.S. westward
expansion, 6
League for the Advancement of
States’ Rights, 27
Legislation
and environmental
movement, 25, 28–29
and natural resources,
159–165
Lewis and Clark expedition, 8
Liberia
and diamond trade, 80
and timber exports, 93
Lifewater International, 219–220
Lignite Energy Council, 220
Livestock industry, 53–54
cooperative efforts with
environmentalists, 59–62
and declining market for
beef, 56
and environmental
movement, 27–28, 56–57
subsidization of, 57–58
Loess Hills, 52
Louisiana Purchase, 8
Magna Carta, 5
Mammoth Cave National Park,
18
Manifest Destiny, 7–8, 10
Marsh, George Perkins, 12
Marshall, Bob, 37
Marvel, John, 59–60
MAXXAM Corporation, 69–70
McFarland, J. Horace, 141–142
Mendes, Chico, 142–143
Mexican Cession, 9
Mexico, 96–97
Mineral Information Institute,
220
Mineral Leasing Act of 1920,
20–21, 33, 39
Minerals, 32
metallic and nonmetallic, 32
reserves, 33–34
See also Diamond mining and
trade; Gold
Minerals Management Service,
241
Mining, 33
U.S. stability, 76
See also Diamond mining and
trade; Gold
Mining Law of 1872, 13, 20, 22,
33
Monongahela National Forest,
64
Morton, Rogers, 38
Mount Desert Island, 18
Mount Rainier, 42
Muir, John, 14–15, 23
Multiple Mineral Development
Act of 1954, 22
Multiple Use and Sustained
Yield Act of 1960, 26, 65
Muskett, Milford, 143–144
MUSYA. See Multiple Use and
Sustained Yield Act of
1960
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, 92
National Association of State
Foresters, 220
Index
305

National Audubon Society, 18,
182–183, 220–221
list of ten most endangered
birds, 184t.
National Cattlemen’s Beef
Association, 21, 56, 221
National Commission on
Science for Sustainable
Forestry, 221
National Conservation Areas, 46
National Energy Foundation,
221–222
National Environmental Policy
Act of 1970, 25, 38–39, 64
National Environmental Trust,
222
National Forest Foundation, 222
National Forest Management
Act of 1976, 26, 28, 65
National Forest Products
Association, 65
National Landscape
Conservation System, 179
sites, 180t.–182t.
National Mining Association,
222
National Park Foundation, 49
National Park Service Organic
Act of 1916, 42, 159
1970 amendments, 50–51
text, 160–162
National Park Service, 18, 20, 42,
241
and fee demonstration
program, 43, 44–45
and grazing policies, 55
influence of environmental
movement and focus on
science, 42
and performance
management focus, 42
and Sequoia National Park,
19, 24
See also McFarland, J. Horace
National Park Trust, 48–49, 223
National parks, 13, 19–20
additional categories since
1970, 50–51
as best U.S. idea, 41
commercialization of, 18–19
maintenance shortfalls, 48
and private sector assistance
or sponsorship, 49–50
proposed selling of, 49
staffing shortfalls, 48
visitation 182, 183t.
See also Great Smoky
Mountains National Park;
Mammoth Cave National
Park; Sequoia National
Park; Shenandoah National
Park; Yellowstone National
Park; Yosemite National
Park
National Parks Conservation
Association, 48, 52, 223
National Petroleum Council,
241–242
National Public Lands Grazing
Campaign, 61–62, 223. See
also Kerr, Andy
National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, 71
National Volcanic Monuments,
46
National Wildlife Federation, 65,
223–224
National Wildlife Refuges
Arctic, 26, 39–40
list of ten most endangered,
183–184, 185f.
Native Americans (and First
Nations)
and Canadian logging, 90–91
and forest management, 65
and westward expansion, 11
Native Forest Network, 224
Native Habitat, 224
306
Index

Natural gas, 21
environmental impact, 82–83,
87
and human rights, 86
limited resources, 82
political and economic
effects, 82, 84, 87–88
top producing countries, 188,
190t.
western states, 41
wide geographic distribution
of resources, 82
See also Oil
Natural resource agencies. See U.S.
natural resource agencies
Natural resources
conflicts in western states,
31–32
defined, 1
early historical
understandings, 4–5
eras (U.S.), 2–3
and legislation, 159–165
Natural Resources Conservation
Service, 242
Natural Resources Defense
Council, 224
Nature Conservancy, 225
NEPA. See National
Environmental Policy Act
of 1970
New Forests Project, 225
New York State Common
Retirement Fund, 87
Newell, Frederick, 17
NFMA. See National Forest
Management Act of 1976
Nigeria
militant attacks on oil
operations, 87–88
oil industry and
displacement of
indigenous peoples, 83
See also Saro-Wiwa, Ken
Nixon, Richard, 37, 38
NLCS. See National Landscape
Conservation System
No Dirty Gold Campaign, 81
Nonrenewable resources, 32
depletion, 32
and environmental damage,
34, 36–37
and infrastructure damage,
34, 36
and land prices, 35
and severance taxes, 35
and value and return, 34, 35
Norman, Joan, 145–146
Northern spotted owl, 28
Norton, Gale, 50
NPCA. See National Parks
Conservation Association
Office of Fossil Energy, 242
Office of Surface Mining, 242–243
Oil, 21, 33
and Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge, 39–40
crude oil and petroleum
exporting countries to
U.S., 188 189t.
environmental impact, 82–83,
87
Exxon Valdez oil spill (1989), 40
and human rights, 86–87
limited resources, 82
political and economic
effects, 82, 83–88
reserves, 34
Santa Barbara oil spill (1969),
37–38
shale, 40–41
top ten producing countries,
188, 190t.
western states, 40–41
wide geographic distribution
of resources, 82
See also Natural gas
Index
307

Oil & Gas Accountability
Project, 225
Olympic National Park, 48, 66
Olympic Peninsula, 66–67
Oregon Compromise, 9
Oregon Natural Desert
Association, 225–226
Oregon Natural Resources
Council, 226
Oregon Trail, 11
O’Sullivan, John L., 7–8
Outdoor Industry Association,
47
Pacific Lumber Company, 69–70
Paganism, 4
Palau, 52
Partners in Parks, 226–227
Partnership Africa Canada, 227
Penn, William, 146–148
Pinchot, Gifford, 14–18, 25, 54
on sustainability, 63–64
Pinchot Institute for
Conservation, 227
Pollution, 22–23, 25
Pombo, Richard, 49
Population
growth (1783–1860), 10
Western states, 22
and westward expansion, 8–9
Postel, Sandra, 148–149
Powell, John Wesley, 53
Protected areas policy
and abundance of protected
areas, 50–52
conflicts over, 51–52
designation proces, 51–52
and fee demonstration
program, 43–48
and national parks, 41–42
and staffing and
infrastructure
maintenance, 48–50
Public Employees for
Environmental
Responsibility, 227
Quincy Library Group, 70–71,
228
Quivira Coalition, 153–154
Rainforest Action Network, 83
Rainforest Foundation USA, 228
Rangelands, 13, 20, 21, 23, 27
abstract of GAO report on
management of, 166–167
and cattle ranching, 53–54, 56
conflict management, 59–62
conflicts over leasing, 56–58
and environmental impacts
of grazing, 58–59
grazing fees, 54, 165
leased grazing lands (by
state), 55–56
subsidization of livestock
industry, 57–58
See also Forest and Rangeland
Renewable Resources
Planning Act of 1974;
Grazing policies; Hage,
Wayne
RangeNet, 59, 228
Reagan, Ronald, 27
Recreational Fee Demonstration
Program, 43–44
conflicts over, 46–48
GAO on, 44
modification by Federal
Lands Recreation
Enhancement Act, 45–46
NPS and BLM report on,
44–45
states opposing, 47
Red River Basin, 8
Reduced-impact logging, 92
Redwood trees, 12
Regula, Ralph, 45
Republic of Congo, 80
308
Index

Resource Renewal Institute,
228–229
RIL. See Reduced-impact
logging
Roadless Area Conservation
Rule, 28
Rockefeller, John D., 18
Rocky Mountain Mineral Law
Foundation, 229
Roman law, 4–5
Roosevelt, Franklin, 19, 66
Roosevelt, Theodore, 15, 16, 17,
49, 66
Royal Dutch Shell, 87–88
Ruch, Jeff, 50
Russia
and oil industry, 84
and Siberia-Central Asia
Canal, 97
Sagebrush Rebellion, 27
Saguaro Juniper Corporation,
60, 229
San Juan Citizens Alliance,
229–230
Santa Barbara oil spill (1969),
37–38
Saro-Wiwa, Ken, 149–150
Save the Redwoods League,
69–70
School land grants, 10–11
Seacology, 230
Sequoia National Park, 18–19,
23–24
Severance taxes, 35
Seward, William H., and
Seward’s Folly, 9–10
Shenandoah National Park, 18
Shenandoah Valley battlefield
site, 52
Siberia-Central Asia Canal, 97
Sierra Club, 15, 23, 230
on fee demo program, 46
on forest management, 65
on grazing, 62
See also Adams, Ansel;
Brower, David Ross
Sierra Leone, 80
Silent Spring, 22–23
Simon Bolivar University,
Institute of Technology
and Marine Sciences, 87
Society for Range Management,
230–231
Society of American Foresters,
54–55, 231
Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 231
South Africa, 79–80
Southeast Alaska Conservation
Council, 231
Southern Appalachian Forest
Coalition, 232
Southern Pine Council, 232
Southern Rockies Conservation
Alliance, 232
Spratly Islands, 85
Stanfield, Robert, 54
State cessions (1781–1802), 7
Stewards of the Range, 233
Strong, Maurice, 150–152
Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act of 1977,
36
Surfaces Resources Act of 1955,
22
Sustainability
and forests, 63–66, 92–93
global, 75
Taft, William Howard, 18
TAPS. See Trans-Alaska
Pipeline System
Taylor Grazing Act of 1934, 20,
55, 56, 159
excerpts, 162–163
Temple, H. W., and Temple
Commission, 18
Index
309

Temple, Nicola, 152–153
Texaco, 86–87
Texas, 9
Thoreau, Henry David, 12
Timber industry, 67
Tongass National Forest, 64
Tourism, 24
Trans-Alaska Pipeline System,
37, 38–39
Trees for the Future, 233
Trillium Management, 87
Tropical Forest Foundation, 233
Turkmenistan, 84
Udall, Stewart, 23
United Nations
Department for Economic
and Social Affairs, 244
and diamond industry, 77,
79, 80
on East African drought, 93
Environment Programme,
244
Food and Agriculture
Organization, 88–89, 245
and Iraq oil-for-food scandal,
85–86
and Yasuni National Park, 83
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
14, 17, 42, 243
U.S. Department of Energy, 243
U.S. Department of the Interior,
14, 15, 17, 42, 243
General Land Office, 20, 53
Office of Surface Mining,
36–37
U.S. Department of War, 14, 42
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, 244
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
and fee demonstration
program, 43
and grazing policies, 55
on spotted owl, 68
U.S. Forest Service, 12–13, 15,
16–17, 240
and Civilian Conservation
Corps, 19
and clear-cutting, 64–65
competing goals in 1950s, 21
and Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement
Act, 46
and fee demonstration
program, 43–44, 45
founding principle, 63
and grazing policies, 55
and rangelands, 13, 20
and Roadless Area
Conservation Rule, 28
See also Pinchot, Gifford
U.S. Geological Survey, 241
on mineral reserves, 33–34
Venezuela, 87
Washington Wilderness
Coalition, 233–234
Water
availability per capita, 94
Bonn Ministerial Declaration,
168–169, 175–178
conflicts, 95–98
cooperative efforts, 98–99
dams and indigenous
peoples, 96–97
displacement, 95
impact of scarcity, 94–95
as reason for
interdependence, 98
reclamation, 94
rights, 53–54
river basins, 94
scarcity as potential cause of
war, 93–94
scarcity defined, 94
use statistics, 192, 193t.
Watt, James, 27
310
Index

Webster, Daniel, 10
Weeks Act of 1911, 12–13
Western Clean Energy
Campaign, 234
Western Forestry and
Conservation Association,
234
Western Land Exchange Project,
234–235
Western Resource Advocates,
235
Western Slope No-Fee Coalition,
46, 47
Western states
federal land ownership,
31–32
population, 22
resource conflicts, 31–32
Western Watersheds Project,
Inc., 59
Western Wood Products
Association, 235
Westward expansion
colonial era, 6
economic factors, 9
and federal land policies,
10–12
and Manifest Destiny (major
land acquisitions), 7–10
and Native Americans, 11
population factors, 8–9
White, Courtney, 153–154
Wild and Scenic Rivers, 179
Wild Wilderness, 235
Wilderness Act of 1964, 26
Wilderness Areas, 179
Wilderness Society, 65, 236. See
also Zahniser, Howard
Wildlands Project, 236
Williams, Terry Tempest,
154–156
Wilson, Woodrow, 15, 18, 66
Winrock International, 236
Wise use movement, 27
Woodland Trust, 236–237
World Bank, 84
World Conservation Union, 237
World Diamond Council,
237–238
World Energy Council, 82, 238
World Federation of Diamond
Bourses, 79
World Gold Council, 238
World Resources Institute,
238–239
World Stewardship Institute,
239
World Wildlife Fund, 239
Worldwatch Institute, 191
Yasuni National Park, 83
Yellowstone National Park, 18,
41
prior reservations, 12, 13
Yosemite National Park, 15, 18,
42, 131–132
Zahniser, Howard, 156–157
Index
311

About the Author
Jacqueline Vaughn is professor of political science at Northern
Arizona University, where she specializes in public policy and
administration. Professor Vaughn holds a Ph.D. in political sci-
ence from the University of California, Berkeley, where she also
attended the Goldman School of Public Policy. She taught previ-
ously at the University of Redlands and at Southern Oregon Uni-
versity. Professor Vaughn has a broad spectrum of academic
experience in both the public and private sectors. Her environ-
mental background stems from her work with the South Coast
Air Quality Management District in southern California, and
with Southern California Edison, where she served as a policy an-
alyst. Professor Vaughn’s previously published works include
The Play of Power: An Introduction to American Government; Green
Backlash: The History and Politics of Environmental Opposition in the
United States; Disabled Rights: American Disability Policy and the
Fight for Equality; Environmental Activism: A Reference Handbook;
George W. Bush’s Healthy Forests: Reframing the Environmental De-
bate (coauthored with Hanna J. Cortner); and Environmental Poli-
tics: Domestic and Global Dimensions, now in its fifth edition.
312

