
I
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Frank R. Kardes
University of Cincinnati
Maria L. Cronley
Miami University
Thomas W. Cline
Saint Vincent College
Consumer Behavior

Consumer Behavior
Frank R. Kardes, Maria L. Cronley, 
Thomas W. Cline
Executive Vice President and Publisher, 
Business & Computers: Jonathan Hulbert
Vice President of Editorial, Business: 
Jack W. Calhoun
Editor-in-Chief: Melissa Acuña
Executive Editor: Mike Roche
Developmental Editor: Julie Klooster
Vice President of Marketing, Business & 
Computers: Bill Hendee
Marketing Coordinator: Shanna Shelton
Senior Content Project Manager: 
Colleen A. Farmer
Media Editor: John Rich
Frontlist Buyer, Manufacturing: 
Miranda Klapper
Production Service and Compositor: 
S4Carlisle Publishing Services
Senior Art Director: Stacy Jenkins Shirley
Internal & Cover Designer: Lisa Albonetti
Cover Image: iStock Photo
Image Rights Acquisitions Account 
Manager: John Hill
Photo Researcher: Darren Wright
Sr. Text Rights Acquisitions Account Manager: 
Mardell Glinski Schultz 
Text Permissions Researcher: Sarah D’Stair
© 2011 South-Western, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright hereon may be reproduced or used in any form or by any 
means—graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording, taping, Web distribution, information storage and 
retrieval systems, or in any other manner—except as may be 
permitted by the license terms herein.
For product information and technology assistance, contact 
us at Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support,
1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit 
all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
ExamView® is a registered trademark of eInstruction Corp. 
Windows is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation 
used herein under license. Macintosh and Power Macintosh are 
registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. used herein under 
license.
© 2008 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009939851
ISBN-13: 978-0-538-74540-6
ISBN-10: 0-538-74540-1
Instructor’s Edition ISBN 13: 978-0-538-74688-5
Instructor’s Edition ISBN 10: 0-538-74688-2
South-Western Cengage Learning
5191 Natorp Boulevard
Mason, OH 45040
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our 
preferred online store www.ichapters.com
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 13 12 11 10 09

III
Part 1 
Consumer Behavior and Marketing Strategy
 
 
 
Chapter 1 | Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research
 
 
 
Chapter 2 | Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning
Part 2 Consumer Information Processing
 
 
 
Chapter 3 | Consumer Perception
 
 
 
Chapter 4 | Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change
 
 
 
Chapter 5 | Motivation and Emotion
 
 
 
Chapter 6 | Learning and Memory
 
 
 
Chapter 7 | Automatic Information Processing
 
 
 
Chapter 8 | Self-Concept and Personality
Part 3 Consumer Decision Making
 
 
 
Chapter 9 | The Consumer Decision Making Process
 
 
 
Chapter 10 | Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice
 
 
 
Chapter 11 | Behavioral Decision Theory
Part 4  Consumer Social Influences 
and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
 
 
 
Chapter 12 | The Influence of Culture and Values
 
 
 
Chapter 13 | Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance
 
 
 
Chapter 14 | Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers
 
 
 
Chapter 15 | Online Consumer Behavior
 
 
 
Chapter 16 | Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior
 
 
 
Endnotes
 
 
Glossary
 
 
Name Index
 
 
Subject Index
 
 
Company Index
Brief Contents

IV
Contents
 Part 1 
Consumer Behavior and Marketing Strategy  2
 
AN INTERVIEW WITH CHERYL STALLWORTH 
3
 
Chapter 
1 | Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research  5
 
 Reality Television Works For Consumers 
and Marketers  5
 
What Is Consumer Behavior?  8
 
Consumers: Individual versus Organizational  8
 
Consumer Activities  9
 
Consumer Responses  10
 
Why Study Consumer Behavior?  11
 
To Improve Business Performance  11
 
To Influence Public Policy  11
 
To Educate and Help Consumers Make Better Decisions  13
 
Consumer Behavior as a Field of Study  13
 
The Evolution of Consumer Behavior Research  14
 
Motivation Research  15
 
A Behavioral Science Perspective  15
 
Interpretivism  17
 
Consumer Behavior Research  18
 
Basic versus Applied Research  19
 
Correlations and Causal Relationships  20
 
Secondary versus Primary Data  22
 
Primary Data Collection Methods  23
 
Observation  24
 
Direct Questioning: Surveys, Interviews, and Focus Groups  24
 
Experiments  26
 
Projective Techniques  26
 
Chapter Summary  27
 
Key Terms  28
 
Review and Discussion  28
 
Short Application Exercises  29
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   2 9

Contents  
V
 
Chapter 
2 | Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning  30
 
 America’s Most Entertaining Supermarket 
Destination  30
 
A Divide and Conquer Strategy  32
 
How Consumers and Society Benefit from Market Segmentation  34
 
Factors Influencing Market Segmentation Strategies  35
 
Bases of Segmentation  37
 
Demographic Bases  37
 
Geographic Bases  37
 
Psychographic Bases  41
 
The VALS System  41
 
Behavioral Bases  46
 
Product Attributes or Benefits  46
 
Usage Occasions and Product Usage  47
 
Positioning  48
 
Positioning a Leader  49
 
Positioning a Follower  50
 
Positioning Linked to Segmentation Bases  51
 
Positioning by Core Benefit  51
 
Positioning by Price  51
 
Positioning by Product Usage Situation  52
 
Positioning by Product User  52
 
Repositioning  52
 
Perceptual Mapping  53
 
Chapter Summary  54
 
Key Terms  55
 
Review and Discussion  55
 
Short Application Exercises  56
 
M an ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   5 6
 
End-of-Part Video Short  57
 Part 2 Consumer Information Processing 58
 
AN INTERVIEW WITH ROBERT S. WYER, JR 
59
 
Chapter 
3 | Consumer Perception  62
 
Apple Paints the Market  62
 
Defining the Perceptual Process  63
 
Sensory Thresholds  66
 
The Absolute Threshold  66
 
The Just Noticeable Difference  67
 
Adaptation  69
 
Subliminal Perception and Advertising  70

VI 
Contents
 
Physical Influences on Attention  72
 
Short-Term Memory  72
 
Arousal  73
 
Voluntary and Involuntary Selective Attention  74
 
Salient Stimuli  74
 
Novelty  75
 
Intensity  75
 
Complexity  76
 
Vividness  77
 
Emotional Interest  77
 
Concreteness  77
 
Proximity  79
 
Chapter Summary  79
 
Key Terms  80
 
Review and Discussion  80
 
Short Application Exercises  80
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   8 1
 
Chapter 
4 | Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change  82
 
Erroneous Beliefs about Homeopathic Medicines  82
 
Nonevaluative Judgments: Beliefs  83
 
Evaluative Judgment: Attitudes and Their Properties  86
 
Zanna and Rempel’s Model  86
 
Overview of Involvement  88
 
Attitude Models Based on High or Low Consumer Involvement  90
 
Expectancy-Value Models  90
 
The Theory of Reasoned Action  91
 
Information Integration Theory  92
 
The Elaboration Likelihood Model  94
 
The Heuristic/Systematic Model  95
 
Parameters of Judgment  96
 
General Strategies for Changing Attitudes  97
 
Chapter Summary  98
 
Key Terms  98
 
Review and Discussion  99
 
Short Application Exercises  99
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   1 0 0
 
Chapter 
5 | Motivation and Emotion  101
 
Nostalgia Sells  101
 
An Overview of Motivation and Emotion  102
 
The Process of Motivation  103
 
Motivation and Human Needs  104
 
Drive Theory and Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs  104
 
Self-Determination Theory  105

Contents  
VII
 
The Trio of Needs  106
 
Attitude Function Theory  107
 
Balance Theory  110
 
Cognitive Dissonance Theory  111
 
Emotion  113
 
Discrepancy-Interruption Theory  114
 
Excitation Transfer Theory  115
 
Chapter Summary  117
 
Key Terms  117
 
Review and Discussion  117
 
Short Application Exercises  118
 
M an ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   1 1 8
 
Chapter 
6 | Learning and Memory  119
 
Martini & Rossi  119
 
The Importance of Learning and Memory  120
 
Types of Learning  120
 
Classical Conditioning  120
 
Operant Conditioning  124
 
Comprehension and Miscomprehension  124
 
Memory  126
 
The Seven Sins of Memory  126
 
Transience  127
 
Absent-mindedness  127
 
Blocking  128
 
Misattribution  131
 
Suggestibility  131
 
Bias  132
 
Persistence  132
 
Chapter Summary  133
 
Key Terms  133
 
Review and Discussion  133
 
Short Application Exercises  134
 
M an ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   1 3 4
 
Chapter 
7 | Automatic Information Processing  135
 
Subliminal Advertising  135
 
What Is Automatic Information Processing?  136
 
The Adaptive Unconscious  137
 
Thin Slice Theory of Informational Processing  138
 
Implicit Memory  139
 
The Priming Effect  140
 
The Implicit Association Test (IAT)  143
 
Familiarity Effects  144
 
Distraction Effects  144

VIII 
Contents
 
Subliminal Advertising Revisited  145
 
Chapter Summary  146
 
Key Terms  146
 
Review and Discussion  147
 
Short Application Exercises  147
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   1 4 8
 
Chapter 
8 | Self-Concept and Personality  149
 
Gap’s Khakis Have Personality  149
 
Self-Concept Defined  151
 
The Role of Self-Concept  153
 
The Extended Self  155
 
Loved Objects  157
 
Self-Monitoring  158
 
Impression Management Theory  159
 
Appearance Management  159
 
Ingratiation  160
 
Aligning Activities  161
 
Personality 162
 
Multiple Trait Theory  163
 
Brand-Personality  165
 
Characterization  168
 
Cognitive Factors  169
 
Need for Cognition  169
 
Need for Humor  170
 
Need for Cognitive Closure  171
 
Chapter Summary  172
 
Key Terms  173
 
Review and Discussion  174
 
Short Application Exercises  174
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   1 7 5
 
Part Video Short  175
 Part 3 Consumer Decision Making  176
 
AN INTERVIEW WITH BABA SHIV 
177
 
AN INTERVIEW WITH GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN 
178
 
Chapter 
9 | The Consumer Decision Making Process  180
 
Kellogg’s Company: Cereal with Disclosure  180
 
The Consumer Decision Making Process  181
 
Types of Consumer Decisions  181
 
Brand Laziness  184
 
Brand Loyalty  184

Contents  
IX
 
Variety Seeking  185
 
Problem Solving  187
 
The Traditional Model of Consumer Decision Making  188
 
The Nature of Problem Recognition  189
 
Needs  190
 
Wants  192
 
Opportunities  193
 
The Nature of Information Search  195
 
Influences on Search  195
 
Motivation to Search  198
 
Results of Search  198
 
Economics of Search  198
 
 Alternative Evaluation and Choice: An Uncertainty-Reduction 
Model  199
 
Consumer Uncertainty  201
 
The Perceived Product-Market  202
 
Consideration and Choice  203
 
Cluster Size  204
 
Cluster Variance  205
 
Cluster Frontier (The Ideal Brand)  205
 
Brand Variance  206
 
Post-Purchase Evaluation  206
 
Consumer Satisfaction  209
 
Dissonance-Reduction  209
 
Expectancy Disconfirmation Model  210
 
Chapter Summary  211
 
Key Terms  212
 
Review and Discussion  212
 
Short Application Exercises  213
 
M an ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   2 1 3
 
Chapter 
10 | Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice  214
 
Sony Has a Television for Every Consumer Taste  214
 
The Consideration Set: Determining Choice Alternatives  216
 
Influencing the Consideration Set  217
 
Part-List Cuing  217
 
The Attraction Effect  218
 
The Compromise Effect  218
 
Constructing Evaluations to Make Choices  219
 
Consumer Choice: Stimulus-Based, Memory-Based, and Mixed Choice  220
 
Attitude versus Attribute-Based Choice Strategies  221
 
Choice Based on Heuristic Processing  223
 
Prediction Heuristics  226
 
Representativeness Heuristic  226
 
Availability Heuristic  228
 
Simulation Heuristic  230
 
Anchoring-and-Adjustment Heuristic  230

X 
Contents
 
Choice Heuristics  231
 
The Lexicographic Heuristic  231
 
The Elimination-by-Aspects Heuristic  231
 
The Additive-Difference Heuristic  232
 
The Conjunctive and Disjunctive Heuristics  232
 
The Frequency of Good and Bad Features Heuristic  232
 
Chapter Summary  234
 
Key Terms  234
 
Review And Discussion  235
 
Short Application Exercises  235
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   2 3 6
 
Chapter 
11 | Behavioral Decision Theory  237
 
Vioxx  237
 
Expected Utility Theory  238
 
Framing Effects  239
 
Framing Influences Marketing Decisions  240
 
Reference Dependence and Loss Aversion  241
 
The Endowment Effect, the Sunk Cost Effect, and Choice Deferral  243
 
Preference Reversals  245
 
Selective Thinking  247
 
Chapter Summary  250
 
Key Terms  250
 
Review and Discussion  251
 
Short Application Exercises  251
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   2 5 2
 
End-of-Part Video Short  252
 Part 4  Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary 
Strategies for Marketers  254
 
AN INTERVIEW WITH THOMAS O’GUINN 
255
 
AN INTERVIEW WITH ROBERT CIALDINI 
258
 
Chapter 
12 | The Influence of Culture and Values  259
 
Cheaters Prosper  259
 
Culture Defined  261
 
A Cultural Framework for Consumer Behavior  262
 
The Culturally Constituted World  262
 
Station 2 in Figure 12.1: Consumer Products  263
 
Station 3 in Figure 12.1: Consumers  265
 
Enculturation and Acculturation  268

Contents  
XI
 
Language  268
 
Cultural Translation  270
 
Body Language  270
 
High- and Low-Context Cultures  271
 
Symbols  273
 
Norms  275
 
Return Potential Model  276
 
Consumer Values  278
 
Core Values  278
 
Means-End Chains  278
 
Attributes  279
 
Benefits  279
 
Values  279
 
Rokeach Value Survey  281
 
The List of Values (LOV)   282
 
Chapter Summary  282
 
Key Terms  283
 
Review and Discussion  284
 
Short Application Exercises  284
 
M an ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   2 8 5
 
Chapter 
13 | Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance  286
 
An Influence Agent at Work  286
 
Defining Compliance  288
 
The Automaticity Principle  288
 
The Commitment and Consistency Principle  290
 
The Foot-in-the-Door Technique  290
 
The Low-Ball Technique  292
 
The Reciprocity Principle  293
 
The Door-in-the-Face Technique  294
 
The That’s-Not-All Technique  296
 
The Multiple-Deescalating-Requests Technique  298
 
The Even-a-Penny Technique  298
 
The Scarcity Principle  299
 
The Social Validation Principle  300
 
Cultural and Individual Differences  301
 
Injunctive Versus Descriptive Norms  303
 
The Liking Principle  306
 
Familiarity  306
 
Physical Attractiveness  307
 
Similarity  308
 
Ingratiation  309
 
The Authority Principle  309
 
Chapter Summary  311
 
Key Terms  311
 
Review and Discussion  312

XII 
Contents
 
Short Application Exercises  312
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   3 1 3
 
Chapter 
14 | Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers  314
 
The E.B. Horn Great Diamond Hunt  314
 
Word-of-Mouth: Pushing the Buzz Button  316
 
Why Is Word-of-Mouth So Powerful?  317
 
Buzz Marketing  318
 
Product Pushers  319
 
Imitation Evangelists  319
 
Stealth Celebrity Endorsers  320
 
Consumer Generated Marketing  320
 
Celebrity and Athlete Endorsers  322
 
Product Placement  325
 
What Is Product Placement?  325
 
Why Is Product Placement Growing?  328
 
Added Realism  328
 
Reach and Longevity  328
 
Indirect Endorsements  328
 
Cost Reduction  329
 
Types of Product Placement  329
 
Chapter Summary  330
 
Key Terms  331
 
Review and Discussion  331
 
Short Application Exercises  331
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   3 3 2
 
Chapter 
15 | Online Consumer Behavior  333
 
Yahoo!  333
 
The Age of Interactivity  334
 
Features of a Well-Designed Website  336
 
Choice and Customization  336
 
Information Search and Navigation  337
 
Organization of Information  337
 
The Implications of Reduced Search Costs for Information  339
 
The Consumer Advocacy Paradigm  341
 
Chapter Summary  344
 
Key Terms  345
 
Review and Discussion  345
 
Short Application Exercises  345
 
Man ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   3 4 6

Contents  
XIII
 
Chapter 
16 | Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior  347
 
Disney  347
 
Entry Strategy  348
 
Product Life Cycle Management  349
 
Brand Equity Management  351
 
Product Line Management  354
 
Managing Market Leaders and Market Underdogs  357
 
Acquisition Versus Retention Strategies  358
 
Chapter Summary  362
 
Key Terms  362
 
Review and Discussion  362
 
Short Application Exercises  363
 
M an ag e r i al  A ppl i c at i o n   3 6 3
 
End-of-Part Video Short  363
 
Endnotes  365
 
Glossary  389
 
Name Index  399
 
Subject Index  401
 
Company Index  414

XIV
Preface
Businesses spend enormous amounts of time, money, and other resources on monitor-
ing, predicting, understanding, and influencing the behavior of consumers. Success 
depends on convincing consumers to use their products and services rather than com-
petitors’ offerings. Toward this end, consumers are inundated by marketing commu-
nications in the traditional media (e.g., television, radio, print advertising, and direct 
mail), the new media (e.g., Internet), and in retail stores (e.g., packaging and point-of-
purchase displays). However, effective marketing requires an in-depth understanding of 
the variables that capture the attention and interest of consumers; that influence how 
consumers acquire, retain, and update product knowledge; and that influence how 
consumers use product knowledge as a basis for judgment and choice.
Consumer behavior encompasses all consumer activities associated with the pur-
chase, use, and disposal of goods and services, including the consumer’s emotional, 
mental, and behavioral responses that precede, determine, or follow these activities. 
The unwavering focus on the consumer is the unique contribution of marketing that 
distinguishes this activity from the other business functions (e.g., accounting, finance, 
production, management). An in-depth understanding of consumers is needed to 
develop better products and services, to market these products and services more effec-
tively, and to achieve a sustainable competitive advantage.
This book provides in-depth, scientifically grounded explanations of consumer behav-
ior without sacrificing breadth. We discuss a variety of “classic” consumer behavior topics, 
including consumer information processing, consumer decision making, persuasion, and 
the role of culture and society on consumer behavior. In addition, we address some novel 
topics that enhance the usefulness and impact of the text, including an emphasis on inter-
national and ethical perspectives, an examination of “contemporary” or “state-of-the-art” 
media, and a discussion of online tactics and branding strategies. In summary, we aim 
to strike a balance among theoretical concepts, research findings, and applied marketing 
examples to achieve a strong consumer-focused, strategy-oriented approach.
Organization of the Book
This book is organized in five main parts. Part One focuses on consumer behavior and 
marketing strategy. It explores what consumer behavior comprises, how it fits into the 
larger field of marketing, and how marketers study it. Part One also explains how mar-
keting managers use their research-based knowledge about consumers to develop more 
effective segmentation and positioning strategies. Effective strategic decisions related to 
segmentation and positioning are essential for successful marketing practice.
Part Two focuses on consumer information processing, or the steps or stages of 
thinking and reasoning that influence how consumers acquire, retain, and revise prod-
uct knowledge. Here, we take an internal view of the consumer to examine how these 
fickle, stubborn, passionate, and fascinating creatures interact with the marketing world 
by processing information and making decisions.
Part Three focuses on consumer decision making, or how consumers use their 
knowledge about products and services to choose the brands they buy. The chapters in 
Part Three break down consumer decision making and examine each step in detail.

Preface  
XV
Part Four focuses on consumer social influences and contemporary strategies for 
marketers. Part Four explains the external influences of culture, values, and referent 
others on consumers and their behaviors. It also explains how to reach consumers more 
effectively, how to develop more effective online tactics, and how to develop more 
effective branding strategies.
Part Five focuses on common biases and errors in managerial decision making and 
how to avoid them. Even experts are susceptible to a wide range of decision-making biases 
that can hurt business. A clearer understanding of managers’ decision-making processes 
helps managers to avoid some common pitfalls. Part Five’s chapters 17 and 18 can be 
found on the book companion site, http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes.
Finally, it should be noted that although the chapters are presented in separate sec-
tions in this book, all chapters, topics, and themes are related to all the others.
Pedagogical Enhancements
We believe that students work best when they can see phenomena from all angles: 
when they can understand what theories and concepts mean, see how they integrate 
with other concepts, and see how they are applied to smart business practice. To help 
students understand, apply, and integrate the concepts of consumer behavior in terms 
of real companies and marketing situations, this book is filled with a variety of features, 
with a heavy emphasis on interesting examples, strong visuals, and applied exercises.
Part Features
Each of the first four parts of the book begins with an interview with one or two well-
respected consumer researchers to stimulate student interest. This helps set the tone 
for each part, providing a “big picture” of its theme that helps students understand the 
relevance of the topics in the part.
At the end of the last chapter in each part is a link to a short video case study and 
set of applied questions to accompany the video. The videos are real-world examples 
that illustrate topics found in the parts. The accompanying questions are designed to 
apply chapter concepts. These videos can be found on the book companion site, http://
www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes.
Chapter Features
Each chapter includes a variety of aids to enrich student interaction and learning, 
including:
• Learning Objectives. A list of key concepts and objectives for each chapter.
•  Opening Vignette. A mini-case using a real company, product, or situation to 
bring the subject of the chapter alive.
•  Marketing in Action. A feature that illustrates the use of various consumer behav-
ior concepts in the practice of marketing for a real company, product, or situation.
•  Eye on International. A feature that discusses the use of consumer behavior 
concepts in real companies, products, or situations in international contexts.
•  Ethics. A feature to increase student sensitivity to ethical issues and to stimulate 
classroom discussion.

XVI 
Preface
•  Advertisements, Websites, Photos, Charts, and Illustrations. Specific 
examples to show students how companies attempt to persuade and influence 
consumers. Numerous photographs and illustrations of products, package 
designs, and consumers in action increase student interest and involvement in 
the material.
•  Chapter Summary. An overview of key topics and concepts. Students can check 
their comprehension of the material by reviewing the summary.
•  Key Terms. A list of the key concepts presented in the chapter, which can be 
used to reinforce students’ comprehension.
•  Review and Discussion. Questions to encourage students to think critically 
about what they have just read.
•  Short Application Exercises. Questions help students apply the knowledge 
they have gained from reading the chapter.
•  Managerial Application. A mini-case problem requiring the use of multiple 
concepts discussed in the chapter.
The Consumer Behavior Resource Package
Teaching consumer behavior is an exciting and challenging task. A comprehensive set 
of ancillary materials has been created to support instructors.
FOR THE INSTRUCTOR
Instructor’s Manual
This teaching tool provides suggestions and additional assignments designed to supple-
ment the textbook and help enhance the classroom experience. Each chapter includes 
the following materials:
• Learning objectives and teaching tips
• Lecture outlines
• Answers to review and discussion questions
• Suggested classroom activities and assignments
The Instructor’s Manual is available on the Instructor’s Resource CD-ROM or can 
be downloaded from the book companion site, http://www.cengage.com/marketing/
kardes.
Test Bank
A comprehensive test bank is available to assist instructors in assessing student learning. 
The test bank contains more than 1,200 questions, including a mix of:
• Definitional questions that test knowledge of concepts
•  Conceptual questions that test the ability to recognize concepts and relate to 
situations
• Applied questions that test the ability to integrate and apply concepts

Preface  
XVII
Question formats include multiple-choice, true/false, and essay questions for each chapter.
Recent pressure on faculty and institutions to implement and report on learning outcome 
requirements by the AACSB and other accreditation bodies is a challenge in higher educa-
tion. The development of Consumer Behavior has given us the opportunity to help faculty 
meet these needs. We have tagged test items with general business and marketing discipline 
outcomes that allow you to more easily produce learning outcome reports for accreditation 
purposes. An electronic version of the test bank is available and allows instructors to add, 
delete, edit, and easily generate multiple forms of a test. The Test Bank is available on the 
Instructor’s Resource CD-ROM or can be downloaded from the book companion site.
ExamView
Available on the Instructor’s Resource CD-ROM, ExamView contains all the questions 
in the Test Bank tagged as described above. This program is easy-to-use test creation 
software compatible with Microsoft® Windows®. Instructors can add or edit questions, 
instructions, and answers, and select questions (randomly or numerically) by preview-
ing them on the screen. Instructors can also create and administer quizzes online over 
the Internet, a local-area network (LAN), or a wide-area network (WAN).
PowerPoint® Presentation
A comprehensive set of PowerPoint® slides is available to adopters of the textbook. These 
chapter-by-chapter slides include important figures, tables, and graphs taken directly from 
the text, as well as an overview of the key concepts of each chapter. User friendly, the 
PowerPoint® slides can be used “as is” or integrated with the instructor’s own PowerPoint® 
presentations. Instructors can modify or delete any slide or add their own slides to the 
existing set. In addition, instructors may choose to share the slides with students by upload-
ing them to the school’s network. The PowerPoint® slides are available on the Instructor’s 
Resource CD-ROM or can be downloaded from the book companion site.
Instructor’s Resource CD 
(ISBN 0-538-75650-0)
The Instructor’s Resource CD-ROM includes electronic versions of all the instructor 
supplements: PowerPoint® slides, Instructor’s Manual, Test Bank, and ExamView test-
ing files software and more.
Instructor Book Companion Site
http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes.
Specially designed Web content provides additional information, guidance, videos, 
and activities for instructors. There is additional information for chapter 12 regarding 
demographics and subculture, along with student exercises for these topics to enhance 
learning on the site. Part 5 of the textbook (Chapters 17 and 18) can be found on the 
book companion site.
For the Student
http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes.
Specially designed Web content provides additional information, guidance, and activi-
ties for students. The student book companion site includes key terms, learning objectives, 

XVIII 
Preface
videos, interactive review quizzes, and a resource center providing useful links to other 
consumer behavior-related websites. Part five of the textbook (Chapters 17 and 18) can be 
found on the book companion site.
Acknowledgments
We would like to warmly acknowledge the many helpful comments and insights from 
David Ackerman, Ph.D. (California State University—Northridge), Ronald J. Adams, 
Ph.D. (University of North Florida), Jeri Mullins Beggs (Illinois State University), 
Nivein A. Behairy, Ph.D. (University of California—Irvine), Drew Boyd (Ethicon 
EndoSurgery), Deborah L. Cowles, Ph.D. (Virginia Commonwealth University), Susan 
Emens (Kent State University), Vicki Blakney Eveland, DBA, (Mercer University), 
Annette D. Forti, DBA (SUNY College at Old Westbury), Dorothy Harpool 
(Wichita State University), Curtis Haugtvedt, Ph.D. (Ohio State University), Dale 
F. Kehr (University of Memphis), Michael Lynn, Ph.D. (Cornell University), Susan 
Powell Mantel, Ph.D. (Ball State University), Havva J. Meric, Ph.D. (East Carolina 
University), Bruce E. Pfeiffer, Ph.D. (University of New Hampshire), Andrew J. Rohm, 
Ph.D. (Northeastern University), Joel Saegert, Ph.D. (The University of Texas at San 
Antonio), and Eric Yorkston, Ph.D. (Texas Christian University). Finally, we would 
like to acknowledge the many undergraduate and graduate students we have taught 
over the years who have helped shape our thinking for this textbook.

XIX
Frank R. Kardes
Frank R. Kardes is the Donald E. Weston 
Professor of Marketing at the College of Business 
at the University of Cincinnati. He is a recipi-
ent of the Distinguished Scientific Achievement 
Award of the Society for Consumer Psychology, 
and a Fellow of the American Psychological 
Association, the American Psychological Society, 
the Society for Consumer Psychology, and the 
Society for Personality and Social Psychology. 
His research focuses on omission neglect, consumer judgment and inference pro-
cesses, persuasion and advertising, and consumer and managerial decision making. 
He has published in many leading scientific journals and is frequently invited to pres-
ent his research at leading universities throughout the world—including Wharton, 
Yale, Cornell, Chicago, Northwestern, Michigan, the Australian Graduate School of 
Management, the London Business School, the Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology, and INSEAD (France). Dr. Kardes was an Editor of the Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, Advances in Consumer Research, and the Handbook of Consumer 
Psychology, and is currently an Associate Editor of the Journal of Consumer Research 
and the Journal of Consumer Psychology. He also serves on the editorial boards of 
Behavioral Marketing Abstracts, the International Journal of Research in Marketing, 
and Marketing Letters.
Maria L. Cronley
Maria L. Cronley is an Associate Professor of Marketing in the Farmer School of 
Business at Miami University, where she teaches undergraduate and graduate courses 
in Consumer Behavior, Customer Acquisition, and Marketing Strategy. She earned 
her Ph.D. in Marketing from the University of Cincinnati and brings several years 
of industry experience to the field. Her primary research interests center on con-
sumer judgment and decision processes, with specific emphasis in the areas of infer-
ence, biased processing, and persuasion. She sits on the Journal of Consumer Psychology 
Editorial Review Board and has published numerous articles in scholarly journals, 
including the Journal of Consumer Psychology, Journal of Consumer Research, Journal 
of Business Research, Journal of Economic Psychology, Advances in Consumer Research, 
and the Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied. She has received over three dozen 
awards and grants for her scholarship and teaching. Dr. Cronley also serves on the 
Executive Board for the Society for Consumer Psychology and co-chairs the Training 
and Education Committee for the Society that oversees the prestigious national SCP 
Dissertation Proposal Competition.
Maria L. Cronley
About the Authors
Thomas W. Cline
Courtesy of Thomas Cline
Courtesy of Maria Cronley
Image not available due to 
copyright restrictions

XX 
About the Authors
Thomas W. Cline
Thomas W. Cline is Professor of Marketing in the Alex G. McKenna School at Saint 
Vincent College, where he teaches courses in consumer behavior, marketing research, 
advertising and promotion, strategic marketing, and statistical methods. He is a recipi-
ent of the International Teaching Excellence Award from the Association of College 
Business Schools and Programs. Dr. Cline has twenty years experience as a marketing 
research consultant, specializing in surveys, experimental designs, and focus groups. 
He earned a Ph.D. at the University of Cincinnati and an MBA from the University 
of Virginia. Dr. Cline has published numerous articles in academic journals, includ-
ing the Journal of Advertising, Journal of Consumer Psychology, and Journal of Economic 
Psychology, Psychology and Marketing, and Journal of Marketing Communications. 
Dr. Cline is widely cited in the popular press, including USA Today, Psychology Today, 
CBS News, The LA Times, MSNBC, and The Washington Times. Dr. Cline also serves as 
head coach for the men’s and women’s golf teams for Saint Vincent College, hosted at 
Arnold Palmer’s Latrobe Country Club in Latrobe, PA.

1
Consumer Behavior

PART
1
Consumer Behavior
and Marketing Strategy
c h a p t e r s
2
 1 | Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research
 2 | Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning

3
Chief Executive Officer
Greenfield Consulting Group
Why is it important for companies to acquire a deep 
understanding of their consumers?
Without a deep understanding of consumers it is im-
possible to meet their expectations. Going beyond the 
fundamental “functional” needs, e.g., the need for food 
and shelter, it is important to understand deeper needs 
like the need for social acceptance. These are the higher 
order needs that only surface when marketers dig deeper 
into brand relationships and how these relationships allow 
consumers to express themselves. For example, a con-
sumer can tell me that they are purchasing a car because 
they need transportation. A deeper exploratory of their 
real need is to convey a certain image . . . so this consumer 
doesn’t need just a car . ww. . they need a Toyota Prius be-
cause they want to be accepted within the tribe of people 
that are environmentally conscious opinion leaders.
What research techniques do you use to learn about 
your consumers?
Our company specializes in qualitative research, so 
these are tools that are not designed to be projectable 
to large populations. They are designed to allow us to 
probe deeply into motivations and desires. In addition 
to focus groups, we practice “qualographies” which 
are  “ethnographic-like” tools that enable us to actively 
 observe and interact with people in real life environ-
ments like their kitchens, or in-store in order to:
•  Understand how people interact with categories and 
brands in a socio-cultural context
•  Understand people’s rituals, artifacts, and folklore to 
help de-codify the role and meaning of brands
We also use a number of digital tools that enable us 
to speak to creative consumers across broad geographies 
to understand trends, social development, and differ-
ences in attitudes based on geographic influencers.
Basic focus groups are a terrific way of letting con-
sumers “play off of” perceptions relative to categories 
and brands. In order to understand the strengths and 
weaknesses of a brand’s equity, we can create a “con-
sumer brawl” in a focus group with consumers taking 
opposing sides to “argue” the benefits or drawbacks 
of a brand and highlight issues and opportunities for 
positioning enhancement.
These are just examples of the many tools that can 
be employed to “dig deeply.”
How can knowledge about consumer behavior be used 
to develop more effective segmentation strategies?
Consumers can be clustered based on similar attitudes 
and behavior to determine which clusters are most similar. 
This then enables marketers to develop messages that ap-
peal to specific clusters. The size of clusters is often quanti-
fied to determine if a viable business opportunity exists.
How can knowledge about consumer behavior be used 
to develop more effective positioning strategies?
Understanding consumer motivations, attitudes and 
ensuing behavior helps determine the role of a category 
or brand in the consumer’s world. Uncovering the 
brand’s role provides the context or language for talking 
about that brand in a way that makes sense and is useful 
for the consumer. So for example, understanding that 
a consumer feels better about the world that they are 
Cheryl Stallworth is the Chief Executive Officer for the Greenfield Consulting Group, 
a global marketing research firm that specializes in qualitative research methodologies. 
The Greenfield Consulting Group is part of Millward Brown, one of the top ten global 
marketing research agencies. As a marketing generalist with expertise in qualitative 
research methodologies, Greenfield Consulting Group focuses on using insights to develop 
effective marketing strategies.
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
CHERYL STALLWORTH
Q
Q
Q
Q
Cheryl Stallworth: Navone Studios

4
living in when they are doing something active to care 
for the environment, taps into a basic need for 
well-being (for them and their family). Not saying that 
Toyota has done this, but a brand like Toyota Pruis can 
become part of the consumer’s “personal toolkit” of 
products that help them to achieve a personal sense of 
well-being. Thus, this can then be a position for Prius to 
play in, based on an insight that well-being is an impor-
tant attribute/feeling/state-of-mind for environmentally 
conscious consumers.
How can knowledge about consumer behavior be used 
to help consumers make better choices?
This knowledge can help marketers develop products 
and shape messages that actually meet people’s needs 
instead of creating products that “trick” consumers into 
buying them based on gimmickry. In other words, iden-
tifying and delivering against real needs allow marketers 
to develop sustainable long-term relationships with 
consumers, which is much more efficient and profitable 
in the long run.
Q

Reality Television Works for 
Consumers and Marketers
Understanding Consumer Behavior 
and Consumer Research
 1 | Define consumer behavior.
 2 | Explain why it is important to 
understand consumer behavior.
 3 | Describe how the study of consumer 
behavior has evolved as a scientific field 
of study.
 4 | Discuss how consumer behavior is 
specifically examined and measured 
through marketing research.
 5 | Provide examples of various methods
for collecting consumer research 
data.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to. . .
objectives
Reality programming had its humble beginnings in MTV’s The Real World, now the longest 
running reality television drama with 22 seasons over 17 years, as of this book’s writing. Today, 
blockbuster challenge shows, such as CBS’s Survivor and Fox’s American Idol, underscore reality 
programming as a legitimate and predominant genre of television entertainment that is not 
going to go away, according to many.1 Indeed, the most popular reality TV programs, such as 
Survivor, American Idol, and The Bachelorette, have been among the top-rated shows over the last 
several seasons. Every major American television network and cable network has produced at 
least one reality show; there are well over 100 of them currently on the airwaves.2 Even the Public 
Broadcasting System has joined in with their Colonial House and 1900’s House series, where 
participants don period costumes and try to live within the era. Furthermore, reality television 
1
CHAPTER
5

6
isn’t produced just for American viewers’ tastes. Trading Rooms (like the American Trading Spaces) 
and Bargain Hunt (an antique purchasing contest) appear on UK television, and Australian Idol 
and Big Brother Italy (similar to their U.S. counterparts) are popular in those countries.
Reality TV programming is a product, just like t-shirts and coffee, and consumers can’t 
seem to get enough of it. But why do consumers keep watching? This is one type of question 
that consumer behavior researchers are interested in answering: why are consumers continually 
and passionately tuning in to watch a woman in search of Mr. Right, dating a group of eligible 
bachelors and weeding them out one by one? According to consumer behavior researchers, 
reality TV programs offer several benefits to consumers, including satisfying their fundamental 
voyeuristic tendencies. “We all like to watch people in situations where we ourselves might 
be pressured or tense. . .It is a safe way of experiencing a socially traumatic event. . .We can 
vicariously feel what they are feeling but at a safe distance,” says Professor Kip Williams of 
Macquarie University.3 We also role-play with ourselves in the context of the show, imagining 
how we might react in a similar situation compared to the show participants, which researchers 
say, can teach us to be self-improving and improve feelings of self-worth, like learning how to 
decorate our space on a dime, stand up to our peers, or navigate the world of business.4
Reality TV also satisfies the notion that anyone can achieve fame—if only for “fifteen 
minutes,” and provides the enjoyment of rooting for the underdogs of life, believing that the 
Michael Becker/TM and Copyright © 20th Century Fox Film Corp. 
All rights reserved, Courtesy: Everett Collection
6

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
7
7 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
average guy really can get the beautiful girl, or the skinny redhead from nowhere can become a 
superstar, for instance.
Knowing that these shows satisfy consumers and keep them viewing is the biggest reason 
television producers keep churning them out. But there are also lots of reasons for marketing 
executives to love reality programming, the most obvious of which is that people are watching, 
and high ratings mean that the advertisements are also potentially viewed. Who is watching 
is also important. Reality television appeals most to older teenagers and young adults, highly 
desirable and sought-after groups of consumers.5
Another added benefit of reality programming is that marketers can place their products 
in the settings of the program, allowing consumers to view the products in the contexts of 
everyday living. These subtle product endorsements can’t be tuned out like an advertisement; 
they appear to consumers as unsolicited. The judges on American Idol drink from Coca-Cola 
cups; the Trading Spaces crew cleans up with a Swiffer mop; and the kids on The Real World 
drink Starbucks coffee. In fact, product placement is so popular (thanks in large part to reality 
TV programming) that Nielsen Media Research began tracking products that appear in 
television programming in 2003.6
Finally, reality programs are often cheaper to produce than other forms of programming, 
such as dramas or situation comedies, so an advertiser can afford to sponsor a show, place 
products in the show, run 30-second commercials during the breaks, and block competitors 
from running advertisements. Coca-Cola is reported to have paid $35 million in one season 
for its role on Fox’s American Idol.7 And the profits don’t end there. There are instant messaging 
and phone charges for voting, cross promotions on websites, and show gear for sale. Who 
doesn’t want a buff from Survivor?
With the winning combination of consumer devotion and a surplus of revenue-generating 
opportunities, reality TV is a phenomenon that shows how consumers’ behaviors can influence 
an entire industry.
People engage in behaviors as consumers on a daily (even hourly) basis. What purchases 
have you made in the last few days? Maybe you bought a cup of coffee or something 
more expensive and long-lasting, like a new cell phone or a new outfit. What were you 
thinking when you made the purchase? What were you feeling? Even if you didn’t actually 
buy something, you were probably exposed to marketing information in the form of 
7

8 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
advertisements, product information on packages, opinions from friends or family, and brand 
symbols on almost everything. Simply being exposed to marketing information is a form of 
consumer behavior, albeit a passive one. Consumers devote a great deal of effort, time, and 
material wealth to evaluating products and services and purchasing and using products of all 
kinds. Thus, people’s behavior as consumers is a critical component of their everyday lives. In 
our role as consumers, we define our world and our place in it; we interact with the world and 
collectively, we even shape and change that world, creating phenomena like reality TV.
What Is Consumer Behavior?
Not many years ago, when students opened a textbook on consumer behavior, they 
read that consumer behavior (usually called buyer behavior) involves the study of how 
consumers decide to buy products. While this definition is accurate, it is an inadequate 
description of the full scope of activities in which consumers engage prior to purchase 
and during and after consumption. Contemporary definitions are much broader and 
try to capture the full range of consumer activities. Consumer behavior entails all con-
sumer activities associated with the purchase, use, and disposal of goods and services, 
including the consumer’s emotional, mental, and behavioral responses that precede, 
determine, or follow these activities (see Figure 1.1).
ob jec tive 1
Figure 1.1 
What Is Consumer Behavior?
Consumer
Behavior
Consumer Activities:
Purchase
Use/Consume
Dispose
Consumer Responses:
Emotional
Mental
Behavioral
This definition covers a lot of ground. Let’s break down the definition and examine 
consumers, consumer activities, and consumer responses more closely.
Consumers: Individual versus Organizational
The term “consumer” can describe either individual or organizational consumers. 
Individual consumers purchase goods and services to satisfy their own personal needs 
and wants or to satisfy the need and wants of others. Purchases for others include satis-
fying household uses, such as filling the family car with gasoline or paying the home’s 
electric bill; gift purchases, such as buying a birthday gift for a brother; or charitable 
contributions, such as buying cookies from a Girl Scout or a raffle ticket at a school 
fundraiser. Individual consumers come in all ages, life stages, and social backgrounds; 
8

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
9
they range from the six-year-old boy begging his mother for green ketchup in the gro-
cery aisle to the 20-something college graduate renting her first apartment to the retired 
couple in their 70s browsing in antique shops while on vacation.
Organizational consumers purchase goods and services in order to:
•  produce other goods or services
•  resell them to other organizations or to individual consumers
•  help manage and run their organization8
For example, Starbucks Coffee purchases coffee beans, brewing equipment, and 
paper cups in order to produce and offer its products. The company also purchases 
(and repackages) coffee beans to resell to individual consumers and other organizations, 
such as restaurants and grocery stores. Finally, Starbucks purchases office equipment, 
uniforms, and cleaning supplies, and may even hire a tax accounting firm, all to help 
keep the organization running smoothly.
Organizational consumers include for-profit firms, such as manufacturers, farmers, 
financial institutions, wholesalers, and retailers, and not-for-profit businesses, such as 
charities, political groups, and civic clubs. Local, state, and federal government agencies 
and other public institutions like schools, hospitals, and libraries are also organizational 
consumers. Although organizational consumer behavior is an important area of study, 
this book concentrates on individual consumer behavior.
Now that we understand who consumers are, let’s examine consumer activities as 
they relate to our definition of consumer behavior.
Consumer Activities
Consumer behavior is broken down into purchase, use, and disposal activities. 
Categorizing consumer behavior by type of activity is useful because consumers’ re-
sponses to stimuli may differ depending on whether they are purchasing, using, or 
disposing of a single product or service. For example, when leading up to purchase, 
a long line outside a night club is a positive factor in evaluating that club. Long lines 
imply that everyone wants to go there, and that the club is probably very good. But, 
after you have purchased your ticket, that long line is no longer a desirable factor, as 
you  impatiently wait to get in. Furthermore, once you make it to the door, that long 
line ahead of you now means that the club is overly crowded, and therefore, a lot less 
 appealing. So, from this example, categorizing activities by whether they occur prior 
to purchase versus during use shows how consumer responses can change significantly 
within a situation. Before we closely examine consumers’ responses, let’s first consider 
consumer purchase, use, and disposal activities in more detail.
Purchase activities are those through which consumers acquire goods and services. 
Purchase activities also include everything done leading up to the purchase, such as 
gathering and evaluating information about the product or service and choosing where 
to make the purchase. The purchase method and any additional services desired—
home delivery and installation, and extended warranties, for instance—also influence 
purchase activities. So too are factors unique to the situation, such as the atmosphere 
of a store, the design of a website, the reason for the purchase, and the amount of time 
the consumer devotes to the buying decision.
Use activities describe where, when, and how consumption takes place. For example, 
do consumers immediately consume the product after purchase, like an ice cream cone 
or a haircut, or do they delay consumption, such as when they buy new clothing for a 

10 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
future occasion or an airline ticket? Is the product consumed as part of a special event, 
such as going on vacation or attending a wedding, or as part of a special occasion, such 
as a holiday or birthday? Is the entire product consumed before disposal, such as a 
movie theater ticket or a battery, or is some left unconsumed, such as chewing gum or 
ink remaining in a toner cartridge?
Finally, disposal activities are the ways consumers get rid of products and/or packaging af-
ter consumption, and include discarding products, recycling, reuse, and resale. For example, 
sorting biodegradable trash, giving outgrown clothing to charity, and using paper grocery 
bags for book covers are recycling and reuse behaviors. Resale opportunities, like garage sales, 
classified ads, and flea markets have met their match in Internet auction sites like eBay.
Consumer Responses
Central to our definition of consumer behavior are consumers’ emotional, mental, and 
behavioral responses to goods and their marketing.
Courtesy of The Salvation Army, Canada & Bermuda
Donating gently used products to charitable organizations is one type of disposal activity.

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
11
Emotional responses (also called affective responses) reflect a consumer’s emotions, 
feelings, and moods. For example, when a consumer buys his first car, both excitement 
and uncertainty are probably among his affective responses.
Mental responses (also referred to as cognitive responses) include a consumer’s thought 
processes, opinions, beliefs, attitudes, and intentions about products and services. 
Weighing the pros and cons of financing a new car, making a mental list of attributes the 
car should have, and imagining oneself driving that car are some of the cognitive processes 
a consumer might experience in purchasing a new automobile. Mental responses can be 
evaluative, involving making a judgment that assigns value to something. They can also 
be non-evaluative, involving thinking about something without making a value judgment. 
Cognitive responses can be very specific and refer to one brand or even one attribute of 
that brand; they can also be very broad and deal with entire categories of products.
Finally, behavioral responses include a consumer’s overt decisions and actions during 
the purchase, use, and disposal activities identified earlier. To continue the car purchase 
example, a consumer is likely to pay close attention to various car advertisements, read 
sales literature at the car dealership or on a manufacturer’s website, test drive a car prior to 
purchase, discuss the decision with friends or family, and regularly maintain the car with 
oil changes after the purchase. Each of these actions exemplifies behavioral responses.
Why Study Consumer Behavior?
People study consumer behavior for a variety of reasons and in a variety of contexts, 
such as a student in a university class, a marketing executive working in an organiza-
tion, an advertising designer working at a large agency, or a professor teaching and 
doing scholarly research. Let’s examine a few of the benefits of studying consumer 
behavior, specifically, to improve business performance, to influence public policy, and 
to educate and help consumers make better decisions.
To Improve Business Performance
Organizations that market products and services often study consumer behavior—or use 
the results and recommendations of others’ research—to improve business performance 
through customer-focused strategies. Marketers who understand their customers can 
create better products and services, promote their products and services more effectively, 
and develop marketing plans and strategies that foster sustainable competitive advantag-
es. Their goal is to understand the general dynamics of consumer behavior that remain 
constant regardless of fads or trends. This understanding enables marketers to predict 
what motivates people to buy and then to deliver products that respond to those motiva-
tions, thereby successfully meeting and exceeding customer expectations over time.
For example, in 2001, global consumer goods producer Procter & Gamble (P&G) 
introduced Crest Whitestrips, the first product of its kind to offer over-the-counter tooth 
whitening affordably in a convenient delivery system. Crest had conducted extensive con-
sumer behavior studies and drew upon everything it knew about consumers when develop-
ing and marketing this product. As a result, P&G gained a significant competitive advantage 
over its competitors in the home dental products market, an advantage it still enjoys today.
To Influence Public Policy
People working in government agencies or in non-profit organizations often are 
called to influence public policy and improve society’s well-being. Public policy is the 
 establishment of laws and regulations that govern business practice in order to protect 
objec ti ve 2

12 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
consumers. Those interested in shaping public policy study consumer behavior to 
 understand the public needs and wants, and at the same time, to protect the public 
from unfair, unethical, or dangerous business practices. For example, in the packaged 
foods industry, the use of chemicals and preservatives has steadily increased as manufac-
turers have developed longer-lasting and more convenient forms of packaged food. In 
response, consumers have become increasingly concerned about the ingredients in pro-
cessed food products because of their potential health risks and the nutritional conse-
quences of synthetic additives. As a result, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
regulations now require marketers of food products to supply nutritional information 
on product packages in the form of “Nutritional Food Panels.”
Crest Whitestrips Create Competitive Advantage with Consumer-Focused Strategy
Marketing in Action
When consumer packaged goods giant, Procter & 
Gamble, introduced Crest Whitestrips nationally in May, 
2001, it was the first product of its kind to offer over-the-
counter whitening at an affordable price in a convenient 
 delivery system. The product comes in strips that are  applied 
to upper and lower teeth for 30 minutes twice a day for 
14 days. The clear, flexible strips contain a peroxide-based 
gel that bleaches the teeth. Most customers do notice a 
 difference, and the company claims the product whitens 
teeth 10 times better than traditional whitening toothpaste.
Procter & Gamble also employed a strategically clever 
and unique marketing campaign for Whitestrips. Knowing 
that demand for this innovative technology would outpace 
production capabilities, Procter & Gamble introduced 
the product in a limited capacity, placing Whitestrips in 
dentists’ offices, on home shopping television channels, 
and on the Internet and charging premium prices for kits, 
a pricing tactic referred to as market skimming. An added 
benefit of this marketing strategy was that the brand 
gained dentist approval and recommendation, because 
they were able to track the product’s performance first-
hand, and they also shared in early profits.
According to Procter & Gamble officials, a “consumer 
focus. . .is at the heart of everything we do. The consum-
er is boss, and the consumer demands the best value ev-
ery day.”27 Part of offering better value is through unique, 
new-to-the-world products like Crest Whitestrips. In order 
to deliver this value to the customer, Crest conducts 
extensive consumer behavior studies and draws upon 
everything it knows about consumers when developing 
and marketing new products. The company has invested 
millions in consumer research in the United States and 
other countries, and even has several dedicated research 
facilities that watch, record, interview, and measure 
consumers in the laboratory. Recently, Procter & Gamble 
has focused its consumer behavior research efforts out 
in the field, going into consumers’ homes and studying 
consumers in “real life.” Procter & Gambles’s dedication 
to understanding consumers’ needs and staying focused 
on the consumer appears to be well-founded. According 
to a research study examining products that consumers 
reported they were willing to buy, innovative products, 
such as Crest Whitestrips, that improve physical health or 
sense of well-being topped the list.28
Crest Whitestrips have become one of the most suc-
cessful new products in Procter & Gamble’s history. More 
than 10 million people have used Whitestrips, and the 
product was among the top 10 best-selling new non-food 
products in United States in 2001. Whitestrips continue 
to be one of the top-selling items in Crest’s product line—
now a $200 million plus business. More recently, Crest 
has introduced improved followup products, such as 
Premium Whitestrips and Advanced Seal. It seems there is 
no end in sight for our brighter, whiter smiles.29
PRNewsFoto/Crest Whitestrips/Newscom

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
13
To Educate and Help Consumers 
Make Better Decisions
Many people study consumer behavior because they want to educate  consumers 
or help them act responsibly. For example, in addition to enacting labeling 
laws to protect consumers, the FDA provides detailed advice to consumers on 
how to interpret dietary information. You can visit the FDA’s website on food 
and nutrition to learn more at http://www.fda.gov. How consumers gather, 
process and use information, and what motivates them, are important research 
topics for those interested in consumer education.
Finally, agencies and organizations involved in consumer education and as-
sistance study consumer behaviors that are socially (or individually) destructive. 
These behaviors are often referred to as the “dark side of consumer behavior.” 
This dark side includes consumer actions that are unhealthy, unethical, illegal, 
and  potentially dangerous to individuals or society, such as misusing or over-
using products, compulsive purchasing, shoplifting, and product tampering. 
Governments, businesses, and consumer interest groups want to curb these 
undesirable behaviors. Accordingly, these groups often study consumer behavior to 
best formulate strategies to promote positive behaviors (e.g., getting regular mam-
mograms) or aid in the cessation of negative behaviors (e.g., quitting smoking).
Understanding the definition of consumer behavior and examining some 
of the benefits of studying consumer behavior provide a foundation for how 
research measures consumer behavior. First, let’s look at how consumer behav-
ior became a scientific field of study. This subject is useful in understanding 
how the current scientific discipline of consumer behavior evolved and sug-
gests future directions for consumer research. In the next few pages, we also 
discuss how this text approaches the study of consumer behavior.
Consumer Behavior as a Field of Study
Consumer behavior is an applied social science that draws on theories and concepts of 
psychology, sociology, anthropology, economics, and statistics. A fairly young science, 
the study of consumer behavior emerged in the late 1940s when many firms shifted 
from a selling orientation (selling consumers the excess inventory of what they pro-
duced) to producing goods that consumers actually needed and wanted. This change in 
focus was the beginning of the marketing concept, the idea that firms should discover 
and satisfy customer needs and wants in an efficient and profitable manner, while ben-
efiting the long-term interests of society.
Today, the marketing concept is a core philosophy for many successful organizations. 
As for the future, the field of consumer behavior is likely to emphasize satisfying basic 
customer needs and wants. As a result, organizations are already focusing on delivering 
customer perceived value and customer delight. Customer perceived value “is the con-
sumer’s overall assessment of the utility of a product based on perceptions of what is 
received and what is given.”9 In other words, it is the estimated net gain customers receive 
from their sacrifice of time, money, and effort expended to purchase, use, and dispose 
of a product or service (i.e., benefits vs. costs). Customer delight goes a step beyond 
customer perceived value, suggesting customer benefits that not only meet, but also ex-
ceed expectations in unanticipated ways. Procter & Gamble executives state that offering 
customers better value when they purchase products and delighting customers during 
their usage experience with those products represent fundamental “moments of truth” 
objec ti ve 3
www.fda.gov
Nutrition food panels are the result 
of consumer behavior research 
related to public policy."

14 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
for the company.10 In other words, generating value and delight for consumers is essential 
for long-term success. Likewise, L´Oréal, a French cosmetic company, attempts to create 
customer delight by creating a new market called Nutricosmetics that combines cosmetics 
and nutrition. The company has launched a “beauty pill” that reportedly firms the skin. 
While both cosmetics and vitamins satisfy customer needs and wants, the interconnection 
of the two creates unanticipated  benefits for the consumer, and hence, customer delight.
Most competitors in a product category can satisfy customers’ expectations about 
the functional benefits of a product or service, but firms gain competitive advantage by 
anticipating and providing benefits that customers are initially unaware of and/or will 
desire in the future. Identifying and satisfying consumers’ latent demand is critical to 
providing customer delight.11 Thus, the overarching goal of a consumer-centered firm 
is to maximize long-term customer value and delight, while also maximizing profits 
and doing so better than the competition.
The Evolution of Consumer Behavior Research
How researchers study consumer behavior has also evolved over the past several de-
cades. Three prominent approaches are examined here: motivation research, behavioral 
science, and Interpretivism.
Eye on International
L’Oréal, the French cosmetic company known worldwide for its 
cosmetics and hair-care products, is at the forefront of a new 
marketing concept designed to deliver customer delight and 
to “change the lives of women 
everywhere,” according to 
Laurent Attal, Managing Director 
of L’Oréal’s Active Cosmetic 
division.30 The concept, called 
Nutricosmetics, combines cosmet-
ics and nutrition to offer consum-
ers nutritional supplements with 
beauty benefits that work from 
the inside out. The company’s first 
product in its nutricosmetic line, 
launched in March, 2003, is 
called Innéov Firmness, an oral 
supplement that firms the skin, according to laboratory research. 
Of course, L’Oréal claims the supplements are even more effec-
tive when used in conjunction with the company’s line of topical 
anti-aging creams. L’Oréal teamed up with Nestlé, a Swiss mul-
tinational company with expertise in nutrition, to create the prod-
uct. The “beauty pill” contains lacto-lycopene, which is similar to 
a natural molecules found in tomatoes and soy. The supplement 
is designed for women over 40 who are concerned about aging 
and want to improve skin tone and elasticity.
Known for the famous 
slogan, “Because I’m worth 
it,” L’Oréal hopes its new slo-
gan, “This pill could change 
women’s lives forever,” is also 
taken to heart by its consumers 
worldwide. So far, it seems to 
be working. L´Oréal’s Active 
Cosmetic Division, Innéov’s home 
in the company, enjoyed an 
11.9 percent increase in sales in 
2003. The company claims that 
the pill has conquered the market 
and is the leader in  anti-aging nutritional cosmetics. In addition, 
according to a consumer research study done by the company 
in August, 2003, loyalty to the new product is very strong. Some 
80 percent of women who had taken the supplements over a 
three-month treatment period reported that they would purchase 
the product again.
L´Oréal: Delighting Customers with Beauty Inside and Out
heather_mcgrath/iStockphoto.com

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
15
Motivation Research  One of the earliest approaches to studying consumer 
behavior, motivation research applied psychoanalytic therapy concepts from clinical psy-
chology to consumer behavior research. The method was developed by Ernest Dichter, 
a Freudian psychoanalyst, shortly after World War II. He used in-depth interviewing 
techniques to uncover a person’s hidden or unconscious motivations.12 In consumer 
research, an in-depth interview (IDI) is a lengthy (sometimes several hours), probing 
interview, where a carefully trained interviewer extensively questions a subject about 
his or her purchase motivations. Depth interviews are more formally described later in 
this chapter under specific research methods.
During the peak of motivation research, Dichter performed in-depth interviews 
in more than 200 different product categories.13 He applied Freudian interpretations 
to consumer actions and viewed consumers as largely immature, irrational, and driven 
by hidden erotic desires. For example, Dichter believed that an underlying reason 
for the popularity of canned soup was that women unconsciously associated it with 
breast milk—nutritious and warm—and so, didn’t feel guilty about serving it in place 
of preparing a full meal. A man who lights a woman’s cigarette represented a form of 
eroticism—the physical act of lighting a match or lighter created a tension-filled mo-
ment, peaking with pressure (as the match is struck) and followed by relaxation.14
Over the years, many advertisers have embraced motivation research because of its 
seeming ability to tap deep-rooted needs. For example, Dichter’s contention that baking 
cakes fulfilled a woman’s inner desire for children helped lead to Pillsbury’s doughboy 
character and slogan, “Nothing says lovin’ like something from the oven.” Exxon’s tiger 
mascot with the slogan, “Put a tiger in your tank!” was created in part based on the sup-
posed masculine masculine symbolism conveyed by the animal.15
Motivation research fell out of fashion in the 1960s. Critics of the approach pointed 
out methodological limitations, such as the subjective nature of interview interpretations, 
as well as the strategic and practical limitations of applying sexual explanations to most 
consumer actions. However, motivation research left two important legacies to the field of 
consumer research: (1) a focus on consumer motivations, i.e., trying to answer the ques-
tion of why people behave as they do, and (2) the technique of in-depth interviewing. 
Today, motivation research is still used occasionally, but usually in conjunction with  other, 
more rigorous techniques; strong Freudian sexual interpretations are de-emphasized.
A Behavioral Science Perspective  Since the 1960s, a behavioral 
science perspective (also referred to as Positivism and social science) has dominated the 
field of consumer research. Behavioral science applies the scientific method, rely-
ing on systematic, rigorous procedures to explain, control, and predict consumer be-
havior. Thus, behavioral scientists study people and their behaviors in the same way 
that natural scientists study physical phenomena. Because behavioral scientists study 
people, however, research findings are more difficult to interpret. The primary meth-
ods of behavioral science include the experimental approach—conducting controlled 
 experiments—and the marketing science approach—employing computer-based simula-
tions and mathematical models to explain and predict consumer behavior.
Behavioral scientists who study consumer behavior tend to view consumers as 
largely rational; they seek causes for behavior, conduct research to be used for strategic 
marketing decision making, and primarily use quantitative research methods. In quan-
titative research methods, empirical data are collected. Empirical data are numerical, 
based on observation, experiment, or experience, rather than speculation or theory. 
This data is used to perform sophisticated statistical analyses. Because quantitative 
research methods typically use representative samples of a larger consumer group of 

16 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
interest (also called a population of interest), these results can typically be generalized 
from the study group to the larger group.
This textbook uses a predominantly behavioral science perspective for studying con-
sumer behavior, although alternative approaches are also discussed. The scientific ap-
proach is advantageous for those interested in developing consumer-focused strategies 
and provides a foundation for critical thinking, creative problem solving, and decision 
making. This approach is based on the scientific method, a collection of systematic activi-
ties that enables researchers to study problems and find answers to questions.16 Like a 
roadmap, the scientific method leads scientists in the right direction, but different re-
searchers may take different routes to arrive at the same destination. But they always fol-
low the rules of the road. (See Figure 1.2.) The steps of the scientific method include:
1.  Observe and ask the question: Observations we make of the world around us are 
the basis for formulating questions or problems we want to solve.
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
17
2.  Form a hypothesis and make a prediction: When a question or problem emerges 
from observation, we generate a potential explanation called a hypothesis 
that may provide the answer. A prediction is what we expect to happen if our 
 hypothesis is correct.
3.  Test the hypothesis: We test our hypotheses under controlled conditions, 
 including testing only one hypothesis at a time and limiting the circumstances/
environment of the testing to see if our predictions are correct. Hypotheses that 
cannot be confirmed through testing must be rejected, and hypotheses must be 
tested and re-tested before they can be accepted as true. When behavioral scien-
tists test a hypothesis, an empirical confrontation ensues, i.e., empirical data are 
collected, and the results are compared to those suggested by the hypothesis.
4.  Theory generation: If a hypothesis is confirmed via testing and re-testing, we 
generate a theory, which is a general answer to our original question. Once a 
theory is established, it also guides future research.
A scientific foundation should serve you well as a student and in your chosen career. 
Depth of understanding is key to success in today’s complex marketplace. Marketers 
and business practitioners who possess in-depth, scientific understanding of their cus-
tomers are more likely to succeed where others fail.
Figure 1.2 The Scientific Method
Observation and
Asking the Question
Form a Hypothesis and
Make a Prediction
Test the Hypothesis...
Does the result confirm
the hypothesis?
Theory Generation
YES!
NO!
Faulty test or
hypothesis?
RETHINK!
Interpretivism  An alternative research approach to behavioral science that relies less 
on scientific and technological methodology is called Interpretivism (or Postmodernism). 
Researchers working from this perspective view consumers as non-rational beings and 
their reality as highly subjective. These researchers’ goal is to collect data to describe and 
interpret this reality. Interpretivist consumer researchers are often especially interested in 
the consumption experience and stress understanding consumers from a broader societal 
perspective. They also tend to reject the quantitative approach of behavioral science in 
favor of qualitative research methods. In qualitative research methods, descriptive, non-
empirical data are collected that describe an individual consumer’s subjective experience 
with the product or service. Because qualitative research methods typically do not include 

18 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
large, representative samples from the population of inter-
est, their results cannot be generalized. But while these tech-
niques typically lack generalizability, they provide in-depth, 
detail-rich descriptions of consumers’ experiences that can be 
very useful in developing further questions and understand-
ing consumers on an abstract level.
The field of consumer behavior has a rich heritage of 
diverse scientific disciplines on which to draw. And, regard-
less of the perspective or methods used, the primary goal is 
to advance the field of consumer behavior in order to benefit 
students, marketers, business, scholars, and society. The fol-
lowing sections of this chapter discuss how consumer behav-
ior is examined and measured through marketing research.
Consumer 
Behavior Research
Consumer researchers study consumer responses and activi-
ties by using marketing  research methods. Marketing re-
search is a systematic process of planning, collecting, analyz-
ing, and interpreting data and information relevant to mar-
keting problems and consumer behavior. Marketing research 
also enables businesses to better understand the market(s) in 
which they compete and the broader environment in order 
to identify  opportunities and threats. Finally, consumer re-
searchers use marketing research to analyze the effectiveness 
of marketing strategies, programs, and tactics. Ultimately, 
effective marketing and consumer research should provide 
marketers with relevant information for making decisions, 
reducing uncertainty, and improving profits.
Unfortunately, sometimes marketers forego conducting 
marketing research. Instead, they often rely on their intu-
ition. Intuition is simply common sense, a guess, or “gut 
feeling.” Decisions based on intuition are often made with 
limited or incomplete information. Relying too heavily on 
intuition and “gut feelings,” rather than on sound research, 
can lead to costly business mistakes. This is one reason so 
many new products fail, as many as 95 percent by some esti-
mates.17 For example, not long ago, Heinz introduced a new 
clam chowder made with the finest ingredients, including 
expensive, very tender clams, working under the assumption 
that consumers would prefer high quality ingredients—a 
rather common sense assumption. The product was a fail-
ure. If the company had done systematic research on con-
sumer preferences, it would have discovered that, counter 
to the common sense assumption, consumers actually prefer 
lower quality, tough, rubbery clams in their chowder.
Another area of concern in studying consumer behav-
ior is the unethical and/or unintended manipulation of 
o b j e c t ive 4
 
Tampering with research results
 
is a serious ethical problem. A few
 
years ago, The Coca-Cola Company 
 
and Burger King conducted an 
applied consumer research project in the form of a three-week 
promotional campaign in some Burger King restaurants in 
Richmond, Virginia. (Coke had been the main provider of foun-
tain drinks for Burger King since 1999, after signing a 10-year 
deal with the chain.) The objective of the project was to test the 
appeal of Frozen Coke, a slushy drink. Coke wanted Burger King 
to offer the frozen drinks as a kids’ snack. If the tests were suc-
cessful, Burger King would make Frozen Coke a regular offering 
nationwide.
Apparently the initial research results of the campaign weren’t 
pleasing to some people at Coke, and they decided to inflate 
their test results—without Burger King’s knowledge, of course. 
It was reported this involved paying a man $10 thousand to get 
hundreds of kids to go to Burger King restaurants and ask for the 
Frozen Coke value meal. With the “rigged” results of the test mar-
ket sales appearing to be quite positive, Burger King ramped up 
the Frozen Coke program. Burger King and its franchisees com-
mitted to a national promotion of Frozen Coke in more than 7,600 
restaurants, and invested an estimated $65 million in advertising 
and the equipment and syrup to make the frozen drinks.
Then a finance executive in Coke’s fountain-drink division 
was let go. He filed a lawsuit, claiming that he had been unfairly 
fired for complaining about these, and other, unethical practices 
at Coke. In his lawsuit, he accused Coke of rigging the Frozen 
Coke research project. This led to informal investigations by the 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the U.S. 
Justice Department. Coke was subpoenaed by a federal grand 
jury. Eventually, Coke admitted that it had rigged the test.
Needless to say, Coke’s customer, Burger King, was not 
thrilled. Sales of Frozen Coke have been about one-half of what 
Burger King expected, and for a while, the company threatened 
to discontinue the drink. Finally, Coke and Burger King reached 
a settlement, with Coke agreeing to pay up to $21 million to 
Burger King and its franchisees.
Wouldn’t you hate to be in the shoes of the marketing 
managers who created this whole mess? Not surprisingly, the 
executive who approved the scam is no longer employed by 
Coke. Unfortunately, cases like this one have been too common 
in today’s highly competitive business environment, with market-
ers on the front lines when it comes to producing positive results 
for their stakeholders. While finding the “right” results from the 
research may seem crucial, failing to maintain integrity and high 
ethical standards in research can be serious mistake that every-
one typically pays for in the end.32
E T H I C S

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
19
research data or results. Firms sometimes manipulate, alter, or misinterpret—inten-
tionally or unintentionally—research results, often to their own advantage.
Now that we’ve broadly examined consumer behavior research, the remaining sec-
tions of this chapter review:
•  major classifications of research: basic versus applied
•  two special relationships, correlations and causal
•  two main sources of research data: secondary and primary
•  popular methods for collecting primary data
Basic versus Applied Research
Consumer research is divided into two broad categories based on the goals of the re-
search: basic research and applied research. Basic research looks for general relation-
ships between variables, regardless of the specific situation. For example, basic research 
has shown that using celebrity endorsers in advertising can increase consumers’ positive 
attitudes toward a brand, especially when the celebrity is well liked and fits well with 
the product or the product’s image. Examples include Tiger Woods endorsing Nike golf 
equipment and Mariah Carey endorsing Pepsi Cola.18
PRNewsFoto/Gatorade/Newscom
This photo shows Tiger Woods involved in applied research for the development of “Gatorade Tiger.”
The key benefit of basic research is that conclusions drawn from it generally ap-
ply across a variety of situations, and researchers can use these generalizations to guide 
strategic planning and develop marketing tactics. Thus, basic research findings apply 
not only to Tiger’s hitting Nike golf clubs and Mariah’s singing about Pepsi, but to most 
celebrities and brands in general. This helps marketers make more informed decisions, 
such as whether to use a celebrity endorser in advertising.
Basic research variables studied can include those related to the consumer, such as per-
sonality or demographic variables; they can also relate to the marketing mix (product, price, 
place, and promotion). Examples include advertising tactics involving humor appeals or 

20 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
sex appeals and the consumer’s environment or personal situation, such as music played in 
a retail store, or shopping when pressed for time, e.g., 5:00 P.M. on Christmas Eve.
Applied research examines many of these same variables, but within a specific context 
of interest to a marketer. Applied research is more common than basic research because con-
sumer researchers want to solve particular business-related problems of immediate interest.
Let’s revisit our celebrity endorser example. Given what researchers know about 
the influence of celebrity endorsers from basic research, a company, let’s say Kraft, 
decides to use a celebrity endorser to advertise a new line of kids’ yogurt. The company 
develops two or three advertisements, each with a different celebrity endorser. These 
celebrities are people who might fit with the product or convey an image desired by the 
company, such as Kelly Ripa, the famous mom and talk-show host, or Hillary Duff, a 
popular young actress. The company then conducts applied research to test which of 
the endorsers is most effective. In this case, the research is aimed at evaluating a specific 
brand and endorser combination, and the results would not apply to other situations.
Correlations and Causal Relationships
Consumer researchers are especially interested in uncovering two special types of relation-
ships—correlations and causal (cause-and-effect). When a statistically testable and sig-
nificant relationship exists between two variables, we say the variables are correlated (see 
Figure 1.3).19 A variable is simply any factor that that can potentially change. For example, 
if researchers are studying the relationship between advertising and sales, those would be 
the variables of interest. There are three main types of correlations: positive, negative, and 
zero. In a positive correlation, the two variables increase or decrease together. A negative 
correlation means that as one variable increases, the related variable decreases. For ex-
ample, research has shown that there is a positive correlation between advertising expen-
ditures and level of sales.20 As advertising increases, sales also increase. On the other hand, 
a negative correlation between product malfunctions and customer satisfaction exists—as 
product malfunctions increase, customer satisfaction tends to decrease.
A zero correlation means that there is no predictable relationship between two 
 variables. For example, there is zero correlation between the quality of non-frozen, 
concentrated orange juice and the physical distance between the orange grove and the 
Figure 1.3 Graphs Showing Correlations between Advertising and Sales
Dollars invested in advertising 
Sales
Positive Correlation
Negative Correlation
Zero Correlation
Sales
Sales

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
21
processing facility. This may surprise you, because many consumers believe (and many 
orange juice marketers imply) that the closer the processing plant is to the field, the 
fresher and higher quality the orange juice. Believing there is a correlational relation-
ship between variables where none actually exists is called an illusory correlation.
One limitation in identifying correlations is that they tell us nothing about which vari-
able influences the other. This means that even if we know that two variables (A and B) are 
correlated, we still do not know whether variable A influences variable B; B influences A; 
or A and B influence each other. Applying the advertising and sales example, even though 
we know that sales and advertising are positively correlated, advertising may influence sales, 
sales may influence advertising, or both variables may influence each other simultaneously.
In contrast, causal relationships capture both correlation and direction of the rela-
tionship. A causal relationship between two variables means that the variables are cor-
related and that one variable influences the other, but not vice versa (see Figure 1.4).
In other words, a causal relationship exists if the following requirements are met:
 
1.  the two variables are correlated
 
2.  the cause must precede the effect
 
3.  other potential causes are ruled out21
Let’s look again at the positive relationship between advertising and sales. Of course, 
marketers are interested in whether advertising actually drives sales. They know that the 
variables are correlated, and it seems logical to conclude that advertising is the cause and 
must precede sales, and not vice versa, but does this constitute a causal relationship? Does 
this relationship satisfy all the requirements for a causal relationship? While intuition may 
point marketers toward answering “yes” to these questions, they cannot truly establish a 
causal relationship between advertising and sales without some scientific evidence. Can 
they obtain such evidence? Yes, by employing the scientific method, they can conduct 
experiments to test causality. In fact, there is a causal relationship between advertising 
and sales. Experiments are discussed in more detail under “Research Methods.”
Interestingly, marketers suspected the causal relationship between advertising and 
sales for centuries, and anecdotal evidence suggests that this relationship was tested sys-
tematically as long ago as the early 1800s in Boston. As the story goes, there was a lady, 
Lydia Pinkerton, who invented and marketed a tonic to women for “medicinal needs.” 
To promote his mother’s product, Mrs. Pinkerton’s son created large banners advertis-
ing the tonic and placed them in neighborhoods and on bridges and buildings. Much to 
his amazement, he discovered that every time he moved the banners into a new neigh-
borhood, sales increased in that area. So, he decided to specifically test the relationship. 
He went into several neighborhoods where sales were very high, and he removed all the 
banners. Not surprisingly, sales dropped in the neighborhoods that had been stripped 
Figure 1.4 The Cause and Effect Relationship
Cause
(Independent variable)
Effect
(Dependent variable)
Increase in
Advertising
Increase in
Sales
Increase in
Sales
Increase in
Advertising

22 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
of the advertisements. Mr. Pinkerton concluded that advertising was related to sales and 
that the more he advertised in a given geographic area, the better were his sales. This is 
one of the first recorded marketing research studies examining this relationship.22
Systematic testing allows researchers to determine causal relationships with a high 
degree of certainty. However, whereas a scientific approach allows researchers to estab-
lish causality among variables in a controlled setting, variables seldom exist in isola-
tion in the real world. Rather, confounding elements introduce uncertainty, making 
research difficult. Causal relationships also tend to overlap, with some effects—like 
increased sales—having many different causes that may work together or indepen-
dently, such as amount of advertising, product quality, and price. Fortunately, although 
uncertainty can’t be completely eliminated, scientific techniques described in this book 
allow consumer researchers to minimize it.
Up to this point in our discussion of consumer behavior research, we have seen that 
researchers conduct different broad types of research, namely basic and applied research, 
and that uncovering correlations and causal relationships are often of special interest. 
Now we turn our attention to specific types of data and methods for their collection.
Secondary versus Primary Data
Where do marketers collect data? There are two broad sources of data: secondary data 
and primary data. Secondary data is data that already exist and is readily accessible. One 
source could be internal organizational sources, such a company’s sales history records, 
customer database, sales force observations, or even previous company research proj-
ects. Secondary data is also available from outside sources, including U.S. and foreign 
government agencies that offer a variety of reports, such as the U.S. Census Population 
Report and the Vital Statistics Report; academic and trade publications, such as Moody’s 
Manuals, Journal of Consumer Research, and Advertising Age, that often publish the re-
sults of both basic and applied research; and finally, commercial syndicated data sourc-
es, such as Nielsen TV Ratings Reports and InfoScan data from supermarket scanners. 
Syndicated data are data that are periodically collected using standardized procedures 
and analyzed by a commercial firm, which then makes the results available for purchase. 
For example, Nielson Market Research Company monitors people’s television viewing 
habits. Research participants are asked to keep journal information on their viewing 
habits and an electronic monitor attached to the television records channel selection 
and viewing time. Table 1.1 lists some examples of secondary data sources.
The advantages of secondary data are that it is usually readily available, rich in  detail, 
and may not cost any more than the time and effort it takes to search the Internet or 
go to the library. The disadvantages of secondary data are that it may lack currency 
and relevancy. For example, the U.S. Census is done every 10 years, and eight- or 
nine-year-old information may not be timely enough to address our current problems. 
Furthermore, secondary data are often aggregated, which means they are reported as a 
whole, rather than broken down in detail. So, these data may not be specific enough to 
directly relate to a marketer’s situation.
Primary data are new data collected specifically for the research purpose at hand. 
For example, prior to this textbook’s availability for sale, the publisher collected pri-
mary data, in the form of questionnaires sent to potential users, to predict how students 
and instructors would like the book.
The advantages of primary data are that the information is specific and relevant to 
a specific project, is current, and data collection can be controlled. On the downside, 
primary data tend to be very expensive and may require considerable time to collect, 
organize, and analyze.

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
23
Primary Data Collection Methods  A diverse set of methods en-
able researchers to “get inside the mind of the consumer” through primary data. There 
is no one perfect primary research method. Each has strengths and weaknesses, so the 
best methodology is the one that achieves the individual researcher’s objectives. Let’s 
examine four common primary research methods:
 
1. observation
 
2. direct questioning
 
3. experimentation
 
4. projective techniques
Table 1.1 Secondary Data Sources
Internal Sources:
 a. Company customer records and databases
 b.  Financial statement, such as annual reports, profit/loss statements, and balance sheets
 c. Sales Call Sheets and records
 d. Inventory records
 e. Prior research study reports
External Sources:
 a. Online Indexes and Databases
 
• Business Source Complete
 
• Business and Industry
 
• Global Market Information Database
 
• IBISWorld
 
• Marketline (Datamonitor)
 
• MRI  (Mediamark)
 
• SRDS Media Solutions
 
• Country Profiles and Country Commerce Online
 
• Europa World Plus
 
• Sports Business Research Network
 b. Specific Periodicals and Books
 
• Standard and Poor’s Industry
 
• Moody’s Manuals
 
• The Handbook of Consumer Psychology
 
• The Advertising Age Encyclopedia of Advertising
 
•  Marketing Journals, such as Journal of Consumer Research, Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, Journal of Marketing, Journal of Marketing Research, Journal of Retailing, 
Journal of Advertising
 
•  Trade Magazines such as Advertising Age, Progressive Grocer, Sales and Marketing 
Management
 
•  General Business Publication such as Business Week, Forbes, The Wall Street Journal, 
Harvard Business Review, The Economist
 c. Government Sources
 
•  U.S. Bureau of the Census (http://www.census.gov). The census includes 
reports not only on general population, but also on housing, the labor force, 
manufacturers, business, agriculture, and foreign aspects.
 
•  Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (http://www.ipums.umn.edu). This series 
of data includes samples of the U.S. census gathered for over 100 years and 
historical census files from other countries.
 
•  Bureau of Labor Statistics (http://stats.bls.gov). This source collects data on 
employment, industrial relations, prices, earnings, living conditions, occupational 
safety, technology, and productivity.

24 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Observation  By using observational techniques, researchers 
can record people’s behavior, either with or without their knowl-
edge. When a person is aware of the observation, the research is 
referred to as obtrusive observation. For example, toy manufacturers 
routinely invite children in for “playtime.” In a research facility 
made to resemble a classroom, playground, or family room, chil-
dren are encouraged to play with toys while researchers record all 
their behaviors and comments.
When a person is unaware of being observed, the research is 
unobtrusive observation. For example, in addition to monitoring se-
curity, cameras in retail stores can track traffic patterns, examining 
path and pace as customers move through the store and see where 
traffic jams occur. Consumer goods marketer Procter & Gamble 
sends employees into grocery stores to casually observe consumers 
shopping for its products. These observations yield valuable infor-
mation about how much time customers spend at the store shelf, 
how many products they examine, where customers’ attention is 
focused, and whether they seem confused.
A specialized form of observation called participant observation 
occurs when a researcher joins a family or group for an extended 
period and  observes members’ behaviors. Adapted from cultural an-
thropology, this type of research is also called ethnographic research. 
This type of research is growing in popularity, especially when the researcher needs an 
honest, behind-the-scenes peek into consumers’ lives. For example, Whirlpool recently 
conducted an ethnographic research project for a new line of luxury jet-bathtubs by 
filming participants while they soaked in the tub. Innovations Focus, a firm that uses 
ethnographic research for new product development, was interested in understanding 
how women use lipstick. To that end, they observed Mary Kay in-home make-up par-
ties run by a make-up consultant, participated in several in-home make-up application 
sessions, and even accompanied women while shopping for lipstick.23
Observational techniques are valuable because they can measure what consumers 
actually do, but observation alone cannot reveal a person’s underlying motivations, 
 attitudes, and preferences. In addition, observation may also raise ethical issues when it 
is used to collect data that consumers regard as private.
Direct Questioning: Surveys, Interviews, and Focus 
Groups  Direct forms of questioning are probably the most popular types of con-
sumer research methods because researchers can collect a wide variety of data, such as 
group versus individual, brief answers versus long answers, and qualitative versus quan-
titative. Researchers can also collect large amounts of data with direct questioning, and 
the variety of direct questioning methods adds flexibility to the data collection task. 
Questioning the consumer directly can take a number of forms, including written and 
oral surveys, which can be administered via mail, telephone, fax, e-mail, the Internet, 
or face-to-face.
A survey is simply a set of structured questions to which a person is asked to 
 respond. For example, The Harris Poll, run by Harris Interactive, is one the country’s 
largest Internet survey providers, with an active multi-million participant database cov-
ering 40 countries.24 Mail and e-mail surveys are relatively inexpensive, but response 
rates are typically low—from 5 to 20 percent. Phone surveys achieve higher response 
©Michael Greenlar/The Image Works

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
25
rates but reduce the number of questions that can be asked because many answer op-
tions have to be repeated, and few people are willing to stay on the phone for more than 
5 to 10 minutes. To talk to customers face-to-face, companies often recruit research 
participants in malls and shopping centers, a technique referred to as mall-intercept. 
Mall-intercepts are a convenient way to reach consumers, but respondents may be 
reluctant to discuss anything sensitive face-to-face with an interviewer.
Surveys are useful for collecting specific, often complex, information from a large 
number of individuals. They are typically easy to administer, and the general public is 
familiar and comfortable with this technique. However, as is true of all research tech-
niques, surveys are vulnerable to bias. Wording questions correctly can be very difficult, 
and the language can influence a consumer’s response. For example, consider the ques-
tion, “In order to prevent terrorism, should airports be allowed to conduct passenger 
searches based on racial profiling and suspicious behavior?” This question has a number 
of potential problems. First, it is ambiguous. What behavior exactly is considered suspi-
cious behavior in an airport? Second, the question is double-barreled, which means that 
it is really asking more than one question. What if the respondent approves of passenger 
searches on the basis of suspicious behavior but not on the basis of racial profiling—how 
should the respondent answer? Third, it is a leading question. Qualifying the question 
with, “In order to prevent terrorism. . .” clearly tips the respondent off to the fact that 
a “yes” answer is desired. This question may also suffer from what is referred to as social 
desirability bias. In this situation, respondents may not answer a question honestly or 
completely because they feel that the information is too personal or socially sensitive.
In face-to-face interviews, interviewer bias is an additional problem. Interviewer bias oc-
curs when responses are influenced by variables such as the interviewer’s age, gender, appear-
ance, verbal or non-verbal reactions, or by a desire to please the interviewer. For example, 
male respondents may hesitate to give personal information to a female interviewer. Or, a 
respondent may fabricate answers in an attempt to not appear ignorant to an interviewer.
Another method of direct questioning is the in-depth interview (IDI), a one-
on-one, interview of at least one hour in length, but sometimes considerably longer. 
A highly trained interviewer establishes rapport with a respondent and then proceeds 
to lead him or her through a loosely structured discussion of the research topic. This 
method is particularly appropriate for sensitive or emotionally charged topics, or when 
the researcher is attempting to gather detailed information about very complicated 
behaviors. In an in-depth interview, the research can peel away layers of respondents’ 
emotions, thoughts, or behaviors. The disadvantages of in-depth interviews are that 
they tend to be time-consuming and costly, because the interviewer must be highly 
trained. Furthermore, respondents are typically compensated for their time, and the 
data can be difficult to analyze and interpret.
Extending interviewing to the group level, a focus group consists of 6 to12 cur-
rent or potential customers run by a facilitator who monitors and guides the group 
discussion. Focus groups are conducted for a variety of  reasons, including brainstorm-
ing for ideas, assessing new products, and evaluating promotional campaigns. With a 
skilled facilitator, focus groups are opportunities to generate energy and group syner-
gies that can result in new ideas or unique insights. On the downside, like interviews, 
focus groups require a skilled facilitator and may yield unwieldy data. In addition, 
focus groups are vulnerable to problems associated with group dynamics. For example, 
groupthink is the tendency for groups to make poor quality decisions for the sake of 
 unanimity.25 Groupthink occurs when groups are highly cohesive, and when they are 
under considerable pressure to make a quality decision.

26 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Experiments  Experiments manipulate variables 
in a controlled setting to determine their relationship 
to one another. Researchers use experiments to rule out 
all but one explanation for a particular observation. In 
designing an experiment, researchers first identify any 
variables that can possibly change. There are three broad 
types of variables:
•  Independent variables are the factors that are changed 
or manipulated.
•  Dependent variables are factors that change in re-
sponse to researchers’ manipulations of the indepen-
dent variables.
•  Constants are factors that researchers do not allow to 
change, but instead control.
Recall our discussion of the potential causal relation-
ship between advertising and sales. Experiments are the 
best methods for determining causality. For instance, a 
marketer could manipulate advertising (the independent 
variable) by showing an advertisement for a product to one group of participants and 
not showing the advertisement to a second, control group—a group that is not exposed 
to any independent variables and serves as a standard of comparison. The marketer 
could then examine the resulting influence of the advertisement on average sales (the 
dependent variable). If sales are significantly higher in the ad-group than in the no-
ad-group, the marketer could conclude that changes in advertising are likely to cause 
changes in sales.
Participants in experiments should be randomly assigned to the conditions, which 
means the assignment is determined by chance, such as flipping a coin. Random as-
signment helps to rule out other possible causes for the results, such as different person-
alities among participants and varying levels of product knowledge and interest, among 
others. Random assignment forces these individual differences to cancel out. Ideally, 
researchers would replicate the experiment a number of times and in different settings 
to show additional support for their findings.
Experimentation is the most effective technique for determining causal relation-
ships, but it does have a drawback in that consumers are removed from their natural 
surroundings. The contrived laboratory setting may prevent consumers from acting as 
they would in a real market setting.
Projective Techniques  Borrowed from psychology, projective techniques 
are an “unstructured, indirect form of questioning that encourages respondents to proj-
ect their underlying beliefs, attitudes, feelings, and motivations in an apparently un-
related or ambiguous scenario.”26 In other words, projective techniques use seemingly 
meaningless exercises to uncover consumers’ unconscious points of view. Projective 
techniques consist of a variety of tests that fall under four broad categories:
 
1. Word-association tests, which ask subjects to respond to a list of words with one 
or more associated words that come to mind
 
2. Completion tests, which ask subjects to fill in the blanks by finishing sentences 
or stories
Digital Vision/Getty Images
Focus group are a great way to initiate meaningful 
conversations with customers.

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
27
 
3. Construction tests, including cartoon construction, which ask subjects fill in the 
word/thought “bubbles” in a cartoon; or picture construction, where subjects 
tell a story about a picture (see Figure 1.5)
 
4. Expression tests, including role-play activities and third-person techniques, 
which ask subjects to describe the actions of typical others
Projective techniques can often generate responses that participants would be un-
willing or unable to give if questioned directly. For example, the makers of Old Spice 
High Endurance Antiperspirant-Deodorant use an expression-type projective tech-
nique, asking research participants to describe a “typical” user of their product and 
a “typical” user of a competing product. This technique helps paint a rich picture of 
how each brand is perceived and reveals subtle differences between brands that research 
participants are not able to articulate directly. On the negative side, projective tech-
niques can be time-consuming and awkward to code (input as data) and analyze, and 
interpretation can be subjective.
Figure 1.5 Example of a Construction Projective Technique
Chapter Summary
Welcome to the exciting world of consumer behavior 
research! Now you have an idea of what consumer behav-
ior entails, how it fits into the larger field of marketing, 
and how we study it. Consumer behavior comprises all 
 consumer activities associated with the purchase, use, and 
disposal of goods and services, including the consumer’s 
emotional, mental, and behavioral responses that pre-
cede, determine,or follow these activities. One dominant 
 approach to studying consumer behavior is the behavioral 
science perspective, which relies on rigorous quantitative 
research methods and procedures to describe, explain, 
control, and predict consumer behavior. An alternative 
approach, which relies less on scientific and technologi-
cal methodology and more on the qualitative approach, is 
called Interpretivism.
Understanding, explaining, and predicting consumer 
behavior are complicated tasks. This textbook adopts a sci-
entific approach to achieve a deeper understanding of con-
sumer behavior. In this approach, researchers are especially 
interested in two special types of relationships between vari-
ables, namely, correlational and causal relationships. When 
a statistically testable and significant relationship exists 

28 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Review and Discussion
 1. Based on the definition of consumer behavior, iden-
tify some of the consumer behavior-related activities 
you have engaged in today.
 2. What is/are the key difference(s) between customer 
perceived value and customer delight?
 3. How do public policy makers use the results of con-
sumer research?
 4. How might an Interpretivist researcher attempt to 
examine why more men (versus women) have an 
emotional attachment to their automobiles? How 
would a behavioral science researcher approach the 
same question?
 5. Define qualitative research and quantitative research 
and highlight the differences between them. Provide 
one example of each technique.
 6. Discuss the advantages of conducting marketing 
 research, rather than relying on intuition and 
common sense.
 7. Give an example of a correlational relationship 
and a causal relationship that you have observed in 
daily life. Explain how each example illustrates the 
relationship.
 8. Describe the major differences between secondary 
and primary data collection, as well as the advantages 
and disadvantages of each.
 9. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using 
observational techniques of data collection.
10. Why is random assignment important in any 
 experiment that seeks to determine causality?
consumer behavior
individual consumers
organizational consumers
marketing concept
customer perceived value
customer delight
behavioral science
quantitative research methods
interpretivism
qualitative research methods
marketing research
basic research
applied research
correlated
causal relationship
secondary data
primary data
survey
in-depth interview
focus group
experiments
projective techniques
Key Terms
between an event and a condition, we say that the event and 
the condition are correlated. A causal relationship between 
two variables means that the variables are correlated and 
that one variable influences the other, but not vice versa.
Consumer researchers conduct basic and applied re-
search to identify important variables relevant to consum-
er behavior. Basic research aims at understanding relative 
relationships between variables, whereas applied research 
examines variables within a specific context of interest 
to the marketer. There are two broad sources of research 
data—secondary data and primary data. Secondary data 
are data that already exist and can be accessed within an 
organization or from external sources. Primary data are 
new data collected on a project-by-project basis.
Consumer researchers collect primary data by a num-
ber of methods, including observation, direct questioning, 
experimentation, and projective techniques. Observational 
techniques record people’s behavior, with or without their 
knowledge. Questioning the consumer directly takes a va-
riety of forms, including surveys, in-depth interviews, and 
focus groups. Experiments manipulate variables in a con-
trolled setting to determine their relationship to one another 
and are the most effective technique for determining causal 
relationships. Projective techniques are indirect forms of 
questioning that uncover unspoken feelings and attitudes.
Researchers analyze consumer behavior research data 
in order to discover customer need and wants, deliver 
products and services that satisfy those needs and wants, 
and ensure that the customer remains satisfied over time. 
Ultimately, effective consumer behavior research provides 
marketers with relevant information for making better 
 decisions and reducing uncertainty.

Chapter 1   Understanding Consumer Behavior and Consumer Research 
29
Short Application Exercises
1. Find an advertisement that attempts to influence 
consumers’ disposal activities and describe the dis-
posal activity. Is the advertisement effective, in your 
opinion? Why or why not?
2. Design an experiment that tests the effect
of using a celebrity endorser on consumers’ 
brand attitudes. In addition, identify the
independent and dependent variables and state the 
hypothesis.
3. Conduct a library search and find one article that 
describes either a basic or applied marketing research 
project. What were the goals of the project, the re-
search method employed, and the major results of the 
project?
4. Using the Internet, conduct a secondary data collec-
tion to investigate aging trends in the United States. 
Hint: you may want to start at the U.S. Census 
Bureau website.
The truths and power of consumer analysis become 
real when you observe consumers in real shopping 
situations. This is a common technique (sometimes 
called mystery shopping) used by many companies 
to better understand their customers. Your chal-
lenge is to use observational research to answer a 
behavioral research question.
Procedure:
Step 1:  Choose one of the observational re-
search tasks shown here to complete or 
make up a question/task of your own.
Possible Research Tasks:
1.  Compare the behaviors of men 
shopping alone for groceries with 
those of women shopping alone 
for groceries.
2.  Compare the behaviors of pre-
adolescent boys shopping with an 
adult with those of pre-adolescent 
girls shopping with an adult.
3.  Compare the shopping behaviors 
of senior citizen couples with 
those of young couples.
4.  Observe the behaviors of teenage 
boys and girls shopping without 
a parent.
5.  Compare the purchase of a 
specific food or beverage item 
in a supermarket versus a 
restaurant/bar.
6.  Observe the purchase of impulse 
items at the point of check-out.
Step 2:  Plan to go on at least two data-gathering 
trips.
Step 3:  Collect your observations. You should 
collect at least five (5) observations of 
each type of subject (for example, five 
men and five women for a total of 10). 
You will definitely want to take notes 
on each observation and know what 
types of information you are looking 
for before you start. (And while you 
are observing, make sure that you do 
not distract or disrupt your subjects. 
You should make sure that you are in-
conspicuous as possible.)
Step 4:  Summarize the information you 
 collected and see if there are differ-
ences among the groups you selected. 
What are your findings? What are 
the potential implications for a 
 company who wants to market to 
those groups?
M a nag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n

America’s Most Entertaining 
Supermarket Destination
30
Consumer Focused Strategy: 
Segmentation and Positioning
 1 | Define segmentation, target markets, 
and positioning, and understand 
why this process is important to 
marketers.
 2 | Explain how society benefits from 
market segmentation.
 3 | Describe the factors that influence the 
determination of a segmentation strategy.
 4 | Discuss various bases of segmentation.
 5 | Provide examples of strategies marketers 
use to position brands after segmentation.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to...
objectives
You know you’re not visiting a traditional grocery store when you park your car in the shadow of 
the jungle animals standing in a watering hole outside the store, and you enter the building through 
doors flanked by traffic signals flashing “Start Your Carts” in red, yellow, and green, with a race 
car hanging above the entrance.  You also know you’re in for a unique experience when you see an 
olive display bigger than most salad bars, when you encounter the alligator meat, goat heads, and 
rattlesnake steaks in the meat section, and when you are directed to wine selection that rivals any 
selection anywhere.
The supermarket is Jungle Jim’s International Market and this grocery store, which carries 
an amazing variety of food from around the world, is one of the most popular specialty 
supermarkets in the Midwest.  Located in southwest Ohio, the 300,000 square foot store draws 
2
CHAPTER

over 70,000 visitors a week, including many arriving in tour buses from neighboring states.  
From the animatronic Robin Hood that performs in the “Sherwood Forest” of foods from 
England section, to the yacht named for the “Gilligan’s Island-ish SS Minnow” in the seafood 
section, Jungle Jim’s is a marriage of two defining traits that make it completely unique in 
world of supermarkets: shopping as an entertainment destination and international specialty 
foods.  While this dual emphasis seems like an unconventional combination, Jungle Jim’s has 
managed to differentiate and insulate itself from the fiercely price-competitive grocery market 
and establish a unique position in consumers’ minds.
The entertainment pleases the young and the young-at-heart, while the depth and variety 
of international products, in addition to standard supermarket fare, offer customers choices 
that aren’t available other places.  According to development director, Phil Adams, “We pride 
ourselves on getting items from every country in the world and not just a few items, but many 
items.  A regular store may carry two or three items from India; we carry everything you would 
find in a typical store in India.  That’s the difference.”1 Sure enough, the store carries over 
150,000 products from 75 different countries, including 1,300 varieties of hot sauce, 
1,600 different kinds cheese from 40 countries, 65 different kinds of imported olive oil, 
31
Courtesy of Jungle Jim’s

32 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
12,000 labels of wine, and a huge assortment of exotic produce, including Chinese okra, 
Indian bitter melons, and baby bananas from Mexico.2
By carving out a unique position in the Midwest grocery market and serving the specific 
needs of its customers, Jungle Jim’s has managed to grow over the last 35 years from a roadside 
fruit stand to a sprawling six-and-a-half acre food experience.  
A Divide and Conquer Strategy
A primary aim of organizations operating from a marketing perspective is anticipating 
and satisfying customer needs and wants. One of the most important ways in which 
marketers do this efficiently and profitably is through the strategic use of market seg-
mentation and positioning.
Market segmentation is the process of dividing the large and diverse mass mar-
ket into subsets of consumers who share common needs, characteristics, or behaviors, 
and then targeting one or more of those segments with a distinct marketing mix. By 
identifying groups of highly similar consumers, a marketer can develop products 
and services specifically tailored to that group’s needs that also closely match the 
capabilities of the organization, thus maximizing the chances of profit and success. 
Specifically, market segmentation allows a company to efficiently focus resources 
and efforts by avoiding those parts of the market it cannot satisfy well, thereby 
avoiding unwieldy competition. Given the diverse preferences of consumers today 
and the myriad products and services available, it is difficult for most companies 
to be everything to everyone. In addition, when evaluating a market through the 
segmentation process, a company is able identify segments that are saturated with 
strong and powerful competitors, as well as underserved segments that may represent 
areas of opportunity.
Two key assumptions underlie market segmentation. First, consumer preferences 
vary. Some consumers prefer plain pizza with sauce and cheese, while others prefer their 
pizza “loaded.” Some consumers prefer a car that gets good gas mileage, whereas others 
are more concerned about cargo space and towing features. Although this may seem 
obvious, if all consumer preferences were universal, there would be few advantages to 
market segmentation. Second, by tailoring a product or service to a segment’s specific 
needs, marketers can make the offering so appealing that the members of the segment 
are willing to pay a price that offsets the costs associated with catering to the specialized 
needs of the segment. We will return to these assumptions when we examine the factors 
that influence whether a firm engages in market segmentation and to what extent.
After a marketer has segmented its market, the firm can select appropriate segment(s) 
to target. Thus, a target market is simply the segment(s) toward which a firm’s market-
ing efforts are directed. Selection of the target market(s) should be based on a thorough 
strategic analysis of the organization’s external environments (the mass market, com-
petitors, and general technical, political, and socio-cultural environments) and internal 
ob jec tive 1
32

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
33
situations (past performance analysis and determination of future options), ultimately 
matching organizational strengths with market opportunities.3 Finally, a positioning 
strategy is developed. Positioning is the process of communicating with our target 
market(s) through the use of marketing mix variables—a specific product, price, dis-
tribution channel, and promotional appeal—in such a way as to help consumers dif-
ferentiate a product from competitors and understand how a particular product best 
satisfies their needs.
Market segmentation and positioning are two of the most important concepts in 
the study of consumer behavior and in marketing, because consumers today have more 
product categories from which to choose and more choices within those categories. 
Marketers conduct a great deal of consumer research to identify appropriate bases for 
market segmentation, select appropriate target markets, and develop effective position-
ing and marketing mix execution strategies.
Stone+/Getty Images
Given the number of choices available coupled with the diverse preferences of customers, effective 
segmentation and positioning is crucial for marketers today.

34 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
How Consumers and Society Benefit 
from Market Segmentation
Through market segmentation a firm offers products and services specifically tailored 
to the needs and wants of consumers within a specific segment. While this implies an 
obvious benefit to consumers, namely having their specific needs catered to, other ben-
efits to consumers and to society may not be so obvious.
First, by committing efforts and resources on mar-
ket segmentation, consumers no longer have to receive 
and evaluate marketing information that is irrelevant or 
unwanted. This reduces consumers’ time spent in search, 
evaluation, and purchase activities. For example, a mar-
ried, suburban, stay-at-home mom doesn’t need or desire 
to receive direct-mail containing an offer for an urban 
nightclub’s rapid dating service any more than a young, 
urban, single, living in an apartment, needs or wants a 
telemarketer calling and offering lawn and landscaping 
services. While these marketing misfires occasionally 
happen, in general, consumers benefit by the efficiency 
that market segmentation offers in terms of appropriately 
 directing marketing information.
Imagine for a moment that marketers never 
 discovered the efficiencies of dividing consumers into 
segments and targeting those segments. Most consum-
ers are so accustomed to this marketing practice that 
such a scenario is hard to imagine. But, if the process 
of market segmentation did not exist, consumers’ lives 
would probably be very different. For instance, imagine 
getting pizza coupons in the mail from a pizza parlor in 
Rome, Italy. Or, imagine a telemarketer calling you and 
attempting to sell you industrial lubricant for your large 
industrial drill press—you don’t have a large industrial 
drill press in your dorm room or apartment? Beyond 
being buried in paper and flooded with irrelevant tele-
marketing, chances are you would also never learn about 
the new products and services that actually would ben-
efit you and make your life better—products like low-
cost cellular phones, ergonomically correct backpacks 
that don’t hurt your spine, and low-carb peanut butter. 
Many marketers would argue that the reason for our 
high standard of living is that marketers learned that 
for most products and services a single-product market-
ing strategy cannot efficiently or effectively reach and 
service everyone, and that markets must be broken into 
manageable segments. Then, companies can tailor of-
ferings and messages to their benefit and the benefit of 
consumers and society.
objec tive 2
 
Can market segmentation create
 
market segregation? Although
 
segmentation offers several 
 
important benefits that we discuss 
in this chapter, it is not a panacea. Namely, segmentation can 
reinforce societal prejudice.
While market segmentation may seem far removed 
from the serious social problem of prejudice, some marketing 
researchers and sociologists argue that market segmenta-
tion reinforces separatism between groups and members of 
society, minimizing exposures to others and reinforcing a “me” 
 orientation— “I own certain products, have particular interests 
and activities, and belong in a group with others like me.”
Formally, prejudice is defined an unfounded fear, hatred, or 
mistrust of a person or group of people, based on insufficient 
knowledge and typically centered on ethnicity, nationality, reli-
gion, or social class. If prejudice is based in based on insufficient 
knowledge and fear of others, it is possible and quite probable 
that market segmentation reinforces societal prejudice. After all, 
market segmentation certainly does not encourage the coming 
together of the diverse members. On the contrary, the explicit 
goal of market segmentation is to create homogenous subsets 
from the diverse marketplace. Once that is accomplished, 
marketers deliver—via the marketing mix and mass media—
products, services, and promotional messages that feed con-
sumer’s most narcissistic tendencies. From personalized tennis 
shoes and exclusive customer reward programs to advertise-
ments that speak directly to the customers and the customer’s 
peers (and to no one else), marketers do encourage people to 
develop personal and distinctive styles, stress the uniqueness 
and “special-ness” of a person’s own in-group, and highlight 
differences between their groups and others.
Although there are a number of ways that segmentation 
is beneficial to consumers, marketers, and society, consum-
ers should also recognize the degree to which segmentation 
reinforces ignorance, stereotypes, and prejudice. We have yet 
to learn how harmful to society and its values this separatism or 
segregation is, but it is important for current and future market-
ers (that’s you!) to consider potential hidden costs and ethical 
implications of our marketing strategies.24
E T H I C S

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
35
Hulton Archive/Getty Images
The Ford Motor company is generally recognized as the first “mass 
marketer” in the United States.
Courtesy of BMW of North America
Mass customization allows marketers to cater to individual 
needs and wants.
Factors Influencing Market
Segmentation Strategies
Market segmentation is a multi-product strategy: different products are developed for 
different subcategories. For example, Pepsi Cola markets Pepsi, Diet Pepsi, Pepsi Max, 
Diet Pepsi Lime, and Caffeine Free Pepsi Wild Cherry Pepsi and Pepsi One to differ-
ent market segments.4 Market aggregation is the opposite of market  segmentation—a 
 single-product, one-size-fits-all strategy in which individual differences among 
 consumers are ignored.
If a firm chooses not to target specific segments, but rather, pursues an aggregation 
strategy, offering the same product and marketing mix to all consumers, this is called 
mass marketing. The first generally recognized mass marketer in the United States was 
Henry Ford, founder of the Ford Motor Company, who offered the Model-T automo-
bile to the market “in any color as long as it is black.” Ford was also the first company to 
advertise on a national level.5 Opposite of mass marketing, a firm may choose to mar-
ket one-to-one with a customer, a strategy also called micromarketing. A special form 
of one-to-one marketing, called mass customization, is the targeting of large segments, 
or traditionally mass markets, with highly customized products.6 For example, BMW’s 
Build-a-Car website feature allows BMW customers to design their own BMW 3-Series 
car, mixing and matching exterior and interior colors, options, and accessories.7
When should a firm pursue a market segmentation strategy (instead of an aggrega-
tion strategy), and at what level of individual targeting? The best answer follows from 
four main considerations: consumer preference heterogeneity, the majority fallacy, the 
sales-cost trade-off, and the potential for cannibalization.
We’ve seen that perhaps the most important consideration related to market 
segmentation is the extent to which tastes and preferences differ among consumers. 
Formally, this assumption is called consumer preference heterogeneity. Some peo-
ple prefer spicy food, whereas others prefer bland foods. As preference heterogeneity 
objec ti ve  3

36 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Figure 2.1 The Majority Fallacy
Small
Small
Large
Most preferences are normally distributed, and the largest segment is usually in the middle 
segment. However, competition is usually greatest for this segment.
increases, the case for segmentation increases. Moreover, the greater the variability, the 
more potential profits provided by individual segments.
When consumers’ preferences vary, it is important to analyze how these prefer-
ences are distributed. Let’s return to our spicy food example. In terms of level of 
spiciness, the vast majority of consumers prefer foods that are average (not too bland 
and not too spicy), but there are also smaller segments of consumers who prefer very 
mild, bland tastes, and customers who prefer extremely hot and spicy foods. Because 
it is logical to assume that size of the potential market segment is positively correlated 
to profit, it is often easy for a company to focus exclusively on large average segments, 
where the majority of customer preferences lie, and neglect smaller less typical seg-
ments. This tendency is called the majority fallacy; pursuing the majority segment 
is considered a “fallacy” because the largest segment, where competition tends to be 
most intense, is not always the most profitable. Smaller segments can actually be more 
profitable when there is less competition. (Figure 2.1 illustrates the majority fallacy.) 
For example, Ragu spaghetti sauce and many other sauces are average in terms of 
spiciness and are very popular, but competition in this segment is intense. There are 
at least 10 different brands that would be considered an average spicy sauce. On the 
other hand, Hunt’s Prima Sauce is a fairly spicy spaghetti sauce that appeals to a much 
smaller market segment. Although this segment is small, it is quite profitable because 
there is little competition.
Another influence on segmentation strategy is the sales-cost trade-off. This trade-
off recognizes that, as market segmentation increases, sales increase because a firm’s 
offerings align more closely to consumers’ preferences. But at the same time, costs also 
increase because a multi-product strategy costs more to implement than a one-product 
strategy. Why? Manufacturing and marketing costs increase as the number of products 
offered increases due to additional equipment, skills, and resources needed to make and 
market a variety of products. Hidden marketing costs associated with multi-product 
strategies also exist. For example, retail shelf space is limited, and retailers may be un-
willing to carry many different varieties of a product. For example, when Coca Cola in-
troduced New Coke in the 1980’s, Burger King switched from carrying Coke to Pepsi 
because it did not want to carry both New Coke and Coke Classic in its fountains.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
37
Finally, the risk of cannibalization influences market segmentation decisions. 
Cannibalization occurs when products offered by the same firm are so similar that they 
compete among themselves, thus creating a case of oversegmentation. For example, if a con-
sumer drinks Pepsi, she might also drink Pepsi One; thus Pepsi competes against itself for her 
drink purchase. At one time, Quaker State offered 1,500 different brands of motor oil. The 
company cut its product line in half and profits increased dramatically because cannibaliza-
tion and other types of costs decreased. Sharing manufacturing and marketing costs across 
product offerings is important when cannibalization is a potential issue. Thus, a company 
must strike a delicate balance between effective market coverage and too many offerings.
Now that we have discussed what market segmentation is and some of the influ-
ences related to market segmentation and targeting strategies, we turn our attention to 
the various bases of market segmentation.
Bases of Segmentation
There are many different ways to segment a market, and marketers should consider 
multiple approaches. Consumers differ on many dimensions, and each dimension sug-
gests a potentially useful basis for dividing up the market. While we will discuss each 
base of segmentation as a single strategy, remember that firms typically use multiple 
methods in combination to divide and group consumers. A number of segmentation 
bases are listed in Table 2.1, along with possible segmentation variables and examples 
associated with that segmentation base. Let’s consider some of them in detail.
Demographic Bases
Market segmentation is often based on customers’ vital population statistics, called 
 demographic characteristics. Popular demographic characteristics include age, gen-
der, income, education, occupation, social class, marital status, household size, fam-
ily life cycle, and culture or ethnicity. Demographics-based segmentation is the most 
popular segmentation base because demographic characteristics are visible, relatively 
easy and inexpensive to measure, and most secondary data, such as U.S. Census data, 
is described in terms of demographic characteristics.
Not surprisingly, our preferences, buying habits, and behaviors vary dramatically as a 
function of many different demographic characteristics. For example, males and females 
prefer different brands of clothes, health and beauty products, and many brands are 
targeted exclusively at a particular gender, such as Dove for women and Axe for men.
Geographic Bases
In geographic based segmentation, marketers split the market based on physical loca-
tion of potential customers. An underlying assumption of this market segmentation 
base is that consumers located in geographic proximity share similar needs and prefer-
ences for products and services. Boundaries defined by zip code districts, towns, cities, 
states, regions, countries, and continents might indeed be useful to a company. For ex-
ample, Heineken markets a non-alcoholic beer in several countries in the Middle East, 
where the sale of alcoholic beverages is forbidden. Procter & Gamble markets different 
formulations of  Tide detergent throughout the world, depending on regional water 
quality and washing machine type. Geographic segmentation also includes climate or 
topographical characteristics of an area. Snow blowers are marketed in cold areas of the 
country, and surfboards sell better along warm, coastal regions.
ob jec ti ve 4

38 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Table 2.1  Possible Market Segmentation Bases, Categories, and Illustrative Examples
Possible Bases:
Possible Segmentation Variables:
Illustrative Examples:
Demographic
Age
Under 6, 7–12, 13–21, 22–34, 35–50, 50
Seeking to cater to the under-25 market,
Sprite sponsors rap concerts and MTV 
events.
In Japan, females are targeted as the 
main coffee consumers by coffee 
companies like Starbucks, who operates 
over 500 outlets in that country.8
Carnival Cruises offers a line of special 
cruises aimed at couples.
Hallmark offers a line of cards 
specifically targeted to African 
Americans, called Mahogany.
Pre-depression, Depression era, Baby 
boomers, Generation X, Generation Y, 
Millennials
Gender
Female, Male
Income
Under $25,000, $25,000–$75,000, $75,000
Education
Some H.S., H.S. graduate, Some college, 
College graduate, Postgraduate
Occupation
Blue-collar, White-collar, Military, Craft
Social Class
Lower, Middle, Upper
Marital Status
Single, Married, Divorced, Co-habitating, 
Widowed
Family Life Cycle
Single, Young married, Full nester, 
Empty Nester, Single elderly
Culture/Ethnicity
White, African American, Hispanic, 
Asian, Pacific Islander, Middle Eastern, 
American Indian
Geographic
Pop. Density
Urban, Suburb, Exurb, Penturbia, Rural
Gottschalks’ clothing store chain targets 
small rural markets to avoid competing 
with large national clothiers (avoiding 
the majority fallacy).
Campbell’s Soup markets a spicy nacho 
soup in Texas and California.
Region
North, South, East, West
Neighborhood, Town, City, State, Country
Mountains, Plains, Deserts, Ocean, Jungle
Climate
Temperate, Hot, Rainy, Dry
Psychographic
VALS (see discussion)
4C’s (see discussion)
Dyson vacuum cleaners, with its trendy 
and innovative design appeals to 
Aspirers in the 4C’s group.
Behavioral
Attribute/Benefit
Price, Convenience, Ease-of-use, Status
Snackwell’s products are aimed at people 
that want sweet snacks but are also 
conscious of their health and weight.
Campbell’s markets Soup-On-The-Go 
for those times when people don’t have 
time to sit down and eat lunch.
Subway offers frequent users rewards 
of free food after a certain number of 
purchases.
Occasion
Morning, Evening
Leisure, Work, Rush
Holiday, Special day
Product Usage
Current user, Potential user, Lapsed user
Light, Medium, Heavy

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
39
Community type is also a segmentation variable and includes urban environments, 
suburbs, exurbs (remote suburbs), and penturbia (small towns). In the United States, 
people continue an exodus out of the cities, which began in the 1920’s, first to suburbs 
and then to the exurbs, and finally to small towns, called penturbia. This trend has 
strongly influenced the growth of the suburban “strip” mall and large regional shopping 
malls. Only recently have U.S. cities seen a resurgence in urban living. Worldwide, the 
trend is still a shift toward the urban, and by 2006, the majority of people will live in 
urban areas, with the number of mega cities, defined as urban areas of 10 million or 
more, projected to grow to 26 by 2010.9
Geo-demographic segmentation combines geography and demographic segmen-
tation bases. Sometimes called zip-code marketing, this segmentation strategy relies on 
the common tendency for people who are similar along demographic dimensions to live in 
close proximity. In other words, we tend to live near people who are like us (i.e., “birds of a 
feather . . .”). For example, it is not surprising to drive into certain suburban neighborhoods 
in the U.S. and see swing-sets in almost every yard, minivans in the garages, and bicycles in 
the driveways. Sometimes we may make a conscious choice to live near others who are simi-
lar to us on certain dimension. For example, in San Francisco, there is a neighborhood called 
The Castro District, which is predominantly populated by gay and lesbian households. 
Alternatively, we may not consciously choose to live by those who are similar to us, but 
situational factors simply make a certain neighborhood or living situation a logical choice. 
Take our suburban neighborhood example. That neighborhood may attract young families 
more than other kinds of homebuyers or renters because it is near a school, or has houses 
in the price range of what a young family can afford, or simply because there are so many 
families with children already living there. Those who also have children find the presence 
of potential playmates for their kids an attractive social benefit of the neighborhood.
©Lee Snider/The Image Works
Tide is marketed world-wide and adapted to local markets.

40 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Another interesting aspect of this phenomenon is that people who live near each 
other may become even more alike over time. Neighbors observe one another and may 
compare their actions, opinions, activities, and possessions as well as purchase products 
in order to gain social acceptance and fit in, or they may simply see the benefits of 
owning a product their neighbors enjoy. For example, suppose someone in a suburban 
neighborhood builds an outdoor patio. In order to fully enjoy the patio, the hom-
eowner has frequent outdoor cookouts and parties, inviting friends and neighbors. It 
isn’t long until one of the neighbors thinks, “This patio is great; I want one for myself.” 
And, even better, the patio owner will probably recommend his own patio builder.
Claritas, a company specializing in geo-demographic based segmentation, markets 
a segmentation system called PRIZM® (recently updated and now called PRIZMNE
®) 
that incorporates geographic data down to the neighborhood and household levels, 
demographic data from the U.S. Census, and consumption and media usage informa-
tion, resulting in segmentation of the U.S. market into 66 distinct segments, combined 
into 14 broad social groups. Any household or neighborhood in the U.S. can be pro-
filed. Here is a sampling of some of the 66 segments:
Hallmark Reaches African Americans in a Culturally-Relevant Way
Marketing in Action
African Americans account for approximately 13 percent 
of the population, according to the 2000 U.S. Census, 
and Hallmark, a leader in greeting cards since the early 
1900’s, has tapped into this market with their line of 
Mahogany greeting cards. Introduced as a limited 16-
card promotion in 1987, the selection of seasonal and 
everyday cards became a permanent line in 1991, and 
is now the largest, most extensive brand of cards cen-
tered on the African American demographic and culture. 
According to the company website (www.hallmark.com), 
“Mahogany features more than 1,000 cards to help 
African Americans honor their relationships in innovative, 
compelling, and culturally relevant ways.”
Hallmark conducts extensive research to maintain its 
understanding of this unique market segment, including 
working with African American artists and writers in card 
design, seeking out culturally relevant African American 
artwork to incorporate into Mahogany cards, and talk-
ing to consumers about their lifestyles. The goal is to truly 
understand African-American culture and heritage and 
reflect that understanding in the product line.
The top two retail markets for Mahogany cards are 
Washington D.C. and New York, which have high con-
centrations of African American populations. Other top 
markets include Chicago, Philadelphia, and Altanta. In 
2005, Hallmark introduced two additional Mahogany 
card lines: Sister to Sister and DaySpring® Inspired 
by Mahogany. Sister to Sister targets female African-
Americans with warm, conversational messages for wom-
en communicating with other women, while DaySpring® 
has an evangelical Christian theme. In addition to the full 
line of cards, consumers will find the Mahogany Cards 
With Sound and a new offering of humor cards. By effec-
tively employing demographic segmentation, Hallmark is 
meeting the needs of this ethnic community. 
Courtesy of Hallmark Cards, Inc.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
41
#3 Movers and Shakers is the nation’s group of upwardly mobile executives, who 
are highly educated, wealthy, and live in dual-income suburban households. 
Members of this group are the most likely to own a small business.
#4 Young Digerati are an affluent, well-educated, ethnically diverse group that is 
comfortable in this high-tech era. They are singles and couples living in high-end 
condos and apartments in trendy urban neighborhoods.
#13 Upward Bound represents the legendary soccer moms and dads and are a key 
market for child-centered products. Households in this group consist of dual-
income earners with college degrees and white-collar jobs. These upper-class fami-
lies live in newer suburban subdivision.
#21 Domestic Duos is a group that consists of middle-class empty-nesters living in 
older suburban neighborhoods. With their home paid off and their fixed-pension 
income, living is stable and enjoyable, although not extravagant.
#51 Shotguns and Pickups tend to be young, working-class couples with large fami-
lies, and not surprisingly, are the most likely of all the segments to own a hunting 
rifle and a pickup truck. One third of this group also lives in mobile homes.
#61 City Roots is a segment of lower-income retirees living low-key lifestyles on 
fixed  incomes. These folks – made up largely of African Americans and Hispanics—
live in urban neighborhoods in condos and townhouses that they have owned for 
many years.10
Companies can use the PRIZMNE
® system to identify clusters in their markets and 
custom design marketing campaigns to penetrate into specific segments. For example, 
Cox Communications, a large cable provider, was able to identify segments nationwide 
that used its products. Armed with this information, the firm could target non-users in 
these segments in various markets, increasing sales and market penetration.
Psychographic Bases
Marketers also segment markets based on psychographics, which is the measurement of 
lifestyle, often combined with measures of attitudes, beliefs, and personalities. Lifestyle, 
which is simply how we live, is traditionally defined in terms of a person’s activities (how 
they spend their time doing things such as volunteer work, vacationing, and exercis-
ing), interests (what they consider important or value in life such as home, recreation, 
and family), and opinions (how they feel about the world around them such politi-
cal, religious, and social beliefs). Researchers use large batteries of questions (called AIO 
Inventories) to measure activities, interests, and opinions to develop consumer profiles, 
usually called psychographic profiles or AIO’s. Psychographic information is more compre-
hensive than demographic information. Whereas demographic analysis focuses on who 
buys products, psychographic research focuses on why they buy.
The VALS System  One widely used market segmentation tool that employs psy-
chographics is the VALS™ System developed by SRI Consulting Business Intelligence 
(SRIC-BI). VALS originally stood for “values and lifestyles,” and when it was first in-
troduced in 1978, it segmented consumers based on social values and lifestyle variables. 
The system was significantly revised in 1989 social values were replaced with psycho-
logical motivators and personality variables in order to tap into the enduring attitudes 
and values that influence buyer behavior in the marketplace. An individual’s VALS 
type is determined by their answers to  39 measured statements (35 psychological and 

42 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
4 demographic); a respondent indicates agreement or disagreement to each statement. 
Statements include:
I like outrageous people and things.
I follow the latest trends and fashions.
I would rather make something than buy it.
I consider myself an intellectual.
While several market segmentation models are available for the 
U.S. market, they don’t necessarily translate into foreign mar-
kets. To address this need, market researchers have attempted 
to create more global segments based on psychographics. One 
example of a cross-cultural lifestyle market segmentation system 
is called the Cross Cultural Consumer Characterization, or the 
4C’s for short. This model was developed by leading advertis-
ing agency, Young and Rubican. It is considered  cross-cultural 
because its developers believe that the target values upon 
which the segments are based are universal and found in all 
cultures. The model was developed based on data from seven 
European countries: the UK, France, Italy, Spain, Germany, 
Switzerland, and the Netherlands, but it now includes a world-
wide database. Using a method that adapts values to local 
cultural norms, 4Cs has been constructed in over 50 countries 
including places as various as Iceland, Lithuania, Thailand, 
El Salvador, and Kazakhstan.
The model is based on seven enduring human values, a set 
of accepted personal principles and standards that emerged in 
the data, namely the need for status, security, control, discovery, 
enlightenment, survival, and escape. 4Cs is constructed using 
only values statements, nonetheless, values do connect with 
demographic circumstances. Based on these core values and 
data, seven relatively stable lifestyle segments were constructed:
Resigned:      Tends to be older; is rigid, strict, authoritar-
ian, and oriented to the past and to the 
value of survival. Brand choices stress 
economy, familiarity and communication 
with the segment is best centered on expert 
opinion and simple messages. (About 10% 
of the population)
Struggler:      Limited resources and capabilities; disor-
ganized and alienated from mainstream 
society. Brand choices are centered on 
sensation and escape. (About 8% of the 
population)
Mainstreamer:  The largest segment; members are conven-
tional, conforming, passive and above all 
avoid risk; represents the majority view. Focus 
is on well-known brands and value-oriented 
brands, and communication with the segment 
should be emotionally warm and reassuring. 
(About 30% of the population)
Aspirer:       Tends to be younger; may be in entry-level 
white-collar profession; oriented to status 
value and the external—material posses-
sions, appearance, image, and fashion. 
Brand choices are trendy, fun, and unique. 
(About 13% of the population)
Succeeder:     Confident and accomplished but is all 
about control; may be an executive or
in top management; oriented to confidence, 
work ethic, goals, and leadership. Brand 
choices are based on prestige, reward, 
and caring for oneself, and communication 
with the segment should focus on evidence 
of claims. (About 16% of the population)
Explorer:       Based in discovery, explorers are adrenalin 
junkies who love breaking rules, seeking out 
the unconventional, and being impulsive. 
Brands for this segment are innovative and 
daring. (About 9% of the population;)
Reformer:      Focused on enlightenment, freedom, and 
personal growth; typically higher education 
and higher income; oriented to healthy de-
bate and is not impressed by status. Brand 
choices tend to innovative and practical. 
(About 14% of the population)23
Segmentation Across Cultures is Gaining Importance
Eye on International
Mordin, C., May 2005, Connecting with consumers, 4Cs Overview, www.4cs.yr.com. Reprinted by permission.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
43
There is too much sex on television today.
I like the challenge of doing something I have never done before.
I would like to understand more about how the universe works.11
VALS classifies American adults into eight distinct consumer segments, as shown 
in Figure 2.2 and Table 2.2.
The segments are grouped along two dimensions: (1) primary motivation and 
(2) resources. An individual’s primary motivation governs his or her activities. 
Consumers are inspired by one of three primary motivations—ideals, achievement, 
and self-expression. Consumers motivated by ideals are guided by ethical codes, 
Figure 2.2 The VALS Segments
VALSTM Framework 
High Resources
High Innovation
Low Resources
Low Innovation
THINKERS
BELIEVERS
STRIVERS
MAKERS
ACHIEVERS
EXPERIENCERS
INNOVATORS
Primary Motivation
Ideals
SURVIVORS
Achievement
Self-Expression
Innovators
Thinkers
Achievers
Experiencers
Take-charge
Reflective
Goal oriented
Trend setting
Sophisticated
Informed
Brand conscious
Impulsive
Curious
Content
Conventional
Variety seeking
Survivors
Believers
Strivers
Makers
Nostalgic
Literal
Contemporary
Responsible
Constrained
Loyal
Imitative
Practical
Cautious
Moralistic
Style conscious
Self-sufficient
Source: SRI Consulting Business Intelligence, www.sric-bi.com/VALS. Reprinted by permission.

44 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Table 2.2 Description of the VALS Segments
Innovators
Innovators are successful, sophisticated, take-charge people with high self-
esteem. Because they have such abundant resources, they exhibit all three primary 
motivations in varying degrees. They are change leaders and are the most receptive 
to new ideas and technologies. Their purchases reflect cultivated tastes for upscale, 
niche products and services.
Thinkers
Motivated by ideals; high resources
Thinkers are mature, satisfied, comfortable, and reflective. They tend to be well 
educated and actively seek out information in the decision-making process. They favor 
durability, functionality, and value in products.
Believers
Motivated by ideals; low resources
Believers are strongly traditional and respect rules and authority. Because they are 
fundamentally conservative, they are slow to change and technology averse. They 
choose familiar products and establish brands;
Achievers
Motivated by achievement, high resources
Achievers have goal-oriented lifestyles that center on family and career. They avoid 
situations that encourage a high degree of stimulation or change. They prefer 
premium products that demonstrate success to their peers.
Strivers
Motivated by achievement; low resources
Strivers are trendy and fun loving. They have little discretionary income and tend 
to have narrow interests. They favor stylish products that emulate the purchases of 
people with greater material wealth.
Experiencers
Motivated by self-expression; high resources
Experiencers appreciate the unconventional. They are active and impulsive, seeking 
stimulation from the new, offbeat, and risky. They spend a comparatively high 
proportion of their income on fashion, socializing, and entertainment.
Makers
Motivated by self-expression; low resources
Makers value practicality and self-sufficiency. They choose hands-on constructive 
activities and spend leisure time with family and close friends. Because they prefer 
value to luxury, they buy basic products.
Survivors
Survivors lead narrowly focused lives. Because they have the fewest resources, they 
are not active consumers and therefore do not exhibit a primary motivation. They tend 
to be brand loyal and buy discounted merchandise. While they make do with limited 
material goods they are often satisfied with their lives.
Source: SRI Consulting Business Intelligence, www.sric-bi.com/VALS. Reprinted by permission.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
45
religious beliefs or personal philosophies and a general quest for life knowledge and 
understanding. Those motivated by achievement seek social approval from society and 
base their behaviors on the reactions of their peer or aspirational (a group to which 
person desires to belong) groups. Consumers motivated by self-expression emphasize 
individuality and direct experience and seek out variety and risk.
Resources comprise psychological attributes, such as self-confidence, energy, vanity, 
and intellectualism, coupled with demographic characteristics that influence one’s abil-
ity to act on his or her primary motivation such as income and education. Table 2.2 
provides a description of each of the VALS segments.
National data about the VALS segments preferences for products, services, lei-
sure activities and media is provided through a linkage with Mediamark Research 
Segmenting markets on core benefits is smart when your brand offers a distinctive 
attribute that is easy to communicate and remember.
Courtesy of Kodak

46 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Figure 2.3 Market Segmentation Based on Price
High
Low
Perceived 
Pain
Perceived Value 
High
Low
Price
Segment 
Value
Segment 
Convenience
Segment  
Loyal
Segment 
Intelligence, LLC. Financial behaviors are available from SRIC-BI’s Consumer 
Financial Decisions survey. Custom services are regularly conducted for specific 
 client needs.  GeoVALS ™ estimates the percentage of VALS segments by zip code.  
JapanVALS ™ segments Japanese consumers.
Behavioral Bases
Behavioral-based segmentation groups consumers based on their preference for a 
particular product attribute or benefit, usage occasion, user status, rate of product us-
age, and loyalty status.
Product Attributes or Benefits  Important product attributes like 
taste are useful segmentation tools because they are easy to identify. When segmenting 
the market for digital cameras, for example, companies have relied on product attributes 
such as resolution quality to define market segments and develop appropriate products. 
The Kodak Company offers cameras ranging from six megapixels to 14 megapixels for 
the non-professional camera buyer.
Which is among the most common product attributes used to segment consumers? 
Price. Consumers can be segmented based on price in many ways. One price segmentation
model is presented here (see Figure 2.3). It divides segments based along two dimen-
sions. One dimension, referred to as perceived pain, is the amount of anxiety and nega-
tive feelings a consumer experiences when paying what he or she believes is a high price 
for a product. The other dimension is called perceived value, the amount of product 
differentiation a consumer perceives among products, or the degree to which a con-
sumer views brands within a product category as unique based on price. A consumer 
rated high on perceived value tends to view large differences among brands in terms of 
 quality and other product benefits. A consumer rated low on perceived value tends to 
view brands as commodities with little brand differentiation.
Will a consumer always fall into one category for all products purchased? Of course 
not—the segment will depend on the product category and is influenced by situational 
variables.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
47
AP Photo / Al Behrman
These two dimensions form four price segments. Consumers 
who possess high levels of perceived pain and low levels of perceived 
value represent the price segment. These consumers reside in the up-
per-left quadrant of Figure 2.3. In other words, consumers in this 
segment feel that most brands are pretty much alike and don’t want 
to pay a high price for a particular brand. These consumers tend 
to be the ultimate price shoppers and may sacrifice extra benefits 
and services in order to achieve the lowest price. For example, stores 
that carry discontinued or slightly damaged items (called off-price 
discounters) have become very popular and appeal to the price seg-
ment. Also, generic brands and store brands tend to appeal to this 
segment.
Those consumers with low levels of perceived pain and low levels 
of perceived value fall into the convenience segment. They reside in the 
lower-left quadrant of Figure 2.3. While these consumers also view 
brands as having little differentiation, unlike the price segment, these 
consumers are not particularly sensitive to price. These consumers are 
most sensitive to the time they have to spend shopping and want to 
minimize search and evaluation, and thus, they are willing to pay a 
higher price for the convenience of easy brand selection. Internet and 
catalog shopping appeal to these consumers. Although shipping costs 
associated with buying on the Internet or from a catalog tend to drive 
up product prices, the consumer can conveniently shop and compare 
several brands very quickly from the comfort of home.
Consumers residing in the lower-right quadrant of Figure 2.3 represent the loyal 
segment, a combination of low perceived pain and high perceived value. This segment 
is highly desirable to marketers who have invested to build meaning into their brand 
name and offer a premium product. This is the “choosy mom” who chooses Jif (wheth-
er she has a coupon for it or not), and she always buys Jif. If the brand is not available, 
then she won’t purchase peanut butter that week because she is so brand loyal that 
substitutes are unacceptable.
The last segment is called the value segment. Consumers who reside in the upper-
right quadrant of Figure 2.3 demonstrate a combination of high perceived pain and 
high perceived values. While these consumers view brands as highly differentiated, 
they also do not want to pay for that differentiation. In other words, these consum-
ers want it all: the best brand names at the very lowest price. In many ways, this is 
the most difficult segment to satisfy. For example, outlet malls that carry overstocks 
of premium brands—Coach bags, Calvin Klein clothing, and Wedgwood china, for 
instance—are very popular and appeal to the value segment. Coupon usage is also 
high among this group because coupons allow shoppers to feel like they are getting a 
special, exclusive deal on a quality brand.
Usage Occasions and Product Usage  Usage occasion segmenta-
tion describes purchasing and consuming products at different times of day, different 
times of year, and at different events or on different occasions. For example, people 
prefer to eat toast and drink hot tea at breakfast but prefer sandwiches and ice tea at 
lunch. Different seasons call for different types of products. Heavy coats and wool 
sweaters are necessary in winter in many parts of the U.S., whereas summer calls for 
t-shirts and shorts. Finally, products might be consumed every day or as part of a 
special event or occasion. For example, many people consume honey on a daily basis, 

48 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
using it as substitute for sugar or jam, but honey manufacturers have also identified 
a specific segment of users who consume the product while running or exercising. 
Clever marketers have designed special portable honey packets for this purpose. Many 
consumers also use specific products for specific events or on special occasions, such 
as pumpkins on Halloween and sparklers on the 4th of July. Marketers may rely ex-
clusively on an event or occasion for product usage, such as a local mortuary service, 
or may simply adapt their all-occasion product to fit the occasion, such as M&M’s in 
Christmas red and green.
Product usage segmentation is based on identifying light, medium, or heavy 
users of a product or identifying current, potential, or lapsed users. Different mar-
keting tactics are required for different groups of consumers. For example, poten-
tial users may be unaware of the product category or unaware of the benefits of 
the product. Thus, marketing efforts targeted toward this group should work to 
increase awareness and educate potential consumers about the specific product ben-
efits. Heavy users, on the other hand, already know about and like the product. 
Therefore, marketing efforts targeted toward this group should remind them to 
keep purchasing and maintaining their loyalty. For example, many firms now prac-
tice customer loyalty programs, marketing tactics and programs designed to reward 
and retain a company’s most loyal customers. For years, airlines and hotels have of-
fered special reward programs for frequent travelers. Frequent airline flyers can earn 
free tickets, class upgrades, and faster check-in service, while hotels offer free rooms 
or room upgrades to frequent guest. Now, a variety of firms offer customer loyalty 
programs, including bookstores, restaurants, movie theatres, and gas stations, just 
to name a few. The more purchases the customer makes, the more rewards and 
benefits he or she earns.
Positioning
The previous sections have detailed the various segmentation bases by which consum-
ers can be divided, clustered, and targeted. So far, we’ve explained why it’s important 
for marketers to identify individual customer segments, i.e., the “divide” portion of the 
divide and conquer strategy. Next, we describe the “conquer” portion of the strategy, 
namely positioning. We’ve already seen that positioning is the process of communicat-
ing with target market(s) in such a way as to help consumers differentiate the firm’s 
product from other products and understand how the product can specifically satisfy 
their needs and wants. Sometimes marketers use terms like value proposition or “The Big 
Idea!” to describe a brand, product, or company’s specific positioning strategy within 
the market. For example, Dove’s big idea is The Campaign for Real Beauty and is 
reflected in the brand’s promotional efforts.  
According to positioning experts Reis and Trout, the “position” of a product is 
the place the product occupies in the customers’ minds, relative to the competitor’s 
products.12 What is important about this definition is: (1) a firm must always posi-
tion in terms of the competition, and (2) positioning is not something a marketer 
does to a product, it’s actually something that happens in the mind of the prospect as 
a result of the brand messages and communication that the marketer provides. Thus, 
marketers can’t definitively position a product, although they talk about positioning 
strategy as if that is what they do. All marketers can do, however, is communicate 
the marketing mix to the target market in such a way that the consumer accurately 
objec tive 5

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
49
Marketers like Dove communicate their value proposition through advertising and other elements of the marketing mix.
positions the product in his or her own mind, hopefully in line with the intentions 
of the marketer.
All marketing activities influence positioning and vice versa. For example, Armani 
does not allow Walmart to carry its men’s clothing line because this low-cost retailer 
would undermine Armani’s high-end positioning strategy. Likewise, Walmart does 
not want to carry Armani suits because this would be inconsistent with its image as 
a low-cost retailer. Such inconsistent channel decisions would confuse customers of 
both firms.
Companies use several strategies to position their products; depending on the prod-
uct’s characteristics; market segmentation bases used; competitive environment; and 
goals of the company. We’ll review some of them here.
Positioning a Leader
Some brands have the distinction of being the first brand to enter and define a market. 
These brands are referred to as pioneering brands. Research has shown that pioneering 
brands have an advantage in the market for a number of reasons. First, they are novel 
and interesting; thus, consumers tend to pay much more attention to them than to re-
dundant, copycat brands.13 Second, when a new product category is created, consumers 
are typically unsure of their preferences. When this is the case, the combination of fea-
tures and benefits associated with the pioneering brand seems especially useful, so much 
so that the pioneer actually sets the ideal points for the category in terms of product 
features and benefits.14 In addition, when follower brands are introduced, consumers 
tend to compare follower brands with the pioneer but not vice versa, and consequently, 
the pioneer seems unique and special while followers seem like pale imitations.15
All of these advantages lead to greater strategic opportunities for pioneering brands 
because they enable the pioneer to clearly positing itself as the leader of a category, 
Courtesy of Dove/Unilever

50 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
and positioning as a leader means setting a standard of comparison, which means 
being the brand against which all the other brands in the category are judged. Consider 
the following classic positioning statements (communicated via Coke’s advertising): 
“Coke is the real thing,” “Coke is it!” and “Coke is the pause that refreshes.” All these 
messages imply that everything else is a pale imitation. Coca-Cola invented the cola 
category and much of its marketing emphasizes this point. Similarly, advertising for 
many pioneering brands argues, “we invented the product,” implying that the brand 
knows more about the product category than any other competitor. Some examples 
are Jeep – “There’s Only One,” and Xerox – “The document company” and “The 
knowledge company.”
Positioning a Follower
How do firms market a product that isn’t the pioneering brand? One strategy for po-
sitioning a follower brand is to separate the brand from the leader by creating what 
appears to the customer as a new product category.16 For example, Pepsi has been 
very successful competing against Coca Cola by positioning itself as a hipper, trend-
ier brand for a new generation. Several years ago, Anheuser-Busch held the domestic 
beer market. When Heineken entered the U.S. market, it was positioned under a new 
 category—premium imported beer—and is still the leader in this category. Anheuser-Busch 
also wanted to expand in the premium category so it invented the premium domestic 
beer category with Michelob. Anheuser-Busch quickly followed with Michelob Ultra 
to serve the diet beer category.17
Pursuing a “doing the opposite” positioning strategy is also an option for a follower 
brand.18 When following this approach, a brand positions itself opposite the leader. Take, 
for example, the battle between Mercedes-Benz and BMW. For many years, Mercedes-
Benz was the most famous luxury car in the world. BMW decided to take an oppo-
site strategy. While Mercedes was known for comfort and luxuriant roominess, BMW 
focused on nimble performance. Its big idea was “The Ultimate Driving Machine.” 
BMW outsells Mercedes in most markets in the world, including the U.S.19
Another classic example of doing the opposite is the famous 7-Up uncola campaign,
which began in the 1960’s. A cola is opaque, sweet, and strong in aftertaste, and the 
opposite of a cola is uncola. Television advertising for 7-Up used a highly success-
ful comparative theme in which dried-up, shriveled cola nuts (actually cocoa beans) 
were compared with juicy, colorful, lively “uncola nuts” (fresh lemons and limes). The 
company also created uncola drinking glasses, which were upside-down Coca-Cola 
hourglass design glasses. During the campaign in the late 1960’s sales rose a whopping 
20% per year. Prior to the campaign, consumers did not think of 7-Up when they 
purchased soft drinks. 7-Up was used primarily as a headache remedy and alcoholic 
mixer (it was promoted “for home and hospital use” when first introduced in 1929). 
Interestingly, despite 7-Up’s growth in the soft drink market; its old reputation has 
persisted. Many older U.S. consumers still keep it in their liquor cabinet, and some 
people still drink it when they are sick, although there is no medicinal benefit to 7-Up 
because it is full of sugar.
Finally, turning disadvantages into advantages is a useful strategy for follower brands. 
Avis is the number two brand in car rentals so “we try harder.” Often, smaller companies 
will also use the phrase “not the biggest, just the best” to convey that smaller can mean 
higher quality and more individualized service.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
51
Positioning Linked to Segmentation Bases
Beyond broad strategies for positioning leaders and followers, some specific strategies 
apply to all types of brands. These strategies parallel bases of segmentation discussed 
earlier in the chapter.
Positioning by Core Benefit  One popular strategy employs a core 
benefit proposition, which relies on a single attribute or benefit that differentiates 
the brand from competitors’ offerings. When positioning with a core benefit, the 
proposition should be short and easy to remember, and should sharply differentiate 
the product from competing brands. In others words, the benefit should be exclusively 
associated with the brand and strongly held in the consumers’ minds.20 Volvo is safety; 
Federal Express is overnight; Brawny Paper Towels are strong; and Subway is fresh.
Courtesy of SUBWAY® Restaurants 
SUBWAY® is a registered trademark of 
Doctor Associates Inc.
Positioning by Price  Sometimes it is difficult to focus on a core benefit. 
Perhaps a competitor already is known for a key benefit; or perhaps a firm’s core ben-
efit is complicated and difficult to communicate to the consumer. Price is an alterna-
tive attribute. It is easy to understand and communicate, and it is important to most 
consumers because they consistently use price as a gauge of quality— “You get what 
you pay for.”21 The assumption that there is a strong relationship between price and 
quality leads consumers to infer that high price signals high quality. This is called the 
price-quality heuristic. Communicating price differences among brands to consumers 
translates into perceived quality differences.
Positioning by price typically takes the form of using premium pricing or pricing 
below competitor brands. Premium pricing, sometimes called prestige pricing, is pric-
ing the brand at the high end of product category’s price range. It can be applied to any 
type of product, such as Piaget watches for $15,000, ST DuPont lighters for $7,000, 
Clive Christian #1 Perfume for $1,900 per ounce, and Ben and Jerry’s Ice Cream for 
$5.00 a cone.
Pricing lower than competitors’ brands is a strategy often used by store brands, such 
as Kmart brands, Kroger brands, and so on. These brands typically promote the store 
brand as being the same as the name brand, simply lower in price. Moreover, retail-
ers can highlight price differences easily by placing store brands next to name brands 
on the store shelf. Walmart is the most well-known low-price positioned company in 
 history. It sets prices up to 10% less than competitors in many areas.

52 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Positioning by Product Usage Situation  Product usage strat-
egy focuses on when or how a product is purchased and consumed. Promotion that 
builds a strong association between a particular brand and a particular usage situa-
tion leads consumers to think of that brand whenever the situation arises. For exam-
ple, Campbell’s soup is predominantly positioned for use at lunchtime (this strategy 
dates back to days when schoolchildren came home for lunch). Gatorade is posi-
tioned as good for replacing bodily fluids lost during vigorous exercise and participa-
tion in sporting activities. Finally, Peeps candies are a must-have at Easter, although 
the marshmallow treats are now sold throughout the year during most holidays.
Positioning by Product User  Sometimes it is useful for marketers 
to identify their brand with the user of the product. To do so, marketers use either 
“real-life” representations—Secret Deodorant is “strong enough for a man but made 
for a woman,” for instance—or through characters that are archetypes (typical, ideal, or 
classic examples) of the user, such as the fictitious Betty Crocker or the Marlboro Man. 
Interestingly, Marlboro cigarettes were originally targeted to women; they had red-
tipped filters to hide lipstick stains and were packaged in a pink box. When the brand 
failed to do well, the rugged Marlboro man helped reposition the brand toward men. 
We will discuss repositioning next.
Repositioning
Repositioning attempts to change the way consumers perceive a brand, either their 
own brand or a competitor’s. One of the most famous examples of repositioning the 
competition’s brand was a campaign for Tylenol.22 Tylenol radio ads in the 1980s stated, 
“For the millions who should not take aspirin, if your stomach is easily upset, or if you 
have an ulcer, or if you suffer from asthma, allergies, or iron-deficiency anemia, it would 
make sense to check with your doctor before you take aspirin. Aspirin can irritate the 
stomach lining, trigger asthmatic or allergic reactions, and cause small amount of hid-
den gastrointestinal bleeding. Fortunately, there’s Tylenol.” Aspirin, especially the Bayer 
brand, was known as the “miracle drug,” but Tylenol’s campaign repositioned aspirin 
as potentially harmful to health. Today, aspirin is once again the miracle drug, through 
Bayer’s and other brands’ repositioning based on the core benefit of heart health.
In another classic case, Royal Doulton china changed consumers’ perception of 
Lenox china by simply informing consumers that Lenox is made in Pomona, New 
Jersey, while Royal Doulton is made in Stoke-on-Trent, England and hence it is real 
English china. Moreover, New Jersey conjures up negative images of factories, black 
smoke and pollution for some consumers. Finally, Scope mouthwash used reposition-
ing to combat the competition, Listerine, quite effectively. Scope’s advertising cam-
paign stated that Listerine “gives you medicine breath,” but Scope delivers “fresh minty 
breath.” This campaign was even more effective because Listerine’s slogan at the time 
was, “The taste you hate twice a day.”
In summary, there are many different positioning strategies. The best depends on 
the characteristics of the product, the competition, and the type of mental associations 
marketers want consumers to form about their brands. If a brand is the pioneer, the 
firm should emphasize this in their promotion, i.e., take credit for being first. If a brand 
is markedly different on a single easy-to-communicate and important dimension, a 
single core benefit proposition can succeed. If a brand is highly similar to competitors’ 
offerings or difficult to differentiate, a firm may be able to differentiate via price, usage 

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
53
situation, or user. Finally, if competing brands have an exploitable weakness, reposi-
tioning is a tenable strategy.
Perceptual Mapping
Measuring consumer perceptions is an important part of positioning. Perceptual 
maps measure the way products are positioned in the minds of consumers and show these 
perceptions on a graph whose axes are formed by product attributes. The maps pro-
vide a research tool to assess how multiple products in a category are positioned, how 
the attributes relating to the product are seen in the customers’ eyes, and whether there are 
any product “gaps” in the market.
Researchers create perceptual maps by surveying members of the target market, ask-
ing people to rate products across multiple product attributes. For example, if research-
ers were interested in soft drinks, likely attributes used in the analysis would include 
sweetness, carbonation, fruitiness, lightness, etc. Attribute ratings are then subjected to 
various statistical techniques and a perceptual map can be extracted. On the map, similar 
brands are plotted close together, and dissimilar brands are plotted far apart. Thus, one 
thing a perceptual map tells marketers is who their direct competitors are (those plotted 
near to one another) and what brands represent less vigorous competition. Blank spaces 
on perceptual maps indicate gaps in the market. Gaps typically indicate:
 
a. a true opportunity in the market that we might be able to pursue;
 
b. a combination of attributes that nobody actually needs or wants, which is why 
there is not competitor there;
 
c. a combination of attributes that is impossible to deliver to the consumer 
without the development of new technology. (There are many examples of 
products invented to fill these types of gaps, such as Air Pump athletic shoes 
and shoes with shocks, lightweight cell-phones, and mouse-pads on laptop 
computers.)
Figure 2.4 shows a hypothetical map for our soft drinks example. This map 
is based on two dimensions: (1) sweetness and (2) carbonation or “bubbliness.” 
Figure 2.4 Perceptual Map
Vanilla Coke
Not Bubbly
Sweet
Not Sweet
Bubbly
Diet Coke
Fresca
Pepsi
Red Zone
Dr. Pepper
Coke
Cherry Coke
Sprite
7-Up
Canada Dry

54 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Chapter Summary
One of the most important ways in which marketers dis-
cover and satisfy customer needs and wants efficiently is 
through the divide and conquer process of market seg-
mentation and positioning.
Market Segmentation is the process of dividing the 
large and diverse mass market into subsets of consum-
ers who share common needs, characteristics, or be-
haviors, and targeting one or more of those segments 
with a distinct marketing mix. By identifying groups of 
highly similar consumers, a marketer is able to develop 
products and services specifically tailored to that group’s 
needs that also closely match the capabilities of the or-
ganization, thus maximizing the chances of profit and 
success.
Marketers make two underlying assumptions related 
to market segmentation: first, consumer preferences vary, 
and second, by tailoring a product or service to a segment’s 
needs, firms can make the offering so appealing that seg-
ment members are willing to pay a price that offsets the 
higher associated costs.
In addition to these assumptions, four factors influ-
ence a company’s market segmentation strategy: consumer 
preference heterogeneity (the idea that consumer prefer-
ences vary), the majority fallacy (the risk of focusing on 
large average segments and neglecting smaller, less typical 
segments), the sales-cost trade-off (the fact that market 
segmentation increases sales and cost simultaneously), and 
potential for cannibalization (the case in which different 
products offered by the same company are so similar they 
compete with each other).
Bases of segmentation include demographic, geo-
graphic, psychographic, attributes/benefits, and behav-
ioral. Demographic based segmentation divides custom-
ers along vital population statistics. In geographic based 
segmentation, the market is divided based on physical 
location of potential customers. An underlying assump-
tion of this market segmentation base is that consumers 
located in geographic proximity share similar needs and 
preferences for some products. Geo-demographic segmen-
tation  combines geography and demographic segmenta-
tion bases. Psychographic based segmentation centers on 
customers’ lifestyles, and one of the leading lifestyle seg-
mentation  systems is the VALS System. Behavioral based 
segmentation includes segmenting consumers based on 
consumer preference for a particular product attribute or 
benefit,  usage occasion, user status, rate of product usage, 
and  loyalty status.
Positioning is the process of communicating with our 
target market(s) through the use of marketing mix vari-
ables to help consumers differentiate our product from 
others and perceive how our product best satisfies their 
needs. Sometimes marketers use terms like value proposi-
tion or “The Big Idea” to describe a brand, product, or 
 positioning strategy.
Like the bases of segmentation, there are several strate-
gies companies use to position their products. The best 
(Perceptual maps can have more than two dimensions but then they become more 
difficult to interpret.) What does this map show if we work for the 7-Up com-
pany? It shows that our closest direct competitors are Cherry Coke and Sprite; we 
are  perceived as very fruity but not too sweet; and there is a gap in the market in 
the lower left quadrant. Additional research is required to determine the nature 
of the gap.
Finally, ideal vectors can also be plotted on perceptual maps, which show ideal com-
binations of attributes. The slope of the ideal vector indicates the ratio of the two 
dimensions preferred by consumers. We can generate ideal vectors for all consumers or 
by specific market segments.

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
55
positioning strategy depends on the characteristics of our 
product, market segmentation bases used, the competi-
tion, and the type of mental associations we want con-
sumers to form. If our brand is the pioneer, we should 
emphasize this in our promotion. If our brand is markedly 
different on a single easy-to-communicate and important 
dimension, a single core benefit proposition should be 
used. If our brand is highly similar to competitors’ of-
ferings or difficult to differentiate, we may by be able to 
differentiate anyway via price, usage situation, or user. If 
competing brands have an exploitable weakness, reposi-
tioning is a possible strategy. Finally, marketers use per-
ceptual mapping to measure consumer preferences and 
develop competitive strategy.
Key Terms
market segmentation
target market
positioning
consumer preference heterogeneity
majority fallacy
sale-costs trade-off
cannibalization
demographic characteristics
geographic based segmentation
geo-demographic segmentation
psychographics
behavior based segmentation
core benefit proposition
premium pricing
repositioning
Review and Discussion
 1. Clearly distinguish between the following terms, de-
mographics, psychographic, lifestyle, and positioning.
 2. What are the two underlying assumptions of market 
segmentation?
 3. How do the majority fallacy and the potential for 
cannibalization influence market segmentation 
decisions?
 4. According to the VALS technique, what type of con-
sumer would probably buy a digital video camera? 
What type of consumer would take a fishing vacation 
trip? Justify your answer.
 5. Describe how marketers of Tropicana orange juice 
could use usage situation to broaden the products 
segment.
 6. Why might the pioneering advantage be even stron-
ger for services than it is for physical products? Give 
one example.
 7. How might a leading brand of personal music play-
ers, such as Apple’s iPod, best position itself? Give 
specific examples.
 8. What steps might a follower brand of personal 
music players, such as Sony, do in terms of position-
ing to increase its chances of success? Give specific 
examples.
 9. Describe when it is best to position using a core 
 benefit proposition. Why?
10. Describe the three situations that gaps in perceptual 
maps represent.

56 
Part one   Consumer Behavior and Marketing  Strategy
Short Application Exercises
 1. Find print advertisements that reflect segmentation 
based on the following:
 
a. Demographic based using ethnicity/culture
 
b. Attribute/benefit based
 
c. Behavioral based on usage occasion
 2. Visit the PRIZM website and enter your own zip 
code to see your neighborhood profile. Do you feel 
it accurately reflects your household and neighbor-
hood? Why or why not?
 3. Visit the VALS website and complete the online 
questionnaire to find out the segment to which you 
belong. Take some time to read the segment descrip-
tions. Do you feel your segment accurately portrays 
your lifestyle? Next, take the survey again, but an-
swer the questions from the perspective of someone 
else: your crazy neighbor, you elderly uncle, or your 
 conservative grandfather. (NOTE: Make sure to click 
the “yes” button that asks whether you have taken 
the survey before.) Again, are you satisfied with the 
 profile? Why or why not?
 4. Develop a questionnaire to measure some AIO’s 
of your fellow college students. Administer the 
 questionnaire to 20 students and generate lifestyle 
segments based on your results.
 5. Identify one example in the marketplace of a compa-
ny that has repositioned either itself or a competitor. 
Was the campaign successful? Justify your opinion.
According to the U.S. Federal Research U.S. credit 
card debt per household was $8,475, making cred-
it card debt a large portion of all consumer debt. 
The use of credit cards varies extensively. For some, 
a credit card is a convenient substitute for cash, 
while others like to “buy now”—even it they can’t 
afford it.
Imagine you have been hired as a consumer 
behavior consultant for JP Morgan Chase, one 
of the country’s largest issuers of consumer credit 
card products. The company has decided one of 
the highest growth potential market segments for 
their credit card products is a “young influentials” 
segment. In light of this potential market segment, 
consider the following questions:
1. How would you define this market segment?
2. How would this segment use (and/or poten-
tially abuse) credit cards?
3. What major benefits of owning a credit card 
should be stressed to this target segment?
4. What do you think is the best way to get 
information about your credit cards to these 
consumers?
5. What would be the primary message of your 
advertisements?
6. JP Morgan Chase is also concerned about the 
ethics of marketing credit card products to con-
sumers who might abuse them. U.S. consum-
ers’ filings for personal bankruptcy are at an 
all time high. Additionally, in every major city, 
many people are flocking to classes and consul-
tations designed to help them get out of con-
sumer debt—a process that begins by cutting 
up credit cards. Besides the ethical issues, many 
consumers who abuse credit cards will never 
pay their credit card bills entirely. How can the 
company modify the advertising message to 
attract ONLY responsible credit card users?
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n

Chapter 2   Consumer Focused Strategy: Segmentation and Positioning 
57
The part video is designed to expand and highlight the consumer behavior concepts in this part of the book. To 
view the videos, go to http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes and click on the student companion 
site link. After viewing the video, answer the following questions to test your knowledge on the part content 
and its application to the video case.
Segmentation at Lake, Snell, Perry, and Mermin Associates
Lake, Snell, Perry, and Mermin and Associates is a marketing research company that uses both research to 
profile and segment various groups in the U.S. population. The company helps its clients to understand and 
better appeal to these various groups. Clients are typically political candidates, non-profit foundations, and 
public interest groups.
 
1. Imagine you work for this company and are proposing a new research project to a prospective 
client, a political candidate. What are the advantages of segmenting potential voters? How will 
identifying and understanding potential segments help  the candidate ultimately win?
 
2. Consider your own school. Develop a research methodology to segment and profile the popula-
tion of your school. What specific questions would you pose? How would you collect this data? 
Speculate on what some potential segments might look like. Name the segments and provide a 
descriptive profile of these segments.
 
3. Engage in a secondary research project and gather information on one of the segments 
discussed in the video case. If a political candidate were trying to appeal to this group, what 
specific marketing tactics/messages might the candidate use?

PART
2
Consumer Information Processing
c h a p t e r s
58
 3 | Consumer Perception
 4 | Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change
 5 | Motivation and Emotion
 6 | Learning and Memory
 7 | Automatic Information Processing
 8 | Self-Concept and Personality

AN INTERVIEW WITH ROBERT S. WYER, JR 
59
Please describe the information processing paradigm 
and what this paradigm offers to the field of consumer 
behavior.
Consumers’ behavior is influenced to a large extent by 
the information they receive about the products they 
consider purchasing. It is therefore important to know 
how this information is used. An information process-
ing approach to understanding consumer behavior 
breaks down the effects of information on judgments 
and decisions into a number of steps:
1. Attention to the information
2.  Interpretation of its features in terms of preexisting 
concepts
3.  Organization of these features into a representation 
of the referent as a whole
4. Storage of this representation in memory
5.  Later retrieval of the representation, along with other 
knowledge acquired about the referent
6.  Assessment of the implications of this knowledge for 
a subjective evaluation or behavioral decision
7.  Translation of these implications into an overt 
response.
The effects of information about a product or 
responses to it and the way situational factors influence 
these effects can be mediated by its effects at any one or 
more of these stages.
Information processing researchers try to understand 
the cognitive processes that operate at each stage and 
the factors that affect them. In addition, they attempt to 
develop theoretical models that specify how the various 
stages of processing interface.
Most conceptualizations of information processing 
are metaphorical and do not pretend to describe the 
physiology of the brain. Thus, they should be evaluated 
on the basis of their utility and not their validity. The 
theories that have been proposed in cognitive and social 
psychology, many of which have been applied in the 
consumer area, have generally been very successful in ex-
plaining known phenomena and generating predictions 
of new ones.
Please explain the priming effect and the different 
types of priming effects that you have studied.
People normally do not use all the knowledge they have 
acquired about an object to evaluate it or decide how 
to respond to it. Rather, they only use a small subset of 
this knowledge that happens to be easily accessible in 
memory at the time. “Priming” refers to a procedure 
used in the laboratory to increase the accessibility of 
different subsets of knowledge and to investigate the 
effects of their use. Any number of procedures can be 
used, depending on the particular type of knowledge of 
concern. Single concepts can often be primed by having 
individuals construct sentences in which exemplars of 
the concepts are used. However, activating more general 
types of knowledge (stereotypes, affective reactions, 
procedures, and implicit theories) requires different 
techniques.
In many cases, concepts and knowledge can be 
primed subliminally. It is critical however, to ensure that 
individuals are unaware of the relationship between the 
priming task and the task that they are asked to perform 
subsequently. Individuals should not realize that the 
primed knowledge comes to mind for reasons that have 
anything to do with the judgments or decisions they are 
called upon to make. If individuals are aware, they often 
intentionally avoid using the concepts or knowledge to 
prevent bias, and this can lead the priming to have a 
contrast effect.
My own and others’ work was initially designed 
to test various theoretical assumptions concerning the 
effects of priming per se. For example, we showed that the 
Robert S. Wyer, Jr., is the J. M. Jones Professor of Marketing at the University of Illinois. 
He studies information processing; the representation of narrative information in memory 
and its use in judgment; priming effects on comprehension, judgment, and decisions; 
memory processes; and affect and cognition.
Professor of Marketing
University of Illinois
Q
Q
Courtesy of Norbert Schwarz

60
likelihood of using a trait concept to interpret a person’s 
behavior increased with how recently and how frequently 
the concept had been primed in a prior, unrelated task. 
Once the person’s behavior was interpreted in terms of this 
concept however, its effect on evaluations of the person 
described by the behavior increased over time.
The effects of priming are now well established. 
In our more recent work, we have used priming as a 
methodological tool to examine phenomena of interest 
for other reasons. Research with Catherine Yeung, for 
example, used priming techniques to examine the role of 
affect in product impression formation. We showed that 
priming positive or negative affect influenced consumers’ 
initial impressions of a product formed on the basis of 
a picture. This impression, once formed, was used as a 
basis for later judgments of the product independent of 
the attribute information presented subsequently. A series 
of studies with Hao Shen has used priming techniques 
to demonstrate that cognitive procedures, if activated in 
one situation, can persist to influence the processing of 
information in a later, totally unrelated, situation. Thus, 
for example, individuals who have been induced to give 
the same answer to each of a series of questions about 
animals are less likely than other participants to choose 
a variety of different products in a later, multiple-choice 
decision task. Furthermore, the rate at which individuals 
are required to speak while shadowing a speech affects the 
speed with which they complete a marketing survey in an 
unrelated situation they encounter subsequently.
Of particular interest is a series of studies with 
Jing Xu. She finds that individuals who are induced 
to make comparative judgments in an initial situation 
develop a “which-to-choose” mindset that increases their 
likelihood of deciding which of two products to purchase 
in a later situation without considering the option of 
not buying anything at all. This is apparently true even 
when the comparative judgments are totally unrelated 
to purchase behavior. Thus, for example, comparing 
the physical attributes of wild animals or judging the 
similarity of foreign countries, can increase the likelihood 
of making a purchase in a product choice situation.
How does priming occur outside the laboratory? What 
is the role of television, advertising, and other types of 
marketing communication?
Although the concepts and knowledge that are primed 
in the laboratory are intentionally manipulated, the 
effects of knowledge accessibility generally occur 
without awareness. Consequently, numerous experiences 
that fortuitously occur in daily life can influence the 
concepts and procedures consumers apply in evaluating 
products and making purchase decisions a short time 
later. Perhaps more important, concepts and knowledge 
that have been applied very frequently in the course of 
individuals’ daily lives can become chronically accessible 
in memory and therefore, can have effects that generalize 
over a number of situations.
L. J. Shrum and his colleagues provide a particularly 
interesting demonstration of these effects in their research 
on the impact of television on perceptions of social reality. 
They found that individuals tend to overestimate the 
incidence of persons, objects, and events in the real world 
that are overrepresented on television. Shrum also found 
that the degree of their overestimation increases with the 
amount of television individuals watch. Although other 
explanations of this effect have been suggested, Shrum 
provides convincing evidence that it results from the 
fact that objects and events seen on television are more 
accessible in memory and are used as a basis for frequency 
estimates without considering the context in which they 
were encountered. So, heavy television viewers, relative to 
light viewers, overestimate the number of policemen and 
doctors in the general population, the incidence of violent 
crime, and the number of households with swimming 
pools in the backyard.
The chronic accessibility of concepts and 
knowledge can also vary with individuals’ cultural 
backgrounds. A series of studies by Donnel Briley, 
Michael Morris and Itamar Simonson show that 
Asians, who are more inclined than Westerners to 
think of themselves in relation to one another, exhibit 
a tendency to choose the “compromise” option in 
a multiple-alternative product decision task. Put 
another way, they are more inclined to choose options 
that minimize the negative consequences of their 
decision, independently of the positive outcomes 
that might accompany them. Interestingly, these 
differences are not evident unless cultural norms are 
made more accessible in memory, either by asking 
participants to give reasons for their choices or, in the 
case of bilingual consumers, by varying the language 
in which the product decision task is administered.
How do consumers get into a buying mindset? 
Can marketers trick consumers into buying more 
than should?
Jing Xu’s research provides one possible answer. It sug-
gests that consumers who are asked by a salesperson to 
make comparative judgments before considering a pur-
chase are more likely to make a purchase than they oth-
erwise would. I’m reminded of my personal experiences 
with Oriental rug salesmen. After displaying a number 
of rugs, they frequently ask you to indicate which one 
you prefer, thus attempting to induce a “which to buy” 
mindset that will stimulate a purchase without consider-
ing the option of buying nothing.
Q
Q

61
A more common situation may be exemplified by 
the shopping momentum effect identified by Dhar, 
Huber, and Kahn. Inducing individuals to make a small 
purchase early in the experiment increases their willing-
ness to make a second purchase later on. They argue 
that the process of making the first purchase activates an 
“implemental” mindset that persists over time.
However, one could speculate about numerous other 
real-world priming phenomena that have implications 
for marketing strategy. Nunes and Boatright found that 
customers in a beachfront shopping area were more 
willing to pay a higher price for CDs being sold if the 
sweaters at an adjacent booth were priced relatively high 
than if they priced relatively low. Although the specific 
process underlying this effect is unclear, it provides yet 
another example of the effects of concept activation on 
purchase behavior outside the laboratory.
Having said this however, I personally believe that 
our objective as consumer behavior researchers is not to 
provide marketers with tools for tricking the public into 
buying more than they should, but to provide consumers 
with tools they can use to avoid being tricked. Because 
the effects of knowledge accessibility are largely uncon-
scious, this is a challenging problem.

62
Apple Paints the Market
62
Consumer Perception
 1 | Define perception, attention, cognitive 
capacity, and comprehension.
 2 | Describe how the perceptual process 
works.
 3 | Explain how sensory thresholds and 
physical influences affect perception.
 4 | Discuss how selective attention is both 
voluntary and involuntary.
 5 | Provide examples of how marketers 
appeal to the senses to obtain and 
maintain consumers’ attention.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to...
objectives
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s—the first two decades of the home computer market—
consumers had one choice when it came to computer color—beige. But when the 
Apple Computer Company launched its teal (officially, “Bondi Blue”) iMac in August, 1998, 
the computer market changed forever. Surprised and dazzled by the new color, cool new design, 
and lower price, consumers stormed computer stores and bought more than 800,000 iMacs 
in less than five months.1 By January, 1999, Apple had launched five more fruity flavors for its 
iMac and iBook lines—blueberry, grape, tangerine, lime, and strawberry. By 2000, other major 
computer manufacturers, including Dell Computer, Hewlett-Packard, and Compaq Computers, 
were considering offering colorful PCs.2 Ironically, the Hewlett-Packard Company had received 
a proposal from Oregon industrial designer Ziba Design, Inc. to produce a teal-colored 
computer back in 1996, i.e., two years before Apple introduced its colorful model. Ziba Design 
suggested teal as the color because it is not gender specific and, at the time, was not considered 
3
CHAPTER

63
trendy, so, they reasoned, it would be seen as new and different. Hewlett-Packard rejected the 
recommendation, thinking that consumers would not want to buy outwardly colorful computers.3
Apple’s success in daring to add a splash of color to computers changed the way computers 
were viewed and added a new attribute to those considered when consumers shop for personal 
computers. Apple’s success also underscored the importance of color to consumers; it is 
a strong, distinguishing factor that can be used to grab consumers’ attention and boost a 
company’s reputation as an innovator.
Interestingly, while the rest of the computer industry appears to have finally found color, 
as shown by Dell’s new line of Inspiron laptops, Apple has returned to monochromatic white, 
black, and silver as its signature colors, standing out once again.
Defining the Perceptual Process
Why do some product packages stick out on grocery store shelves, while others barely 
get noticed? Why do some television commercials generate attention, while others are ig-
nored? This chapter describes how consumers physically acquire and interpret informa-
tion about products, services, and the world around them through perceptual process.
Perception is a process of receiving, selecting, and interpreting environmental stim-
uli involving the five senses. Through perception, we define the world around us and 
ob jec ti ve 1
AP Photo/Chiaki Tsukumo

64 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
create meaning from our environment. For example, consumers eat ice cream, and it 
feels cold and tastes sweet. People look upward, see blue, and know that they are view-
ing the sky. But, how cold or sweet or blue is different for every individual because each 
person’s perceptual process is unique. This chapter demonstrates that myriad factors 
influence consumers’ perceptions. That no two people perceive the world in the same 
way is a challenging concept because it’s difficult for people to step outside their own 
physical senses, i.e., to try to see things as others see them. The erroneous assumption 
that everyone else perceives the world as we do is called phenomenal absolutism.
The steps in the perceptual process are shown in Figure 3.1. Although the pro-
cess appears sequential from sensory exposure through comprehension, the entire pro-
cess occurs almost instantaneously, and the steps of the process interact and overlap 
seamlessly.
objec tive 2
Figure 3.1 The Perceptual Process
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Perceptual Process 
 
Sensory Exposure
Sight 
Hearing 
 
 
Touch 
Attention
Comprehension
The perceptual process is influenced by sensory thresholds, physical limits
on attention, voluntary and involuntary attention selectivity, and personal 
and situational factors.
Smell
Taste 
Perception of the environment requires consumers to use their physical senses. 
Sensory exposure occurs when a stimulus, like the smell of pretzels in the shopping mall 
or a print ad in the newspaper, is detected by the physical senses. Although the senses 
include dozens of secondary sensory systems, consumers’ primary senses are sight, hear-
ing, smell, taste, and touch. The body’s first and immediate response to a stimulus is 
called sensation. Sensation involves gathering data from the sensory organs and ner-
vous system and sending it to the brain for processing and interpretation. But not all 
stimuli receive attention. People perceive only a fraction of the stimuli to which they 
are exposed. In other words, consumers are not passive recipients of the world around 
them. To avoid being overwhelmed by the sheer volume of stimuli available in the 
marketplace, consumers are selective about stimuli. Thus, an important part of the per-
ceptual process is discriminating among stimuli and selecting those to receive further 
processing. This step represents the act of attention.
Attention means focusing on one or more environmental stimuli while potentially 
ignoring others. Attention is highly selective in nature. If consumers didn’t have selective 
attention (also called perceptual selection), they would be so overloaded with information 
in the marketplace that they couldn’t function effectively. For example, in the United 
States are more than 1,100 television stations, more than 13,000 radio stations, and 
about 25,000 newspapers and magazines. The average U.S. consumer is exposed to about 
3,000 ad messages per day.4 In addition, the typical American watches about 4.3 hours of 

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
65
television per day, spends about 1.5 hours per day surfing the Web, 30 minutes each day 
talking on the phone, and reads a newspaper at least once per week.5
Adding to this state of media overload, American firms spend more than $45 billion 
a year on advertising and another $65 billion a year on promotions (e.g., coupons, sales, 
free samples, rebates, premiums, sweepstakes, sporting event sponsorships). Obviously, 
consumers cannot attend to all product information to which they are exposed. Cognitive 
capacity, or the ability to pay attention to and think about information, is limited. 
Consequently, marketers need to understand what guides consumers’ allocation of cogni-
tive capacity and their selective attention.
The last step in the perceptual process involves providing meaning to the sensory 
data that gets processed. Comprehension is the ability to interpret and assign meaning 
to the new information by relating it to knowledge already stored in memory. The ways 
new environmental stimuli are categorized, interpreted, and experienced are influenced 
by existing knowledge. Ask two people with radically different political opinions to 
interpret a political speech, and the answers will differ dramatically. To revisit the ice 
cream example from the opening of this discussion, when consumers taste chocolate ice 
cream, their senses take in sweetness, cold, chocolate flavor, the smell of chocolate, and 
wet stickiness. Consumers’ ability to organize, categorize, and interpret these sensations 
help them recognize that, indeed, they are eating chocolate ice cream. After compre-
hension, preferences and choice follow.
Perception is important to marketers because it is the communication gateway to 
the consumer. Understanding perception and how it influences consumers’ attention 
to the environment, their interpretation and comprehension of stimuli, and ultimately 
their behavior, is essential to developing successful products and marketing messages. 
The rest of the chapter explores the influences and limits of the perceptual process of 
importance to marketers, including sensory thresholds, physical limits on attention, 
and voluntary and involuntary attention selectivity.
Photodisc/Getty Images
Consumers today are in a state of media overload but have limited cognitive capacity, which is why 
selective attentions is so important.

66 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Marketing to the Senses: The Ingenious Ways Marketers Use Color
Marketing in Action
Marketers have long realized the importance of percep-
tion and appealing to our physical senses, and perhaps 
our most important physical sense is sight. Through sight 
we perceive colors, sizes, and the position of objects 
in the environment. In fact, the majority of our sensual 
perception occurs through sight. Visual tools related to 
perception are used by marketers to increase attention to 
marketing messages.
An important tool for marketers related to sight is the 
use of color. According to color experts, color sells! Color 
catches attention, conveys meaning, and elicits emotions 
from consumers. Let’s look at some common colors and 
how they are perceived:
• Red is typically associated with appetite and sexual 
arousal; it is attention-getting and exciting. Red can 
also convey a warning or a rescue from danger: think 
of the American Red Cross or a bright red fire engine.
• Orange is also a high-energy color associated with 
appetite and power. Tide laundry detergent uses an 
orange package to signify its strength.
• Blue is considered relaxing; it is associated with sky, 
water, trust, and the future. Blue is America’s favorite 
color, according to the Crayola Crayon makers.
• Green is representative of health, refreshment, and 
the environment. The Healthy Choice packaged food 
brand uses green as its signature color to symbolize its 
low-fat content and health.
• Yellow sends a message of optimism, happiness, 
and nature. Yellow is symbolic of light, the sun, and 
cleanliness. Cleaning products are often packaged in 
yellow.
Marketers know that colors speak to people and give 
them messages about the product, making color an im-
portant part of the overall marketing message.
Sensory Thresholds
The Absolute Threshold
Have you ever watched a dog sniff the ground as he tracks some secret scent? Or lis-
tened to your cat move around the dark house at night, able to see every obstacle? There 
are some stimuli that people simply cannot perceive. Overall, however, the sensory 
limits or thresholds for animals—including humans—are relatively high. The minimum 
level of stimuli needed for an individual to experience a sensation is called the absolute 
threshold. It is the lowest point at which a person can detect “something” on a given 
sensory receptor. The smells that dogs can use for tracking are too slight to be detected 
by humans, so this stimulus is beyond our olfactory absolute threshold. Likewise, the 
farthest point at which a person can read a billboard advertisement from a moving car 
represents an absolute threshold.
In addition to the overall physical strengths and weaknesses of human senses, 
individual differences in sensory ability also exist. For example, children tend to 
experience lower absolute thresholds, which might explain why infants often react 
to startling noises and bright lights by crying or showing distress. Research dem-
onstrates that women also tend to have lower absolute thresholds than men. Some 
objec tive 3
PRNewsFoto/American Red 
Cross/Newscom

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
67
people may have their senses impaired or altered because of disability or aging; some 
people often have one sense that they feel is particularly strong, such as a keen sense 
of smell or sharp vision. Two consumers riding together in a car may see a billboard 
advertisement at different times from different distances. Consequently, advertisers 
need to make sure that the type on the billboard is large enough and brief enough 
to maximize the number of people capable of reading it. As a general industry rule 
of thumb, because a billboard is read by the average person in six seconds or less, it 
should contain no more than six words in the primary message. Pharmaceutical com-
panies and other industries that must include details and fine print in their advertise-
ments must design the type large enough for the average person to read—particularly 
if the target market is seniors, who typically prefer 16 point font. So, as can be seen, 
the absolute threshold is an important consideration for marketers when designing 
marketing stimuli for targeted audiences.
The Just Noticeable Difference
Another important sensory threshold is the ability to detect changes in relative levels of 
stimuli. The just noticeable difference (j.n.d.), also called the differential threshold, is 
the amount of incremental change required for a person to detect a difference between 
two similar stimuli. For example, the number of pounds you have to put on before your 
friends notice you’ve gained weight is the j.n.d., as is the amount you have to raise your 
voice in a crowded restaurant until you can be heard by your companions.
In the middle of the nineteenth century, German scientist Ernst Weber found that 
the magnitude of the j.n.d. between two stimuli was systematically related to the intensity 
of the first stimulus, rather than some absolute amount. In other words, Weber discov-
ered that the ability to sense a change in stimulus level depends on the original magni-
tude of that stimulus. The greater or stronger the initial stimulus was, the greater was 
the amount of change required for it to be noticed. This is known as Weber’s Law. For 
instance, consider a product just put on sale. A rule of thumb in retailing maintains that 
a price should be marked down at least 20 percent for consumers to notice the price 
change. So, if a grocer marks down a can of pineapple that normally costs $1.00, the sales 
price should be $0.80 cents (0.80  $1.00 or a $0.20 discount). However, that same 
$0.20 discount won’t benefit a package of steaks that cost $10.00; the steaks would have 
to be marked down to $8.00 (a $2.00 discount) to be noticed by consumers.
PRNewsFoto/Chick-fil-A, Inc./AP Photo
Marketers need to consider consumers absolute thresholds when designing marketing materials.

68 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Consumers’ abilities to detect change in stimuli and j.n.d. are critical to market-
ers, particularly when the goal is to ensure that negative product changes (e.g., in-
creases in price or reductions in product quality) go unnoticed, falling below the j.n.d. 
Conversely, when positive product changes occur (e.g., sales discounts or updated 
product features), a marketer wants to ensure that the change is readily apparent, 
exceeding the j.n.d., without being excessive or wasteful.
Marketers also use j.n.d. in an attempt to increase the profit margin on a product 
by decreasing the amount of product offered in the package, rather than by increas-
ing the price. Reducing the volume in a product’s package reduces the firm’s cost per 
unit. Here, understanding the amount of change that can be made to the product’s 
volume, while remaining below consumers’ j.n.d., can generate incremental profits. 
This practice is called package-pricing. It’s a way for a company to enact an “invisible” 
price increase. In recent years, PepsiCo reduced the weight of its snack food bag from 
14.5 ounces to 13.5 ounces while keeping the price constant; Dannon reduced the 
size of its yogurt cup from 8 ounces to 6 ounces—a 25 percent reduction, while only 
lowering the suggested retail price by 20 percent; Dreyer’s and Edy’s Grand Ice Cream 
cut package sizes from 1.89 liters (a half-gallon) to 1.66 liters.6
Courtesy of the General Mills Archives
1936 
1965 
1986 
1996
But this tactic is not without risk. When Kimberly-Clark implemented a five 
percent package reduction while holding prices steady on its Huggies Diapers, rival 
Procter & Gamble flooded the market with coupons and price promotions on its 
Pampers and Luvs diaper brands. Consumers often feel cheated if they figure out that a 
brand has applied package-pricing. Nevertheless, research shows that while consumers 
prefer a straightforward price increase over reductions in package quantity, if a com-
pany can employ package-pricing and effectively fall below the j.n.d., most customers 
may never notice the change in price.7
Marketers also often use j.n.d. estimations to help update existing package de-
signs or brand symbols without losing any brand recognition that has been cultivated 
through expensive marketing communication. When this is the case, small successive 
changes are made, each carefully designed to fall below the j.n.d. For example, Tony the 
Tiger, Betty Crocker, and Colonel Sanders (the Kentucky Fried Chicken Colonel) and 
Aunt Jemima have been subtly freshened up and modernized over the years.
Of course, sometimes the marketer’s goal is to exceed the j.n.d. with package and  message 
changes in order to generate attention and create “buzz.” Pepsi has periodically introduced 
obvious and significant changes to its packaging as part of its marketing campaigns.

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
69
Adaptation
Another concept related to sensory thresholds is adaptation, the process of becoming 
desensitized to sensual stimuli. Over time, if a stimulus doesn’t change, we adapt or 
orient to it and notice it less. This is important to marketers because as advertisements 
and other marketing stimuli become familiar, they are less likely to attract attention. 
The following conditions can increase adaptation:
•  High Repetition: When an advertisement is overexposed, it loses the ability 
to attract attention and interest; this is also known as advertising wear-out.
•  Simplicity: Simple stimuli tend to encourage adaptation because they don’t 
require much cognitive capacity to process. A billboard with no words is easy to 
comprehend, but may quickly become part of the scenery.
•  Low Intensity: Soft sounds, faint smells, and dull colors all produce quick adap-
tation because they require little input from human sensory systems.
Each year, The Economist publishes a collection of predictions 
for the coming year. Recently, the magazine predicted a boom 
in the business of marketing with scents. Harrods, a premier 
European retailer, has led this effort by injecting tailored aromas 
into its stores to try to extend 
the multi-sensory buying 
experience for its customers. 
The scent-marketing tactics 
were part of larger cam-
paign called the “Senses” 
promotion, designed to en-
courage customers to look, 
touch, smell, taste, and listen 
more while they shopped.
The luxury retailer, 
working with The Aroma 
Company and the Brand 
sense agency, injected scents 
into several store areas. 
Vanilla and 
chocolate were featured in 
ladies shoes. The ladies 
swimwear department sported the scent of coconut oil. Basil 
and lime scents perfumed store entrances as well as the paper 
receipts that customers received after making a purchase (so they 
took the scents home). The garden living department featured the 
fragrance of freshly mown grass. In one area, customers were 
able to sample all 12 different aromas from around the store.
Harrods’ effort fol-
lows those of several U.S. 
retailers, including Macy’s, 
Bloomingdales, and Saks 
Fifth Avenue, which all have 
adopted scent-marketing 
strategies. Scent market-
ing—associating your brand 
with a specific smell—sup-
posedly helps brands con-
nect with consumers on an 
emotional level. The logic 
behind this assumption is 
that smell directly enervates 
the limbic system, which 
is the part of the brain that 
controls emotion. According 
to the Simon Harrop at the Brand sense agency, the sense of 
smell is emotionally powerful, affecting humans up to 75 per-
cent more than the other senses.25
Harrods Sniffs Out a New Way to Appeal to Customers
Eye on International
Stone/Getty Images

70 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Marketers work hard to discourage adaptation. For example, how frequently an 
ad appears is typically monitored closely to avoid wear-out. In contrast, a marketer 
may try to increase the intensity of sensory input. Cadillac recently purchased all 
the ad time for the premier episode of A&E Channel’s Mad Men to ensure that 
their message wouldn’t get lost in advertising clutter. Additional information about 
how marketers design messages to rise above the clutter is provided later in the 
chapter.
Subliminal Perception and Advertising
In a typical college marketing class today, if a professor were to ask how many stu-
dents believed that subliminal messages are effective in influencing people, the majority 
would answer in the affirmative.8 That’s because the public has been fascinated with 
the topic of subliminal perception for years. The popular press has taken advantage of 
this interest, perpetuating speculations and inaccuracies about the use of subliminal 
messaging in marketing. Many people believe in subliminal advertising. One older 
study reported that approximately 81 percent of the participants had heard of sub-
liminal advertising, and 65 percent believed the practice was successfully used to sell 
products.9 In response to public fears, even though no substantial body of research 
shows subliminal messaging has any practical behavioral influence on consumers, the 
practice is banned in Great Britain and Australia and can result in licensure penalties 
in the United States.
Subliminal perception is the unconscious awareness of a stimulus. Technically, 
“subliminal” means beneath the absolute threshold (limen is another word for thresh-
old). Nevertheless, many subliminal messages are actually supraliminal, meaning they 
fall above the absolute threshold, but are consciously repressed by the recipient. In 
other words, consumers don’t consciously engage these messages; they process them at 
a subconscious level.
Subliminal advertising has a notorious history. Although the basic terminology 
and concept of subliminal messaging has been around for more than a century, its 
close association to advertising emerged in the 1950s, and was brought to the public’s 
attention by James Vicary.10 In 1957, Vicary conducted a six-week subliminal message 
experiment in movie theatres in New Jersey during a showing of the movie Picnic. He 
flashed subliminal messages, “Drink Cola-Cola” and “Hungry? Eat Popcorn” dur-
ing a movie, at 1/3000 of a second—far too quickly to be recognized via conscious 
awareness. Vicary claimed that popcorn sales increased by 57.7 percent, and Coke 
sales increased by 18.1 percent as a result of the subliminal embedded message. He 
coined the term, “subliminal advertising,” to describe this form of messaging. His 
findings launched a flurry of research into subliminal marketing messages, a nation-
al debate on the ethics of subliminal messaging, and the perception among many 
consumers that subliminal messages are commonly (and successfully) employed by 
marketers. Regrettably, Vicary’s results were fabricated to promote his business. After 
years of other researchers failing to replicate his experiments, Vicary finally admitted 
that he had done little research and did not have enough data to draw meaningful 
conclusions.
In the 1970s, Wilson Bryan Key reignited interest the topic.11 His books focused 
on identifying supposed sexual symbols, pictures, and words embedded in adver-
tising, so-called subliminal embeds. He claimed that marketers include the sexually 
themed subliminal embeds to physically arouse viewers to increase attention and 
persuasion.

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
71
In 1989, a lawsuit was filed against the 
musical group, Judas Priest, for supposedly 
planting the hidden phrase “Do It” in their 
song “Better You Than Me.” The subliminal 
phrase could be heard when the record al-
bum was played backward. The parents of 
two teenage boys brought the lawsuit and 
alleged that the phrase pushed their suicidal 
sons to act. The group argued they didn’t in-
tentionally place the message on the album 
and if they had, it should be protected by the 
First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, 
which protects freedom of speech. However, 
the judge ruled that subliminal messages are 
not protected by the First Amendment be-
cause people can’t avoid them, so they con-
stituted an invasion of privacy. But the judge 
also ruled that actual persuasion via sublimi-
nal messaging had never been proven. As a result, the case 
was ruled in favor of Judas Priest.
Over the years, companies have tried to profit from 
the open use of subliminal messaging. The first recognized 
mass marketing use of subliminal advertising appeared 
in 1959 when Chevrolet aired a television commercial in 
which the announcers sang:
“Hey, have you heard about the crazy new way to send 
a message today?”
It’s flashed on a screen too quick to see, but still you get 
it subliminally . . .
Ladies and gentlemen, the ’59 Chevy.
The new car was then flashed on the screen subliminally. 
In the 1980s, a rash of companies selling self-help sublimi-
nal message audio tapes sprang up, promising everything 
from weight loss to a job promotion. In 2006, Kentucky 
Fried Chicken planted a hidden coupon in frames of televi-
sion commercials. These were specifically designed for users 
of digital video recorders; when the commercials were played 
frame-by-frame, the coupon was revealed.
Recently, researchers have returned to the subject of the 
potential influence of subliminal stimuli. Some research 
has shown that under controlled circumstances, sublimi-
nal stimuli can influence attitudes and behaviors (we will 
return to this research when we discuss automatic infor-
mation processing later in the text). Still,  applications for 
subliminal messaging in a mass- marketing  environment 
have not been demonstrated  because the conditions need-
ed to generate subliminal perception are very difficult to 
produce outside the laboratory. Unfortunately however, 
misconceptions about the use of subliminal messaging still 
persist today. In reality, the majority of marketers do not 
 
Learn Spanish while you sleep. Just
 
pop in an audiotape or CD before
 
you go to bed; listen to the soothing
 
music as it lulls you to sleep; and 
within a few weeks, you will be speaking fluent Spanish. It sounds 
great, but like so many techniques that promise big results with 
little effort, subliminal self-help audiotapes are too good to be true. 
Here’s how they claim to work: subliminal material is embedded 
into audiotapes that play soothing music or nature sounds. As you 
listen, your subconscious mind processes the subliminal informa-
tion, resulting in the desired behavioral outcome. The audiotapes 
typically promise results with just a few weeks of listening. If 
listening to an audiotape doesn’t suit your style, you can now have 
subliminal text messages flashed at you on your computer screen 
while you work. A variation on the audiotape theme, these mes-
sages work in basically the same way.
Subliminal self-help audiotapes have been around for more 
than 20 years, and have been used by large numbers of people. 
Even famous golfer Tiger Woods claims to have listened to sub-
liminal self-help audiotapes as a child. These materials are still 
strong sellers on the Internet. A simple search of Amazon.com, a 
popular Web-based bookseller, reveals more than 250 different 
types of these materials for sale. They promise everything you 
can imagine, including learning a foreign language, curbing bad 
behaviors like smoking and overeating, improving self-esteem 
and self-confidence, curing phobias, and increasing happiness.
Unfortunately, like subliminal advertising techniques, there is 
no substantial body of credible research that shows that any of 
these materials yield real results. If a person wants to stop smok-
ing, lose weight, or learn a foreign language, they are better 
served by doing it the old-fashioned way—through hard work 
and determination.
E T H I C S
Images courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Subliminal stimuli can be embedded in an image or symbolic, which means 
that subliminal content is actually visible but repressed by the viewer.

72 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
intentionally use subliminal messaging because it would be a waste of time and money. 
So, when subliminal words, symbols, or pictures do appear in marketing communica-
tions, they are typically accidental or the work of an unhappy, vindictive employee.
Now that we have examined the physical thresholds of the senses, let’s look at two 
other physical influences on the perceptual process: cognitive limitations related to 
short-term memory and physical arousal.
Physical Influences on Attention
Beyond the physical limitations of our senses, consumers possess limited cognitive 
 capacity and mental resources for information processing, particularly with respect to 
attention. People are able to attend to and think about only a small amount of infor-
mation at one time, and attention varies from person to person and from situation to 
situation. The next section examines two pervasive physical influences on attention: 
short-term memory limits and physical arousal.
Short-Term Memory
Short-term memory is the part of memory where small bits of information are stored 
for short periods of time. All information that is actively and consciously considered is 
processed in short-term memory. This is why short-term memory is sometimes called 
“working memory,” “active memory,” or “conscious awareness.” Recently received sensory 
input utilizes short-term memory.
According to famous Harvard psychologist George Miller (1956), people 
are able to consider approximately five to nine (seven plus/minus two) units of 
 information at one time. This is often referred to as “Miller’s Rule.”12 A unit of 
information can be very small, such as a single number, letter, or word, or very 
large, such as a string of numbers, letters, words, or ideas.13 It is easy to test Miller’s 
Rule. Quickly, off the top of your head, recall as many brands of breakfast cereal as 
you can. How many brands do you recall? For most, the number will fall between 
five and nine.
Because people can attend to only about seven units of information at a time, it 
is easy to overwhelm or overload consumers with too much information. For exam-
ple, a grocery store may carry a dozen or more different brands of laundry detergent. 
In addition, detergents are often available in large (e.g., 150 ounces), medium (e.g., 
100 ounces), and small (e.g., 50 ounces) containers. If 12 brands are available in each 
of these three sizes, consumers are faced with 36 different alternatives from which to 
choose. To compare all possible pairs of these 36 alternatives, consumers would have 
to make over 1,200 comparisons (36!/(36  2)!  1,260). Few consumers are willing 
to commit the time and effort necessary to choose among a set of just 12 alternatives 
(resulting in 12!/(12  2)!  132 pairwise comparisons).
Interestingly, one factor that influences the amount of information people can 
attend to at one particular moment is prior knowledge or expertise.14 People who are 
knowledgeable about a topic are able to attend to more pieces of information, and 
as knowledge increases, unit size increases. Consequently, compared with novices, 
experts attend to and think about larger units of information. Ultimately, this pro-
cessing advantage enables experts to solve problems more effectively and efficiently 
compared to novices.
ob jec tive 4

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
73
Arousal
Arousal, a state of physical wakefulness or alertness, also influences consumers’ at-
tention.15 When arousal is extremely low, people are asleep. The level of wakefulness 
or alertness people experience during the normal course of a day is moderate. Viewing 
exciting events like action movies, rock concerts, basketball games, and football games 
(and, yes, even stimulating lectures) produce high levels of arousal. Consumption of 
caffeine products (e.g., coffee, tea, cola, energy drinks), as well as exposure to loud 
noises, flashing lights, and unexpected events, also produces high levels of arousal. 
Similarly, physical exertion from roller coaster rides, sports activities, and aerobic 
 exercise produces high arousal.
An inverted-U-shaped relationship exists between arousal and consumers’ ability 
to attend to information. Consumers’ ability to pay attention to information is low 
when arousal is extreme (low or high). When arousal is too low, the amount of cogni-
tive capacity and mental resources available for information processing is also low. It is 
difficult to attend to much information when people are tired, drowsy, or completely 
disinterested. Surprisingly, when arousal is high, cognitive capacity is also low. Under 
conditions of high arousal, consumers are over stimulated, and this arousal competes 
with their ability to attend to large amounts of information. On the other hand, when 
consumers are moderately aroused, they are alert but not over stimulated, freeing up 
cognitive capacity which can be used to attend to information (see Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2 The Relationship Between Attention and Physical 
Arousal
Attention Intensity
High
Low
Low
Attention
Intensity
(cognitive
capacity)
Moderate
High
Arousal
Consider the results of an interesting field experiment on attention and memory 
for television commercials aired during the Super Bowl.16 Fans from the two  cities 
represented in the Super Bowl were highly aroused and over stimulated, and as a 
 consequence, attention and memory for the television commercials aired during the 
game were poor. In contrast, viewers from other cities across the country were only 
moderately aroused, and these viewers exhibited much better attention and memory 
for the same television commercials. Under moderate levels of arousal, attention and 
memory are at their best.

74 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Voluntary and Involuntary Selective Attention
Consumers are exposed to so much marketplace information that they cannot possibly 
process and think about each and every product-related piece of data they encounter. If 
consumers had to think carefully about every ad, each package label, and every marketing 
communication they saw or heard, little time would be left for anything else. According to 
famous researcher Daniel Kahneman, the allocation of attention is influenced by both vol-
untary and involuntary factors.17 People voluntarily attend to information consistent with 
their current knowledge and expertise and to information relevant to their plans, inten-
tions, and goals. Specifically, we manage our perceptual exposure by focusing our attention 
to things in the environment that are meaningful and appealing. For example, people who 
dislike country music avoid tuning in to country-music radio stations. Likewise, consumers 
shopping for new laptops purposefully seek out marketing information about computers.
One real concern for marketers today is how to win the battle for broadcast 
 advertising exposure in this age of the remote control. With the growing popularity of 
digital video recorders (DVRs), consumers can mute, fast-forward, and skip over com-
mercials entirely. Some advertisers are trying to adapt to these technologies, similarly 
to the Kentucky Fried Chicken coupon example described earlier. Other practitioners 
are trying to make their advertisements more interesting and entertaining to discourage 
viewers from zapping past ads; still others are simply opting out of television advertis-
ing altogether. Some industry experts speculate that eventually cable providers and 
advertisers will be forced to provide incentives to encourage consumers to watch their 
messages. These incentives may come in the form of coupons, patronage rewards, or in 
extreme cases, a reduction in the cable bill for each ad watched.
Involuntary influences on attention are rooted in the very nature of the stimuli. 
Some marketing stimuli draw so much attention, they are difficult to tune out, even 
when consumers make a concerted attempt to ignore them. A clear understanding of 
these involuntary influences enables marketers to more effectively design and imple-
ment marketing strategies. Let’s take a closer look at these influences.
Salient Stimuli
Salient stimuli draw consumers’ attention involuntarily.18 Some products, 
packages, and ads just “stick out” because they are different and interesting. 
For example, Rolls Royce is notably different from other types of automobiles; 
as a consequence, the brand stands out on the road. Pringles potato chips 
come in tall, cylindrical packages that are distinguishable from typical potato 
chip bags. Consequently, Pringles potato chip packages are conspicuous on 
grocery store shelves.
However, salience depends on context. In other words, stimuli that stand 
out in one context or situation may not stand out in another. For example, 
while a Rolls Royce automobile might be quite noticeable driving through 
most typical American college campuses, it would not be very salient in the 
parking lot of an exclusive country club in Beverly Hills, California, whose 
members all drive luxury automobiles. Stimuli are salient only when they 
are very different from other stimuli in a specific context. From a perception 
perspective, when a stimulus is salient, it is figural or focal, and everything 
else fades into the background. This is known as the figure-ground prin-
ciple of perception. Marketers create salience through novelty, intensity, and 
complexity.
objec tive 5
AP Photo/Jeff Chiu
Salient stimuli are novel, intense, 
and complex.

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
75
NOVELTY  A novel stimulus is one that is new, original, different, or unexpected. 
Sometimes the product itself is novel. Procter & Gamble is now offering flavor cartridges, 
called Pur Flavor Options, for the Pur Water Filtration System. Sumseeds are roasted 
sunflower seeds that are energized with caffeine.
Placing marketing messages in unexpected places also increases novelty. Charmin Toilet 
Tissue has opened a Charmin-themed public restroom in Times Square in New York. Other 
unexpected advertising venues are on eggs, airsickness bags, airplane tray tables, the sides of 
straws, and embedded in candy.19
AP Photo/Mary Altaffer
Advertisers constantly experiment with novel advertising and promotional execu-
tions. New characters, themes, and scenarios are constantly under development. For 
example, the Apple versus PC television commercials initially were novel, amusing, 
and attention-generating. They featured two actors playing the roles of an Apple brand 
computer and a PC, bantering about the flaws of the PC in humorous ways. Apple 
Computer Co.’s advertising agency was able to sustain the novelty for an extended 
period of time by developing many different variations on the theme.20 One version 
of the ad showed the PC ill with a virus, while another version showed Apple giving 
PC a photo album for a gift. The ad campaign’s novelty would have waned much more 
quickly if numerous variations of the theme had not been employed.
INTENSITY   The intensity of a stimulus, such as its loudness, brightness, or length, 
affects salience, and in turn, induces attention. Intensity can be influenced through 
several stimulus characteristics, including size, volume, color/brightness, odor, length, and 
position. Larger print ads, longer radio and television ads, and bigger retail displays tend 
to be more intense. Ever notice that sometimes a television ad is louder than the show 
you’re watching? Bright colors are exciting, and warm colors (e.g., red, yellow, and brown) 
are more arousing than cool colors (e.g., blue, green, and grey). Position is the place an 
object occupies in space or time. A stimulus that is easy to see is more likely to be noticed, 

76 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
which is why suppliers jockey for the eye-level shelf or 
the displays at the end of aisles in stores. In magazines, 
ads placed either on the front or back covers or near the 
front of the magazine on the right hand page are more 
likely to be noticed than their counterparts.
While more intense stimuli generally draw more at-
tention, the goal is to generate a level of intensity that 
results in that product or message standing out from 
surrounding stimuli. Thus, having a silent television ad 
among a series of loud ones or using a black and white 
print ad in a colorful magazine can also create intensity 
based on simple contrast.
COMPLEXITY  Stimuli that require substantial 
cognitive processing or that challenge consumers 
to make sense of them can be intriguing and draw 
attention. Dynamic stimuli—with constant change and 
movement—can be perceived as different and salient. 
Spokespersons in television commercials typically move 
or walk while they talk because presentations delivered 
by stationary speakers are much less engaging. Moving 
signs, like the famous Las Vegas cowboy sign with the 
arm that moves up and down, also draw more attention 
than stationary signs. Neon signs often display letters 
that light up one at a time and appear to move. Such 
stimuli are difficult to ignore.
Two perceptual concepts also related to complexity 
are closure and grouping. Closure is the  tendency for 
a person to perceive an incomplete picture as complete, either consciously or subcon-
sciously. People like to fill in missing pieces when a puzzle is incomplete (see Figure 
3.3). Incomplete messages from marketers beg for completion, thus drawing the per-
ceiver in, and messages where closure is required tend to elicit strong recall.
© Spencer Grant/PhotoEdit
Figure 3.3 Closure: There are no complete shapes, but we fill in 
the missing pieces.

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
77
Grouping is the tendency to arrange stimuli together to form well-organized units. 
Thus, objects viewed in close proximity tend to be grouped together, as do stimuli that 
move in the same direction together. Marketers can use grouping to create positive asso-
ciations for their brands. For instance, placing an attractive, well-liked celebrity endorser 
in an advertisement with the brand can create a positive association to that brand. If 
marketers want an audience to associate the product with the presenter, they should place 
them close together; if marketers want consumers to perceive two ideas as associated, they 
should present them in close proximity.
Both closure and grouping help provide salient attention-drawing stimuli. Next, we 
examine another attribute of stimuli that draws attention involuntarily—vividness.
Vividness
Vivid stimuli, like salient stimuli, draw attention automatically and involuntarily.21 
However, unlike salient stimuli, vivid stimuli are attention-drawing across all contexts. 
Because vividness is context independent, it does not matter what other stimuli are 
present in a given situation. Vivid stimuli are:
• emotionally interesting
• concrete and imagery provoking
• proximate in a sensory, temporal, or spatial way22
Let’s examine more closely these characteristics of vivid stimuli.
EMOTIONAL INTEREST  Consumers’ goals, hobbies, and interests determine 
what information is emotionally interesting and vivid. Stimuli that are interesting 
to one person may not be interesting to another, but a stimulus that is emotionally 
interesting tends to get noticed. Stamp collectors find stamps incredibly fascinating. 
They spend hours studying their collections, examining watermarks, postmarks, and 
even perforations. Stamp collectors have been known to dream about stamps and see 
stamps when looking at plaid shirts (the plaid squares turn into stamps). To these 
individuals, stamps are very vivid and emotionally interesting. By contrast, people who 
are not stamp collectors find stamps hopelessly boring.
Although both salient and vivid stimuli draw attention involuntarily, what is 
 salient in one situation may not be salient in another, and what is vivid to one person 
may not be vivid to another. Salient stimuli capture the attention of all of the people 
some of time, while vivid stimuli grab the attention of some of the people all of the 
time. Unfortunately, marketers can’t make their products interesting to everyone, just 
like stamp collectors can’t make stamps interesting to everyone. Emotional interest is 
but one factor that influences the vividness of a product, ad, promotion, or package. 
Vividness is also affected by concreteness and proximity.
CONCRETENESS  Concrete information is specific, easy to picture, imagine, and 
visualize, versus abstract information, which is conceptual or theoretical. For instance, 
the taste of a hot, juicy hamburger is more concrete than a picture the hamburger, but 
the picture is more concrete than a written description. Research demonstrates that 
making product attributes more concrete in a marketing message increasess the amount 
of attention paid to the attribute and subsequently increases the perceived importance 
of the attribute.23

78 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Face-to-face communications are typically more concrete and vivid than written 
communications, an important advantage of a field-based sales force. One research 
study investigated the effects of face-to-face versus written messages on judgment by 
presenting subjects with a description of a new personal computer.24 The exact word-
ing of the description was held constant. However, the description was presented either 
in a face-to-face format or in a written format. Even though the words presented in 
each situation were exactly the same, the face-to-face message had a much stronger 
impact on subjects’ evaluations of the described product. However, results also showed 
that the vividness effect is weaker when subjects had a strong prior opinion about the 
described product and when a lot of negative information is available. When a product 
Carl Karcher Enterprises, Inc.
Marketers try to make their advertisements as concrete, and thus vivid, as possible.

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
79
is described with many negative descriptions, strongly negative opinions are formed 
regardless of whether information is presented in a vivid or pallid manner.
PROXIMITY  Information that is proximal, or close to a consumer, is more 
vivid and has more impact than information that is distant or not immediately 
relevant. Three different kinds of proximities are important: sensory, temporal, and 
spatial. Sensory proximity refers to firsthand (proximal) versus secondhand (distant) 
information. Information that is perceived by consumers’ own eyes and ears is more 
vivid than information perceived and relayed by another person. When consumers 
see for themselves that a product works, they are more convincing than if they receive 
secondhand, hearsay evidence. This is one reason marketers encourage consumers to 
sample products. Temporal proximity refers to how recently an event occurred. Events 
that occurred recently are much more vivid and draw more attention compared with 
events that occurred a long time ago. People are much more aware of and concerned 
about the awful flight they had the last time they flew on a particular airline than about 
the great flight they had five years ago. Finally, spatial proximity refers to the location of 
events. Events that occur near consumers’ homes are much more vivid than events that 
occur far away in other countries.
To summarize, information can be made more vivid and draw more attention in 
many different ways. Vividness can be increased by making information more emo-
tionally interesting, more concrete, or more proximal to the consumer. Obviously, in-
formation that grabs our attention has a stronger influence on judgment and choice 
relative to information that is virtually ignored.
Chapter Summary
This chapter looks at perception, the process through which 
we define the world and create meaning from our environ-
ment. Broken down, the perceptual process includes sen-
sory exposure, attention, and comprehension. The process 
first relies on physical senses, such as sight, sound, smell, 
touch, and taste, to take in stimuli. Through attention and 
comprehension, those sensations are processed into mean-
ingful and useful information and knowledge.
Not all stimuli to which consumers are exposed receive 
attention. People pay attention to a fraction of the stimuli 
to which they are exposed. In other words, attention is 
highly selective, and there are important limits and influ-
ences on attention and the perceptual process. The first 
of these influences deals with the thresholds of our sen-
sory systems, including the absolute threshold, the just-
noticeable-difference (j.n.d), and adaptation. Subliminal 
perception, the unconscious perception of stimuli, is an 
interesting topic related to these sensory thresholds.
Beyond the physical limitations of the senses, people 
also have limited cognitive capacity to devote to attention. 
Because of short-term memory limitations, people are able 
to attend to and think about a relatively small amount 
of information at a time, usually between five and nine 
pieces of information. This ability varies from person to 
person and from situation to situation.
Finally, the allocation of attention is also volun-
tarily influenced by factors unique to each individual. 
Consumers voluntarily pay attention to stimuli consis-
tent with their existing knowledge and expertise and 
their plans, intentions and goals. People involuntarily 
pay attention to stimuli that salient and/or vivid. Stimuli 
that are salient draw attention involuntarily but are con-
text dependent. Novel, intense, and complex stimuli 
tend to be salient. Vivid stimuli are emotionally inter-
esting, concrete, and proximal, and these stimuli are 
vivid, regardless of the physical context. Combined, the 
influences on attention and perception are pervasive, but 
these influences help us to function in an environment 
of information overload.

80 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Key Terms
perception
phenomenal absolutism
sensation
attention
cognitive capacity
comprehension
absolute threshold
just noticeable difference (j.n.d.)
weber’s law
adaptation
advertisement wear-out
subliminal perception
short-term memory
miller’s rule
arousal
salient stimuli
figure-and-ground principle
closure
grouping
vivid stimuli
Review and Discussion
1. Clearly distinguish among the following terms: 
perception, attention, cognitive capacity, and 
comprehension.
2. Why is sensation important in the perceptual 
process?
3. In what ways does selective attention differ for each 
person?
4. How does the absolute threshold influence the poten-
tial effectiveness of subliminal advertising?
5. What implications does the perceptual phenomenon 
of adaptation have for advertisers?
6. Do you think superstores that specialize in one 
type of product, such as office supplies, shoes, or 
 electronics, run the risk of overloading consumers 
with too much information? Why or why not?
7. What is Miller’s Rule?
8. What is the primary difference between salient and 
vivid stimuli?
9. How does closure in an advertisement increase 
salience?
10. How can marketers increase vividness for their 
advertisements?
Short Application Exercises
1. Ask five different friends to freely recall as many 
brands of hotel chains, pizza restaurants, and NFL 
teams as they can, and see if Miller’s Rule regarding 
short-term memory applies. Do the results vary by 
level of knowledge or interest?
2. Find print advertisements that include salient stimuli 
and justify your choices.
3. Find a print advertisement that includes stimuli that 
are vivid (for you) and justify your choice.
4. Describe how marketers of Levi’s Jeans could use 
sensory-based marketing messages to increase sales. 
Identify one technique for each of the five senses.
5. Read the Marketing In Action Box on the ways mar-
keters use color and identify four brands that you 
feel effectively incorporate color into their marketing 
strategies. Explain why.

Chapter 3   Consumer Perception 
81
Imagine you work in the marketing department 
for a mid-sized regional bakery that sells dough-
nuts, cookies, and snack cakes in retail grocery 
stores. Your company would like to increase sales 
of its doughnuts and is considering an in-store 
sampling campaign to generate more interest in 
the product. This campaign would involve offer-
ing retail customers free samples of doughnuts in 
stores, along with a coupon for a discount on a 
box of doughnuts. You know that taste is a pow-
erful sense and would like to engage the consumer 
in as many ways as possible to entice them to buy 
the product.
For this campaign to be implemented, you need to 
convince your superiors in the company that giving away 
free doughnut samples, a sizable investment in product 
and labor, may actually increase sales. In addition, you 
suspect that retail grocery store managers are likely to be 
interested in how this in-store sampling campaign may 
influence overall store sales. You realize that some mar-
keting research is needed. You decide to run an experi-
ment in one local grocery store.
1. Design an experiment to test whether in-store doughnut sampling influences sales of 
the doughnuts and/or the overall store sales. What should the independent and de-
pendent variables be?
2. Given what we have studied in this chapter about sensory marketing, what experi-
mental outcomes do you predict will occur?
3. How might a participant in your experiment who is very hungry affect the results?
4. Based on your answers above, is in-store food sampling a smart marketing technique 
for your company’s product? Why or why not?
YOUR CHALLENGE:
M a nag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n

Erroneous Beliefs about 
Homeopathic Medicines
82
Attitude and Judgment 
Formation and Change
 1 | Define search, experience, and credence 
attributes.
 2 | Define descriptive, informational, and 
inferential beliefs.
 3 | Calculate numerical values for attitudes 
using expectancy-value models.
 4 | Use dual-process models of persuasion 
to design more effective marketing 
communications.
 5 | Use multiple strategies to develop more 
effective marketing communications.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
objectives
People are capable of believing almost anything, and many beliefs are clearly not based on 
facts (e.g., superstitions). Some unethical companies take advantage of consumer gullibility by 
marketing completely ineffective homeopathic medicines.1 Homeopathy is based on the “law 
of similars,” which suggests that the effects of a substance on a healthy person provide clues 
regarding a potential cure for an unhealthy person. For example, if a substance causes a healthy 
person to experience slight nausea, very small amounts of the substance are presumed to cure 
an unhealthy person suffering from nausea. However, homeopathic medicines incorporate 
such small amounts of a given substance that the substance has no effect on anyone, healthy 
or unhealthy. Nevertheless, many gullible consumers continue to believe in the effectiveness of 
homeopathic medicines. Why?
CHAPTER
4

Two psychological principles are involved here. First, the principle of similarity or “like 
goes with like” is surprisingly compelling, and judgments of similarity influence a wide variety 
of other judgments. The belief that “you are what you eat” is based on similarity. Many 
consumers believe that eating greasy foods gives you greasy skin, eating spicy foods gives you 
heartburn, and eating natural foods is healthy (despite the fact that arsenic and other poisons 
are “natural”). Second, placebo effects occur commonly in medicine. If a patient believes that 
a particular medicine will be effective, the patient often gets better even if the medicine had no 
effect. In summary, beliefs can be surprisingly powerful—even when they are not true!
Nonevaluative Judgments: Beliefs
Beliefs are nonevaluative judgments, or ratings about product attributes and benefits. 
Marketers define attributes as specific features or characteristics of a brand (e.g., size, 
price, style), and benefits as the outcomes or consequences that follow from each at-
tribute (e.g., safety, exclusivity, trendy). Beliefs capture consumers’ assessments about 
a specific relationship between a brand and an attribute or benefit. “Starbucks coffee 
is strong” describes a belief about the relationship between a brand and an attribute, 
without making judgments about whether strong coffee is good or bad. Similarly, 
“McDonald’s  hamburgers do not contain soy” describes a belief about how much of 
an attribute is present in a brand, also without placing a positive or negative value 
on soy in hamburgers. Some people like soy for health reasons; others find the taste 
objectionable.
ob jec ti ve 1
83
PRNewsFoto/Boiron/AP Photo 
Homeopathic medicines are based on the principle of similarity.

84 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
More generally, beliefs entail assessments about probability or the likelihood of 
something occurring.2 Because consumers often have imperfect information regard-
ing products and brands, they sometimes think about the likelihood that a product 
contains a particular attribute or provides a specific benefit. For example, how likely 
is it that Bufferin has caffeine or that Tums relieves heartburn quickly? Likelihood 
judgments can also pertain to past events in the marketplace 
(e.g., how likely is it that competitors tampered with Tylenol 
capsules?), future events (e.g., what is the probability that a price 
reduction will occur?), or current events (e.g., how likely is it that 
aspirin therapy prevents heart attacks?). Likelihood judgments 
can also pertain to the probability of a cause-effect relationship 
(e.g., how likely is it that smoking cigarettes causes lung can-
cer?). In summary, beliefs represent judgments about the likeli-
hood that a particular product claim, event, state of events, or 
relationship is true.
In addition to having beliefs about how likely it is that a 
product possesses a given attribute or benefit, consumers also 
maintain beliefs about the importance of a particular attribute or 
benefit. For example, different brands of snacks differ in terms 
of saltiness, brands of automobiles differ in terms of fuel effi-
ciency, and brands of cloth differ in terms of softness and fash-
ion. For some consumers, healthiness is more important than 
saltiness, style is more valued than fuel efficiency, and comfort 
is more important than fashion.
Many different product attributes are potentially impor-
tant to consumers. Most of these attributes belong to one of 
three possible attribute categories. Search attributes are attri-
butes that can be judged or rated simply by examining a product without necessar-
ily buying it.3 Brand name, price, and appearance-related attributes (e.g., design and 
color) are good examples of search attributes. Experience attributes are attributes 
that can be judged or rated only by using a product. Sensory attributes pertaining 
to the taste, smell, and feel of products are good examples of experience attributes. 
Credence attributes, a special case of experience attributes, are attributes that can 
be judged or rated only after extended use. Reliability, durability, and safety are good 
examples of credence attributes.
Consumers establish beliefs on the basis of several different types of informa-
tion. Descriptive beliefs are based on direct experience with a product or what 
we see with our own eyes or hear with our own ears.4 Search attributes and ex-
perience attributes are used to form descriptive beliefs. Simply by examining the 
physical dimensions of a laptop, consumers can form descriptive beliefs about the 
laptop’s size and weight. In the same vein, consumers who have experience with 
a plasma television develop descriptive beliefs about the TV’s refresh rate or side-
angle viewing.
In contrast, informational beliefs are based on indirect experience or on what other 
people tell us. Friends, relatives, acquaintances, spokespersons, and salespeople have be-
liefs about products, and they usually are eager to share their viewpoints. In addition, 
consumers often rely on word-of-mouth to form beliefs about the attributes and benefits 
of new or unfamiliar products and brands. For example, if a trusted friend describes a 
objec tive 2
AP Photo/Steven Senne
Following the 1982 poisonings, Johnson & 
Johnson introduced Tylenol caplets, a coated, 
capsule-shaped tablet. 

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
85
brand as durable, a consumer may adapt this belief. Inferential beliefs are beliefs that go 
beyond the information given.5 Consumers often draw their own conclusions, or infer 
beliefs about attributes and benefits based on both direct and indirect experiences. For 
example, if a particular automobile is judged to be sturdy or durable, consumers might 
infer or assume that it is also safe, even though they were never told this specifically. If a 
product is expensive, consumers often infer that it is high in quality. Conversely, if a prod-
uct is inexpensive, consumers often infer that it is low in quality. To the extent that two 
attributes, such as price and quality, are perceived or expected to be related (or correlated), 
information about one attribute permits consumers to draw inferences about the other.6
Correlation is not the only basis for inferential beliefs. Inferences can also be formed 
on the basis of overall evaluations about a product.7 For example, if a consumer’s over-
all evaluation of an Olympus digital camera is very favorable, the consumer may infer 
that the camera has a high quality zoom lens even if he or she never received any 
information about this camera’s zoom lens specifically. Similarly, if a consumer’s over-
all evaluation of the camera if unfavorable, the consumer may infer that this  camera 
has a low quality zoom lens. The former is referred to as a “halo effect” (if a brand 
is judged favorably on one key attribute, it must be good on other attributes), while 
the latter is called the “devil effect” (if a brand is judged unfavorably on an important 
attribute, its other attributes must also be poor). Finally, inferences can be based on 
prior knowledge.8 For example, consumers typically know a good deal about familiar 
product  categories, such as cars. The typical car has four wheels, an engine, an exhaust 
system, and so on. Consequently, consumers do not need to be told that a brand new 
car model has four new wheels, a reliable engine, or a quiet exhaust system. Consumers 
infer or assume that the car has these features by default, even if they receive no infor-
mation about them.
Overall, inferential beliefs basically involve some type of evaluative judgment, whereas
descriptive and informational beliefs simply describe likelihoods or relationships 
 between objects. Think of inferential beliefs as a bridge between beliefs and  attitudes. 
In the next section, we discuss attitudes in greater depth.
Blend Images/Jupiter Images 
Two consumers evaluate search attributes such as design, fabric, and color.

86 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Evaluative Judgment: 
Attitudes and Their Properties
Attitudes are evaluative judgments, or ratings of how good or bad, favorable or 
unfavorable, or pleasant or unpleasant consumers find a particular person (e.g., 
salesperson, spokesperson), place (e.g., retail outlet, Web site, vacation site), thing 
(e.g., product, package, advertisement), or issue (e.g., political platform, economic 
theory).9 Evaluative judgments have two main components: direction (positive, nega-
tive, or neutral) and extremity (weak, moderate, or strong). Attitudes often follow 
from beliefs. When consumers believe that a new product has many features that 
match their needs, they are likely to form positive attitudes about the new product. 
For example, suppose consumers believe that Verizon offers a relatively simple ser-
vice, and these consumers value simplicity. It follows that they will form favorable 
attitudes toward Verizon.
Marketers need to understand that all consumer attitudes are not created equally. 
Typically, consumers develop some attitudes that are strongly held or held with con-
viction and other attitudes that are weakly held or held with low confidence.10 Strong 
attitudes tend to be highly accessible from memory, maintained with high confidence, 
held with little uncertainty, and highly correlated with beliefs. The last property is re-
ferred to as high evaluative-cognitive consistency. On the other hand, weak attitudes 
are relatively inaccessible from memory (or difficult to retrieve from memory), kept 
with low confidence, held with high uncertainty, and exhibit low evaluative-cognitive 
consistency. Attitude strength is important because strong attitudes are difficult to 
change and have a great deal of impact on other judgments and on behavior. In other 
words, strong attitudes guide consumers’ thoughts and actions, while weak attitudes 
do not. So, it’s no surprise that marketers strive to elicit strong, favorable attitudes 
from their target markets toward their brands and limit or reduce strong, negative 
attitudes.
In addition, marketing practitioners cannot simply assume that all favorable attitudes 
are the same. For example, two different consumers may express positive evaluations of 
the Verizon brand, and yet only the first consumer purchased a long-
term service contract. This situation may occur because, even though 
both consumers indicated a liking for Verizon, the first consumer’s 
attitudes were strongly held, whereas the second consumer felt only 
mildly positive about the brand.
Zanna and Rempel’s Model
Research on evaluative-cognitive consistency shows that attitudes 
are often based on beliefs. However, attitudes can be based on other 
types of information as well. Zanna and Rempel developed a the-
ory suggesting that attitudes can be based on cognition (beliefs), 
affect (feelings, moods, and emotions), or behavior.11 Let’s look at 
an example. A consumer’s attitude toward a Dairy Queen hot fudge 
sundae is likely to be influenced by her cognitions, such as beliefs 
about the sundae’s properties (e.g., features, taste, size), affect, or 
how she feels when she eats a Dairy Queen hot fudge sundae (e.g., 
Courtesy of American Dairy Queen Corporation 

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
87
good mood, refreshed, rewarded). In addition, her attitudes may be influenced by the 
very act of buying hot fudge sundaes. If a consumer buys a Dairy Queen hot fudge 
sundae as a reward for completing a difficult task, this behavior may encourage strong, 
favorable attitudes toward the brand. This is not unusual. After buying a product or 
service (behavior), consumers’ attitudes toward brands are often more favorable than 
their attitudes prior to making the purchase.
In addition to being formed on the basis of cognition, affect, or behavior, atti-
tudes can also influence or change cognition, affect, and behavior. In other words, 
there is a reciprocal relationship between attitudes and the bases of attitudes. 
Favorable attitudes lead consumers to focus on favorable beliefs (e.g., sundaes are 
made from milk and milk is healthy), rather than unfavorable beliefs (e.g., sundaes 
have a high fat content and are therefore unhealthy). Favorable attitudes also lead 
Measuring Beliefs and Attitudes in Market Research
Marketing in Action
Marketers frequently conduct market surveys to learn 
about consumers’ beliefs and attitudes. Consumers are 
typically asked to judge or rate several product attributes 
and to enumerate their overall attitudes toward the prod-
uct. Beliefs about attributes and overall attitudes can be 
measured on semantic differential scales, also called 
bipolar adjective scales. For example, a new Nike run-
ning shoe can be rated on several attribute dimensions— 
comfort, price, and style—on rating scales ranging from 
0 (not comfortable, not expensive, not stylish) to 10 (very 
comfortable, very expensive, very stylish). Similarly, over-
all attitudes can be measured on rating scales ranging 
from 0 (very bad, very unfavorable, very unsatisfactory) 
to 10 (very good, very favorable, very satisfactory).
Sometimes marketers use Likert scales, also called 
agree/disagree scales, instead of or in addition to se-
mantic differential scales. To measure beliefs using Likert 
scales, marketers ask consumers to indicate how much 
they agree or disagree with several statements about a 
product’s attributes. For example, consumers could be 
asked to rate their agreement with the statements, “Nikes 
are comfortable,” “Nikes are expensive,” and “Nikes are 
stylish” on scales ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 
5 (strongly agree). Sometimes labels are provided for 
each scale point: 1  strongly disagree, 2  disagree, 
3  neither agree nor disagree, 4  agree, and 5  
strongly agree. Similarly, attitudes toward the statements, 
“Nikes are very good,” “My overall impression of Nikes 
is very favorable,” and “I am very satisfied with Nike’s 
products” can be specified on rating scales ranging from 
1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Obviously, data obtained from belief and attitude 
surveys are very useful. Firms use such data to determine 
the attributes of most importance to consumers. Firms 
can then use this information to develop better products 
and more effective promotion and advertising cam-
paigns. Companies also use survey data to diagnose 
the weaknesses of existing products and to forecast 
demand.
AP Photo/Gene J. Puskar 

88 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
consumers to focus on positive feelings rather than on negative feelings. Finally, favorable  
attitudes toward sundaes increase the likelihood that consumers will buy and consume 
sundaes.
Attitudes can be based on one’s own beliefs, especially if consumers consider 
themselves to be knowledgeable about a product category.12 However, attitudes can 
also be based on the beliefs of other people, especially when consumers consider 
themselves to be less knowledgeable about a product category than other people. 
Television advertising often uses experts as spokespersons because experts are more 
knowledgeable about a topic than the typical person. The beliefs of experts can have 
a powerful  influence on the attitudes of consumers, provided that consumers trust 
that experts are providing truthful and accurate information. On the other hand, 
consumers attempt to avoid expert  influence when they suspect that an expert is ly-
ing to take advantage of them.
Mood can also influence attitudes, even if mood has nothing to do with the 
products or services that consumers evaluate.13 For example, a sunny day might 
put people in a good mood, and this can lead people to evaluate products and ser-
vices more favorably. However, when consumers suspect that their moods might 
be biasing their judgments, they attempt to avoid letting their moods influence 
them. So overall, attitudes can be influenced by many different variables—in-
cluding cognition, affect, behavior, the opinions of others, and unrelated moods. 
Now that we’ve discussed attitudes, let’s examine the importance of consumer 
involvement.
Figure 4.1  The Reciprocal Relationship between Attitudes and 
Their Bases
The Bases of Attitudes
Beliefs (cognition) 
Affect (feelings) 
Purchase (behavior) 
Attitudes 
(Evaluative Judgments)
Overview of Involvement
Sometimes consumers think carefully about their beliefs and attitudes, and sometimes 
they reflect very little. One of the most important determinants of the amount or  extent 
of thinking is the level of involvement, or the personal relevance and importance of 
an issue or situation.14 When an issue or situation is relevant and important, higher 
levels of consumer involvement follow, and consumers think very carefully about the 
implications of the available information. When an issue or situation is not relevant or 
important, involvement is low, and consumers reflect very little. Involvement with a 
particular issue or topic is called enduring involvement. Here, consumers’ levels of inter-
est in the topic are fundamental—either high or low, and hence, their interest (or lack 
of interest) endures. For example, consumers who ski regularly become fundamentally 

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
89
involved with many aspects of skiing, including products, services, events, and weather 
conditions. As a result, their high levels of involvement with skiing endure through 
many winter seasons and over a variety of product life cycles. On the other hand, con-
sumers who never ski demonstrate very low levels of involvement, which also endure, 
as even the newest, most interesting ski products and skiing events are likely to elicit 
only a passing glance.
A second type of involvement, based solely on special circumstances or specific 
conditions, is known as situational involvement. Here, any personal relevance that 
a consumer develops for a situation is ephemeral or short lived. When the situation 
goes away, the consumer’s interest decreases correspondingly. For example, a consumer 
who travels infrequently is not likely to be concerned about luggage products in a seri-
ous or enduring manner. However, if an important travel opportunity suddenly arises, 
this same consumer may increase his situational involvement with luggage products. 
But, when this consumer returns from the trip, his interest in luggage will decrease 
to its prior, low level. His involvement with luggage is not enduring; it is strictly 
situational.
When a purchase decision is important or consequential, situational involvement is 
typically high and consumers are likely to think very carefully about the decision. For 
example, buying a car is consequential for most people, and they think carefully about 
what characteristics of a car are right for them. However, when a purchase decision is 
unimportant or inconsequential, situational involvement is low and consumers aren’t 
likely to think carefully about the decision. For example, buying a candy bar is a fairly 
trivial exercise, and most consumers buy the brand they usually buy without thinking a 
lot about the purchase decision. Furthermore, when information is complex, inconsis-
tent, or difficult to evaluate, a high degree of situational involvement is needed to ap-
preciate the implications of the information for attitudes. However, when information 
is simple and easy to evaluate, a high level of situational involvement is not needed to 
determine its relevance or its implications.
Sometimes firms generate too much situational involvement 
for consumers. The U.K. division of Hoover, the 
famous vacuum cleaner manufacturer, ran a sales 
promotion in 1992 to stimulate growth.24 Anyone 
who spent 100 pounds sterling or more on Hoover 
products received two free airline tickets for travel 
anywhere in Europe. Consumer response was so 
positive that Hoover, U.K., ran another sales pro-
motion featuring two free airline tickets from the 
United Kingdom to the United States for anyone spending 
250 pounds sterling or more on Hoover products. More 
than 200,000 consumers thought this was a good deal. 
As it turned out, it was a very good deal for consumers 
but bad deal for Hoover, U.K. The company ended up 
losing 48.8 million pounds sterling, and many senior 
 managers were fired.
Hoover, U.K., Learns the Hard Way That Sales Promotions 
Can Be Too Expensive
Eye on International
PRNewsFoto/Hoover/AP Photo 

90 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Attitude Models Based on High or Low 
Consumer Involvement
Several key models of attitude formation deal primarily with high involvement conditions. 
These models propose that consumers think a good deal about their evaluations of prod-
ucts and services, integrating a relatively large amount of information in a manner consis-
tent with mathematical models. Examples include expectancy-value models, the theory 
of reasoned action, and information integration theory. Expectancy-value models sug-
gest that attitudes toward a product depend on consumers’ subjective evaluation of the 
product’s attributes multiplied by the expectancy that the product possesses each attri-
bute. The theory of reasoned action is one specific type of expectancy-value model that 
explains how beliefs are combined to influence attitudes and how social norms or rules 
and attitudes influence behavior. The information integration theory is another type of 
expectancy-value model that explains how beliefs are combined to influence attitudes. The 
two theories differ in at least one important way: the theory of reasoned action suggests 
that beliefs are added together, but information integration theory suggests that beliefs are 
averaged together.
Dual-process models of attitude formation assume that consumers think a great 
deal when involvement is high but they don’t think much when involvement is 
low.15 The elaboration likelihood model and the heuristic/systematic model are 
the most famous examples of dual-process models. Both models suggest that there 
are two different routes to persuasion: a high involvement route in which consumers 
think a lot (i.e., the central route of the elaboration likelihood model and the system-
atic route of the heuristic/systematic model), and a low involvement route in which 
consumers think very little (i.e., the peripheral route of the elaboration likelihood 
model and the heuristic route of the heuristic/systematic model). The next section 
of this chapter looks at the use of expectancy-value models to compute actual values 
for attitudes.
Expectancy-Value Models
Early expectancy-value models were used to determine the value of gambles. For ex-
ample, would you rather play a gamble that offers a 30 percent chance to win $100 
or a gamble that offers a 25 percent chance to win $125? The answer is simple if you 
compute the expected values of each gamble. The expected value is the probability of 
success multiplied by the monetary outcome. So, the value of the first gamble is 0.30  
$100  $30. The expected value of the second gamble is 0.25  $125  $31.25. Now 
it’s obvious that the second gamble is the better deal.
Expectancy-value models can also be used to compute attitudes toward products. For 
example, would you rather buy car A, which offers low maintenance, good gas mileage, 
and reliability, or car B, which offers quick acceleration, excellent handling, and a quad-
raphonic sound system? First, you need to rate each attribute on a scale ranging from very 
bad (1) to very good (7). Next, you need to rate the likelihood that car A actually has the 
attributes of low maintenance, good gas mileage, and reliability, and the likelihood that 
car B actually offers quick acceleration, excellent handling, and a superior sound system. 
Finally, you multiply the attribute ratings by the likelihood ratings and add these ratings 
up separately for each car. The final calculations represent a specific consumer’s attitudes 
toward each car.
objec tive 3

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
91
Figure 4.2  Theory of Reasoned Action Attitude Formation 
for Clark Shoes
×
×
×
Belief (b)
4
3
5
=
=
=
Attribute
Comfort 
Support 
Style 
Overall Attitude 
Attitude (A)
20 
12 
25
57 
4
5
5
Evaluation (e)
The Theory of Reasoned Action
This type of expectancy-value model suggests that beliefs are added together to form 
attitudes and, as the number of favorable beliefs increases, the amount of favorable at-
titude also increases.16 Specifically, A  Σbe, where A is the attitude toward a product or 
an attitude toward buying the product, b is the belief that the product has a given attri-
bute considered important to consumers, and e is the evaluation or the extent to which 
consumers like each specific attribute. Beliefs (b) and evaluations (e) are measured for 
each important attribute. To compute an attitude, consumers multiply their b (beliefs) 
by their e (evaluations) for each attribute, and add these ratings.
For example, suppose a market researcher wanted to compute a group of  consumers’ 
attitudes toward Clark shoes. Consumers would rate the shoes on all important attri-
butes, such as comfort, support, and style. Suppose the belief ratings for these attributes 
were 4, 3, and 5, respectively, on a scale from 1 (very low likelihood) to 7 (very high
likelihood). Furthermore, suppose the evaluation ratings for these attributes were 
5, 4, and 5, respectively, on a scale from 1 (very bad) to 7 (very good). b  e for each 
attribute is 4  5  20, 3  4  12, and 5  5 25, respectively. The overall attitude 
rating is 20  12  25  57. If Clark shoes return a higher overall rating than other 
brands of shoes, a consumer develops more favorable attitudes toward Clark shoes than 
for other brands (see Figure 4.2). This model also suggests that marketers can change 
consumers’ attitudes by changing beliefs (b) about the level of the attribute present in 
a brand, changing evaluations (e) about whether the attribute is important, or both. 
This particular model also informs marketing researchers about the specific attributes 
that perform well and perform poorly for their brands.
The theory of reasoned action is a simple additive model—as the number of favor-
able beliefs increases, overall attitudes increase. This theory also suggests that attitudes 
 influence intentions, which subsequently influence behavior. This should be straightfor-
ward: as attitude favorableness toward a product increases, intentions to buy the product 
increase, and as a result, consumers are more likely to actually purchase the product.
However, variables other than attitudes also influence intentions. Specifically, 
subjective norms or social rules for behavior also influence consumer intentions. 
Specifically, SN  ∑ (NB  MC), where SN refers to subjective norms, NB refers 
to normative beliefs or beliefs about what other people think of you if you use a 
product, and MC refers to the motivation to comply or how concerned you are 
about what other groups of people think of you if you use a product. For example, 

92 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
to measure normative beliefs about what other people think of you if you wear 
Clark shoes, you could rate how much you think your (1) friends, (2) parents, and 
(3) co-workers would like your Clark shoes on a scale from 1 (very bad) to 7 (very 
good). You could also rate your own motivation to comply with the wishes of your 
friends, parents, and co-workers on a scale from 1 (very low motivation) to 7 (very 
high motivation).
Suppose your ratings were 5, 7, and 6, respectively, for normative beliefs, and 
7, 1, and 6, respectively, for the motivation to comply. Note that the motivation 
to comply is low (rating of 1) for your parents because you don’t really care what 
they think of your shoes. However, your motivation to comply is high (a 7 rat-
ing) for your friends because you really care about what they think of your shoes. 
NB  SN  (5  7)  (7  1)  (6  6)  78. The higher this number is, the 
more likely are normative beliefs to influence intentions. Attitudes plus norma-
tive beliefs influence intentions, and as intentions increase, consumers are more 
likely to buy a product (see Figure 4.3). Taken together, consumers use attitude 
formation and subjective norms to form their intentions to purchase, and purchase 
intentions often predict actual purchase. A flowchart for the theory of reasoned 
action is provided in Figure 4.4.
Information Integration Theory
The theory of reasoned action suggests that beliefs are added together to form attitudes. 
However, information integration theory suggests that beliefs are averaged together to 
form attitudes.17 This distinction is important because an addition-based model implies 
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives 
Subjective norms influence consumers’ intentions to purchase 
products and brands.

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
93
Figure 4.3  Theory of Reasoned Action Subjective Norms 
for Clark shoes
×
×
×
5
7
6
7
1
6
=
=
=
35
7
36
78
Friends
Parents
Overall Subjective Norms
Co-workers
Normative 
Beliefs (NB)
Motivation to
Comply (MC)
Subjective
Norm (SN)
Source of
Compliance
Figure 4.4  The Theory of Reasoned Action
Beliefs 
Attitudes 
Subjective 
Norms 
Intentions 
Purchase
that more is better: as the number of favorable attributes increases, attitude favorableness 
 increases. However, an averaging model implies that less is more. Here, advertisers should 
encourage consumers to focus only on the very best attributes of their products and ser-
vices, because attributes with lower than average ratings pull the overall rating down. The 
theory of reasoned action and information integration theory differ in another important 
respect. The theory of reasoned action computes attitudes as a function of beliefs and 
evaluations. However, information integration theory estimates, or weights, how impor-
tant an attribute is on the basis of overall attitude ratings and individual attribute ratings. 
Specifically,
A  ∑ws, with ∑w  1, where A is the attitude toward the product, w is the 
importance weight of each attribute, and s is the evaluation of each attribute. The 
weights (w) must sum to one (1.00), and this makes the model an averaging model. 
The weights (w) are estimated using a statistical analysis—usually analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA) or multiple regression. This procedure is useful because consumers 
can’t  always tell  researchers how important a particular attribute really is to them. 
Consumers sometimes overestimate the importance of some attributes and underesti-
mate the importance of others. Information integration theory suggests that marketers 
can change consumers’ attitudes by changing w, s, or both. The model also informs 
marketers about which attributes perform well, which attributes perform poorly, and 
which attributes are most important.
Suppose you are forming attitudes toward Clark shoes by using information inte-
gration rather than the theory of reasoned action. You consider style to be most im-
portant, followed by comfort and support. Accordingly, you allocate style 50 percent 

94 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
ob jec tive 4
of the total importance weights (w  0.50), comfort 30 percent (w  0.30), and 
support 20 percent (w  0.20). Note that the weights total 1.00, or 100 percent. 
Next, you evaluate style, comfort, and support on a scale of 3 (very bad) to 3 
(very good), 2, 1, and 3,  respectively. By multiplying each importance weight (w) 
by each evaluation (s), you arrive at an overall attitude via information integration of 
1.3 (see Figure 4.5).
Note that information integration theory suggests that overall values below zero 
indicate unfavorable attitudes, while overall values greater than zero indicate favorable 
attitudes. Unlike the theory of reasoned action (an additive model), in information 
integration (an averaging model), adding attributes doesn’t guarantee higher overall 
 attitudes. Consumers must rate any new attributes both important and positive for 
their overall attitudes to increase. Now, let’s turn our attention to dual-process models, 
where high involvement is not always assumed.
The Elaboration Likelihood Model
The name, elaboration likelihood, implies that consumers are sometimes likely to think 
about and elaborate on ads and other persuasive messages and are sometimes unlikely 
to do so. When consumers think a great deal, they are likely to consider supportive 
arguments if they agree with a message or counterarguments if they disagree with it. 
The elaboration likelihood model also suggests that there are two different routes to 
persuasion, the central route and the peripheral route.18 When involvement is high, 
and when the ability to think about a marketing claim is high, consumers are likely to 
follow the central route to persuasion by focusing on information most central to or 
important for forming an accurate attitude. Strong arguments and reasons for forming 
a particular attitude are most persuasive when consumers follow the central route to 
persuasion.
On the other hand, when involvement is low or when the ability to think about 
a marketing claim is low because of distraction, a lack of relevant knowledge, time 
pressure, and so on, consumers are likely to follow the peripheral route to persuasion. 
They focus on peripheral cues or superficial information that makes it easy to form an 
opinion without much thought. Good examples of peripheral cues include attractive, 
likeable, and expert sources and positive moods and feelings. Attractive, likable, and 
expert sources seem trustworthy, so if these sources say that an advertised product is 
good, consumers often believe these sources rather than spend time thinking about the 
attributes and benefits of the product themselves. Furthermore, positive moods and 
Figure 4.5  Information Integration Theory Attitude Formation 
for Clark Shoes
 
Attribute 
Weights (w) 
 
Evaluation (s)
 
Attitude (A) 
Comfort 
0.50 
× 
2 
= 
1.0
Support 
0.30 
× 
–1
= 
–0.3
Style 
0.20 
× 
3 
= 
0.6
 
1.3
Overall Attitude

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
95
feelings often transfer to the advertised brand when consumers follow the peripheral 
route to persuasion.
The elaboration likelihood model indicates that facts and reason are important 
when consumers follow the central route to persuasion, but not when consumers 
follow the peripheral route to persuasion. The model also indicates that celebrities, 
authority figures, humor, and pleasant background music and scenery are important 
when consumers follow the peripheral route to persuasion, but not when consum-
ers follow the central route to persuasion. In other words, consumers use different 
types of information depending on which route to persuasion they are following. 
Furthermore, the central route to persuasion leads consumers to form strong atti-
tudes that are accessible from memory, persistent, resistant to change, and that have 
a strong influence on other judgments and behavior. Conversely, the peripheral route 
to persuasion leads consumers to form weak attitudes that are not accessible from 
memory, not long-lasting, not resistant to change, and that have a weak influence on 
other judgments and behavior.
The Heuristic/Systematic Model
Another dual-process model of persuasion, the heuristic/systematic model, also sug-
gests two routes to persuasion. When involvement is high and when consumers are able 
to think carefully about a persuasive message, consumers follow the systematic route to 
persuasion. In so doing, they analyze all information for its relevance to an attitude and 
integrate all relevant information into an attitude.
When involvement is low or when consumers are unable to think carefully about a 
message, consumers follow the heuristic route to persuasion and use persuasion heuris-
tics or shortcuts to form an attitude. A heuristic or mental shortcut is quick and simple; 
it allows consumers to form an attitude rapidly, but it also encourages them to overlook 
Figure 4.6 The Elaboration Likelihood Model of Persuasion
Exposure to
Advertising
Peripheral Route
(minimal processing
and simple inferencing)
Low Ability
High Motivation
High Ability
Low Motivation
Motivation to Elaborate
(depends on involvement, need for cognition, etc.)
Ability to Elaborate
(depends on knowledge, comprehensibility,
repetition, distraction, etc.)
Central Route
(effortful processing of information
central to the true merits of an attitudinal position)

96 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
a good deal of information that they might have needed to 
form an accurate attitude. Good examples of persuasion 
heuristics are “experts are usually correct,” the “majority is 
usually correct,” and “length implies strength,” i.e., long 
messages imply there are a lot of valid reasons for liking 
an advertised product. Strong brand names on a product, 
such as Sony, Disney, and so on, imply that these products 
are good. Weak or unfamiliar brand names imply that an 
advertised product is a bad product.
All persuasion heuristics enable consumers to form 
attitudes quickly without much thinking. If consumers 
are sufficiently confident that their attitudes are correct, 
they stop thinking about a persuasive message. If they’re 
not as confident. However, they think more carefully 
by following the systematic route to persuasion. When 
both routes to persuasion point to the same conclusion 
(i.e., both routes imply that the advertised product is a 
good product), both routes influence attitudes. However, 
when the two routes to persuasion point to opposite con-
clusions (i.e., one route implies that the product is good, and the other implies that 
the product is bad), the systematic route overrules the heuristic route to persuasion. 
Now that we’ve evaluated various models of attitude formation, let’s consider the 
range of information used in judgment and some general approaches for changing 
consumer attitudes.
Parameters of Judgment
Nearly all types of information can be used in consumer judgment. Information from 
marketing communications, consumer magazines, other consumers, and prior knowl-
edge and experiences retrieved from memory influence judgment. The information 
used and how it is used, however, depend on five important parameters:
• perceived relevance of the information
• task demands
• cognitive resources
• nondirectional motivation
• directional motivation22
The greater the perceived relevance of a piece of information, the more heavily that 
information is weighted or used in judgment. For example, word-of-mouth communi-
cations are often weighted more heavily than marketing communications because con-
sumers trust their friends and other consumers more than they trust marketers.23 As the 
difficulty or complexity of a judgment task increases, consumers are more likely to rely 
on information that is easy to use (e.g., simple information with straightforward implica-
tions). As cognitive resources, or the ability to think carefully about a judgment task or 
choice task decrease, consumers are more likely to rely on information that is easy to use.
Motivation also influences how extensively consumers use information. Nondirec-
tional motivation refers to a preference to acquire and to think carefully about all 
judgment-relevant information, regardless of its direction or its implications. As non-
directional motivation increases, consumers typically use more information and think 
objec tive 5
E T H I C S
 
 As recently as 10 years ago, 
 marketing was a dirty word in 
the charity business, but today, 
American charities are embracing
many marketing principles.25 The American Heart Association’s 
hip new slogan, “learn and live,” has replaced its old and boring 
slogan, “fighting heart disease and stroke.” The American Heart 
Association has also declared February 3 as “Wear Red Day” to 
increase awareness of heart disease. This marketing campaign 
is bolstered with red pins and red-lit national icons, including the 
Empire State Building and Niagara Falls, which were lit with red 
lights on February 3. These efforts have been highly successful. 
The American Heart Association raised $540 million in 2005, 
compared to $326 million in 1998. Is it ethical for charities and 
other non-profit organizations to use marketing methods? Do 
you think that charities use their brand logos and promotions as 
peripheral cues in an effort to persuade consumers?

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
97
more carefully about the implications of this information. Nondirectional motivation 
also encourages balanced information processing, or an attempt to use all relevant in-
formation, regardless of its ease of use. Directional motivation, on the other hand, refers 
to a preference for information that supports a consumer’s preferred conclusion. This is 
also knows as wishful thinking. For example, after buying an expensive automobile, a 
consumer usually focuses only on information that suggests that he or she made a wise 
purchase. The consumer typically prefers to avoid information that discusses potential 
problems with the car or that better alternatives are available. Wishful thinking often 
leads a consumer to use less information and to use one-sided information that supports 
a preferred conclusion, rather than taking a more balanced approach. Together, the five 
parameters of judgment determine how much information is used, what information is 
used, and how heavily or lightly this information is weighted in consumer judgment.
General Strategies for Changing Attitudes
All complete theories of persuasion or attitude change suggest that it is important to 
choose an appropriate source or spokesperson, to use a suitable message or type of mes-
sage, and to tailor the message to appeal to the intended audience or market segment. 
Source factors, message factors, and recipient factors are all important, and the study 
of persuasion concerns the study of who says what to whom. Who refers to the source, 
what refers to the message, and whom refers to the recipient.21
Effective sources tend to be attractive, likable, knowledgeable, trustworthy, and 
credible. The effectiveness of a particular type of source depends on the situation. 
For example, expert sources are most effective when the message is complex, and 
attractive sources are most effective when the message is simple. Factual messages 
are most effective when consumers are likely to think carefully about the message, 
but emotional messages are most effective when consumers are unlikely to think 
carefully. Two-sided messages that discuss the pros and cons of an advertised prod-
uct are most effective for knowledgeable consumers. On the other hand, one-sided 
Courtesy of Ford Motor Company 
Factual messages are most effective when consumers think carefully about an advertisement.

98 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
messages that discuss the pros only are most effective for consumers who know 
little about the product.
To a large extent, persuasion depends on the likelihood that consumers 
will receive and comprehend a message and on the probability and strength of 
counterarguments.21 More formally, A  R (1 – CA), where A refers to attitude, 
R refers to the likelihood of receiving and comprehending a message, and CA 
refers to the likelihood of counterarguing. This equation implies that persuasion 
is greater when R and CA are moderate than when both are high or both are low. 
Consequently, distraction can increase persuasion when it decreases the ability to 
counterargue more than it decreases the ability to receive and comprehend a mes-
sage. Counterarguing is most likely when a message is inconsistent with consumers’ 
prior beliefs. However, when a message is consistent with what consumers already 
believe, consumers are likely to think of support arguments rather than counterar-
guments. When this is the case, distraction decreases persuasion.
Chapter Summary
Beliefs are nonevaluative judgments, and attitudes are 
evaluative judgments. Marketers frequently try to change 
consumers’ beliefs and attitudes through using advertising 
and other persuasion techniques. Attitudes influence and 
are influenced by cognition, affect, and behavior. The the-
ory of reasoned action suggests that attitudes and subjec-
tive norms influence intentions, and intentions influence 
behavior. This theory also suggests that beliefs are added 
together to form attitudes. Information integration theory 
suggests that beliefs are averaged together to form attitudes, 
and consequently, it is better to tell consumers about a few 
very positive features of a product than to tell consumers 
about many fairly positive features of a product.
Dual-process models of persuasion suggest that con-
sumers think carefully about a persuasive message when 
involvement is high and when they are able to think 
 carefully. The most famous dual-process models are the 
elaboration likelihood model and the heuristic/ systematic 
model. The elaboration likelihood model predicts that 
consumers will follow the central route to persuasion when 
they think carefully about a message and the peripheral 
route to persuasion when they don’t think carefully about 
a message. The heuristic/systematic model predicts that 
consumers follow the systematic route to persuasion when 
they think carefully, but the heuristic route when they 
don’t think carefully. Both theories suggest that it is impor-
tant to predict how carefully consumers will think about a 
message before designing a persuasive message. An effec-
tive persuasive message uses an appropriate source and an 
appropriate argument and targets appropriate recipients.
belief
judgments
search attribute
experience attribute
credence attribute
descriptive beliefs
informational beliefs
inferential beliefs
attitudes
evaluative-cognitive consistency
zanna and rempel’s model
semantic differential scale
likert scales
involvement
expectancy-value models
theory of reasoned action
information integration theory
dual-process models
elaboration likelihood model
heuristic/systematic model
central route
peripheral route
Key Terms

Chapter 4   Attitude and Judgment Formation and Change 
99
1. Design an ad for a car using the theory of reasoned 
action. What attributes should you use and how 
many should you describe? Remember, an adding 
model implies that more is better.
2. Design an ad for a digital camera using information 
integration theory. What attributes should you use 
and how many should you describe? Remember, an 
averaging model implies that less is more.
3. Design an ad for a new product using the elaboration 
likelihood model and the heuristic/systematic model.
4. Form groups of two and ask each other which food 
is disliked the most. Then, take turns trying to con-
vince the other person that the food he or she dislikes 
is excellent. What persuasion principles did each of 
you use?
Short Application Exercises
Review and Discussion
1. How do beliefs influence attitudes?
2. How do attitudes influence beliefs?
3. When are search attributes likely to be more impor-
tant than experience attributes?
4. When are experience attributes likely to be more im-
portant than search attributes?
5. What is involvement? What variables influence in-
volvement? How can you create an ad that increases 
involvement?
6. Think of questions you would ask to measure brand 
awareness using several semantic differential scales.
 7. Think of questions you would ask to measure 
beliefs about advertising using several Likert scales.
 8. When are factual arguments likely to be important? 
When are emotional appeals likely to be important?
 9. In what ways are the elaboration likelihood model 
and the heuristic/systematic model similar?
10. In what ways are the elaboration likelihood model 
and the heuristic/systematic model different?

100 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Imagine you work for a well-known market re-
search firm. Your supervisor has asked you to calcu-
late numerical values for consumer attitudes using
the Fishbein expectancy-value model, A  Σbe. 
In your preliminary research for a client that manu-
facturers LCD HDTVs, you learned that the key 
attributes are picture resolution, screen size,  viewing 
angles, reliability, and easy-to-use inputs. Using the 
data below, compute attitude scores for consumer A, 
a highly knowledgeable consumer, and for consum-
er B, a consumer who knows relatively little about 
HDTVs.
1. Compute attitudes for both consumers. Which consumer likes the product more 
and why?
2. For the knowledgeable consumer, which attribute(s) need improvement?
3. For the consumer who knows little about the product, which attribute(s) need 
improvement?
4. Explain how to influence b and how to influence e for consumer A and for consumer B.
YOUR CHALLENGE:
Attribute 
Consumer A 
Consumer B
 
 b   e 
b   e
1080i 
 7   7 
3   4
47-inch screen 
 6   6 
7   7
Viewing angles 
 6   5 
4   3
Reliability 
 5   6 
3   3
Inputs 
 7   7 
2   3
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n

101
Motivation and Emotion
 1 | Define motivation and emotion.
 2 | Explain approach and avoidance.
 3 | Match advertising approaches to attitude 
functions.
 4 | Explain the role of consistency in 
motivation and persuasion.
 5 | Explain how emotions evoked by one 
stimulus influence emotional responses 
to other stimuli.
After studying this chapter, you should be able to . . .
objectives
Many firms use nostalgia to stir up positive emotions and feelings, such as those consumers 
experience when they reminisce about pleasant childhood memories.1 Feelings of nostalgia are 
very powerful, transporting you back to a time when life was simple, you were healthier and 
happier, and life was grand—at least that is the way you remember it.
A new trend is the nostalgic brand. Marketers are taking successful old brands, updating them, 
and relaunching them with the hope of leveraging consumer nostalgia. For example, BMW’s Mini 
Cooper is an old brand revived, as is the classic Ovaltine chocolate drink mix. American Greetings 
has reintroduced Care Bears, popular cartoon characters from the 1980s. It seems that teenage girls 
are drawn to the colorful and tacky creatures, which shows that even the young are nostalgic at times.
Nostalgia is most often used in advertising campaigns. For example, many automobile 
manufacturers run ads featuring music from the 1960s to capture the attention and interest 
of baby boomers. Television ads for Werther’s old-fashioned candy show a smiling kindly old 
grandfather giving Werther’s candy to his smiling, eager grandson. The ad also shows that 
5
Nostalgia Sells
CHAPTER

102
grandson many years later as grandfather himself, now offering Werther’s candy to his lucky 
grandson. In a similar commercial, a grandmother is feeding Cheerios to a baby in a high 
chair. The baby has his mouth open, and he’s waiting for the cereal, but the grandmother 
keeps playing with the Cheerios by using them as points on an imaginary map to show the 
baby where his relatives live. Children aren’t the only ones who like to play with Cheerios: 
grandmothers do, too! Emotional experiences and responses are surprisingly powerful and 
motivating, as is discussed in this chapter.
An Overview of Motivation and Emotion
Motivation (needs or drives) and emotions (or feelings, affective responses) encourage 
consumers to act. Motivation is a driving force that moves or incites us to act and is 
the underlying basis of all behavior. Individuals are driven to satisfy their needs, wants, 
and desires. Emotion (or emotional and affective responses) is a person’s affect—feelings 
and moods—plus arousal.
Motivation and emotion are linked in a number of ways, which is why they are 
covered together in this chapter. Motivations and emotions are linked because consum-
ers feel positive emotions when motivations are satisfied and negative emotions when 
motivations are not satisfied. Consumers also often describe motivations and emotions 
similarly, saying, “I feel like eating some Pizza Hut pizza,” or “I feel like drinking  Coca- 
Cola,” or “I feel like reading my Consumer Behavior textbook,” and so on. Furthermore, 
motivations and emotions focus attention and energize behavior. Motivations focus 
 attention on goal-relevant objects, and emotions focus attention on emotional objects. 
objec tive 1
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives 

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
103
This chapter examines how motivation and emotion influence consumer behavior by 
examining the process of motivation and several motivation and emotion theories.
The Process of Motivation
What creates the driving force of motivation in a person? Motivation begins when a per-
son feels a need that requires satisfaction. In general, needs are desires that arise when 
a consumer’s current state does not match the consumer’s preferred state. Physiological 
needs, such as the need for air, water, food, sex, and protection from the environment 
(clothing and shelter), are innate needs or primary needs. Psychological needs are learned 
as we grow and are socialized, such as needs for affection, companionship, power, self-
esteem, and intellectual stimulation. These are secondary needs. Needs should also be 
distinguished from wants. Although some people tend to use these two terms syn-
onymously, there are differences. Needs are automatic and required; if you wake up 
at 2 a.m., “dying” of thirst, for instance, you need something to quench it. Wants are 
learned manifestations of our needs, e.g., only a glass of chocolate milk will take care 
of your 2 a.m. problem. Some marketers also distinguish between needs and wants by 
classifying wants as product-specific needs.
Needs are aroused via three routes: physiological, emotional, and cognitive. We 
have already touched on physiologically based needs. Physical changes in the body 
trigger need arousal. For example, your stomach growls when you haven’t eaten in 
several hours; you shiver when your body temperature drops; and your eyes blur and 
feel scratchy when you are deprived of sleep. Emotions also lead to need arousal. For 
example, feeling bored or frustrated at work may lead to the need for a vacation; feeling 
lonely may lead to a need to go to a social event. Finally, arousal can come from our 
thoughts. Recalling the date of your mother’s birthday may prompt a need to purchase 
and send her a gift. Cognitive arousal is tied closely to the environment because envi-
ronmental situations and stimuli often trigger cognitive arousal. For example, seeing 
your roommate’s new pair of tennis shoes may remind you of how old your own shoes 
are and trigger the need to shop.
Once a need is aroused, a state of tension is created that energizes a person to reduce 
or eliminate the need, returning to a preferred state, called the goal (or  goal-object, 
PRNewsFoto/San Francisco Chocolate Factory/AP Photo
Chocolate milk is a product-specific need.

104 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
 goal-state). This tension is called a drive, and the degree or amount of tension influ-
ences the urgency with which actions are taken to return to the desired goal-state. 
Thus, motivation focuses attention on goals and drives us to act.
Motivations focus attention by producing a valuation effect and a devaluation ef-
fect.2 When consumers are extremely hungry, they rate food products as more desirable 
(the valuation effect), and they rate non-food products as less desirable (the devaluation 
effect). Similarly, when consumers are extremely thirsty, they rate beverages as more desir-
able (the valuation effect), and they rate non-beverages as less desirable (the devaluation 
effect). Surprisingly, hungry or thirsty consumers devalue money, even though money 
can be used to buy food or beverages. Furthermore, the devaluation effect is usually larger 
than the valuation effect, and these effects occur only when powerful motivations are 
present. For example, a famished consumer is motivated to attain one goal—to satisfy his 
hunger immediately. Thus, he will devalue any objects (including money) in an attempt 
to reduce hunger. This is one reason some consumers stand in line and pay exorbitant 
prices for food and beverages at amusement parks and sporting events. In this situation, 
they value food and beverages and devalue both time and money.
Motivations also influence the direction of behavior. Two directions are possible: 
approach, or movement towards a desired object or outcome, and avoidance, or move-
ment away from an undesired object or outcome. For example, most consumers seek 
good entertainment; lack of such entertainment causes dissatisfaction. On the other 
hand, many consumers don’t enjoy shopping in crowded retail environments and are 
likely to avoid shopping at peak times unless forced to do so. Motivations also influence 
what goals consumers pursue and how intensely and persistently consumers pursue these 
goals. For example, our hobbies, interests, and needs influence what goals we pursue and 
how intensely and persistently we pursue these goals. Consumers who love collectible 
objects (e.g., wine, comic books, stamps, coins, works of art) pursue these objects fre-
quently (e.g., they search for these objects often), intensely (they search everywhere, in-
cluding stores, flea markets, and the Internet), and persistently (they search for years).
Motivation and Human Needs
Whatever the direction of motivation, needs are the root of the motivational process. 
Several psychologists and researchers have developed theories and models related to 
human needs. Some of the most popular are reviewed next.
Drive Theory and Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Drive theory is one of the earliest theories of motivation.3 Drive theory maintains that 
people have several basic physiological needs, such as needs for food, water, air, etc. 
When people do not get enough food, water, air, or other basic requirements for sur-
vival, a source of energy known as drive compels people to behave in ways that reduce 
these drives. For example, eating reduces the drive for food. Drinking reduces the drive 
for water, and breathing reduces the drive for air.
Physiological needs are the most basic needs experienced by people. Building on 
drive theory, Abraham Maslow suggested that people also have higher-order needs and 
desires.4 After all physiological needs are met, people become preoccupied with safety 
and security needs, including needs for shelter and protection. Once safety and security 
needs are met, people move on to the next level of social needs, i.e., the need for be-
longingness and love. Social relationships, affection, belonging, and choosing the right 
spouse become important at this level. After these needs are met, people advance to the 
ego or esteem level. At this level, people need to feel competent and important. Finally, 
objec tive 2

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
105
the highest level is self-actualization, which is the state of mind of people who feel that 
they have reached their full potential. Theoretically, relatively few people have reached 
this ultimate level. Finally, while each need is defined separately, overlap occurs among 
the categories. No need is ever completely satisfied, but a person cannot progress up-
ward along Maslow’s hierarchy until lower level needs are primarily satisfied.
Marketers design clever promotions to appeal to all levels of needs in Maslow’s 
hierarchy. For instance, watch any late night television show, and you will see big, juicy 
hamburgers and hot, crispy fries floating across the screen to tempt late night cravings. 
Companies that market home security systems, insurance policies, and even clothing, 
promote safety and security needs. The Land’s End clothing catalog has featured a story 
about how one of the brand’s winter coats kept a person stranded in the wilderness 
alive. Products consumed in social groups, such food, beverages, and social gathering 
places stress good friends, good times, and a feeling of belonging. E-Harmony, on on-
line dating service, emphasizes the importance of finding “that true soul mate,” while 
Kodak tells you to “share moments, share life”. Examples of esteem needs are every-
where from health and beauty ads to automobile ads. L’Oreal says that you’re “worth 
it”; Lexus is for when “you’ve arrived”; Maybelline asks, “Maybe she’s born with it?” 
Finally, self-actualization needs, while realized by relatively few, are certainly pursued, 
and marketers use these needs to help people reach for more. The U.S. Army and Air 
Force tap into this need with their slogans, “Be all that you can be,” and “The sky’s the 
limit.” Gatorade asks, “Is it in you?” and Nike says, “Just Do It!”
Self-Determination Theory
Self-determination theory builds on Maslow’s hierarchy of needs by distinguishing 
between intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation.5 Intrinsic motivation refers 
to the desire to pursue an activity or goal for its own sake, rather than for an extrinsic 
Self-actualization
self-esteem,
confidence, achievement,
respect of others, respect by others
friendship, family, sexual intimacy
breathing, food, water, sex, sleep, homeostasis, excretion
security of body, of employment, of resources,
of morality, of the family, of health, of property
Esteem
Love/Belonging
Safety
Physiological
morality,
creativity,
spontaneity,
problem solving,
Iack of prejudice,
acceptance of facts
Figure 5.1 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs

106 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
reward, such as money. Extrinsic motivation refers to the desire to pursue an activity 
or goal in order to receive a reward, such as money or praise. This distinction is im-
portant because people are usually more creative, hard-working, and more fulfilled and 
happy when they pursue intrinsic goals rather than extrinsic goals. According to self-
determination theory, intrinsic motivation is highest when autonomy, belongingness, 
and competence (the ABCs of self-determination) are high. This means that intrinsic 
motivation is greater when people feel that they have free choice (i.e., they are not 
forced to do something), are part of an important group or organization, and feel that 
they are very good at what they do. For example, consumers who view themselves as 
knowledgeable about wines and have income adequate to purchase high quality wines 
are more likely to enjoy shopping for and consuming these products.
The Trio of Needs
Some consumer researchers believe that Maslow’s list of needs can be simplified to 
three key elements particularly important for consumer behavior. The need for power 
refers to the consumer’s desire to control other people, objects (e.g., money), and the 
environment (e.g., one’s home or work) because power increases the likelihood that 
the consumer can acquire the things he or she wants. The need for affiliation refers to 
the need for belongingness and friendship or the desire to be a member of a person-
ally important social group. People with high affiliation needs are socially dependent 
and choose products they feel others will approve of. The need for achievement refers 
to the need to accomplish difficult tasks (e.g., completing a college degree, getting 
a high-paying job) and to be successful. After all, no one wants to be a loser. High 
achievement is a valuable promotional tool when targeting well-educated and affluent 
consumers.
Implementation Intentions
Marketing in Action
Marketers are constantly trying to think of 
new ways to get consumers to use more 
of their products. The greater the amount 
of a product that consumers use, the more 
they will need to buy. A leading consumer 
marketing firm recently succeeded in 
getting consumers to use three times the 
amount of a new liquid cleaning product 
than they would normally use. The firm 
achieved this through implementation 
intentions.23
Implementation intentions are detailed 
plans concerning when and how a con-
sumer intends to use a product or service. 
The more detail the better: consumers 
were asked to think about when they 
would use the product (i.e., using specific 
dates and times) and how they would 
use it (i.e. they were asked regarding a 
cleaning product, what specific objects 
will you clean?). Forming implementation 
intentions creates associations in memory 
between intentions to use a product 
and the specific situations in which the 
product will be used. The stronger the 
 associations are, the more likely people 
will use the product when the specific 
usage  situations arise.
©tacojim/iStockphoto.com

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
107
So far, we have seen that consumers have many different 
motivations and needs. Some are physical (e.g., food,  water, 
air) and some are emotional (e.g., belongingness). Next, let’s 
switch gears and discuss cognitive needs. Cognition refers to 
purposeful thinking or information processing. Some types 
of thoughts and ideas “feel right” and make consumers feel at 
ease and comfortable. Others feel bad and make consumers 
feel awkward or uncomfortable. People have a need for cogni-
tive consistency.6 Typically, consistent thoughts feel right, and 
 inconsistent thoughts feel wrong. Three consistency theories 
provide explanations for consumers’ need for consistency in 
their thinking: attitude function theory, balance theory, and 
cognitive dissonance theory.
Attitude Function Theory
Attitude function theory describes four major types of atti-
tudes.7 Attitudes that serve the knowledge function summarize 
large amounts of information to simplify the world and help 
consumers make decisions. Attitudes that serve the value-expres-
sive function communicate important beliefs to others and help 
consumers interact with each other more efficiently. Attitudes 
that serve the ego-defensive function help consumers feel safe 
and secure and good about themselves. Finally, attitudes that serve the adjustment func-
tion help consumers approach pleasure and avoid pain more quickly and efficiently. 
Persuasive messages that are positive and consistent with the underlying function of a 
consumer’s attitude are more likely to feel right and are be effective. On the other hand, 
persuasive messages that are inconsistent with an attitude function are more likely to 
be ignored. Thus, it is critical for marketers to understand which functions consumers 
draw on when evaluating their products.
Different persuasion techniques are needed for different attitude functions. 
Information and facts are useful for changing attitudes that serve the knowledge func-
tion, but not for changing attitudes that serve other functions. Image appeals are use-
ful for changing attitudes that serve the value-expressive function. Authority and 
fear appeals are useful for changing attitudes that serve the ego-defensive function. 
Finally, hedonic (or pleasure/pain) appeals are useful for changing attitudes that serve 
the adjustment function. Should anyone doubt the power of attitude functions, ob-
serve someone trying to change another person’s religious attitudes (which serve the 
ego-defensive function) with facts (which serve the knowledge function). Similarly, try 
changing someone’s attitudes about a favorite guilty pleasure such as smoking (which 
serves the adjustment function) with imagery such as yellow teeth (which serves the 
value-expressive function).
Understanding a consumer’s regulatory focus is also important. Regulatory focus 
theory suggests that consumers regulate or control their behavior by using either a 
promotion focus or a prevention focus.8 A promotion focus is concerned with the 
presence or absence of positive outcomes and with aspirations and accomplishment. 
A prevention focus is concerned with the presence or absence of negative outcomes 
and with protection and responsibilities. Some consumers are usually more promotion-
focused, while others tend to be more prevention-focused. Messages that encour-
age consumers to think about their aspirations and accomplishments encourage a 
objec ti ve 3
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Need for achivement.

108 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
 promotion focus. Messages that encourage consumers to think about protection and 
responsibilities encourage a prevention focus.
Combining attitude function theory and regulatory focus theory results in a 4  2 
matrix of persuasion techniques.9 For maximum effectiveness, persuasive messages 
must match consumers’ attitude functions and regulatory focus. Figure 5.2 lists major 
persuasive message types and the conditions under which each is most effective.
For example, many ads for personal computers and other high-tech products pro-
vide information about brand attributes and benefits to inform consumers about these 
complex products. Usually, consumers need to be at least somewhat know ledgeable 
about these products to makes sense of the infor mation. Rather than try to inform con-
sumers, prevention-focused knowledge appeals attempt to confuse consumers by using 
unfamiliar technical information or surprising and unexpected information that leads 
consumers to rethink their attitudes. Mystery ads, or ads that do not reveal what is be-
ing advertised until the end of the message, can also encourage consumers to think more 
diligently about their attitudes.10 Many dot.com companies use this approach, as did early 
ads for the Infinity automobile.
Figure 5.2  Types of Advertisements and the Conditions under 
Which Each Will Be Most Effective
Attitude Function   
Promotion-Focused Ads 
Prevention-Focused Ads
Knowledge 
Factual appeals 
Mystery ads
 
Logical arguments 
Surprise
 
Comparative advertising 
Confusion
Value expression 
Image appeals 
Nerd alert ads
 
Celebrity advertising 
Ego defense 
Authority figures 
Fear appeals
 
Experts 
Adjustment 
Pleasure 
Pain
SOURCE: Adapted from Kardes & Cronley (2000).
Promotion-focused value-expressive appeals.
Both images courtesy of United States Army

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
109
Promotion-focused ego-defensive appeals use authority 
figures (e.g., political leaders, religious leaders, police offi-
cers) or experts (e.g., doctors, lawyers, executives) to con-
vince consumers to change their attitudes about products 
and services that offer protection against accidents (e.g., 
insurance), theft (e.g., home and car security systems), and 
other uncertain, negative events. Such appeals are particu-
larly useful for influencing political attitudes. Stereotypes, or 
negative attitudes toward specific groups, also serve an ego-
defensive function by helping people feel better when they 
compare themselves to a group they perceive as inferior.
Adjustment appeals focus on simple hedonism, or the 
pleasure/pain principle. Consumers buy some types of prod-
ucts simply because they taste good (e.g., ice cream, candy, 
and other unhealthy but good-tasting foods and beverages) 
or feel good (e.g., alcohol, caffeine, cigarettes). In the same 
vein, consumers avoid some types of products because they 
taste bad (e.g., mouthwash, fiber cereals), or feel bad (e.g., 
pharmaceuticals that improve one’s health despite aversive 
side effects, such as blood pressure medicines). Promotion-
focused adjustment appeals focus on the benefits of guilty 
pleasures, such as high-calorie foods and beverages, and en-
tertainment products that no one wants to admit they like (e.g., movies such as Dumb 
and Dumber and gossip magazines). Facts and figures do not promote such products 
effectively (e.g., statistics do not convince consumers to quit smoking). Neither does 
image, because many guilty pleasures are consumed privately rather than publicly. Ego-
defensive appeals are similarly ineffective because people like what they like, no matter 
what authorities or experts think.
Prevention-focused adjustment appeals are particularly useful for products that 
help consumers avoid pain, such as pain relievers (e.g., aspirin, Tylenol, antacids, selt-
zers, laxatives, ointments). A recent ad for Excedrin, for example, shows an actor saying 
he does not know why or care how the product works, it just works. In other words, 
no complex arguments; no celebrities; and no experts are needed. Consumers want a 
product that eliminates headaches, and they do not care why the product works.
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Promotion-focused ego-defensive appeals.
Both Images courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Prevention-focused ego-defensive appeals.

110 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Balance Theory
Balance theory focuses on the degree of consistency among three elements:
• p, the person or consumer who receives a persuasive message
•  o, the other person (e.g., a friend, salesperson, or spokesperson) who recom-
mends a particular product or service
• x, a stimulus such as a particular product or service11
Balance exists when the relationships among all three elements are positive (e.g., p likes 
o; o likes x; therefore, p should like x) or if two relations are negative and one is positive (e.g., 
my enemy’s enemy is my friend). Balanced relationships are learned more quickly, are more 
memorable, and are rated as more pleasant. Consumers like balanced triads. However, the 
converse is also true. Consumers do not like imbalanced triads, where all three relations 
among the elements are negative (e.g., p dislikes o, o dislikes x, and p dislikes x) or two rela-
tions are positive and one is negative (e.g., p likes o, o likes x, and p dislikes x). Imbalanced 
triads produce unpleasant tension, and consumers are motivated to reduce this tension by 
changing one (or more) of the perceived relations within the p-o-x triad.
Let’s take an example. If p is you, o is Tiger Woods, and x is Nike, imbalance 
exists if you like Tiger (p likes o), Tiger uses Nike golf equipment (o likes x), and you 
 dislike Nike (p dislikes x). There are three ways that you can bring about balance to 
this triad:
 
1. change your attitude
 
2. deny the relationship
 
3. diﬀ erentiate the relationships
Most of the research published in leading scientific consumer 
behavior journals report the results of experiments conducted 
in the United States. Of course, the United States is a west-
ern culture dominated by people with an independent self-
view (Canada and Western Europe are similar in this dimen-
sion). This means that western consumers are 
primarily interested in maximizing their own 
outcomes and are not always concerned 
about what happens to other people. By 
contrast, in eastern cultures, such as those of 
Japan, China, and Eastern Europe, people 
have a more interdependent self-view. This 
means that these consumers are primarily 
interested in maximizing the outcomes of 
important groups in their lives, such as their 
families, friends, and co-workers.
Recent research on culture and regulatory focus shows 
that consumers with independent self-views often adopt a 
promotion focus.24 These consumers are therefore more 
sensitive and responsive to promotion-focused ads because 
these ads match their promotion-focused regulatory orienta-
tion. By contrast, consumers with interdepen-
dent self-views often adopt a prevention fo-
cus. These consumers are more sensitive and 
responsive to prevention-focused ads because 
these ads match their prevention-focused 
regulatory orientation. Hence, cultural 
backgrounds have a powerful influence on 
regulatory focus, and regulatory focus has a 
powerful influence on the relative effective-
ness of promotion- versus prevention-focused 
advertisements.
Culture and Regulatory Focus
Eye on International
PRNewsFoto/DZP Marketing Communications/
AP Photo
O b jec tive 4

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
111
This type of analysis can be applied to almost any set of three elements. For ex-
ample, consumer, p, likes cigarettes, o, which are linked to heart disease, x. It seems rea-
sonable to assume that the consumer dislikes heart disease (p dislikes x). Therefore, the 
consumer must resolve the imbalance through attitude change (e.g., disliking cigarettes 
and quitting), denial (e.g., cigarettes do not cause heart disease), or differentiation 
(e.g., the consumer likes the way cigarettes make him feel but dislikes the long-term 
side effects). Many ads feature a likable celebrity, o, endorsing a new product, x. If the 
consumer, p, likes o, and if o likes x, subtle pressure toward consistency induces the 
consumer to form a favorable attitude toward x so that the triad is in balance. It’s easy 
to see how balance theory explains why celebrity advertising can be highly effective.
Cognitive Dissonance Theory
Most people assume that attitudes influence behavior, but cognitive dissonance theory 
suggests the reverse: behavior can also influence attitudes. According to cognitive disso-
nance theory, consumers strive for consonance, or consistency between a specific behavior 
and an attitude related to that behavior. Dissonance, or behavior-attitude inconsistency, 
produces an unpleasant tension, referred to as dissonance arousal. When it occurs, people 
are motivated to reduce the dissonance by changing their attitude to match the behavior 
that was performed. The shift in attitude that increases behavior-attitude consistency is 
known as s, the dissonance effect. It often involves effort justification, or attempts to ra-
tionalize the initially undesirable behavior. Sometimes people are persuaded to do things 
that they really don’t want to do. For example, parents talk children into cleaning their 
rooms, professors talk students into doing their homework, and bosses talk employees 
into doing their jobs. As the amount of effort involved in performing a disliked activity 
increases, the more people change their attitudes to convince themselves that the effort 
was worthwhile. This attitude change then leads to future behavior change.
In a classic experiment, college students were asked to perform a senseless and bor-
ing task: to turn a series of pegs on a pegboard one quarter of a turn.12 After turning 
First, you could change your attitude toward Nike (p likes x) or change your atti-
tude toward Tiger (p dislikes o). Second, you could deny Tiger’s relationship with Nike 
by suggesting that he doesn’t really prefer Nike products; he just uses the equipment 
to gain huge endorsements. Third, you could resolve the imbalance through differen-
tiation by indicating that you like Tiger Woods the athlete, but not Tiger Woods the 
celebrity. See Figure 5.3.
 
o (Tiger Woods)
x (Nike Golf Equipment)
+ 
+ 
? 
P (you)
Figure 5.3 Balance Theory

112 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
each peg, they were asked to return the peg to its beginning point and repeat the task. 
This continued for about a half hour. In the high-dissonance condition, each subject 
was asked to tell the next person that the task was “exciting and fun.” These students 
received $1 for performing the task and describing it as “fun” to the next partici-
pant. In the low-dissonance condition, a separate group of students received $20 for 
performing the task and telling the next participant that it was “fun.” Which group 
do you think rated the task more favorably, the group who received $1 or the group 
that received $20? At first glance, one might think the low-dissonance group (those 
who received $20) rated the task more favorably because they were happy to receive 
$20. But the opposite was true. Students in the high-dissonance condition (those who 
received only $1) rated the task more favorably.
Why? Describing the task as “fun” when they knew it was boring is inconsistent, 
and $1 is insufficient justification for lying. Thus, they had to reduce their dissonance 
arousal by changing their attitudes toward the boring task. Maybe it wasn’t so bad after 
all. On the other hand, the students who received $20 had sufficient justification for 
completing the boring task and misrepresenting it to the next participant. There was no 
reason to change their attitude about the boring task. They were paid to do it!
In another classic experiment, consumers were asked to choose between two 
products and were allowed to keep the chosen alternative as a gift.13 Before consum-
ers made a choice, both products were perceived as equally attractive. After making 
a choice however, the chosen product was perceived as highly attractive, and the 
rejected product was perceived as less attractive. This “spreading of the alternatives” 
occurs because making a decision is difficult, and people need to readjust their at-
titudes to justify their decisions. The more difficult a decision, the more people 
convince themselves that the chosen product is desirable and the rejected product is 
undesirable.
Almost any type of decision can set the stage for dis-
sonance effects. For example, suppose a consumer makes 
a bad decision and buys a product that performs poorly. 
This behavior is likely to produce dissonance arousal be-
cause the behavior is inconsistent with the belief or desire 
to make good purchase decisions. Post-purchase disso-
nance is especially likely when the decision
 
1. Is important
 
2.  Involves giving up positive features of a rejected 
alternative or accepting negative features of a 
chosen alternative
 
3.  Involves alternatives that are similar in terms of 
overall desirability
Making purchase decisions is not the only difficult 
activity that people perform. Joining a fraternity or so-
rority, getting into college, getting a job, landing a sale, 
and losing weight are also difficult activities. Research 
has shown that the more difficult the activity (e.g., haz-
ing, interviewing, negotiating) is, the more people value 
their fraternities, sororities, universities, jobs, clients, 
and health clubs. Consequently, people remain loyal 
members of their  fraternities, sororities, universities, 
places of employment, and health clubs for longer pe-
riods of time.
 
Approximately 25 percent of the 
 
population of the United States is 
 
obese. Obesity is a huge (pardon 
 
the pun) social problem because 
of the health risks associated with it, including increased risk for 
heart attacks, diabetes, and other health problems. Of course, 
fast food restaurants, such as McDonald’s, Burger King, and 
Wendy’s, are very popular in the United States, and this popu-
larity may contribute to the obesity problem. Recently, some 
morbidly obese U.S. consumers have brought lawsuits against 
McDonald’s based on the fact that McDonald’s food is very fat-
tening and unhealthy and therefore, McDonald’s food is a major 
cause of the plaintiffs’ obesity problems. The plaintiffs claim that 
McDonald’s is slowly killing them. Does McDonald’s have a 
moral responsibility to produce and market healthier food to help 
reduce the serious obesity problem in the United States? Or, is 
it up to the individual consumer to decide what foods and how 
much food are reasonable to consume? What do you think? 
What is the role of motivational psychological processes in 
wanting to eat unhealthy food in large quantities? Can individual 
consumers be expected to control the physiological and motiva-
tional processes that regulate their urge to eat?
E T H I C S

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
113
Emotion
The previous sections have shown that motivations focus attention and in-
fluence a wide variety of consumer behaviors. We now turn to feelings and 
emotions and show how these also focus attention and influence consumer 
behavior. Even very simple feelings, such as positive affect or positive mood, 
can have surprisingly powerful and complex effects on behavior. Little things, 
like nice weather, finding a dollar on the sidewalk, receiving a small gift or 
a compliment, remembering a positive event, and so on, can induce positive 
affect. When people are in a good mood, they are more helpful, more creative, 
and more willing to try new products.14 Positive affect also helps consumers 
make better and more satisfying purchase decisions.
The mood-as-information model suggests that mood is often treated like 
any other piece of information and is integrated along with other information 
when consumers form an overall evaluation of a product.15 Consequently, a 
good mood often results in a more favorable evaluation, while a bad mood is 
likely to result in a less favorable evaluation, even when mood has nothing to do with 
the product. For example, nice weather, finding a dollar, receiving a compliment, re-
membering a positive event, and other extraneous sources of mood can enhance prod-
uct evaluations. This effect can backfire, however, when consumers recognize that their 
mood may have influenced their evaluation. In this case, consumers attempt to sub-
tract the mood effects. The mood-as-information effect is also qualified by the type of 
product consumers evaluate. The effect is more pronounced for hedonic products, or 
products consumers use to enjoy positive experiences, than for instrumental products, 
or products consumers use to solve a problem.16
The affect confirmation model suggests that affect or mood can also influence how 
consumers use product attribute information.17 Instead of a direct input for judgment, 
as the mood-as-information model suggests, mood can alter the weighting of product 
attribute information. When consumers are in a good mood, positive attributes tend 
Figure 5.4 Types of Affect and Emotion18
Fearful
Nervous
Low
engagement
Quiet
Still
Relaxed
Calm
Positive
Happy
Satisfied
Excited
Enthusiastic
Aroused
Surprised
Drowsy
Sleepy
Negative
Sad
Sorry
Lonely
Grouchy
High
engagement
Blend Images/Jupiter Images

114 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
to be weighted more heavily. When consumers are in a bad mood, negative attributes 
tend to be weighted more heavily. For example, a consumer who is in a good mood may 
consider a positive feature of Polo clothing (e.g., prestige) more important than when 
he is in a bad mood. Alternatively, a consumer who is in a bad mood may think more 
about a negative feature of Polo (e.g., expensive). Hence, mood can have many different 
effects on consumer judgment.
Affective experiences or feelings are intensified when they are accompanied by 
physiological arousal or excitation of the sympathetic nervous system. As stated previ-
ously, emotion is defined as intense affect or affect plus physiological arousal. Emotion 
is more specific than affect because it reflects an appraisal process (e.g., happiness, 
sadness, anger, fear).19 Exciting events like action movies, major sporting events, and 
intense interpersonal interactions produce emotion. Exercise also increases physiologi-
cal arousal levels and can produce emotion. Chemicals, such as caffeine, adrenalin, 
norepinephrine (synthetic adrenalin), and other stimulants also produce emotion.
Although people are good at detecting changes in their arousal levels, they are often 
surprisingly bad at interpreting their own emotions. For example, in a classic study, 
people were injected with norepinephrine (which produces arousal) and were asked 
to stay in a waiting room for the next phase of the experiment.20 Another person was 
also waiting there. Although this person seemed like another participant in the experi-
ment, he was actually an accomplice of the experimenter. In “happy” conditions, the 
accomplice seemed to be overjoyed: he smiled a lot and threw paper airplanes. In “an-
gry” conditions, the accomplice seemed to be annoyed and mad: he frowned a lot and 
complained about having to wait for so long. During the next phase of the experiment, 
participants were asked to fill out a questionnaire asking them about their current emo-
tional states. Participants who received norepinephrine and saw the happy accomplice 
perceived themselves to be happy. Participants who received norepinephrine and saw 
the angry accomplice perceived themselves to be angry, just like him. In other words, 
people used the accomplice’s behavior as a contextual cue to help them interpret their 
own emotions. In general, studies like this have found that people are bad at interpret-
ing their own emotions without the help of such contextual cues.
Discrepancy-Interruption Theory
According to discrepancy-interruption theory, discrepancies or surprises and interrup-
tions or unexpected events that prevent us from pursuing a goal that we are currently 
trying to achieve also increase arousal and emotion.21 Discrepancies increase arous-
al or alertness and wake us up because they often require our immediate attention. 
Interruptions also increase arousal and require immediate attention. Small discrepan-
cies or small surprises produce positive emotions because they are usually mildly inter-
esting and thought-provoking. On the other hand, large discrepancies or big surprises 
usually produce negative emotions because they suggest that our current expectations 
are completely wrong. No one likes to be completely wrong. Similarly, no one likes to 
be interrupted while working on something. So, the more important the task is, the 
more intense our negative emotional reaction is when we are interrupted.
Because small surprises are good, new products that are slightly different from 
other, more familiar products produce a positive emotional response, leading to posi-
tive evaluations of the products. Because big surprises are bad, new products that are 
completely different from other, more familiar products produce a negative emotional 
response, leading to negative evaluations of the products, at least initially. Hence, de-
signers of new products should add features (bells and whistles) that are mildly surpris-
ing and interesting because these make new products more interesting. Developing a 

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
115
completely new product is risky because consumers will not know how to react to it 
or use it, leading to negative emotions, at least initially. Time and money are often re-
quired to educate consumers about completely new products to help them fully appre-
ciate the benefits of an innovation. Televisions, computers, personal digital assistants, 
and other high-tech products were not overnight sensations.
Consistent with discrepancy-interruption theory, research shows that brands that 
are moderately different from other brands in a particular product category engender 
positive arousal and are evaluated more favorably than brands that are typical of a 
product category.21 For example, most soft drinks are high in preservatives and artificial 
ingredients. However, new all-natural soft drinks (e.g., vitamin water) taste different 
and interesting and are evaluated positively in blind taste tests. Conversely, most fruit 
juices are all natural, and consequently, a fruit juice that is high in artificial ingredients 
tastes different and interesting. This results in more favorable evaluations in blind taste 
tests as well. See Figure 5.5.
Excitation Transfer Theory
Because consumers are bad at interpreting their emotional states, the excitation or 
arousal produced by one stimulus (e.g., exciting media events, exercise, stimulants, dis-
crepancies, interruptions) can transfer or spillover to other stimuli.22 Excitation transfer 
theory rests on four key principles of emotion:
 
1.  Arousal is non-speciﬁ c with respect to emotion (i.e., arousal intensiﬁ es 
both positive and negative emotions)
 
2. People are insensitive to small changes in arousal
 
3.  People often look for a single cause for their arousal, even when there are 
multiple causes
 
4.  Physiological arousal dissipates at a slower rate than perceived arousal
These principles suggest that a narrow window exists in which arousal can transfer 
from one stimulus to the next, thereby intensifying the emotional experience attributed 
to the second stimulus. Initially, little transfer occurs because a single, salient stimulus 
is perceived to be the cause of the arousal (e.g., an exciting movie). After a long pe-
riod of time, arousal goes away, and nothing is left to be transferred. After a moderate 
30
40
50
Product Category
Evaluation
Natural
Artificial
Soft Drink
Fruit Juice
Figure 5.5 Discrepancy-Interruption Theory
O b jec ti ve 5

116 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
period of time, however, excitation transfer is 
possible.
At this intermediate point in time, an 
individual is still aroused from the original 
stimulus, but because the stimulus event has 
passed (e.g., the movie is over), the person 
doesn’t perceive that he is still aroused. For 
example, an exciting sporting event or action 
movie is likely to produce arousal that could, 
potentially, transfer to an advertisement em-
bedded in the program. Ads aired during the 
Super Bowl and other exciting events may 
benefit from this excitation transfer process: 
the advertised product may seem more excit-
ing if its ad is aired during an exciting pro-
gram. But timing is crucial. If consumers at-
tempt to interpret their emotions while watching an exciting movie or TV program, 
they would recognize that the source of their arousal is the program, not the products 
advertised during commercial breaks. However, if people attempt to interpret their 
emotions shortly after an exciting event, they are more likely to confuse their arousal 
from the event with interest in the advertised brand.
It’s no surprise that watching a scary movie at a theater can produce arousal, and this 
arousal can later be transferred to your date! In fact, transference produces a more intense 
emotional response than the original arousal. Furthermore, because people are bad at 
interpreting their emotional states, the fear produced by a horror movie can be misin-
terpreted as romantic attraction to the date. Again, timing is crucial. If people attempt 
to interpret their emotions while watching the horror movie, they should recognize that 
they are feeling fear. If people attempt to interpret their emotions shortly after the horror 
movie, however, they are more likely to confuse romantic attraction for fear. Of course, 
the mass media can produce all kinds of emotions (e.g., love, hate, fear, anger, sadness), 
and if the timing is right, arousal will transfer to other stimuli (e.g., other people, adver-
tised products, products consumed while watching an exciting event). See Figure 5.6.
Time:
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Arousal Level
Actual  Physiological Arousal  
Potential “Transfer Zone”
 
 
Perceived Arousal
Figure 5.6 Misattribution of Arousal
Tetra Images/Jupiter Images

Chapter 5   Motivation and Emotion 
117
Motivation and emotion focus attention and energize 
behavior. When consumers desperately need something, 
goal-relevant products are overvalued (the valuation ef-
fect) and goal-irrelevant products are undervalued (the 
devaluation effect). Basic physiological needs must be sat-
isfied before consumers pursue higher-order goals, such 
as safety, belongingness, and, finally, self-actualization. In 
addition to these needs and goals, consumers need cog-
nitive consistency. Several types of cognitive consistency 
are important, including attitude function consistency, 
balance (consistent relationships among p-o-x elements), 
and behavior-attitude consistency. According to cognitive 
dissonance theory, when behaviors and attitudes are in-
consistent, consumers are motivated to change their at-
titudes to make them consistent with their behaviors.
Positive affect increases helpfulness, creativity, and the 
quality of decision making. Emotion is intense affect or 
affect plus arousal. Exciting events, unexpected events, 
interruptions, exercise, and stimulants increase arousal 
and intensify emotional experiences. Because consumers 
are bad at interpreting their emotions without the help of 
contextual cues, one emotion can be confused for another, 
and arousal produced by one stimulus can be transferred 
to another.
Chapter Summary
motivation
emotion
needs
goals
drives
valuation
devaluation
approach
avoidance
drive theory
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
self-determination theory
attitude function theory
regulatory focus theory
affect confirmation model
instrumental product
knowledge function
value-expressive function
ego-defensive function
adjustment function
balance theory
cognitive dissonance theory
arousal
positive affect
discrepancy-interruption theory
excitation transfer theory
mood-as-information model
hedonic product
Key Terms
Review and Discussion
1.   How does motivation focus attention?
2. How does motivation energize behavior?
3. List the hierarchy of needs from the most basic level 
to the most advanced level.
4. What factors increase self-determination and intrinsic 
motivation?
5. Use balance theory to analyze how a specific 
 consumer segment should be linked with a specific 
celebrity and a specific brand.
6. Discuss some ways people can be tricked into 
behaving in ways that are not consistent with their 
attitudes.

118 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
1. Managers are constantly trying to develop ways to 
motivate their employees to work harder without 
paying them more. Think of some ways you might be 
able to accomplish this.
2. Think of some ways you could use advertising to 
motivate consumers to find out more about your 
product.
3. Think of some ways excitation transfer theory can be 
used to make your product more exciting.
4. Form a small group and take turns pretending one 
person is an actor and the others are the audience. 
The actor should think of a past emotional event and 
make a face consistent with the emotion. The actor 
should use only facial expressions and no verbal com-
munications. The actor should pretend to have sever-
al different emotions (e.g., happiness, sadness, anger, 
fear, anxiety). How good is the actor at expressing 
emotions nonverbally, and how good is the audience 
at interpreting the actor’s emotional expressions?
Short Application Exercises
Imagine that you work for a large advertising agen-
cy. Your supervisor has asked you to analyze the 
attitude functions of large consumer segments for 
several different clients. For each client, you need 
to analyze the need or the desire served by the cli-
ent’s product or service. This provides clues about 
the attitude function that is most likely to be as-
sociated with each product or service. Based on this 
functional analysis, design an ad that tailors dif-
ferent persuasion techniques to different attitude 
functions.
M a n ag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
Perform a functional analysis and design appropriate ads for each of the following clients:
 
1. 
General Motors
 
2. 
Carnival Cruises
 
3. 
A local hospital
 
4. 
A candidate for U.S. Senator from your state
 
5. 
Your university
YOUR CHALLENGE:
 7.    Think of an ad that, in your opinion, is particularly 
good at making you feel a strong emotion. How did 
the advertiser accomplish this?
 8.    Think of a product so new and different that it 
made you feel negative emotions at first. How do 
you feel about this product now?
 9.   In what ways are motivations and emotions similar?
10.    In what ways are motivations and emotions 
different?

Martini & Rossi
119
Learning and Memory
 1 | Explain how classical conditioning works 
in advertising.
 2 | Explain how operant conditioning works 
in sales promotion.
 3 | Identify misleading ads that encourage 
consumers to form incorrect inferences.
 4 | Define the seven sins of memory.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to. . .
 . ..
objectives
Most people don’t like martinis the first time they try them. 
The first sip often seems surprisingly dry, medicinal, and high in 
alcohol. However, preferences change over time as people learn and 
change. Even if people don’t like martinis at first, many learn to 
like martinis the more they drink them. Companies like Martini 
& Rossi count on this type of change. Martini drinkers also often 
learn to appreciate subtle differences among different brands of 
gin (e.g., Boodles, Bombay Sapphire, Tanqueray) and different 
brands of vermouth (e.g., Martini & Rossi, Nouilly Prat, Vya). 
They also often experiment with different brands of olives and 
appreciate martini glasses. Martini & Rossi uses advertising and 
other promotional efforts to educate consumers about its product 
and its uses, in addition to simply get consumers to purchase the 
6
CHAPTER
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Martini & Rossi uses advertising to educate 
consumers about its product.

120
The Importance of Learning and Memory
In our continuing discussion of consumer information processing, this chapter dis-
cusses the role of learning and memory in  consumer behavior. Learning, as it pertains 
to consumer behavior, is the process of acquiring new information and knowledge 
about products and services for application to future behavior. As learning increases, 
the amount of knowledge about products and services stored in a consumer’s memo-
ry also increases. Memory enables past experiences and learning to influence current 
behavior. Without memory, we cannot physically function in society. People often 
underestimate how important memory is for everyday behavior; most people don’t 
fully appreciate how essential memory is until this function is seriously impaired as 
a result of health conditions such as Alzheimer’s, Korsakov’s syndrome, or serious 
head trauma.
Consumer behavior research shows that learning plays an important role in prefer-
ence formation.1 Learning changes the way consumers think about and use products. 
The more consumers learn about a product category, the more likely they are to use 
new words and phrases to describe their consumption experiences, and the more likely 
they are to focus on product attributes that didn’t seem as important when they first 
tried the product. In other words, learning enriches consumers’ experiences with prod-
ucts and services, and of course, influences their potential future behavior related to 
the product.
Types of Learning
People learn in many ways. How people learn has been studied extensively in medicine, 
psychology, sociology, and education, and a number of learning theories have been 
developed. Two of these theories, classical conditioning and operant conditioning, are 
discussed next.
Classical Conditioning
Learning leads to knowledge. Knowledge is created when a person makes associations 
between concepts. For example, associating touching a hot stove burner with pain 
creates knowledge about how to behave around stoves. One way associations between 
concepts are formed is by simply thinking about the concepts. Thinking about two 
ob jec tive 1
product to aid in this learning process. How do consumers acquire a taste for products that 
weren’t appealing initially? What role does learning play in preference formation? How 
does learning influence memory and the stability of preferences over time? We will explore 
these questions in this chapter.

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
121
objects or ideas (like the hot stove burner and pain) at the same time is enough to form 
an association in memory; repeatedly thinking about two things at the same time in-
creases the strength of the association. The nature of the objects or ideas and the timing 
are also crucial for learning, as we shall see shortly.
Classical conditioning (or Pavlovian conditioning) is a learning theory 
centered on creating associations between meaningful objects or ideas (or what 
 researchers call stimuli) to elicit desired responses. In a classic example, a research-
er named Ivan Pavlov in the 1920s illustrated classical conditioning with a dog, 
some food, and a bell. Pavlov would place food in front of a dog, which made the 
dog salivate, naturally. Every time Pavlov fed the dog, he would also ring a bell. 
Eventually, the dog would begin to salivate simply at the sound of the bell, without 
the food present.
According to the theory, learning results when a meaningful object, called 
an unconditioned stimulus (the dog’s food), is paired with another object, 
called a conditioned stimulus (the bell). The unconditioned stimulus has a 
known response called an unconditioned response (salivation). Over time, 
the pairing leads to the response, without the original unconditioned stimulus, 
which is called the conditioned response (salivation at the sound of the bell 
without the food present).2
In a consumer behavior setting, advertisers use a wide variety of meaningful 
unconditioned stimuli, including catchy music, sexy models, likable celebrities, 
cute animals, pretty scenery, and so on.3 These positive unconditioned stimuli 
produce positive unconditioned responses, such as amusement, joy, happiness, 
attraction, etc. Negative unconditioned stimuli produce negative unconditioned 
responses or feelings. The brand serves as the conditioned stimuli (just like the 
bell in Pavlov’s experiment). By pairing meaningful unconditioned stimuli with 
the brand, the advertiser hopes to condition consumers to feel positively about 
the brand. Hence, it is crucial for advertisers to select unconditioned stimuli that 
appeal to the target market.
Pairing an unconditioned stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus re-
peatedly leads to stimulus generalization, or to similar responses to both stimu-
li. This means that people learn to associate the unconditioned stimuli or the 
background elements of the ad with the conditioned stimulus, the brand itself. 
Once an association is learned, people respond similarly to the conditioned 
stimulus and to the unconditioned stimulus. Importantly, this occurs even 
when the conditioned stimulus is presented alone. After learning an associa-
tion between an advertised brand and the positive background elements of an 
ad, consumers often encounter the advertised brand alone in a store. To the 
extent that learning or conditioning was effective, the same feelings generated 
by the advertisement should occur when the brand is encountered in the store 
without any advertising.
Timing is crucial. Greater learning or conditioning occurs when the con-
ditioned stimulus is presented before the unconditioned stimulus. This is 
known as forward conditioning because the presence of the conditioned 
stimulus can be used to predict the subsequent occurrence of the uncondi-
tioned stimulus. Many advertisements, however, use backward condition-
ing. That is, the conditioned stimulus (the advertised brand) is presented after the 
unconditioned stimulus (e.g., likable music, people, places, or things). Learning still 
takes place, but the associations are weaker; higher levels of repetitive advertising are 
PRNewsFoto/Old Navy/AP Photo
PRNewsFoto/Michelin/Newscom

122 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
needed for learning to occur. Furthermore, many ads use unconditioned stimuli that 
are ineffective because they were previously encountered alone without pairing (the 
unconditioned stimulus pre-exposure effect). For example, a popular song that has 
been repeatedly encountered alone is not a good candidate for classical conditioning 
because consumers have been pre-exposed to the music. The familiar song is not 
likely to become associated with a brand. Classical conditioning is also less effective 
for old,  familiar brands than for new, less familiar brands.4
Classical conditioning is also less effective when multiple conditioned stimuli pre-
dict the subsequent occurrence of an unconditioned stimulus.5 Conditioned stimuli 
compete with one another for predictive strength. Consequently, as the predictive 
strength of one stimulus increases, the predictive strength of other stimuli decreases. 
Again, timing is paramount. The order in which stimuli are presented has an im-
portant influence on subsequent learning. For example, after consumers learn that 
a target attribute (e.g., brand name) is useful for predicting quality, other cues (i.e., 
other attributes) seem unpredictive. This is known as blocking because the first pre-
dictive stimulus blocks or prevents learning for other predictive stimuli encountered 
later. During the learning phase of a recent study on blocking, participants received 
To facilitate learning about international marketing, Professor 
James Kellaris of the University of Cincinnati led a group of stu-
dents on a field trip to Mexico. The students received a 
45- minute tour of the Freixenet man-
ufacturing facility conducted by a 
representative of Freixenet. Freixenet 
is a Mexican “champagne,” or 
more accurately, a Mexican spar-
kling wine. At the end of the 45-min-
ute tour, the Freixenet representative 
asked if there were any questions. 
One of the students pointed to a 
large container and asked, “Is there 
wine in there?” What does this 
question reveal about the learning 
process? It demonstrates that expos-
ing people to a large amount of 
information is not sufficient to pro-
duce learning. Learning requires motivation, attention, and most 
importantly, relating new information to old information stored in 
memory and thinking about the implications of new information.
Even though the same grapes (usually a blend of char-
donnay, pinot meunier, and pinot noir) and the same process 
(mêthode Champenoise) are used to make sparkling wine world-
wide, sparkling wine can be called 
champagne only if it is made in the 
Champagne region of France. Dom 
Pèrignon is a classic example of 
French champagne, and it is very 
famous because it is the pioneering 
brand or the first “sparkling” wine 
ever produced. Excellent sparking 
wines are made in many other 
countries also, including Freixenet 
of Mexico, Domaine Carneros of 
California, in the United States, Asti 
Spumanti of Italy, Cava of Spain, 
and the sparkling wines of Australia. 
Why do you think it is important to 
the French that the term “champagne” be reserved for sparkling 
wines made in the Champagne region? Why do you think spar-
kling wine is such a popular  product in many different countries?
Eye on International
Mexican “Champagne”
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
123
attribute (airecell or closed-cell compartments) and brand name (Hypalon or Riken) 
information for several products in an unfamiliar category (rafts).6 Either the type of 
compartment or the brand name predicted quality ratings. During a second learn-
ing phase, a redundant cue (tubular or I-beam floor) also predicted quality ratings. 
During the test phase, participants judged the quality of several new raft products. 
Learning about the importance of a redundant cue was blocked by prior learning 
about the first predictive cue, regardless of whether the first predictive cue was a brand 
name or an attribute.
In a follow-up study, researchers investigated the competition between attribute 
versus brand name information as signals for quality by manipulating the predictive 
strength of attribute and brand cues (experimental conditions) or brand cues only (con-
trol conditions).7 During the learning phase, participants received attribute (Alpine 
class down fill or regular down fill) and brand name (Hypalon or Riken) information 
for several products in an unfamiliar category (down jackets). During the test phase, 
participants judged the quality of several new products. The results showed that the 
brand name had a weaker effect on quality judgments when the target attribute was 
predictive (vs. unpredictive) of product quality. This pattern was observed for new 
products in the original product category (down jackets), as well as in a different prod-
uct category (wool sweaters). This effect is reduced when brand–quality associations are 
learned prior to attribute–quality associations or when no information about quality 
is provided during the learning phase. Although conventional wisdom suggests that 
building strong brands requires marketers to design products with high-quality attri-
butes, the results of these studies show that attribute 
equity undermines brand equity when unambiguous 
information about quality is available.
Learning via classical conditioning is important in 
advertising and in many other situations as well. Think 
about the importance of timing for learning about the 
benefits and costs of using credit cards to buy products. 
The benefits of credit card use are  immediate: the prod-
uct or service is yours to enjoy as soon as you use your 
card. Consequently, strong credit card–benefit associa-
tions are learned by consumers. However, the costs of 
credit card use are delayed: the credit card bill arrives 
days or weeks after the credit card purchase is made. 
Consequently, weak credit card–cost associations are 
learned by consumers. In other words, the benefits of 
using credit cards are more strongly associated with 
credit cards than are the costs of using credit cards. 
This conditions or brainwashes consumers into spend-
ing more when they use their credit cards.
To test this idea, a study of credit cards and classi-
cal conditioning examined the average size of tips left 
by restaurant patrons who paid using credit card ver-
sus those using cash.8 Customers who paid by credit 
card left larger tips. In a follow-up study, consumers 
were asked to play a “Price Is Right” game by guessing 
the prices of several products shown on a computer 
monitor. In the experimental condition, a small plas-
tic MasterCard sign was placed next to the computer 
© 2006 MasterCard. All rights reserved. No use thereof may be made without the prior written consent of 
MasterCard.
Consumers spend more and reach the decision to spend more 
quickly when credit card symbols are present.

124 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
monitor. In the control condition, the sign was removed. Higher price estimates were 
formed when the MasterCard sign was present than when the MasterCard sign was 
absent. In another follow-up study, several products and their prices were displayed 
on a computer monitor, and consumers were asked to press one key if they were will-
ing to buy each product and a different key if they were unwilling to buy the product. 
Decision times to buy the product were faster when the MasterCard sign was present 
than when the MasterCard sign was absent. A final study found that college students 
donated more to charity (The United Way) when the request to donate was made in a 
room containing credit-card logos, despite the fact that the donations had to be cash! 
Together, these results show that consumers spend more and reach the decision to spend 
faster when credit card symbols are present rather than absent. As a result, retailers, cata-
log marketers, and Internet marketers should prominently display credit card symbols 
in menus, point-of-purchase displays, catalogs, Web pages, and other marketing com-
munications, because it is very likely that their customers will make larger purchases if 
they know they can use their credit cards.
Operant Conditioning
In classical conditioning, the stimulus precedes the response, but in operant condi-
tioning (or instrumental conditioning), the stimulus follows the response.9 Positive 
reinforcement, or the presence of a reward, increases the probability of a response, 
while negative reinforcement, or the absence of punishment, also increases the 
probability of a response. Extinction, or the absence of a reward, decreases the prob-
ability of a response. The presence of punishment also decreases the probability of a 
response. Learning via operant conditioning is faster under conditions of continuous 
reinforcement, or when reinforcement occurs every time the desired response occurs. 
However, learning via operant conditioning is more persistent under conditions of 
partial reinforcement, or when reinforcement occurs only some of the times the 
desired response occurs.
Rewards used in marketing include coupons, bonus points, rebates, and priz-
es given to consumers who buy your product. Rewards increase the probability of 
repeat purchase. Operant conditioning can also be used to influence consumers who 
do not currently use your product. Negative reinforcements in marketing include 
eliminating expensive shipping terms, reducing paperwork associated with rebates 
and warranties, or eliminating long waiting lines or delivery times. Shaping, or rein-
forcing successive approximations of the desired response, also can be used to encour-
age current non-users to buy your product. For example, a retailer may first reward 
non-users to visit the mall where the store is located by offering a free fashion show. 
Then, the retailer may encourage non-users to visit the store by offering a door prize. 
Next, the retailer may encourage non-users to buy products by offering a discount 
on products purchased in the store using a store credit card. Finally, when consumers 
buy products, the retailer can reward them by offering frequent-user bonus points for 
each purchase.
Comprehension and Miscomprehension
Comprehending or understanding information requires relating new information 
presented in the environment to old information stored in memory.10 Because new in-
formation is typically incomplete, consumers must form inferences to fill in missing 
details to make sense out of the new information. For example, when reading a story 
O b jec tive 2

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
125
stating that Bob pounded a nail into the wall, people au-
tomatically infer that Bob used a hammer even though the 
story never stated this.11 Similarly, when reading an ad for 
a new automobile, consumers automatically infer that the 
automobile has standard features, such as automatic trans-
mission, anti-lock brakes, etc., even if the ad never men-
tions these features. Background knowledge helps people 
fill in missing details to make sense of new information. 
However, sometimes new information is so extreme, it in-
vites consumers to form specific inferences. For example, 
the features of a Lexus are so luxurious that it is difficult 
not to infer that the Lexus is a luxury automobile while 
examining it. Consumers’ goals also influence what infer-
ences consumers are likely to form. For example, consumers 
with the goal of purchasing a luxury automobile are likely 
to evaluate all automobiles in terms of the attributes that 
mean luxury to them.
As comprehension increases, memory performance also 
increases. It is difficult to remember meaningless informa-
tion. This is why professors use memory tests (e.g., mul-
tiple choice exams, fill-in-the-blank questions, short essay 
questions) to assess comprehension. If a  student does not 
understand the course material, the student is not likely to 
remember much, and will probably  perform poorly on the 
exam. Controlled laboratory studies show that students 
have great difficulty memorizing meaningless statements, 
such as “the notes went sour because the bag was ripped.”12 
However, these statements were easy to remember when 
the students were given a theme word (e.g., “bag pipe”) 
that made the statements more meaningful. Ideally, stu-
dents should always try to make new course material more 
meaningful by relating it to prior knowledge.
Because consumers use background knowledge to fill in missing details, ads can 
mislead consumers by presenting claims that are literally true but figuratively false. 
Claims stating that a product may be effective, or is more effective, or is recommended 
by experts often lead consumers to assume that the product is better than it actu-
ally is.13 When consumers see an ad stating, “Be popular! Brush with UltraBrite!” 
they often assume that brushing with UltraBrite will make them more popular, even 
though the ad never directly stated this. When consumers see an ad stating, “Women 
who look younger use Oil of Olay,” they often assume that using Oil of Olay will 
make them look younger, even though the ad never stated this. Advertisements 
often imply much more than what is actually stated, and such implications can be 
misleading.
Visual images can also contain false implications.14 For example, a Milky 
Way ad transforms a glass of milk into a candy bar, implying that the candy bar is 
as  nutritious as a glass of milk. A Mattel advertisement uses extreme close-ups and 
camera angles that make Hot Wheels toy cars appear much faster than they actually 
are. A Campbell’s soup ad shows a bowl of soup with meat, potatoes, and  vegetables 
bursting above the broth level. What consumers do not know is that marbles are 
in the bottom of the bowl, pushing the solid ingredients above the broth level. 
Ob jec ti ve 3
 
Some ads take advantage of con-
 
sumers’ assumptions about ad-
 
vertising claims that are literally true 
 
but figuratively false.37 Because the 
claims are literally true, advertisers can argue that they are not 
lying. However, consumers’ assumptions about the meaning 
of the advertised claims can make the claims misleading. For 
example, the word “may” implies maybe yes and maybe no. 
However, consumers often assume that “may” probably means 
yes. So, when an ad states that Brand X may relieve pain, con-
sumers often assume that yes, Brand X does relieve pain.
Comparison omission can also mislead consumers. When 
an ad states that Brand Y gasoline gives you greater mileage, 
consumers typically assume that this means that Brand Y gives 
you greater mileage than other brands of gasoline. The ad never 
stated this directly, and after all, Brand Y does give you greater 
mileage than water. Piecemeal information can also make a 
product seem better than it actually is. For example, an ad stat-
ing that a Brand Z car had more head room than a Mercedes 
Benz, more leg room than a BMW, and more trunk space than 
a Lexus implies that Brand Z is better than each of these luxury 
automobiles. In reality, the differences were trivial: Brand Z has 
1/10th of an inch more head room than a Mercedes Benz, 
1/5th of an inch more leg room than a BMW, and 1/15th 
of an inch more trunk space than a Lexus. Thus, each of the 
piecemeal claims are literally true, but the actual differences are 
trivial. What are the ethical implications of misleading ads that 
are literally true but figuratively false? Should firms be allowed 
to exploit consumers in this manner? What is the best way to 
protect consumers from misleading advertising?
E T H I C S

126 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
A Black Flag ad shows two glass tanks filled with cockroaches. One tank is sprayed 
with Black Flag, and most of the cockroaches die. The other tank is sprayed with 
another leading brand, but few cockroaches die. What consumers are not told 
is that the cockroaches in the second tank are bred to be resistant to the other leading 
brand of insecticide.
Misleading advertising practices are unfair because consumers must form inferences 
and make assumptions to comprehend advertising claims. Sometimes the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) orders advertisers to air corrective advertising that states that a 
previous ad was misleading, as in the famous Listerine case. A Listerine ad stated that 
Listerine kills germs that cause colds, which simply was not true. Listerine’s corrective 
ad stated that Listerine does not help prevent colds. Nevertheless, extensive research 
has shown that corrective advertising is typically ineffective15 because consumers have 
difficulty changing their beliefs dramatically, even when they realize that those beliefs 
are wrong.16
Memory
Memory researchers often use a computer metaphor to explain how memory works.17 
A computer has a hard drive that can store a large number of inactive files. A computer 
also allows users to retrieve a file from the hard drive and bring it into active memory 
so the file can be processed (e.g., edited or used). Similarly, people have a long-term 
memory system that stores a large amount of inactive data or knowledge. To use such 
knowledge, however, people must retrieve a “file” from long-term memory and bring 
in into short-term memory to process it further. All thinking and 
reasoning occurs in short-term memory, but only a small amount 
of information can be held in short-term memory at any given time 
(7 plus-or-minus 2 chunks or units). If this information is not 
used, it is lost less than 18 seconds later (hence, the name “short-
term  memory”). By contrast, long-term memory appears to store 
an unlimited amount of information for a long period of time. 
Nevertheless, three different types of forgetting can occur in long-
term memory:
 
1. Original information is not maintained
 
2.  New information is not successfully stored in memory
 
3.  New knowledge overrides existing information, or vice-
versa
Information held in long-term memory can also be distorted 
or changed over time. Furthermore, sometimes consumers can’t 
forget things that they’d prefer to forget. We discuss how consum-
ers forget information in the next section.
The Seven Sins of Memory
Although memory influences nearly every thought and action we take, memory can 
also be fallible. There are seven basic mistakes or “sins” of memory: transience, absent-
mindedness, blocking, misattribution, suggestibility, bias, and persistence.18 The first 
three sins refer to three different types of forgetting. The second three refer to three dif-
ferent types of distortion. Persistence refers to the inability to forget things one wants 
to forget.
O b jec tive 4
© Dave Teel/CORBIS

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
127
Transience Transience refers to forgetting over time. If you don’t use it, 
you lose it: If knowledge is not used for a long period of time, information loss can 
occur. Recently processed information is more accessible or easy to retrieve, relative 
to information that was processed long ago. Information accessibility decreases with 
the passage of time. Hence, it is easier to remember commercials we viewed recently 
than to remember commercials we viewed long ago. However, the passage of time is 
not the only variable that influences forgetting. Forgetting can also occur as a result 
of shallow processing (absent- mindedness) or interference from other information 
stored in memory (blocking).
Absent-mindedness Absent-mindedness refers to forgetting as a result of 
shallow or superficial processing of information during encoding or retrieval. Encoding 
refers to attention, comprehension, and the transference of information from short-
term memory to long-term memory. Retrieval refers to the transference of information 
from long-term memory to short-term memory. Lapses of attention or effort during 
encoding or retrieval can lead to forgetting. If consumers are unmotivated to process 
information carefully because of a lack of interest in a product, or if they are unable 
to process information carefully because of distractions or attempts to perform several 
cognitive tasks simultaneously (divided attention), absent-mindedness and the forget-
ting associated with it are likely to occur.
Depth-of-processing research shows that memory performance improves with 
effort.19 A given word is easier to remember if it is processed at a deep level rather 
than at a shallow level. Level of processing can be manipulated experimentally by 
varying the difficulty of the questions we are asked about a word. For example, shal-
low encoding occurs when people are asked a simple 
question: Is TIDE printed in uppercase letters? Deeper 
encoding occurs when people are asked a more difficult 
question: Is TIDE a type of detergent? The word TIDE 
is more likely to be remembered when it is processed 
intensely rather than superficially. Consequently, ads 
that encourage consumers to think deeply about a 
product are more memorable than ads that encourage 
cursory processing. In a similar vein, simply reading a 
bunch of words is a bad way to prepare for an exam. 
Thinking deeply about the concepts, generating ex-
amples of the concepts, and relating the concepts to 
prior knowledge and experience is a much better way 
to study. Research on the generation effect shows that 
memory performance is enhanced when people gener-
ate their own answers to questions rather than simply 
reading them.20 This occurs because generating answers 
requires more effort than simply reading answers, and 
memory  improves as effort increases.
Absent-mindedness can also occur at the time of 
 retrieval. When distracted, consumers often forget to 
perform actions they intended to perform. Consumers 
forget to take their medicine, pick up certain items at the 
grocery store, or keep appointments. In each example, 
consumers forget to perform a future action even though 
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Memory aids such as electronic devices help eliminate 
 absent-mindedness.

128 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
they intended to do so. Memory aids such as post-it notes, pocket calendars, PDAs, 
and even tying string around a finger are often used to prevent this type of forgetting.
Blocking Forgetting frequently occurs because the information one is trying to 
retrieve is temporarily inaccessible as a result of blocking or interference from related 
information. The information one is trying to retrieve is stored in memory; it has not 
been lost over time; it had been encoded deeply; but the search for it in one’s memory 
is not always successful. Sometimes people know they know the answer to a question, 
but they cannot quite put their finger on it. This is known as the tip-of-the-tongue 
effect: The answer seems to be on the tip of your tongue, but you can’t quite retrieve 
it.21 Students often complain that they knew the answer to an exam question, but 
couldn’t retrieve it until after the exam was over. The answer was temporarily inacces-
sible because “ugly sisters” blocked or prevented retrieval of the correct answer. The 
name “ugly sisters” comes from the story of Cinderella, in which the nice Cinderella 
was dominated by her mean older sisters. In memory research, ugly sisters are incorrect 
answers related to the correct answer, and they are retrieved repeatedly instead of the 
correct answer.
The tip-of-the-tongue effect shows that forgetting can occur even when the answer 
to a question is stored somewhere in long-term memory. The answer did not fade or 
decay over time. Instead, the answer is temporarily inaccessible because of interference 
from related information. Studies of very long-term memory show that people can 
remember information learned in high school (e.g., foreign languages, mathematics) 
even more than 50 years!22 Again, this shows that long-term memories do not necessar-
ily fade or decay over time.
Studies of relearning provide the best evidence for forgetting without information 
loss. Relearning something you thought you forgot (e.g., foreign languages, mathemat-
ics) is easier than learning something for the first time.23 In classic relearning studies, 
participants learned 20 pairs of numbers and words (e.g., 43-dog). Two weeks later, 
participants forgot about 25 percent of this material. In the relearning condition, par-
ticipants relearned the same 20 pairs of numbers and words. In the control condition, 
participants learned new words paired with old numbers for all forgotten pairs (e.g., 
the original 43-dog was changed to 43-house). Memory performance was far better in 
the relearning condition than in the control condition. This result could not occur if 
forgotten information were lost forever.
According to the association principle of long-term memory, each node. idea, or 
piece of information stored in memory is connected to other nodes that are concep-
tually related by links known as associations.24 Associations are learned via classical 
conditioning and operant conditioning. Related nodes are connected in a complex as-
sociative network, in which closely related nodes are connected directly by a single as-
sociation, and distantly related nodes are connected by a chain or series of associations. 
Activation or retrieval refers to the transfer of information from inactive long-term 
memory to active short-term memory. Spreading activation refers to the idea that 
when people retrieve a particular node, they automatically think about other closely 
related nodes. An associative network is like a complex system of irrigation ditches; 
each node is like a pool of water connected to other pools via a system of ditches. When 
one pool is filled with water, the water spills out to other nearby pools. The more water 
poured into a pool, the farther the spillage spreads. Eventually, the water runs out and 
the spreading stops.
For example, whenever consumers think about a brand name, like McDonald’s, 
they start thinking about associations to the brand (e.g., Big Macs, fries, shakes, Ronald 

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
129
McDonald). A strong association leads to a priming effect: Simply thinking about 
the brand leads consumers to think about closely related concepts. The priming effect 
can be reduced or eliminated by adding new associations to consumers’ associative 
networks. As the number of new associations increases, the likelihood that consumers 
will think about a particular old association decreases. New associations increase the 
complexity of consumers’ associative networks and produce associative interference, 
in which the new associations compete with and block old associations.
Associative interference is commonly observed in advertising.25 Old ads compete 
with new ads, and vice versa. Proactive interference occurs when information learned 
earlier blocks memory for information learned later. Retroactive interference occurs 
when information learned later blocks memory for information learned earlier. Both 
types of interference are common in advertising. Furthermore, greater proactive and 
retroactive interference occurs with advertisements for brands in the same product cat-
egory (e.g., ads for different brands of cereal) than for brands in different product 
categories (e.g., ads for cereal and for cars).
Blocking is often frustrating because people realize that they know the answer 
they’re looking for, but they can’t find it. How can blocking be reduced? According 
to the encoding-specificity principle, memory is context dependent.26 Contextual 
or background cues have a surprisingly powerful influence on memory performance. 
During encoding, contextual cues are encoded along with the target information one 
is trying to remember. Later, during retrieval, the contextual cues may be the same or 
different. Memory performance is enhanced when the contextual cues at the time of 
encoding and at the time of retrieval match or are highly similar. As the degree of simi-
larity decreases, memory performance decreases.
For example, students typically attend lectures and take exams in the same class-
room. In this case, the contextual cues (e.g., lighting, seating, background noise level, 
etc.) are the same during encoding (learning) and retrieval (taking an exam), and this 
Big Mac
Egg
McMuffin
Fresh
Consistent
Good
Tasting
Hot
BRANDS
PRODUCTS
FUN
Friendly/
Warm
Ronald
McDonald
SOCIAL
INVOLVEMENT
KIDS
FAMILY
MEALS
QUALITY
VALUE
Pricing
Promotions
Consistent
Convenient
Fast
Clean
Ronald
McDonald House
Minority/
Inner City
Programs
McDonald’s
Charities
McDONALD’S
GOLDEN ARCHES
McDonald
Dolls & Toys
Playground
Birthday
Parties
Hassle-
Free
Portion
Size
SERVICE
Breakfast
Hamburgers
Shakes
Fries
Salads
Figure 6.1 
Associative Network

130 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
improves memory. If a professor wants to be mean, he or she could lecture in one room 
and give exams in a different room. In this case, the contextual cues present during 
encoding and during retrieval are different, and this reduces memory performance. 
Even small seemingly irrelevant background differences can have dramatic effects on 
memory performance. Larger background differences have even more dramatic effects. 
For example, students often hurt themselves by studying for an exam late at night 
while drinking lots of coffee. Then they take the exam in the morning without cof-
fee. Nighttime contexts differ from daytime contexts in many respects (e.g., lighting, 
seating, fatigue levels, hunger levels, etc.) and high caffeine contexts differ from low 
caffeine contexts in many respects (e.g., alertness levels, thirst levels, etc.). The greater 
the differences between encoding contexts and retrieval contexts, the more memory 
performance decreases.
Marketers can use the encoding-specificity principle to their advantage by trying to 
increase the similarity of contextual cues present during encoding and during retrieval. 
Consumers often encode information about products while watching TV at home. Later, 
while shopping at a grocery store, they are likely to retrieve information about products 
to make informed purchase decisions. Obviously, large contextual differences exist be-
tween the home environment and the grocery store environment. These differences can 
be reduced by placing characters from advertisements viewed at home in the grocery 
store environment. For example, Life cereal’s TV commercials feature Little Mikey, and 
Little Mikey’s picture appears on boxes of Life cereal in grocery stores. Other advertising 
characters (e.g., the Pillsbury doughboy, Tony the tiger, the Keebler elves, Juan Valdez) 
are also featured on product packages or point-of-purchase displays to help consumers 
remember information from advertisements they viewed in different contexts.
Marketplace Rumors
Marketing in Action
In the 1970s a rumor started that McDonald’s used 
worms in its hamburger meat mixture. In the 1980s, an-
other rumor said that Procter & Gamble donated a portion 
of its profits to the Church of Satan. In the 1990s, a third 
rumor announced that parked Audi 4000s automobiles 
would spontaneously slip into gear and crash into large 
objects. In each of these cases, the firms reacted by deny-
ing the rumors. However, sales of each of these brands 
dropped despite the denials. Why?
Denials backfire because they increase the strength 
of the association in memory between the firm and the 
rumor. A strong association leads to a priming effect: 
simply thinking about the firm leads consumers to think 
about the rumor associated with the firm. The best way to 
eliminate the priming effect is to add new associations to 
consumers’ associative networks stored in memory. As the 
number of new associations increases, the likelihood that 
consumers will think about the rumor decreases.
New associations can include information on the 
various products and services offered by a firm, the 
charitable organizations sponsored by the firm, and the 
prestigious organizations to which the firm belongs (e.g., 
the Better Business Bureau). New associations increase 
the complexity of consumers’ associative networks and 
produce associative interference. That is, new associa-
tions compete with old associations and reduce the prob-
ability that activation will spread to old associations.
Council of Better Business Bureaus

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
131
Misattribution Forgetting isn’t the only memory problem consumers en-
counter. Memory can also be distorted from misattribution. Three different types of 
memory misattributions or confusions are possible:
 
1. source confusion
 
2. feelings of familiarity
 
3. false memories
Source confusion occurs when consumers remember reading a fact about a product 
but misremember where they read it.27 Sometimes consumers believe that they read 
the information from a credible source (e.g., Consumer Reports), but they actually read 
it from a noncredible source (e.g., National Enquirer). Sometimes consumers believe 
that the conclusions they drew after reading a message about a product were actually 
stated in the message. In short, source confusion can lead consumers to trust product 
information more than they should.
The second type of memory misattribution is the tendency to confuse feelings 
of familiarity with a wide variety of possible judgments, including fame, confi-
dence, liking, and truth.28 The more familiar a brand name seems, the more famous 
and popular the brand seems to be. Answers to questions that come to mind readily 
are held with greater confidence. The more familiar an initially neutral product be-
comes, the more consumers like the product. This is known as the mere exposure 
effect because repeated exposure to a product increases familiarity and liking. This 
is one reason why consumers learn to like novel foods (e.g., sushi), beverages (e.g., 
martinis), words (e.g., afworbu), and songs (e.g., new tunes heard on the radio) 
more over time. As the familiarity of a product claim increases, the more consum-
ers believe the claim. This is known as the truth effect.29 Simple repetition (e.g., 
repetitive advertising) is one way to increase the familiarity of a product, a claim, or 
an idea, and simple repetition can increase judgments of fame, confidence, liking, 
or truth. Increasing the ease with which consumers can perceive, read, or compre-
hend product information also increases familiarity. Consumers are most likely to 
confuse familiarity with fame, confidence, liking, or truth when their attention is 
divided during encoding, retrieval, or both.
The third type of memory misattribution is 
a false memory, or the tendency to remember 
items or events that never happened.30 In a typical 
false memory experiment, people study a list of 
words that are closely related to a non-presented 
word. For example, the words “sugar,” “sweet,” 
“chocolate,” and “tasty” are closely related to 
the non-presented word “candy.” When people 
are later asked to recall as many words from the 
list as possible, they frequently recall the word 
“candy,” even though it was not presented. This 
occurs because it is easier to remember the gist 
or the general meaning of the presented words 
than to remember the specific presented words 
themselves.
Suggestibility Misleading questions and suggestions can also lead to memory 
distortion.31 For example, people who witness an automobile accident remember different 
events when they are asked, “How fast was the car going when it ran past the stop sign?” 
Stefan_Redel/iStockphoto.com

132 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
versus “How fast was the car going when it ran past the yield sign?” They also remember 
different events when they are asked, “How fast was the car going when it smashed into 
the other car?” versus “How fast was the car going when it bumped into the other car?” 
Similarly, adults asked to remember their childhood experiences are more likely to remember 
instances of child abuse if they receive suggestions of child abuse from a psychother-
apist. Advertising can also produce memory distortion. For example, after tasting a 
bland orange juice, consumers are more likely to misremember the orange juice as 
flavorful after seeing an ad suggesting that the product is flavorful than after seeing no 
ad. Advertising can distort memory for past experiences with a product.
Bias Previously viewed advertising can also influence what is learned from cur-
rent product experiences.32 Advertising influences consumers’ expectations, and 
expectations subsequently color what consumers see. To the extent that product 
experiences are ambiguous or open to multiple interpretations, expectations guide 
the interpretation of product experiences. Products seem larger, smaller, heavier, 
lighter, tastier, or more comfortable if consumers expect them to be larger, smaller, 
heavier, lighter, tastier, or more comfortable, respectively. Prior beliefs can bias cur-
rent beliefs and experiences.33 Consequently, learning from experience becomes dif-
ficult because prior beliefs and current experiences are perceived as more consistent 
than they actually are.
The opposite is also possible. Current beliefs can bias memory for prior beliefs and 
experiences. In a recent study, marketers were led to prefer supplier A over supplier B. 
Three weeks later, the same marketers were led to prefer supplier B over supplier A. 
When they were asked about their earlier preference, the marketers indicated that they 
always preferred supplier A.34 Even when preferences change dramatically over time, 
people often assume that their earlier preferences were the same as their current prefer-
ences. Consequently, people often believe that their preferences are more consistent 
than they actually are.
Persistence Sometimes people can’t forget things they want to forget. Traumatic 
events are often difficult to forget. Some songs and advertising jingles get stuck in our 
heads. This is known as earworm.35 Try not to think about a catchy song (such as “Who 
Let the Dogs Out”) or advertising jingle (such as the Subway jingle) that you’ve heard 
recently. Simple, catchy, repetitive tunes are especially likely to produce earworm. Trying 
not to think about a specific song, object, or issuep is surprisingly difficult. After trying 
not to think about a specific topic, people are more likely to think about it later when 
they are no longer trying not to think about it! Momentary distractions can also lead 
people to think more about a topic they are trying not to think about. The persistence of 
unwanted thoughts can be frustrating, distracting, and sometimes depressing.

Chapter 6   Learning and Memory 
133
Review and Discussion
1. What are the differences between classical condition-
ing and operant conditioning?
2. How does learning influence memory?
3. How does memory influence learning?
4. Discuss three different ways forgetting occurs.
5. Discuss three different ways memory distortion 
occurs.
6. Discuss some ways that forgetting influences 
consumer behavior.
 7.    Discuss some ways that memory distortion 
influences consumer behavior.
 8.    What are the three types of memory 
misattributions?
 9.    When and how does previously viewed advertising 
influence current beliefs?
10.    When and how does advertising viewed today 
influence memory for past product experiences?
Learning produces knowledge about products, and memory 
determines how knowledge about products is  accessed and 
used. Associations between unconditioned and  conditioned 
stimuli are learned via classical conditioning. Associations 
between responses and consequences are learned via operant 
conditioning. Associations are the building blocks of knowl-
edge stored in memory. Although memory influences nearly 
all aspects of consumer behavior, most consumers underesti-
mate the importance of memory. The seven sins of memory 
are side effects of an otherwise adaptive memory system. 
The sins of forgetting are transience (forgetting over time), 
absent-mindedness (forgetting because of a lack of effort dur-
ing encoding or during retrieval), and blocking (forgetting as 
a result of interference resulting from cue competition). The 
sins of distortion are misattribution (distortion as a result of 
confusion), suggestibility (distortion as a result of the ques-
tions and suggestions of others), and bias (distortion because 
of overestimating the consistency of the past and the present, 
and vice versa). The sin of persistence refers to the inabil-
ity to forget what one wants to forget. Despite these sins, 
memory enables consumers to perform remarkably complex 
thinking, reasoning, and decision-making activities.
Chapter Summary
classical conditioning
unconditioned stimulus
conditioned stimulus
unconditioned response
conditioned response
forward conditioning
backward conditioning
pre-exposure effect
operant conditioning
positive reinforcement
negative reinforcement
punishment
extinction
shaping
continuous reinforcement
partial reinforcement
encoding
retrieval
accessibility
transience
absent-mindedness
blocking
misattribution
suggestibility
persistence
priming effect
associative interference
proactive interference
retroactive interference
encoding-specificity principle
Key Terms

134 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Imagine that you work for the Consumers Union, 
the consumer protection organization that publishes 
Consumer Reports. Your supervisor asked you to test 
the effectiveness of several subliminal self-help CDs 
that are currently on the market. Before designing 
your experiment, you performed a literature review 
and found a classic experiment on the effectiveness 
of subliminal self-help audiotapes. Students were 
randomly assigned to conditions in a 2  2 fac-
torial design in which expectations and audiotape 
contents were manipulated experimentally.36 Half 
the students were told that the audiotape improved 
memory performance. The other half were told that 
the audiotape improved self-esteem.
Half of the students received the memory audio-
tape, and half received the self-esteem audiotape, 
regardless of what they were told earlier. Hence, 
in half of the conditions, expectations and content 
matched (e.g., students expected the audiotape to 
improve memory and the audiotape was supposed 
to actually improve memory). For the remaining 
half, expectations and content were mismatched 
(e.g., students expected the audiotape to improve 
memory, but the audiotape was supposed to actu-
ally improve self-esteem). The results showed that 
expectations influenced memory performance and 
self-esteem ratings and that the content of the 
audiotapes had no effect. Imagine that you conduct-
ed a replication experiment using currently available 
subliminal self-help CDs and that you obtained the 
same pattern of results.
1. Explain your results. Which of the seven sins of memory is at work here and how is 
it operating?
2. Placebo effects are common in medical research. Which of the seven sins of memory is 
responsible for placebo effects? How do medical researchers design experiments to test 
for placebo effects?
3. How are marketing expectation effects and medical placebo effects similar?
4. How would you protect consumers from subliminal self-help CDs that don’t work?
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
YOUR CHALLENGE:
1. Think of some ways you could use classical condi-
tioning in advertising.
2. Think of some ways you could design an advertise-
ment that would improve memory for the advertised 
brand and for claims about the advertised brand.
3. Think of some ways you could design an advertise-
ment that would block memory for competing 
brands and for claims about competing brands.
4. Form a small group and create a memory test for 
other small groups. Each group should pick a 
 product category, write down a list of ten brands, 
and purposely omit one leading brand. Read the list 
quickly to the memory test takers and ask them to 
count backwards from 100 by threes for about 
20 seconds. Then ask the test takers to recall as many 
brand names as possible. How many test takers 
mention the omitted leading brand? Is it possible to 
create false memories in only 20 seconds?
Short Application Exercises

135
Automatic Information Processing
 1 | Define automatic information 
processing.
 2 | Explain the benefits of unconscious 
thought.
 3 | Explain thin slice theory.
 4 | Identify many different types of priming 
effects.
 5 | Describe subliminal priming and 
persuasion.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
objectives
In 1957, market researcher James Vicary claimed that he flashed 
the messages “Eat Popcorn” and “Drink Coke” on a movie screen 
at 1/3,000th of a second during the airing of a popular film called 
Picnic.1 Although no one could see these messages, Vicary claimed 
that popcorn sales increased by 58 percent and Coke sales increased 
by 18 percent. Later, he admitted that he made up these data 
and that he never flashed any subliminal messages on the screen. 
Subliminal messages cannot be seen by the eye or interpreted by the 
conscious mind, but presumably can be “seen” by the subconscious 
mind. Despite Vicary’s admission, many consumers were and still 
are frightened by the possibility of unconscious mind control. This 
is because most consumers do not understand how the unconscious 
mind works. The unconscious mind is the focus of this chapter.
7
Subliminal Advertising
CHAPTER
©2009 American Association of Advertising Agencies. Reprinted by permission.

136
What Is Automatic Information Processing?
Automatic information processing refers to mental processes that occur without 
awareness or intention, but nevertheless influence judgments, feelings, goals, and be-
haviors.2 Consumers do many things without their conscious awareness. For example, 
in a classic study, consumers were shown four pairs of nylon stockings and were asked 
to choose the best pair.3 The stockings were arranged from left to right on a table, and 
the results showed that most consumers preferred the right-most pair. However, when 
they were asked why they liked this pair best, they were unable to explain it. Some said 
that they thought that this pair of stockings was higher in quality than the other pairs. 
This was not correct, however; the study participants were tricked: all four pairs of 
stockings were identical. So, when consumers are not sure why they like one product 
better than another, they often make up an answer that seems reasonable, but may 
be—and often is—wrong.
When shopping for groceries, consumers often buy impulsively. These impulse 
purchases are usually made with little or no conscious thought; later, when it’s time 
to pay for the groceries, consumers are often surprised by how high their bills are. 
Impulse buys are sometimes made without awareness. That is, consumers sometimes 
do not realize that they are putting certain items into their shopping carts. Impulse 
buys are usually made without intention. That is, consumers usually do not intend 
to make impulse purchases. Research shows that grocery shoppers are more likely to 
make impulse purchases when they are hungry and even more when they don’t have 
a shopping list.4
How do consumers make decisions with minimal thought? Some decisions 
are based on attitudes that come to mind automatically whenever consumers see 
objec tive 1
Digital Vision/Getty Images
Impulse purchases are more likely when consumers don’t use a 
shopping list.

Chapter 7   Automatic Information Processing 
137
or think about a particular product.5 Rather than thinking about all the pros and 
cons associated with a product, consumers simply think about whether they like 
the product. This does not occur for all products, but it does occur for highly 
familiar products. For example, consumers do not need to think about the pros 
and cons of Snickers candy bars if they already know that Snickers candy bars 
are among their favorites. Consumers do not need to think about the pros and 
cons of canned spinach if they already know that they detest canned spinach. For 
products associated with strong attitudes that are highly accessible from memory, 
responses come to mind quickly and unintentionally whenever these products are 
encountered.
The Adaptive Unconscious
How does a mental process become automatic? The answer is practice. Learning how 
to drive a car for the first time is painstakingly difficult. It is important to pay close at-
tention to the road, to other cars, to the pedals, and to the controls on the dashboard. 
However, with lots of practice, driving becomes easy because it becomes automatic. 
Instead of paying close attention to everything, practice makes it possible to receive all 
the information you need with just a glance. Practice can also make it easy to play a new 
sport, solve math problems, or make purchase decisions.
What are the benefits of automatic information processing? When a mental process 
becomes automatic and subject to unconscious control, it becomes easier to pay atten-
tion to novel objects and ideas that require careful attention and thought. Here, the 
subconscious mind frees up mental resources for the conscious mind. It would be dif-
ficult, if not impossible, for the conscious mind to navigate our complex environment 
without assistance from the unconscious mind.
Note that this view of the unconscious is quite different from the Freudian view. 
Freud thought that the unconscious hid important thoughts and ideas from us, and 
that this causes mental illness. The purpose of psycho-
therapy, according to Freud, was to uncover these hidden 
thoughts and ideas. In sharp contrast, the modern view 
of the adaptive unconscious suggests that the uncon-
scious mind can be trained to perform routine mental 
activities. This is beneficial, rather than harmful, because 
it enables people to devote more attention and thought 
to non-routine mental activities. For example, shopping 
for routine products, such as milk, butter, and eggs, re-
quires little time or energy. So, time and energy are thus 
freed up for thinking more carefully about non-routine 
purchases, such as the special ingredients for a new dish 
you want to try.
It becomes easier to appreciate the importance of the 
unconscious mind when one compares normal people to 
people whose brain injuries prevent them from experi-
encing emotions and learning unconsciously.6 In an important experiment, groups of 
participants were asked to play a gambling game in which they drew cards from four 
decks. Two of the decks were high-risk decks with high payoffs or high losses, with 
losses more likely to occur than payoffs. Two decks were low-risk decks with low pay-
offs or low losses, but in this case, payoffs were more likely. Normal people quickly 
objec ti ve 2
 
There are many different types of 
 
marketing placebo effects. If a con-
 
sumer believes that a product will 
 
be highly effective, the product 
is often more effective. Marketing placebo effects have been 
observed for self-help tapes, energy drinks, coffee, and other 
products. Even when two products are identical, the higher-priced 
product or the product with the more prestigious brand name of-
ten seems better. Is it ethical to market subliminal self-help tapes 
that don’t work? Is it ethical to market products that produce 
placebo effects, like homeopathic medicines, herbal remedies, 
and New Age cures? Where should the FDA draw the line?
E T H I C S

138 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
and unconsciously learned to draw mainly from the low-risk decks. Interestingly, 
they learned to do this long before they could explain why they did this. People 
with brain injuries that blocked emotions, but who were otherwise highly intelligent, 
drew mainly from the high-risk decks and lost more money. The absence of emo-
tional  responses and gut feelings prevented them from learning to avoid high-risk 
situations.
Thin Slice Theory of Informational Processing
People can learn a surprisingly large amount of information from very quick first 
impressions. “Thin slices,” or brief observations of another person’s behavior, provide 
surprisingly accurate information about this person’s personality traits and current 
feelings and goals.7 Research shows that what people learn from thin slices of be-
havior typically occurs in less than five minute intervals. Ironically, first impressions 
are often more accurate when they are based on very brief observations than when 
they are based on longer observations. Also, first impressions are often more accurate 
when people focus on nonverbal information, such as facial expressions, gestures, voice 
tone, and body movements, than when they focus on verbal information. This occurs 
because people have less control over nonverbal cues than they do over their verbal 
communication.
In a recent study of thin slicing, consumers were asked to make inferences about 
sales management job applicants based on 20-second audiotapes of random portions 
objec tive 3
The Marketing Placebo Effect
Marketing in Action
The more consumers pay for a 
product, the better they expect 
the product to perform. Some 
retailers charge a high price, 
and some charge a low price 
for exactly the same product, 
however. Does the price of 
a product influence how well 
the product performs even if 
different prices are charged 
for the same product? In an 
experiment designed to answer 
this question, consumers were 
told that SoBe Adrenaline Rush 
either sold for a high price or 
a low price.31 After tasting this 
beverage, consumers were asked to solve intellectual 
puzzles. The results showed that consumers solved more 
puzzles after drinking the high-priced beverage than 
after drinking the low-priced beverage, even though all 
consumers drank exactly 
the same beverage.
These results suggest 
that pricing information 
influences consumers’ 
expectations, which 
then influence behavior 
without awareness and 
without intention. This 
phenomenon is known 
as a placebo effect. 
This effect is especially 
common in medicine: 
If people think that a 
pill will make them feel 
better, it often makes 
them feel better, even if the pill has no real effect. The 
placebo effect also occurs in marketing: If consumers 
believe that a product will be effective, it seems more 
effective.
medlar/iStockphoto.com
Priming activates concepts from memory.

Chapter 7   Automatic Information Processing 
139
of job interviews. These inferences were compared to those of the expert sales managers 
who conducted the interviews. The results showed that consumers formed remarkably 
accurate inferences about the social skills and the anxiety levels of the job applicants 
based on thin slices of behavior. Accuracy was even higher when the audiotapes were 
content-filtered, so that consumers could listen to voice tone but the verbal message 
was garbled. Sometimes less is more.
Sometimes snap judgments are more accurate than judgments resulting from a 
great deal of thought. In a strawberry jam taste test, some consumers were asked simply 
to indicate which jams they liked best.8 Other consumers were asked to explain why 
they liked one particular jam better than the others. The researchers then compared 
the ratings of these consumers to the ratings of experts. The results showed that the 
consumers who simply indicated their preferences without explaining them were more 
accurate than the consumers who were asked to explain their preferences. In a follow-
up study, consumers were asked to choose one of several decorative posters to keep for 
free.9 Again, half simply indicated their preferences, and half explained their prefer-
ences. Three weeks later, the consumers who simply indicated their preferences were 
more satisfied with their decisions than the consumers who explained their preferences. 
Sometimes too much thinking can lead to bad decisions.
When should consumers trust their intuition and when should they think care-
fully about a decision problem? Some types of decisions, like picking strawberry jams 
or decorative posters, should be made intuitively. Other types of decisions, like buying 
a car or a kitchen appliance, should be made deliberatively. In a study of intuitive ver-
sus deliberative judgment, participants were asked either to provide simple answers to 
various questions or to explain their answers.10 Some of the questions were subjective, 
such as “Which advertisement would consumers like best?” Other questions were more 
objective, such as “What is the length of the Amazon River?” The results showed that 
intuition worked best for questions with subjective answers, and deliberation worked 
best for questions with objective answers.
Thin-slice inferences are more accurate for questions having subjective answers. 
Thin-slice inferences are also more accurate when consumers have a lot of practice 
forming these inferences and when they receive a good deal of accurate feedback 
about the quality of their inferences.11 The best type of feedback occurs frequently 
and quickly. A great deal of learning takes place under these conditions. On the 
other hand, learning is difficult when feedback is infrequent or delayed. Learning 
also depends on the consequences of one’s mistakes. It is easier to learn from one’s 
mistakes when mistakes are obvious. However, it is difficult to learn from one’s 
mistakes if it is unclear whether a mistake actually was made. For some types of deci-
sions, nearly any reasonable judgment turns out well. For example, most brands of 
CD players are very good. Consequently, consumers are likely to be satisfied with 
nearly any brand of CD player they choose, even if they make a mistake and fail to 
choose the best brand.
Implicit Memory
Sometimes consumers purposefully try to retrieve information from memory. When 
consumers are aware that they are searching for information stored in memory and/or 
when they intend to do so, they are performing an explicit memory task. However, 
sometimes consumers are not aware that they are using memory as a tool to perform 
some task. When memory is used as a tool without awareness or intention, consumers 
ob jec ti ve 4

140 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
are performing an implicit memory task. The priming effect is the most common type 
of implicit memory phenomenon.
The Priming Effect  Priming occurs in situations in which consumers are 
subtly lead to think about a concept, such as a brand name, a product category, an at-
tribute, a benefit, or any idea.12 For example, watching TV primes concepts related to 
products (e.g., information conveyed in ads), politics (e.g., information conveyed in 
news shows), and entertainment (e.g., television shows featuring sex, violence, comedy, 
action, etc.). Crossword puzzles and other types of intellectual puzzles (e.g., find-a-
word puzzles, scrambles) also prime ideas. Fiction and non-fiction books and maga-
zines also prime ideas. Once an idea has been primed, it influences how people think 
about related ideas. People are usually unaware of this influence.
Simply thinking about a concept activates that concept from memory. Once a con-
cept has been activated, it influences how consumers think about subsequent topics. 
For example, in a study on pricing, consumers were asked to fill out a find-a-word 
puzzle.13 In expensive prime conditions, the puzzle contained brand names of expen-
sive automobiles (e.g., Mercedes-Benz, Rolls Royce, Ferrari, Porsche). In inexpensive 
prime conditions, the puzzle contained brand names of inexpensive automobiles (e.g., 
Chevette, V W Beetle, Ford Pinto, Ford Fiesta). Participants were asked to find the hid-
den names and circle them. This simple task resulted in the activation of either expen-
sive or inexpensive automobiles in the minds of the participants. Later, consumers were 
asked to judge the expensiveness of a moderately priced automobile, called the target. In 
the ambiguous condition, participants were asked to rate a moderately priced car with a 
concealed brand name. In the unambiguous condition, different participants rated the 
Can the background music played in a store 
influence consumer choice? To answer this 
question, an experiment was conducted in 
which either French music or German music 
was played in a store.32 The results showed 
that consumers bought more French wine 
when French music was played. The results 
also showed that consumers bought more 
German wine when German music was 
played. These results were surprising because 
the consumers did not think that the music 
had any influence on them. Furthermore, 
France is famous for dry red wines, like 
the cabernet sauvignon-merlot blends of 
Bordeaux and the pinot noir of Burgundy. 
However, Germany is famous for sweet white 
wines, like Riesling, Gewurtztraminer, and 
Kabinett. Even though the styles of wine are 
very different, background music influenced 
choices and did so without consumers’ 
awareness or intention.
Effects of French vs. German Music on Purchase Behavior
Eye on International
Chiyacat/iStockphoto.com

Chapter 7   Automatic Information Processing 
141
same car, except the brand was clearly exposed. Results of the study revealed that the 
previous puzzle task had a surprising influence on subsequent consumer judgments.
Participants who completed the puzzle containing inexpensive brands rated the am-
biguous automobile (no brand name) as inexpensive, while participants who completed 
the puzzle with expensive brand names rated the ambiguous automobile as expensive. 
This is known as an assimilation effect because the target was perceived as similar in 
price to the automobiles primed in the puzzle. In other words, consumers assimilated 
the target with the prime. The results were very different when the ad contained an 
unambiguous automobile. In this case, participants who were primed with inexpensive 
brands rated the moderately priced target (with a clearly visible brand name) as ex-
pensive, while participants who were primed with expensive brands rated the target as 
inexpensive. This is known as a contrast effect because consumers contrasted the target 
with the prime. In summary, priming produced assimilation effects when the target 
was ambiguous and contrast effects when the target was unambiguous (see Figure 7.1). 
The results also showed that consumers did not think that the puzzles influenced their 
judgments.
6.03
5.56
6.55
5.17
1
Ambiguous Target
Unambiguous Target
Ambiguity of Target
Inexpensive Prime
Expensive Prime
Perceived
Expensiveness
Figure 7.1 
The Priming Effect
SOURCE: Herr, P. M. (1989). Priming Price: Prior Knowledge and Context Effects. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 67–75.
Previously viewed ads can also prime ideas that influence the interpretation of 
currently viewed ads. In an important study, participants received one of two ads for 
a personal computer: the Versa-Com computer, a versatile machine that can perform 
many functions, or the EZ-Com computer, a very easy-to-use machine.14 Hence, 
 either “versatile” or “easy to use” was primed. Next, participants received an ad for 
another computer, the PC-3000, which stated that this computer had numerous fea-
tures. “Numerous features” can be good or bad depending on what specific benefits 
consumers are seeking. The results of the study showed that the PC-3000 was evalu-
ated more favorably when “versatile” was primed than when “easy to use” was primed. 
This occurred because “numerous features” seem good when consumers focused on 
versatility, but “numerous features” seem bad when consumers focused on ease of use.
The average American watches more than four hours of television per day, and televi-
sion can distort consumers’ opinions in very subtle ways via the priming effect.15 Watching 
television leads people to overestimate crime, violence, affluence, and marital discord rates, 
as well as the number of doctors, lawyers, and police officers working in the real world. 

142 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Furthermore, the more TV people watch, the more distorted their judgments become. 
Fortunately, these distortions are reduced when people estimate how much television they 
watch before they provide crime and occupation estimates. Distortions are also reduced 
when people are warned that watching television can distort their judgments.
Priming can influence behavior as well as judgment. Many studies have shown 
that people mimic or imitate other people during social interaction.16 People like other 
people who are similar to them in terms of mannerisms, speech patterns, gestures, 
and facial expressions. Mimicry often happens unintentionally and without awareness, 
and mimicry often helps social interactions go more smoothly. Mimicry even happens 
when people are eating together. In an ice cream taste test, people ate more ice cream 
when their partner consumed a great deal of ice cream than when their partner con-
sumed very little, provided their partner was not obese.17 The partner was actually a 
study confederate who was instructed by the experimenter about how much ice cream 
she should eat.
Scrambled sentence puzzles can also prime a surprisingly wide variety of behav-
iors.18 In studies of this phenomenon, participants received a set of words and were 
asked to construct sentences out of them. In “rude” prime conditions, the words related 
to rudeness (i.e., rude, bold, aggressive). In “polite” prime conditions, the words related 
to politeness (i.e., polite, respect, patient). After performing either the rude or the 
polite scrambled sentence priming task, participants were asked to meet with another 
experimenter who was talking with someone else. The results showed that participants 
were more likely to interrupt when they were in rude prime vs. polite prime conditions. 
In a follow-up study, participants were either primed with words related to older people 
(i.e., gray, bingo, Florida) or participated in a no-prime control condition. The results 
showed that when the study was over, participants walked more slowly to the nearest 
elevator when they were in the old prime condition than in the no-prime condition.
In a similar study, participants were asked to write down everything that came to 
mind when they thought about college professors in the professor prime condition.19 
No-prime control participants did not perform this task. Next, all participants played 
the game “Trivial Pursuit.” The person who answered the greatest number of trivia 
questions correctly won (e.g., Question: “Who painted La Guernica?” Answer choices: 
a. Dali, b. Velasquez, c. Picasso, d. Miro). Participants answered more questions cor-
rectly in the professor prime condition than in the no-prime condition. Hence, merely 
thinking about stereotypes can influence behavior.
Other types of priming effects have been observed. For example, procedural prim-
ing effects occur when situations are linked to cognitive or motor processes via “if X, 
then Y” linkages, where X refers to a specific situation and Y refers to a cognitive or 
behavioral activity. If the linkage or association is sufficiently strong, Y is performed 
whenever X occurs. For example, in one study consumers were asked to rank product 
attributes from either the most favorable to the least favorable, or vice versa.20 Ranking 
from most to least favorable led consumers to focus on the best attributes first. Ranking 
from least to most favorable led consumer to focus on the worst attributes first. Later, 
consumers were asked to indicate whether they would buy a computer described by a 
large amount of information (i.e., 10 attributes), and they had to do so either under time 
pressure (i.e., make your decision in 15 seconds) or no time pressure. The results showed 
that the ranking task performed in the first session influenced purchase decisions in the 
second. When the ranking task led consumers to focus on the most favorable attributes 
first, consumers were more likely to buy the computer when the decision had to be made 
under time pressure. This effect was reversed when the decision was made without time 
pressure because consumers were more likely to focus on the attributes considered last.

Chapter 7   Automatic Information Processing 
143
In the mindset priming effect, the cogni-
tive activity performed during the first session 
tends to be performed again in the second, even 
if the products considered during the two ses-
sions are completely different. For example, 
when consumers were given the opportunity to 
buy a pen for a low price or for a high price, 
they typically chose to buy the pen for a low 
price, but not a high price. Later, when given 
the opportunity to buy a moderately expensive 
key chain, consumers were more likely to buy 
in the second session if they chose to buy in the 
first.21 Putting consumers in a buying mindset 
leads them to continue buying.
Clever salespeople can get consumers into a 
buying mindset simply by asking them to indicate 
their preferences for different brands, models, or 
colors. After indicating a preference, consumers 
are more likely to buy. In a recent study, some con-
sumers were asked to indicate their preferences between two computers; another group of 
consumers was simply asked whether they wanted to buy a computer.22 Later, these consum-
ers received descriptions of two vacation packages and were asked to choose one or neither. 
Consumers who indicated their preferences between the two computers in the first session 
were more likely to buy a vacation package in the second session. A preference mindset leads 
consumers to buy and to overlook the option of buying nothing. A follow-up study showed 
that this mindset effect occurs even when the first session preference task does not involve 
products or services.23 Merely indicating preferences for pairs of animals or performing com-
parisons of pairs of animals (e.g., Which animal is heavier, faster, or more ferocious?) in the 
first session increases purchase decisions in the second session.
In addition to buying, preference, and comparison mindsets, it is also possible 
to induce a generating alternatives mindset.24 People frequently focus on one alter-
native at a time, and this can lead to poor predictions. For example, when asked to 
predict whether a leading basketball team is likely to win the championship, people 
typically overestimate the likelihood of this team winning. More accurate predictions 
are formed when people are asked to consider the likelihood of many different teams 
winning, rather than focusing on only one team. Considering the likelihood of many 
different football teams winning the Super Bowl, or the likelihood of many different 
sitcoms winning an award, leads to more accurate predictions of a basketball team 
winning the championship.
The Implicit Association Test (IAT)  People are often unwilling to ad-
mit that they have stereotypes or prejudices. How can researchers measure beliefs about 
stereotypes if people are unwilling to answer questions about stereotypes truthfully? 
The Implicit Association Test (IAT) is a new procedure for measuring sensitive beliefs, 
including those held without awareness or intention.25 For example, words appear on 
a computer monitor, and participants are asked to press one of two keys (left or right 
key) as quickly and as accurately as possible. The computer records response latencies to 
different sets of words automatically. Sometimes the words relate to people (e.g., white 
or black) and sometimes the words relate to evaluations (e.g., good or bad). Response 
times are faster when two associated words are assigned to the same key (e.g., white and 
Digital Vision/Getty Images
Simply indicating a preference can increase the probability 
of purchasing a brand.

144 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
good, black and bad) than when two non-associated words are assigned to the same key 
(e.g., white and bad, black and good). Response time differences increase as the strength 
of the association between two words increases.
In a recent advertising study using the IAT, participants saw several ads for sneakers.26 
For some of the ads, the spokesperson was white, and for some, the spokesperson was black. 
A different brand logo was used in each ad. Scores on standard, explicit attitude scales sug-
gested that white participants liked the sneakers associated with white spokespersons as 
well as the sneakers associated with black spokespersons. However, IAT scores showed that 
white participants’ implicit attitudes were more favorable for sneakers endorsed by white 
spokespersons than for sneakers endorsed by black spokespersons. In contrast, scores on 
explicit attitude scales indicated that black participants preferred the brand endorsed by a 
black spokesperson. However, black participants’ implicit attitudes were equally favorable 
for white and black endorsers. Hence, explicit attitudes and implicit attitudes can and do 
sometimes differ. Marketers could benefit greatly by understanding consumers’ underlying 
(or implicit) attitudes and designing communication to match these attitudes.
Familiarity Effects  Repetitive advertising can have surprising effects on con-
sumer judgment. The more consumers see a product or hear a claim about a product, the 
more familiar that product or claim becomes. Familiarity can be furthered by increasing 
the clarity or the size of a picture of a product, presenting the picture or message for a lon-
ger time, or by presenting the product in sharper focus than the background. As familiar-
ity increases, a brand name seems more famous, liking for the brand increases, judgments 
about the brand are held with greater confidence, and product claims seem more likely to 
be true (the truth effect).27 Distraction can also make claims seem more believable.
Familiar products and ideas are easy to think about, and products and ideas that are 
easy to think about seem more famous, likable, and true. In other words, consumers 
can confuse familiarity with fame, liking, confidence, and truth. Consequently, even 
seemingly trivial manipulations of familiarity (e.g., priming, repetition, clarity, rhym-
ing) can increase judgments of fame, liking, confidence, and truth.
The truth effect is a particularly interesting case: The more consumers see or hear 
a product claim, the more they believe it.28 Repetition increases familiarity, which then 
increases believability. In short, familiar statements that “ring a bell” with consumers often 
appear to be true. All of these familiarity effects are likely to occur when consumers use 
familiarity as a basis for judgment without awareness or intention. This is especially likely 
when involvement is low or when distractions prevent consumers from thinking carefully 
about the source of a feeling of familiarity. However, when consumers think more carefully 
about why a product or a claim seems familiar, familiarity effects disappear. Furthermore, 
when consumers are highly knowledgeable about a product, the truth effect disappears.29
Distraction Effects  According to social psychologist Dan Gilbert, compre-
hension and beliefs are inseparable.33 Consumers initially believe everything they see and 
hear. Unbelieving, or rejecting a false claim, is a separate process. It comes later, perhaps 
only seconds later, but later nevertheless. In other words, believing is as easy and auto-
matic as seeing and understanding. Unbelieving, however, requires more time and effort. 
To demonstrate this, Gilbert and his colleagues asked participants to learn a new language 
by studying statements presented on a computer monitor. After reading a statement, such 
as “a monishna is a star,” participants were told the statement was either true or false. 
In addition, sometimes the true or false feedback was interrupted by a distracting tone-
detection task (i.e., participants were asked to multi-task during the experiment). Later, 
all the statements were presented again, and participants were asked to indicate whether 
each statement was true or false. It is no surprise that because a great many statements 

Chapter 7   Automatic Information Processing 
145
were presented, participants made lots of errors. However, some errors were more com-
mon than others. In fact, participants were more likely to believe false statements to be 
true than true statements to be false. This is because believing is easier than unbelieving.
Naturally, consumers do not ultimately believe everything they see and hear, but 
the important point is that unbelieving or rejecting false claims requires an additional 
step beyond simply understanding the claim. When consumers are overloaded with too 
much information, when they need to make a judgment or decision quickly, or when 
they try to do too many things at once, they are less able to engage in the extra effort 
required for unbelieving. So, under these circumstances, they are more likely to believe 
false claims to be true. Information overload, time pressure, and multi-tasking are facts 
of contemporary everyday life, so consumers may have difficulties rejecting false claims 
even more today than in previous decades.
Can distraction affect important decisions? Evidence indicates that it can. In a fas-
cinating study, participants read statements about two crime reports that crawled across 
the bottom of a television screen, just like a weather, business, or sports bulletin. True 
statements were printed in black and false statements were printed in red. The false 
statements suggested that the first defendant was innocent and the second was guilty, or 
vice versa. Participants were sometimes distracted by multi-tasking while they read the 
crime report. The distraction greatly influenced their judgments. On average, distracted 
participants recommended 11 years in prison for the accused party when the false state-
ments were exacerbating (made to appear worse) and only six years in prison when the 
false statements were extenuating (accompanied by an explanation). In contrast, partici-
pants who were not distracted recommended approximately the same prison sentence 
(about six years) in both cases. Thus, distracted participants had difficulty unbelieving 
false statements, despite the fact that true statements were printed in black, and false 
statements were printed in red. Of course, unbelieving false statements is even more dif-
ficult when the real-world  mass-media fails to provide such color differentiation!
Subliminal Advertising Revisited
At the beginning of this chapter, we discussed the case of James 
Vicary, who claimed he was able to increases sales of popcorn and 
Coca-Cola by subliminal suggestion during a movie. Consumer 
behavior is too complex to be controlled by simple subliminal mes-
sages. However, as this chapter illustrates, memories of past experi-
ences can influence a wide variety of judgments without intention 
or awareness. Furthermore, recent research shows that subliminal 
priming can influence behavior without intention or awareness.30 
In one research project, all participants were asked not to eat or 
drink for three hours prior to the experiment. At the beginning of 
the experiment, participants were randomly assigned to a thirsty 
condition (i.e., they were not allowed to drink any water) or a non-
thirsty condition (i.e., they were allowed to drink as much water 
as they wanted). Next, words were flashed for 16 milliseconds on a 
computer screen followed by a mask, or a string of letters that made 
it even more difficult to see a briefly flashed word. Participants were 
randomly assigned to a thirst-related words condition (i.e., thirst, 
dry) or a control condition in which neutral words were flashed 
(i.e., pirate, won). Finally, participants were asked to perform a taste 
test for two different kinds of Kool-Aid, and they were allowed to 
drink as much of this beverage as they wanted. The results showed 
objec ti ve 5
When combined with accessible needs, sub-
liminal priming can increase persuasion.
AP Photo 

146 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
that thirsty participants who were exposed to thirst-related subliminal primes drank 
more Kool-Aid than did participants in the other conditions.
In a follow-up experiment, thirst-related primes increased preferences for a drink 
that was advertised as thirst-quenching (“SuperQuencher”) over a drink that was ad-
vertised as energizing (“PowerPro”). Again, however, this effect was observed only in 
participants who were already thirsty. Hence, subliminal priming by itself does not 
increase persuasion. But subliminal priming combined with an already accessible need 
or goal can increase persuasion.
Automatic information processing refers to mental pro-
cesses that occur without awareness or intention, but that 
influence judgments, feelings, and behaviors. Automatic 
information processing is useful and adaptive because 
it enables people to perform some simple tasks without 
thinking. This allows people to think more carefully about 
other tasks they need to perform. A response becomes au-
tomatic via practice and repetition. One particularly use-
ful skill that people have learned automatically is thin-slice 
inferencing. Thin slices or brief observations of another 
person’s behavior often tell us a surprisingly large amount 
of information about the person.
The priming effect is another important example of 
automatic information processing. Recent or frequent ex-
posure to an idea presented on television, on the radio, 
in a magazine, in a book, or in a conversation can change 
the way people think about subsequently encountered 
ambiguous information. An unfamiliar product can seem 
expensive or inexpensive, versatile or easy to use, or good 
or bad depending on what information was primed be-
fore examining the product. Priming can also influence 
behavior as well as judgment. People often behave in a 
manner consistent with the implications of a prime and 
do so without awareness or intention.
Chapter Summary
automatic information processing
adaptive unconscious
placebo effect
intuition
thin-slice inferences
explicit memory
implicit memory
assimilation effect
contrast effect
procedural priming effect
mindset priming effect
Implicit Association Test (IAT)
implicit attitudes
explicit attitudes
truth effect
distraction effect
subliminal advertising
Key Terms

Chapter 7   Automatic Information Processing 
147
Review and Discussion
1. What is automatic information processing?
2. Give some examples of automatic information 
processing.
3. When are attitudes likely to come to mind 
automatically?
4. How does a mental process become automatic?
5. What are the benefits of automatic information 
processing?
6. Why do people trust their intuition more than they 
should?
7. Give some examples of thin-slice inferences.
8. Give some examples of the priming effect.
9. What is the IAT?
10. When is the IAT most useful?
1. Subliminal sexual images are sometimes used in ads for 
alcohol. Do people have a strong association in mem-
ory between sex and alcohol? Why are people afraid of 
subliminal advertising? Should they be afraid?
2. Discuss ads for Cialis, Viagra, and other drugs for 
erectile dysfunction. What automatic information 
processing principles would be most useful for selling 
these types of products?
3. Describe the ways the priming effect could influence 
you after watching TV, reading the newspaper, and 
reading a novel.
4. Visit the Web site for the IAT (www.implicit.harvard
.edu) and take the test. What have you learned from 
this test?
Short Application Exercises

148 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
“What’s in a name? A rose by any other name 
would smell as sweet.” Although this may be true in 
Shakespeare, it’s not true in marketing. Because of 
thin-slice inferences, a brand name often tells con-
sumers quite a bit about the brand, including infor-
mation about its identity and personality. A good 
brand name is easy to pronounce, because brand 
names that are easy to pronounce are easier to think 
about and are more memorable. A good brand name 
also primes product applications, the appearance of 
the product, the key features of the product, and an 
appropriate mindset. A good brand name could also 
prime a specific consumer lifestyle, so as to appeal 
to members of a target consumer segment.
M a n ag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
Keeping all of these thin-slice inferences and priming effects in mind, generate three good 
brand names for each of the following products, and explain why each brand name could 
be effective:
 
1. 
Personal computer
 
2. 
PDA (personal digital assistant)
 
3. 
3-D TV
 
4. 
Hawaiian vacation package
YOUR CHALLENGE:

149
Self-Concept and Personality 
 1 | Define self-concept, extended self, and 
love objects.
 2 | Describe the three components of 
impression management.
 3 | Explain how self-monitoring is related 
to consumer behavior.
 4 | Describe multiple-trait theory and how it 
is linked to brand personality.
 5 | Discuss cognitive factors relating to 
single-trait theory of personality. 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to . . .
objectives
A favorable brand personality can be critical to the success of any product. Many of the 
world’s top brands seem to possess human-like traits, which helps consumers decide if they are 
compatible with a particular brand.1 For example, Coca-Cola is reliable; IBM is intelligent; 
G.E. is a planet protector; Disney is cheerful; McDonald’s is friendly; Nokia is fashionable 
yet affordable; Volkswagen is down-to-earth; Harley-Davidson is rugged; and Mercedes Benz 
is sophisticated. Firms have even branded commodities, such as chicken (Purdue), potatoes 
(Idaho), and fruits (Sunkist). With a little help from the late Marvin Gaye, the California 
Raisin Advisory Board transformed raisins from nerdy to hip. But khakis? How can you give 
basic trousers a personality?
Khakis are easy to get along with. You can throw them in the washer, hang them up to dry, 
and they look fine without ironing. Pleated or plain, cuffed or straight, baggy or trim, they go 
well with everything from T-shirts to blue blazers. And they’re not too expensive. But there is 
8
Gap’s Khakis Have Personality
CHAPTER

a downside to their appeal. No matter where you buy them, they all look alike. Consequently, 
khakis have been treated like a commodity—until Gap decided to give khakis some soul.
In 2007, Gap launched an advertising campaign emphasizing the personality of their 
khakis. In one particular ad, a young man is wearing “Khakis with Attitude.” As he puts his 
right leg into his new Gap pleated-front, cuffed, baggy khakis, the pants twist and shout, “Get 
your leg outta there, man!” The young man screams, crashes against the wall and looks in 
terror at the crumpled trousers. The pants continue, “Yo. Listen to me. You bought khakis with 
attitude. You saw the sign. That’s what I got. Now put me back in the closet. I’ll go out with 
you when it warms up.”
In another ad, a young woman is sporting “The Boyfriend Trouser.” As she slips on her new 
Gap khakis, she feels an odd sensation, as if the pants are gently moving. With a cry of fright, 
she tears off the pants. “Please! I love you!” the pants proclaim. The young woman assumes 
the kung-fu attack 
position she learned in a 
personal defense class and 
confronts her trousers. 
“What the hell are you?” 
she demands. “I’m the 
boyfriend trouser. I 
thought that’s why you 
bought me . . . that you 
needed a boyfriend.” 
She withdraws in 
disgust. The Gap 
campaign was a winner. 
Gap differentiated its 
commodity khakis 
from all the others by 
injecting their pants 
with personality, offering 
“pants with an attitude.”2
150
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
151
Self-Concept Defined
Most people are preoccupied with discovering who they are. Indeed, “Who am I?” is 
a question that most of us consider throughout our lives. Our unique answers to this 
question provide insight into our self-concept, the beliefs and attitudes we hold about 
ourselves. Although no precise definition of self-concept exists in the consumer behav-
ior literature, self-concept is often described as the totality of an individual’s thoughts 
and feelings regarding him/herself as an object.3 Self-concept is complicated and mul-
tidimensional. Consumers have been characterized as describing themselves on three 
dimensions: role identities, personal qualities, and self-evaluations.4
Role identities represent the numerous positions that people occupy in society such 
as student, friend, son or daughter, and consumer. People construct these identities by 
observing how they behave and the reactions that others form about them in each of 
their roles.5 Although society imparts role expectations on its members (e.g., friends 
should be loyal), individuals usually have plenty of room to improvise. It may be help-
ful to think of consumers as shaping their role identities within the broad boundaries 
set by society. For example, all people playing the role of customer do not respond 
the same way to sales promotions. Some people are passionate “bargain-hunters,” 
while others play a more indifferent role toward sales. Because people create roles in 
unique ways, each person derives a different role identity even when they occupy the 
same position. Moreover, these differences vary widely across product category. For 
example, a person who is a ’bargain hunter” for shoes may demand an expensive brand 
when it comes to coffee, or vice versa.
When people identify their roles, they often start with occupational or educational 
groups (e.g., college student). Consumers have convenient acronyms that provide 
ready shortcuts, especially in the professions. “She’s an MBA” labels someone as having 
 obtained a master’s degree in business and someone who is probably quite practical. 
“I’m an M.D.” self-identifies a medical doctor, which is different than a D.O. (doctor of 
osteopathic medicine) or a D.D.S. (doctor of dental surgery). Consumers also  identify 
social categories such as religion (e.g., Protestant), race (e.g., African American), and 
ethnicity (e.g., Lebanese). Consumers’ role identities are played out in public, and 
hence, they are more transparent than their personal qualities and self-evaluations, 
which describe idiosyncratic parts of the self-concept that are not so clear-cut. People’s 
notions about how friendly, athletic, and easy-going they are may not match the way 
others perceive them.
Personal qualities involve modes of interpersonal behavior that distinguish people 
from one another, such as sense of humor or friendliness. They also include internal 
psychological styles, such as optimism or cheerfulness, that influence role identities.4 
Personal qualities can be thought of as traits, or tendencies to behave a certain way 
across similar situations. Psychologists believe that traits are developed at an early age, 
remain relatively consistent across similar situations, and endure. Personal qualities pro-
vide consumers with opportunities to play out their role identities. For example, people 
respond differently to product failures and malfunctions. Some people exhibit anger 
and aggression, while others are more “laid back” in response to these disappointments. 
Similarly, consumers who are technologically savvy may play the role as an expert whom 
friends and family members contact when it is time to shop for a personal computer 
or digital video recorder. Consumer psychologists also know that traits play out differ-
ently in different contexts. For example, a person who is classified as anxious is unlikely to 
 express anxiety in the same way in all contexts, e.g., with a friend, policeman, or professor. 
Thus, using personality traits to predict consumer behavior can be a tricky business.
ob jec ti ve 1

152 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
People also perform self-evaluations by considering the 
adequacy of their performances in various role identities. 
Am I a good student or a thoughtful boyfriend/girlfriend? 
Am I a smart shopper? Usually, these evaluations focus on 
competence, perseverance, morality, and social unity. Self-
evaluations also influence role identities. For example, people 
who perceive themselves as “athletic” are more likely to engage 
in organized sports than those with poorer self-evaluations. 
In a similar vein, consumers who see themselves as compe-
tent Internet shoppers often share their knowledge with less 
experienced friends. One consumer might say to another, 
“Just type in www.fedex.com, click ‘track by number,’ and 
type in your tracking number. You can follow your package 
all the way to its destination.” If this advice is well received, 
then the e-shopper’s self evaluation is enhanced and s/he is 
more likely to perform this role identity in the future.
The sum of all self-evaluations determines self-esteem, 
the overall evaluative component of a person’s self-concept. 
Self-esteem can be considered a person’s general attitude 
toward him or herself. Research shows that high self-esteem 
is associated with active and comfortable social interactions, 
but low self-esteem can be depressing and debilitating.1 
People with low self-esteem tend to view social situations as 
threatening, feel more negative toward others, and hence, are 
easily wounded by criticism. In addition, they yield more to 
other’s requests.3 It is probably best to think of self-esteem 
and behavior as a two-way street. People with high self-
esteem tend to be more confident and hence, more influen-
tial. And yet, the behavior of influencing others may lead to 
increased self-esteem, a virtuous cycle.
The opposite may be true for those with low self-esteem. 
With little faith in their ability to succeed, people with low 
self-esteem may fulfill their low expectations, which leads to 
even lower self-esteem—a vicious cycle. Research provides 
evidence that marketing activities can affect a consumer’s 
self-esteem. Exposure to idealistic standards can produce 
unpleasant consequences regarding how we view ourselves.6 
On the other hand, marketing stimuli can also cause our 
self- evaluations to converge toward these higher standards, 
subsequently increasing self-esteem.7 Some marketers have 
attempted to enhance image-related self-esteem through the 
inclusion of more realistic and attainable role models. See the 
Ethics Box regarding Unilever’s “Real Beauty” campaign for 
Dove.
A consumer’s self-concept is comprised of two key 
 dimensions: (1) self-focus (actual versus the ideal) and 
(2) self-location (private versus public). Each dimension has 
two parts. Regarding focus, the actual self-concept repre-
sents how consumers in fact perceive themselves, while the 
Launched in the UK during 2003, 
Dove’s “Real Beauty” campaign 
celebrates women of all shapes, 
sizes, and colors.
“Real Beauty” was conceived 
based on the results of a multinational study of 3,500 women. 
The study revealed that two-thirds of women believe that 
the media endorse an image of beauty unattainable by most 
women. Moreover, just two percent of respondents reported that 
they considered themselves beautiful. Consequently, Unilever 
overhauled Dove’s global advertising message to challenge the 
imagery traditionally associated with beauty and personal care 
products. “Real Beauty” made it to the U.S. in 2005 with ads for 
hair, skin, and body products featuring images of wrinkled skin 
for skin care; rotund bodies for moisturizers; and short, curly 
coifs for hair care products. Two TV ads in the series featured 
women—wrinkled, freckled, and stretched by pregnancy—to 
promote Dove’s Body Nourishers lotion line. Other ads revealed 
six curvy, unapologetic women dressed in underwear to promote 
a new Dove Intensive Firming Lotion. To promote hair care for all 
types of hair, Dove had women rip off blonde wigs in unison to 
reveal their own variety of hair styles and colors.85
In 2006, Dove ran its first Super Bowl ad with an inspi-
rational message designed to raise girls’ self esteem. Helping 
girls accept themselves is a mission of Dove’s five-year market-
ing strategy. In the ad, one dark-haired girl “wishes she were 
blonde.” Another “thinks she’s ugly.” A red-haired girl “hates her 
freckles.” The background music is Cyndi Lauper’s True Colors, 
sung by the Girl Scout Chorus of Nassau County, N.Y. The ad 
also promoted Dove’s Self-Esteem Fund that supports the Girl 
Scouts’ Uniquely Me program. It encourages viewers to “get 
involved” at www.campaignforrealbeauty.com.86
But is the “Real Beauty” campaign for real? Some consum-
ers see it as just another marketing stunt aimed at selling soap.
Perhaps the heart of the issue is whether the campaign 
makes women feel good about themselves. 87 On one hand, 
there are certain classic looks that women would all secretly love 
to possess. When they see a beautiful model promoting a brand, 
women respond imaginatively and, for a moment or two, feel 
beautiful, too. Although they know the product will not change 
them, the power of association is so great that, deep down, 
women feel as though a little of the model’s magic has rubbed 
off—this is the ideal self-concept speaking. On the other hand, 
contemporary, self-confident women want to see figures and 
faces like their own featured and celebrated in advertising—this 
is the actual self-concept speaking. Which self-concept wins? 
Research suggests that when evaluating brands, it’s usually the 
ideal—not the real—that matters, which is an ominous sign for 
Dove’s “real beauty” campaign.
E T H I C S

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
153
ideal self-concept describes how consumers would like to be. The gap is referred to 
as self-discrepancy. With respect to  self-location, the actual public-concept embodies 
 others’ true perceptions of a consumer, while the ideal public-concept represents how 
consumers would like others to see them. The gap between actual public and ideal 
public  concepts is known as a public-discrepancy. This four-part self-concept is shown 
in Figure 8.1.
Depending on the purchase situation, consumers are likely to emphasize a different 
self-concept. For privately consumed products, consumers may simply rely on their 
actual self-concept. In contrast, when purchasing products that will be consumed in 
public, consumers may draw on their actual public-self image to appear consistent with 
others’ expectations, or they may employ their ideal public-concept to change how oth-
ers view them. Let’s take a closer look at the joint interplay of marketing activities and 
self-concept, with  particular emphasis on the actual versus ideal self-concepts.
The Role of Self-Concept
Self-concept is important to marketers because consumers’ self-perceptions influence 
their attitudes towards product categories and specific brands and subsequent purchase 
behavior.8 Consequently, brands deliberately convey images that extend beyond their 
purely functional characteristics. For example, Harley-Davidson evokes mental imagery 
quite distinct from that of Honda or Suzuki, and Nordstrom conveys a different image 
than Kmart or Sears. Research suggests that some consumers like to express themselves 
in their brand choices. Thus, promotional efforts to image-conscious consumers are 
more effective if they portray product images that are consistent with consumers’ self-
concepts.9 But which self-concept should marketers embrace—the actual or ideal? The 
answer is “it depends.”
Because self-concept is relatively important to everyone, consumers tend to  main-
tain or protect their self-concepts on the one hand, and enhance them on the other. 
The former is referred to as the self-consistency motive; the latter is called the self-
esteem motive. Consumers motivated by self-consistency act in accordance with 
Self-Focus
Actual
Ideal
Actual self-concept
Ideal self-concept
Actual public-concept
Ideal public-concept
Self-Location
Public
Private
Source: Cline, T. W. (2009). Working paper, Saint Vincent College, Latrobe, PA. Reprinted by 
permission of the author.
Figure 8.1 The Two-Dimensional Self-Concept

154 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
their self-concepts—even in the face of challenging evidence.1 In contrast, consumers 
motivated by self-esteem engage in activities that lead to more positive self-evaluations.10 
Both motives coexist within an individual, but they can tug us in different directions, 
depending on the task at hand.
Advertisers want us to remember their brands and evaluate them favorably, but 
recall and evaluation are two different tasks. If a consumer’s task is to recall the brand 
name or its attributes, then s/he is more likely to remember information consistent 
with her/his actual self-concept, rather than information consistent with her/his ideal 
self-concept. Why? Consumers generally possess well-developed, actual self-schema 
with rich associative networks in their memories. Self-schemas are cognitive struc-
tures that help us make sense of who we are. Schemas can be thought of as basic 
sketches of what people know about something. People are generally knowledge-
able (if not altogether happy) about who they are. Consequently, people are likely
to attend to and retrieve information congruent with their actual self-schema.11 
Recalling congruent information also enables consumers to maintain a state of cogni-
tive consonance. In general, consumers are motivated to maintain harmony in their 
belief systems and between their attitudes and behavior. Thus, if marketing com-
munication fits with consumers’ understanding of who they are, the communication 
facilitates this desired balance.
The situation is quite different if a consumer is focused on evaluating or judging 
a product. Because consumers are aware of not only who they are, but also who they 
would like to be, a gap between the actual and ideal self-concepts represents a state of 
inconsistency. As such, the ideal self-concept can serve as an important moving target, 
a goal that consumers seek to attain. Thus, when consumers evaluate a brand, they are 
more likely to be influenced by whether the brand fills the gap, i.e., advances them 
toward their ideal self-concepts. It follows that brands congruent with a consumer’s 
ideal self-concept are evaluated more favorably than those congruent with a consumer’s 
actual self-concept. For example, a consumer who wants to achieve “preppiness” may 
meet that goal by endorsing Lacoste, Izod, J. Crew, or Polo Ralph Lauren. On the other 
hand, if a consumer’s ideal self-concept is more “edgy,” s/he may wear clothing from 
Karl Kani or Timberline. In sum, if marketers want consumers to remember their brand 
names, attributes, and benefits, they should create communications that are consistent 
with consumers’ actual self-concepts. In contrast, if changing attitudes is important, 
marketers should communicate information that is congruent with consumers’ ideal 
self-concepts.
The notion of positioning brand images to be congruent with consumers’ self-
concepts reflects the general practice of market segmentation (see Chapter 2). 
Marketers identify patterns of self-concepts residing in specific demographic groups 
and find media that communicate directly to these groups. This practice is not new. For 
decades, Virginia Slims cigarettes attempted to match their slogan, “You’ve come a 
long way, baby” with women’s ideal self-concepts regarding social independence. 
Similarly, Harley-Davidson motorcycles convey raw excitement to consumers seeking 
to improve their ideal self-concepts regarding freedom and adventure. Non-profits and 
government organizations have also used this approach. The U.S. Army’s recent ad 
campaign, “Army Strong,” targets prospects with messages of self-empowerment and 
self- determination. The other military services also rely on slogans to appeal to con-
sumers’ ideal self-concepts. The U.S. Air Force recently abandoned its “Cross Into the 
Blue” to “Do Something Amazing.” Since 2001, the U.S. Navy has promoted with 
“Accelerate Your Life,” and the Marines have relied on “The Few...The Proud,” target-
ing prospects who are motivated by self-esteem.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
155
The Extended Self
Some products are so important to consumers that they are used to confirm their self-
concepts. The relationship between a consumer’s self-concepts and his/her possessions 
is called the extended self.12 The idea that our belongings represent an extension of 
ourselves dates back to 1890, when William James claimed that we are the sum of our 
possessions.13 In a more recent and highly regarded essay, Russell Belk maintains that 
the extended self is not limited to personal possessions, but also includes people, places, 
and group possessions. This view is consistent with the notion that external objects 
become a part of us when we are able to exercise significant control over them. In this 
sense, even body parts are viewed as part of the extended self.14 Research confirms that 
people consider the following categories as possessions:
• Their bodies
• Personal space
The U.S. Army “Targets” Recruits’ Self-Concepts
Marketing in Action
Early in 2001, the U.S. Army abandoned its 20-year 
ad campaign, “Be All You Can Be.” Instead, the Army 
committed its $150 million advertising budget and its 
recruiting goals to “An Army of One.” The campaign 
emphasizes that young people can maintain their sense 
of identity and attain self-fulfillment while serving in today’s 
Army. One promotion in the new campaign featured a 
solitary soldier running outdoors while a voiceover says, 
“I am an army of one, even though there are 1,045,690 
soldiers like me.” Another ad emphasizes technology and 
training, encouraging potential recruits to log onto the 
Army’s website at goarmy.com.
The change in campaign was not without contro-
versy. Advertising expert Jerry Della Famina thought 
it was a mistake. He argued that the Army benefit-
ed from one of the greatest campaigns in history. 
In fact, Advertising Age, an industry publication 
and information leader, ranked the “Be All You Can 
Be” campaign as the second best of the 20th century.
However, although “Be All You Can Be” was embed-
ded in the culture of the nation, apparently it had lost 
its connection with the Army’s target audience of over 
20 million young adults between the ages of 18 and 
24. An important part of that target market is African 
American youth. “We are aware of how popular ‘Be All 
You Can Be,’ is with the Army,” said Bob McNeil, presi-
dent of Atlanta-based IMAGES USA, the Army’s African 
American marketing agency. McNeil noted that “Army 
of One,” speaks directly to African American youth who 
need culturally relevant information to have it stay with 
them.79
During the fall of 2006, however, “Army of One” 
was itself retired. Army officials said the “Army of One” 
campaign was not a failure, but it had not been highly 
effective. The Army missed its recruiting target in 2005 by 
the widest margin in more than 20 years.
In hopes of connecting better with potential recruits, the 
Army introduced its new pitch, “Army Strong,” accompanied 
by a $200 million annual advertising contract with McCann 
Worldgroup, on November 9, 2006, to coincide with the 
Veterans Day weekend. The five-year contract between the 
Army and McCann Worldgroup is valued at $1 billion. 
So far, this campaign appears to be meeting its goals. 
The Army met its 2006 recruiting goal of signing up 
80,000 new soldiers. The new slogan, developed af-
ter numerous focus groups and interviews with soldiers, 
is designed to communicate the idea that if you join the 
Army, you will gain physical and emotional strength as 
well as strength of character and purpose.80 These ideas 
are aimed directly at recruits’ ideal self-concepts.
 
Dates
Campaign Slogan81
1971–1973
Today’s Army Wants to Join You
1973–1979
Join the People Who’ve Joined the Army
1979–1981
This is the Army
1981–2001
Be All You Can Be
2001–2006 
Army of One
2006–present
Army Strong
Slogans of historical U.S. Army advertising campaigns
Courtesy of U.S. Army

156 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
• Consumable goods
• Durable goods
• Home and property
• Significant others
• Children
• Friends
• Mementos
• Pets15
Thus, marketers need to understand the variety of ways consumers express them-
selves through their possessions. And they do. Unilever appeals to consumers’ view 
of their bodies with Lever 2000, “for your 2000 body parts,” an enormously success-
ful campaign, Unilever extended the Lever 2000 brand to include body washes with 
Ginseng and vitamins (Energize), cucumber extracts (Fresh Aloe), and a rain scent 
(Refresh). 3M understands consumers’ desire to “possess” their own personal space or 
sense of privacy. They developed a new product to restore privacy to computer screens 
called the Notebook Privacy Computer Filter. By slipping a thin sheet of plastic in front 
of a computer screen, the images on the screen can no longer be viewed from the side.
For consumers who view their pets as an extension of themselves, PetSmart, Inc., the 
world’s largest specialty pet retailer of products and services, offers in-store PetsHotels, 
Doggie Day Camps, pet training, pet grooming, and adoption programs.
While acquiring and investing in possessions can extend who consumers think they 
are, the loss of important belongings can reduce their extended selves. Burglary victims 
report a diminished sense of self when their possessions are lost to theft. Research sug-
gests that grief and mourning follow theft, just as it does when someone loses a loved 
one.16 Similarly, natural disaster victims report going through a grieving process, includ-
ing denial, anger, depression, and finally acceptance.17 ADT knows that homeowners 
fear the loss of possessions resulting from burglary. In fact, ADT advertises that its 
customer monitoring centers “help protect 
the people and things you value most,” i.e., 
the extended self. Insurance companies like 
Allstate understand that natural disasters can 
damage more than homeowners’ property. 
They can also destroy a consumer’s extended 
self. Accordingly, these firms offer catastro-
phe and disaster insurance for those willing 
to pay the premiums.
Research also suggests that for many 
Americans, the automobile is an important 
part of their extended selves and ideal self-
concepts.18 The process of creating one’s 
extended self through an automobile occurs 
when people customize their cars or pains-
takingly wash and maintain them. Some 
consumers build special sound systems for 
their cars; others spend hours washing and 
PRNewsFoto/ADT/AP Photo
Burglary victims often feel a diminished sense of self.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
157
waxing their vehicles. To these consumers, their  automobiles represent a significant 
part of their extended selves. Marketers of Turtle Wax and 3M Car Care run advertise-
ments that encourage people-car relationships. They feature beautifully conditioned 
automobiles, lavishly maintained by their owners, who caress and talk to their cars as 
though they are lovers. When car aficionados damage their vehicles, they often behave 
as though their own bodies have been wrecked, and they work anxiously to restore the 
automobiles to their original condition. Not surprisingly, for car aficionados, collision 
centers act as surrogate “emergency rooms.”
How do possessions become extensions of consumers? First, they facilitate action by 
allowing consumers to do things they otherwise couldn’t do. For example, without an 
ipod, consumers would not be able to share their favorite songs with their friends, songs 
that also represent part of the extended self. Second, consumers’ belongings symbolically 
extend who they are. For instance, trophies and awards highlight individual accomplish-
ments; diplomas exhibit academic credentials; and photographs and artwork present vivid 
illustrations of what people deem important. Third, possessions bring consumers power 
and prestige. Accumulating antiques and other scarce items, for example, conveys a cer-
tain status, because rare items are expensive. Fourth, possessions allow consumers to asso-
ciate themselves with desirable people, places, or times. Autographs of a favorite celebrity; 
memorabilia acquired on a trip to Paris; and family heirlooms extend who consumers 
are by linking them to these desirable entities.10 Some possessions so are important that 
consumers develop a deep affection for them. These items are known as “loved objects.”
Loved Objects
The people and things that consumers love impart a strong influence on their 
self-concepts. The word “love” is commonly used to describe activities, places, and 
possessions: “I love to golf,” “I love Paris,” “I love your hair style,” “I love that movie.” 
Research shows that consumers not only “love to shop,” but they also “fall in love” with 
the products they buy.19 In fact, love is the second most common word consumers use 
to describe their feelings about possessions (happiness ranks first). Of all the posses-
sions that consumers acquire and divest throughout their lives, only a few attain loved 
status. Loved objects, a special subset of all possessions that comprise the extended self, 
play a central role in our knowledge of who we are as people. Recent research provides 
evidence that loved objects can be part of a synthesizing solution to a specific identity 
conflict. In fact, loved objects are shown to derive much of their emotional status by 
helping resolve these internal conflicts.20 For children, a favorite stuffed animal pro-
vides comfort during times of psychological conflict. For adults, beloved sports cars 
can compensate for lack of social power, and chocolates can be used as rewards. Loved 
objects can also resolve role conflicts. For example, if a man experiences a psychologi-
cal conflict between his role as a businessperson and his role as an art connoisseur, he 
might come to love his paintings and sculptures as a way of preserving his artistic per-
sona and compartmentalize his business as simply a pragmatic choice. “It’s just a job,” 
he says. He might also identify his unloved objects, such as furniture, as practical and 
mundane—like his job. Similarly, if a woman has a conflict between her feminist and 
traditional ideals, she may identify loved objects to help resolve this conflict. Perhaps 
her collection of antique and delicate porcelain figurines raises good feelings about a 
time (the 1950s) in which women were relatively repressed.
Even a favorite pair of blue jeans can resolve internal role conflict. Perhaps a young man-
ager has misgivings about working on Saturday. By dressing in her favorite, well-worn blue 
jeans, she can exercise some autonomy. “If I have to work on the weekends, at least I’ll be 

158 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
comfortable,” she says. In a positive sense then, loved objects can provide a mechanism for 
psychological conflict resolution. Now that we’ve discussed the importance of the extended 
self and loved objects, let’s examine how individuals manage their social behavior.
Self-Monitoring
The extent to which consumers use situational cues to guide their social behavior is known 
as self-monitoring. People who routinely modify their behavior to meet the  expectations 
of others are known as high self-monitors. Conversely, people who act primarily on the basis 
of their internal beliefs and attitudes are known as low self- monitors.21 Put simply, high self-
monitors tend to behave like social chameleons, constantly changing and adapting their 
behaviors to different situations and different people. Low self-monitors march to the beat 
of their own drums. Research shows that low self-monitors exhibit greater attitude-behavior 
consistency than high self-monitors.22 Research also demonstrates that high self-monitors 
show more concern for the self-image they project in social situations.23 As a result, high self-
monitors are more likely to respond to image-based appeals that promise to make them look 
good, while low self-monitors are more likely to evaluate the functional benefits of a prod-
uct.24 Self-monitoring typically involves three somewhat distinct individual differences:
• Willingness to be the center of attention
• Concern about the opinions of others
• Ability and desire to adjust one’s behavior to induce positive reactions in others
Like many individual difference variables, self-monitoring can be measured by a 
survey instrument. Low self-monitors tend to endorse statements like “My behavior 
is usually an expression of my true inner feelings, attitudes, and 
beliefs.” High self-monitors agree with statements such as “When I 
am uncertain how to act in a social situation, I look to the behavior 
of others for cues.”
Self-monitoring can be helpful in resolving the personality-
versus-situation debate in consumer behavior, which focuses on 
the relative influence of personality traits versus situational fac-
tors on consumers’ attitudes and behaviors. Advocates of the 
personality approach argue that an individual’s personality deter-
mines his/her behavior. Conversely, advocates of the situation 
approach believe that the nature of circumstances drives behavior.25 
Research suggests that both approaches can be correct, depending 
on an individual’s self-monitoring. The importance of personality 
traits is discussed later in this chapter.
The term malleable self refers to a multifaceted self-concept that 
includes a good self, bad self, not-me self, desired self, ideal self, ought-
to-be self. Any of these self- conceptions are accessible at any given 
moment.26 In this sense, self-concept is  regarded as both stable and 
malleable. On one hand, the self-concept contains an enduring set 
of self- conceptions. On the other hand, consumers access and use 
different self-conceptions, depending on the task at hand—like tools 
in a toolbox. Classic research indicates that people prefer brands that 
match their self-conceptions. But which self-conceptions do consum-
ers use to compare themselves to brands? Recent research shows that 
high self-monitors use social cues to select self-conceptions, and low 
self-monitors draw on their internal traits.27
objec tive 2
Photodisc/Getty Images
The extent to which consumers use situational 
cues to guide their social behavior is known as 
self-monitoring.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
159
Let’s take a real-world example. Suppose a first-year college student goes dancing 
three nights during the first week of school. Does this mean that she is extroverted 
(a stable personality trait) or did she go dancing to reduce the stress associated with her 
new school environment (a temporary situation)? Self-monitoring provides a third and 
more complete explanation. Perhaps this individual is neither unusually extroverted
nor extraordinarily stressed. She is, however, interested in joining a social sorority 
(a brand), whose members have been frequenting the night clubs this week. As a high 
self-monitor, she evaluated the situation and drew on her “desired self,” i.e., her desire 
to be a member of this sorority. Next, she adapted her behavior to appear extroverted 
and outgoing because she believes this would increase her chances of being invited to 
join the sorority. Alternatively, if she were a low self-monitor, she would probably stay at 
home. Her choice of a sorority would be guided predominately by her internal beliefs and 
attitudes, and she would not attempt to construct a desired image. Perhaps charity is an 
important part of her self-schema, or actual self. Accordingly, she might evaluate sororities 
on the basis on their community service record and search for a sorority accordingly.
Consider also a high self-monitoring consumer who wants to project an image of intel-
lect and culture to his dinner party guests. In addition to choosing appropriate words and 
mannerisms, he selects and displays the brands of food, wine, and music that support an 
intellectual and cultured image. Conversely, the low self-monitor would not be influenced 
by these social cues. Instead, he would select a decorum that fits his actual self-concept, i.e., 
who he really is.28 Some level of self-monitoring is inherent in all social situations. People 
must adapt to their environments in order to interact. Nevertheless, some individuals pres-
ent themselves in such a way as to create exaggerated or misleading images. Motivation for 
this behavior is explored next in a discussion of impression management theory.
Impression Management Theory
The process of creating desirable images of ourselves for others is known as impres-
sion management. In general, people practice impression management to increase 
c ontrol over valued outcomes, such as praise, approval, sympathy, and special treat-
ment. Individuals engage in impression management to make people like them (ingra-
tiation); to generate fear (intimidation); respect (self-promotion); to lift up their morals 
(exemplification); and to engender pity (supplication).29 Consumers employ at least 
three tactics to manage the images that others form about them:
 
1. Appearance management
 
2. Ingratiation
 
3. Aligning activities
Appearance Management  By controlling the selection of clothes, 
grooming, habits (e.g., smoking), verbal communication (e.g., jargon, accents), and 
the display of possessions, consumers convey desired images to others.30 The decisions 
regarding how consumers control their physical appearances and surroundings com-
prise their appearance management. Research supports the notion that consumers 
pay close attention to their physical appearance in order to claim certain identities. Job 
applicants have been shown to manage their physical appearance to match the inter-
viewer’s stereotyped expectations. If the interviewer is thought to be conservative, the 
applicants dress more traditionally than if the interviewer is thought to be progressive.31 
Likewise, salespeople spend considerable time and money on clothing and grooming. 
People also pay close attention to their props (items in their physical environments). 
Do you arrange your dormitory or apartment differently depending on whether your 
objec ti ve 3

160 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
parents or friends will be visiting? 
You are not alone; most consumers 
use props. Executives arrange their 
offices to convey prestige; children 
prop their bedrooms with colorful 
posters; and professors always seem 
to have piles of books on their desks 
and tables (they must be busy). 
Have you noticed that U.S. politi-
cians always have the American flag 
propped in the background and an 
American flag pin in their lapels for 
photo ops and speeches? Fathead 
targets consumers who want to prop 
their surroundings with sports and 
entertainment figures.
Ingratiation  It is inherently pleasing to be liked by others. One of the 
tactics people use to get others to like them is ingratiation, a set of strategic behaviors 
designed to increase the probability of gaining benefits or favors from another person. 
One can ingratiate with self-presentation, opinion conformity, and flattery.
Self-presentation involves either self-enhancement or self-deprecation. The former 
occurs when people promote their good qualities, such as during interviews or on first 
dates. Self-enhancement can backfire, however, if the claims are viewed as conceited32 
or exaggerated and later discredited.33 When employing self-deprecation, people make 
humble or modest claims about themselves, often downplaying their positive attributes 
or their role in a successful outcome. This tactic can also backfire if the self-deprecation is 
excessively negative and perceived as an attempt to elicit reassurance from others.34 Taken 
together, self-presentation is a trade-off between favorability and plausibility—modest 
claims may signal incompetence, and yet, highly favorable claims may not be credible.
Think about your strategy on a first date. On one hand, if you describe all of your 
accomplishments and talents, you may be perceived as boastful and turn off your date. 
On the other hand, if you fail to mention your positive capabilities, your date may 
regard you as mediocre. Either way, you probably don’t get a second date. Thus, self-
 presentation involves striking a balance between the opposing forces of self-enhancement 
and self-deprecation.35 Research demonstrates that the optimal balance shifts, depending 
on whether people are interacting with friends or strangers.36 Self-presentations are more 
likely to be self-enhancing to strangers and modest to friends. Why? Strangers usually 
have little information, so an individual’s performance record may be difficult to verify. 
Consequently, by presenting highly favorable information to strangers, people willingly 
sacrifice likeability in exchange for perceptions of competence. The strategy is differ-
ent with friends. Because they have more background information about you, friends 
can easily disconfirm an exaggerated claim. Moreover, people share common interests 
with friends and expect many future interactions. Thus, people maintain friendships by 
increasing likeability through a more modest self- presentation. Let’s return to the strategy 
for a first date. Research suggests that if a new acquaintance is aware of something you’ve 
done well, s/he will like you more if you are modest about it. On the contrary, if s/he is 
completely unaware of a particular talent, modesty is simply interpreted as mediocrity.37 
In sum, if you’ve got it, flaunt it—but only if your date doesn’t already know about it.
Courtesy of Fathead
Fathead appeals to consumers who like to prop their surroundings with sports and 
entertainment figures.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
161
Opinion conformity entails expressing insincere agreement on important issues. 
Subordinates often use this tactic with supervisors, because people generally like those 
who share their opinions.38 But it can backfire if the target of opinion conformity per-
ceives the ingratiator as pandering. Thus, a clever mix of disagreement on unimportant 
issues and agreement on critical issues reduces suspicion.
Flattery involves excessive compliments or praise designed to make someone feel 
good about her/himself. Flattery does not have to be insincere. In fact, effective flat-
tery should be targeted at important attributes where people feel uncertain about 
their abilities or performance. For example, if a friend expresses anxiety about his 
performance on an important and recently delivered speech, an earnest comment 
such as “I appreciate that you spoke slowly and clearly” is likely to gain favor for the 
ingratiator. Similarly, when a salesperson flatters a potential customer regarding an 
important but uncertain attribute, the customer is likely to respond favorably. For 
example, a consumer may have reservations about his weight and expresses those 
concerns while trying on business suits. A clever salesperson may flatter the customer 
by remarking that he is “in better shape than most men his age.” Recent research 
demonstrates that if customers perceive flattery to be sincere, it matters not whether 
the remark is perceived to be accurate, as both genuine compliments (sincere and 
accurate) and opaque flattery (sincere and inaccurate) appear to generate positive 
intentions to continue working with a salesperson.39 Figure 8.2 provides a multi-
dimensional model of Consumer Ingratiation.
Aligning Activities  Sometimes consumers behave in ways that violate exist-
ing cultural norms. Aligning activities consist of comments that attempt to realign our 
behavior with norms.40 Disclaimers are verbal assertions, made in advance, to offset 
the potential negative  effects of a behavior.41 A celebrity endorser may use a disclaimer 
such as “I’m no expert, but …” to avoid responsibility for a product’s performance. 
A salesperson may remark, “Please hear me out before you refuse this offer” to keep 
potential customers from prematurely rejecting an offer. Accounts entail excuses and 
justifications. The former reduce or deny one’s responsibility for inappropriate actions; 
the latter acknowledge responsibility but rationalize the behavior as appropriate, given 
the circumstances.42 Both excuses and justifications are designed to reduce perceptions 
of wrongdoing. For example, a customer service representative from Dell Computer 
Co., who claims that your computer crashed because you installed incompatible soft-
ware, is excusing Dell from any responsibility for the problem. In contrast, the service 
rep may justify the computer crash on grounds that the computer is seven years old and 
well beyond its useful life. In a similar vein, one salesperson may explain a late delivery 
as a shipping or supplier problem—an excuse; another may explain the late delivery 
as a function of building a custom order—a justification. Accounts work best when 
the individual delivering them is of superior status and when the violating behavior is 
not serious.43 What about students, who are not in a superior position to account for 
serious violations such as late assignments and missed exams? Research suggests that 
students’ excuses and justification are better received if they are truthful and apologetic. 
It also helps if the account is reasonable.
It should be clear that people employ various tactics to manipulate the impressions 
others form of them. Consumers and salespeople manage their appearances; they ingra-
tiate themselves through selective presentation, opinion conformity, and flattery; and 
they try to repair their identities when their conduct is questionable. Next, let’s take a 
look at what makes an individual unique and how that influences his/her behavior as 
a consumer.

162 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Personality
Personality is a set of unique psychological characteristics that influence how a person 
responds to his or her environment, including cognitive, affective, and behavioral ten-
dencies. Understanding a consumer’s personality can help predict his/her responses to 
Figure 8.2 A Multi-Dimensional Model of Consumer Ingratiation
POSITIVE INGRATIATION
Sincerity
[Perception of the Ingratiator’s Motive]
Insincere
[self-enhancement]
manipulative
Sincere
[other-enhancement]
genuine
Accuracy 
[Perception of the accuracy of the remark]
Accurate
[true positive]
Phony Compliment
[smooth talk]
Genuine Compliment
[positive feedback]
Inaccurate
[false positive]
Transparent Flattery
[brown-nosing]
Opaque Flattery
[friendly behavior]
NEGATIVE (anti) 
INGRATIATION
Sincerity
[Perception of the Ingratiator’s Motive]
Insincere
[self-enhancement]
manipulative
Sincere
[other-enhancement]
genuine
Accuracy 
[Perception of the accuracy of the remark]
Accurate 
[true negative]
Disparagement 
[malicious Criticism]
Negative Feedback 
[useful Criticism]
Inaccurate
[false negative]
Sarcasm
[harmful Criticism]
Hyper Critique
[ineffectual Criticism]
Source: Thomas W. Cline, D.P. Mertens, N.S. Vowels, and A. Davies, “All ingratiation is no equal: 
A two dimensional model of consumer ingratiation,” Society for Consumer Psychology 2009 Winter 
Conference. Reprinted by permission of Thomas W. Cline.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
163
marketing activities—but it is a tricky business. People don’t necessarily behave the same 
way in all situations, and an individual’s personality can change over time. Consumers’ 
personalities mature along with their physical growth. For example, advanced educa-
tion may affect consumers’ personalities by teaching them to be more open-minded 
and inquisitive. Similarly, the process of aging often ushers in self-reflection, increasing 
consumers’ desire for reading and experiential travel. Some people become more cyni-
cal over time, while others become more trustful. Few consumers respond to products 
and services today as they did as children or teenagers.
Major life events can also produce “shocks” in a consumer’s personality. Often, a 
full-time job can increase a person’s need to be conscientious, and marriage frequently 
brings a spirit of cooperation (at least initially!). Having children, changing occupations, 
chronic illness, and the death of loved ones can also engender significant shifts in one’s 
personality. Nevertheless, it’s difficult to ignore the enduring qualities of personality; in 
fact, personality has uniformly been considered to be constitutional, i.e., an essential 
and stable characteristic of individuals Some people just seem consistently grouchy, 
while others routinely act pleasingly. In the same vein, some of your friends probably 
assert themselves without fail, while others predictably withdraw from confrontations. 
Earlier in this chapter, we described these individual nuances as traits. Indeed, scholars 
have approached the study of personality from a variety of angles, producing many 
interesting theories, including Freudian Systems,44 Neo-Freudian Theories,45 and trait 
theories.46 The most useful approach for consumer behavior is multiple trait theory.
Multiple Trait Theory
Multiple trait theory maintains that personality traits represent consumers’ tendencies to 
respond in a certain way across similar situations. Traits vary from one person to another, 
and although an individual’s traits can shift, they are generally stable over a reasonable 
time frame. Think of traits as those specific qualities and mannerisms that distinguish one 
person from another. Consider, for a moment, your best friend. How would you describe 
his/her personality? Is this person generally outgoing, smart, shy, or moody? How does s/
he respond to new situations? Is s/he optimistic, dramatic, or indifferent? How does this 
individual react to marketing stimuli? Is s/he a bargain hunter or an impulsive shopper? 
Longstanding research interest in personality and consumer psychology has produced a 
host of measurable personality traits. Among the most popular multiple trait theory tax-
onomies is the Five-Factor Model.47 This multi-factor structure identifies five basic traits 
that derive primarily from an individual’s genetics and early childhood learning.48 The five 
basic traits have traditionally been numbered and labeled as:
 
1. Surgency (outgoingness)
 
2. Agreeableness
 
3. Conscientiousness
 
4. Emotional stability
 
5. Intellect
Figure 8.3 provides specific characteristics of the five core traits.47
The Five-Factor Model enables marketers to categorize consumers into different 
groups based on several traits. Thus, trait theory is a special case of market  segmentation. 
Research shows that important personality traits can be linked to specific consumption 
behavior, such as compulsive buying, i.e., the drive to consume uncontrollably and to buy 
in order to avoid problems. Specifically, consumers who score low on conscientiousness 
ob jec ti ve 4

164 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Figure 8.3 The Five-Factor Model of Personality
Source: Adapted from Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The Development of Markers for the Big Five-Factor 
Structure. Psychological Assessment, 4:26–42.
DIMENSION
Those scoring low are . . .
Surgency
Those scoring high are . . .
Introverted
Shy
Quiet
Reserved
Untalkative
Inhibited
Withdrawn
Timid
Bashful
Extraverted
Talkative
Assertive
Verbal
Energetic
Bold
Active
Daring
Vigorous
Those scoring low are . . .
Agreeableness 
Those scoring high are . . .
Cold
Unkind
Unsympathetic
Distrustful
Harsh
Demanding
Rude
Selfish
Uncooperative
Kind
Cooperative
Sympathetic
Warm
Trustful
Considerate
Pleasant
Agreeable
Helpful
Those scoring low are . . . 
Conscientiousness 
Those scoring high are . . .
Disorganized
Careless
Unsystematic
Inefficient
Undependable
Impractical
Negligent
Inconsistent
Organized
Systematic
Thorough
Practical
Neat
Efficient
Careful
Steady
Those scoring low are . . .
Emotional Stability
Those scoring high are . . .
Anxious
Moody
Temperamental
Envious
Emotional
Irritable
Unenvious
Unemotional
Relaxed
Imperturbable
Unexcitable
Undemanding
Those scoring low are . . .
Intellect 
Those scoring high are . . .
Unintellectual
Unintelligent
Unimaginative
Uncreative
Simple
Unsophisticated
Unreflective
Intellectual
Creative
Complex
Imaginative
Bright
Philosophical
Artistic

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
165
or high on agreeability demonstrate a propensity to shop  compulsively.49 This nega-
tive link between conscientiousness and compulsive buying suggests that individuals 
who have difficulty controlling their buying may also lack organization, precision, 
and efficiency. The positive relationship between agreeability and compulsive buying 
implies that uncontrolled shopping is associated with tendencies to be kindhearted, 
sympathetic, and not rude to others.50 The Five-Factor Model has also been used to 
explain consumers’ bargaining and complaining behavior,51 voting behavior,52 and 
alcohol abuse.53 Research also shows that the Five-Factor Model can provide a frame-
work to tap the dimensions of a brand’s personality.
Brand-Personality
Earlier in this chapter, we learned that consumers prefer brands that enhance their self-
concepts. In some cases, consumers prefer products that reflect who they are, i.e., their 
actual self-concepts. For example, “These blue jeans aren’t for me. They’re too risqué.” In 
other cases, consumers buy products that help them express who they’d like to be, i.e., their 
ideal self-concepts. For example, “I’ll take these preppy jeans; I need to upscale my image.” 
Brands such as Nike and Nokia often conjure up specific brand  images, which comprise all 
the thoughts and feelings consumers have about a particular brand. Consumers’ thoughts 
and feelings are evoked through the stimuli they associate with a brand, such as logos, 
slogans, endorsers, price, distribution channel, typical users, and use situations. Though 
somewhat elusive, brand image can be estimated by asking consumers the first words that 
come to mind when the think about a brand. What comes to mind when consumers think 
of Mountain Dew, Yahoo!, Apple, Kellogg’s, McDonald’s, and Louis Vuitton? 
A considerable amount of research demonstrates that, like people, brands exhibit 
personality traits. Brand personality refers to the set of human characteristics associ-
ated with a brand. Brand personality comprises the human side of a brand’s image. For 
example, Absolut vodka is typically described as a cool, contemporary, 25-year old, while 
Stoli’s vodka is an intellectual, conservative, older man. Would consumers describe the 
personality of Sky vodka any differently? Drawing on the Five-Factor Model of per-
sonality, Jennifer Aaker developed a framework to measure a brand’s personality. She 
identified five distinct personality traits:
 1. Sincerity
 2. Excitement
 3. Competence
 4. Sophistication
 5. Ruggedness54
Each of these factors includes various descriptors, as shown in Figure 8.4.
Three of the five dimensions of brand personality relate to the “Big Five” 
human personality dimensions. Agreeableness matches up with sincerity to capture 
warmth and acceptance; Conscientiousness parallels competence, as both embody 
responsibility, security, and dependability; and extroversion and excitement mutu-
ally describe energy, activity, and sociability. Two dimensions of brand personality 
(sophistication and ruggedness), however, stand apart from the Five-Factor Model. 
This suggests that consumers may not recognize these particular traits in them-
selves, but rather aspire to attain them. This notion is consistent with existing 
marketing activities surrounding archetypal sophisticated brands such as Gucci, 
Lexus, Hennessy, and Rolex that feature glamorous and high-class images. Similarly, 
rugged brands such as Marlboro, Timberline, Jeep, and L.L. Bean symbolize tough, 
outdoorsy ideals that appeal to  consumers’ ideal self-concepts.54
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
What is Gucci’s brand personality?

166 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
The Dimensions of Brand Personality Depend on Culture
Eye on International
Brand personality may be critical to developing brand loyalty, 
but the specific dimensions that describe a brand’s person-
ality are far from universal. For example, researchers from 
China and the UK found that one particular 
dimension important to Americans, but not 
to Chinese, is ruggedness, i.e., “rugged or 
“tough.”82
One explanation for the absence of this 
dimension among Chinese consumers may 
reside in their social norm of non-aggression. 
Many Chinese are influenced by the doctrine 
of Way (Tao), which emphasizes politeness 
and harmony, and the doctrine of Mean (Yau), 
which urges people to avoid competition and 
conflict in order to maintain inner harmony. 
Understandably, “tough” and “rugged” signal undesirable 
meanings in China because these adjectives appear to oppose 
desirable personal attributes, such as “gentle,” “polite,” and 
“elegant.”
The marketing implications for brands 
that rely on ruggedness, such as Marlboro 
cigarettes, are complicated. Should Marlboro 
remain consistent over time and space when 
advertised in foreign countries or shift the mean-
ing of the brand, e.g., associate Marlboro 
with less rugged but more exciting images? 
Research suggests the latter. The American cow-
boy need not be rugged and tough to connect 
with the Chinese. He could be well-mannered, 
intelligent, and reliable.
©Phil Date, 2009/Used under license from 
Shutterstock.com
Figure 8.4 The Dimensions of Brand Personality
Competence
Excitement 
Down-to-earth
Honest
Wholesome
Cheerful
Daring
Spirited
Imaginative
Up-to-date
Reliable
Intelligent
Successful
Upper class
Charming
Outdoorsy
Tough 
Sincerity
Ruggedness
Sophistication
Brand Personality 
Brand personality traits maintain an important relationship with human personality 
traits. First, human traits are characterized based on a consumer’s observable behavior, 
manifest beliefs and attitudes, and physical and demographic characteristics.55 For exam-
ple, “He’s a sophisticated manager, always in a hurry and up-to-date with technology.” In 
contrast, brand traits are characterized based on a brand’s typical user, i.e., the set of human 
characteristics associated with those who routinely endorse the brand. Thus, if technologi-
cally inclined, sophisticated managers are typical users of Bluetooth technology, then these 
particular personality traits are likely to be transferred to the Bluetooth brand.56
Source: Schoen, H., and Schumann, S. (2007). Personality traits, partisan attitudes, and voting 
behavior: Evidence from Germany. Political Psychology, 28, 471-498. Reprinted by permission of 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
167
Consumers also extract cultural meaning from the brands that they purchase. Thus, 
the process is a paradoxical two-way street. A brand’s image is shaped by those who use 
it, and yet, the users construct their identities through a brand’s personality. Research 
also suggests that brand personality includes the demographic characteristics of the typ-
ical users, such as gender, class, and age. For example, Revlon is predominately female; 
Budweiser is male; and Starbucks is gender-neutral. Chevy is middle-class, but Cadillac 
is upper class. Apple’s Mac is young; and HP is old.
Brand traits can also be inferred through typical use situations, which represent the 
various ways a brand is consumed or used. For example, McDonald’s is a popular desti-
nation for single parents to treat their children to a pre-made meal in a colorful, quick-
serve environment. Big Boy also appeals to this demographic, offering a similar menu and 
remarkably comparable brand symbols (Ronald McDonald versus Big Boy). However, the 
use situation at Big Boy is sit-down and typically includes the entire family. For another 
example, consider the desktop computer. Apple Computers are typically used for creative 
applications and hobbies. Quite the opposite, PCs tend to be all about business applica-
tions. The popular “I’m a Mac. I’m a PC.” ads by Apple attest to this dichotomy.
Like human traits, brand traits can also be inferred indirectly through product associa-
tions, such as attributes (e.g., the iPhone’s features are imaginative), product-category (e.g., 
motorcycles are daring), names (e.g., Smucker’s is down-to-earth), and logos (e.g., Nike’s 
swoosh is spirited).57 Finally, a brand’s personality can be formed by using characters and 
celebrities to endorse the brand. See Figure 8.5 for a model of brand personality.
In contrast to a brand’s tangible attributes (e.g., dress or pants size), brand personal-
ity tends to serve a symbolic or self-expressive function for consumers.58 The symbolic 
use of brands occurs because consumers instill brands with human personality traits. 
Marketers understand the importance of symbolic meaning and often use characteriza-
tion to communicate brand personality.
Figure 8.5 A Model of Brand Personality
Brand Personality 
Typical
Use Situations
Product
Associations
Personality
Traits
Demographic
Traits
Typical User 
Celebrity Endorser’s
Personality Traits
Brand Character’s
Personality Traits
Characterization
Source: (Schoen, H., and Schumann, S. (2007). Personality traits, partisan attitudes, and voting 
behavior: Evidence from Germany. Political Psychology, 28, 471-498. Reprinted by permission of John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc.

168 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Characterization
Two strategies provide brands with characterization. Brand personification involves 
giving non-humans human-like traits, while brand anthropomorphism assigns both hu-
man form and human traits to non-humans. Marketers use both strategies to build brand 
personality. For example, Geico’s talking gecko represents brand personification. The gecko’s 
English accent and delightful mannerism are unmistakably human, but he retains the form 
of a lizard. In fact, this laid-back ambassador of great customer service and quick insurance 
rate quotes was voted America’s favorite advertising icon in 2005.59 The idea for the gecko 
emerged from a creative session at the Martin Agency in Richmond, Virginia. For years, the 
company’s name, “Geico,” an acronym for Government Employees Insurance Company, 
had been incorrectly pronounced as “Gecko.” Thus, the gecko was created to 
turn consumers’ mispronunciations into an amusing memory aid. The famous 
gecko first aired on national television in 1999. But the gecko had, and still has, 
competition—in the form of the Aflac Insurance duck. Also debuting in 1999, 
Aflac’s duck—voiced by Gilbert Gottfried—“quacks” out the company’s name 
in frustration to prospective policyholders who can’t seem to remember it. This 
is a deliberate attempt to facilitate brand name recall and link the crazy charac-
ter traits of the duck to an otherwise boring product, supplemental insurance.
Brand personification need not involve animals. The M & M charac-
ters appear in lighthearted commercials for Mars, Inc., one of the largest 
privately owned businesses in the world. The M & M characters have been 
assigned human traits but their forms are primarily non-human, i.e., they 
have faces on a body reminiscent of actual M & Ms. To emphasize the M & 
M’s brand personality, Mars has even named their “spokescandies.” The cyn-
ical and sardonic red duo serve as mascots for milk chocolate M & Ms, and 
happy and gullible yellow duo represent peanut M & Ms. In a 2004 online 
poll sponsored by USA Today and Yahoo!, the M & M candy characters were 
voted America’s favorite advertising icons.60 It’s no wonder, as consumers can 
visit the www.mms.com (planet M & Ms) and create their own look-alike 
M & M characters. The list of brand personifications is lengthy, including classics such 
as the Budweiser Clydesdales, the Energizer Bunny, and Star-Kist’s Charlie the Tuna along 
with the more recently introduced Taco Bell Chihuahua and the Chic-fil-A cows.
In contrast to brand personification, brand anthropomorphization enlists fictitious 
characters with both human traits and human form. In one of the most fascinating cases 
of brand anthropomorphization, the California Raisin Advisory Board, working with its 
advertising agency, Foote Cone and Belding, employed claymation (stop-motion anima-
tion) to bring its dried and shriveled commodity to life. In 1987, the agency created The 
California Raisins, a fictitious rhythm and blues musical group, that debuted singing 
Marvin Gaye’s 1968 classic, “Heard It Through the Grapevine.” The annual advertising 
budget was estimated at $40 million. The dancing raisins created such a popular brand 
image that the licensed dolls, toys, and mugs bearing their likenesses generated nearly 
$200 million in revenue. Although estimates vary, raisin sales increased dramatically dur-
ing the first two years of the campaign, largely as a result of cereal marketers Post Cereal 
Co. and Kellogg Company bolstering the raisin content of their brands. Fewer than five 
years later, however, the characters lost their charm, and sales of raisins had decreased 
to below pre-campaign levels.61 Perhaps the California Raisins overpowered the image of 
Sun-Maid, the very brand they were enlisted to help. Unlike the M & M characters, the 
California Raisins’ faces were sculptured with  specific, human features.
Longstanding brand anthropomorphizations dot the marketing landscape, includ-
ing the Jolly Green Giant, The Pillsbury Dough Boy, Mr. Clean, McGruff the Crime 
PRNewsFoto/Carvel Corporation/AP Photo
The M&M characters represent brand 
personification.

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
169
Dog (National Crime Prevention Council), Planter’s Mr. Peanut, Kellogg’s Rice Krispies 
Snap, Crackle, and Pop, Mrs. Butterworth, the Quaker Oats man, and the Kool-Aid man. 
Each is designed to “humanize” and distinguish the brand from its competitors. In a 
more recent example of brand anthropomorphization, the ABC network developed a 
comedy called “Cavemen,” adapted from Geico Insurance commercials as an offbeat 
 commentary on ethnic prejudice from the perspective of three prehistoric guys trying 
to make their way in the modern world. The television show debuted in fall 2007, but 
didn’t survive the entire season.
In sum, brand personality has long held the attention of marketing professionals, 
who are interested in “striking the right cord” with their target markets.62 Research has 
demonstrated that consumers purchase brands not only for their functional benefits, 
but also for their symbolic roles. Brand personality dimensions can affect consumer 
behavior as a result of self-expressive needs expressed when consumers choose brands 
representing an extension of their actual or ideal-self concepts. Furthermore, brands are 
also capable of affecting consumers’ self-concepts. Recent research provides evidence 
that a brand’s personality can be transferred to consumers.63 Specifically, when consum-
ers think about “sincere” brands, they view themselves as more agreeable. When con-
sumers consider “competent” brands, they see themselves as more sophisticated. These 
findings highlight the extraordinary power of brand personalities. Not only do consum-
ers choose brands because they want to underscore some aspect of who they are or who 
they want to be, but—to some extent—brands also make consumers who they are.
Cognitive Factors
One critical difference between the social sciences (e.g., consumer behavior) and the 
natural sciences (e.g., biotechnology) is that the former recognizes the importance of 
cognitive personality variables, those personality traits that describe an individual’s 
mental responses to objects. Individual differences in cognition can explain how con-
sumers respond differentially to various marketing activities. Earlier in this chapter, 
we learned that high self-monitors, individuals who are sensitive and responsive to 
social cues, constantly change and adapt their behavior to match the particular social 
situation. Conversely, low self-monitors behave more consistently across various situa-
tions. Similarly, locus of control describes the extent to which an individual possesses 
internal or external reinforcement beliefs. Individuals with an external locus of control 
believe that their outcomes are controlled primarily by fate, luck, or more powerful 
others.64 Consequently, their behaviors seem to vary almost randomly across situations. 
Individuals with an internal locus of control, however, believe that they are masters of 
their own destinies and so, are more likely to behave in accordance with their internal 
states, i.e., opinions, beliefs, and attitudes.65
In contrast to multiple trait theory, cognitive approaches often identify one particular 
cognitive trait relevant to consumers’ beliefs, attitudes, and intentions regarding prod-
ucts and services. Traits labeled as “needs” generally reflect consumers’ desires or tenden-
cies to engage in specific mental activities. Three of these motivational traits—need for 
cognition, need for humor, and need for cognitive closure—are discussed next.
Need for Cognition
Just as there are situational differences that enhance consumers’ motivations to care-
fully evaluate persuasive messages, personality differences can also affect consumers’ 
processing motivation in persuasive situations. Need for cognition (NFC) measures 
an individual’s natural tendency to engage in and enjoy effortful cognitive activities. 
O b jec ti ve 5

170 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Specifically, individuals high in NFC are more intrinsically motivated to engage in 
effortful cognitive analyses than are those individuals low in NFC.66 Research shows 
that consumers who score high in NFC focus primarily on the product-relevant infor-
mation in an advertisement. Motivated to evaluate the cogency of the message, these 
consumers are relatively unaffected by irrelevant background appeals, such as celebrity 
endorsements. On the other hand, consumers who score low in NFC pay attention 
to ancillary message cues, such as celebrities and attractive people in the ad. Related 
research reveals that when presented with unfamiliar brands, the attitudes of high NFC 
individuals are based on evaluation of product attributes, while those low in NFC de-
velop attitudes based on simple peripheral cues.67
Need for cognition can also explain consumers’ Internet preferences. Research eval-
uating individual differences in Web usage shows that those high in NFC use the Web 
to search for product information, current events and news, and for general education 
purposes. In contrast, Web users low in NFC are more likely to use the Web for enter-
tainment purposes.68 In general, those high in NFC, who enjoy thinking and effortful 
intellectual pursuits (e.g., chess, bridge, crossword puzzles, Sudoku), tend to be more 
heavily influenced by rational appeals, whiles those low in NFC—who do not enjoy 
effortful cognitive exercises and who think carefully only when necessary—are influ-
enced more by emotional appeals.69
Need for cognition can provide helpful guidelines for public policy makers, who 
have embraced the use of marketing activities to improve public health by preventing 
the spread of HIV infection. A recent study shows that high NFC individuals develop 
a better understanding of the risks of unsafe sexual conduct when the information is 
presented in a written (versus comic strip) format. The opposite is true for those low in 
NFC.70 Results of another study demonstrated the usefulness of need for cognition in 
reducing addictive behaviors, such as smoking. As their perceived vulnerability to the 
negative health effects of smoking increased, smokers more correctly inferred that smok-
ing-cessation gimmicks (e.g., Quest Cigarettes) were no healthier than regular cigarettes, 
especially when their NFC was high. This finding was consistent with previous studies 
demonstrating that increased levels of motivation to process a persuasive communication 
are associated with more critical appraisals of that communication.71
Need for Humor
Humor is such a key ingredient in social communication that it is 
unusual to witness a casual conversation in which jokes and other 
humorous stimuli are not attempted. Similar to the need for cogni-
tion, individual differences in an individual’s need for humor play an 
important role in the processing of persuasive communications. Need 
for humor (NFH) represents an individual’s tendency to crave, seek 
out, and enjoy humor, a construct more motivationally driven than 
sense of humor.72 The domain of NFH includes amusement, wit, and 
nonsense. Research suggests that the influence of humorous ad ap-
peals are shaped by the joint interplay of the level of humor present in 
an ad and an individual’s NFH.73 Specifically, those consumers low in 
NFH appear indifferent to the level of humor in the ad, while those 
high in NFH not only form more favorable attitudes towards humor-
ous ads, but are also turned off by understated or weak humor.
More interesting, NFC (need for cognition) may act as an “on-
off switch” regarding consumers’ NFH. People high in NFC are 
PRNewsFoto/United Airlines/AP Photo

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
171
motivated to process issue-relevant ad claims rather than peripheral cues, so their NFH 
may be switched “off” during message evaluation. As a result, the level of humor in an 
ad has little effect on their attitudes. In contrast, those low in NFC are not motivated 
to critically evaluate the message; they are interested in peripheral cues, such as humor. 
Consequently, their NFH is switched “on.” Taken together, consumers who are low 
in NFC and high in NFH tend to respond most favorably to humorous ad appeals. 
Finally, related research indicates that NFH can influence message recall. Individuals 
with low NFH recall more ad claims if they do not anticipate humor to be present in 
the communication, i.e., the humor is completely unexpected.74
On the basis of humor’s prevalence in advertising and the belief in its universal 
effectiveness, NFH may be useful as a segmentation tool. For example, it may be help-
ful in identifying audiences who are more likely, under certain conditions, to respond 
favorably to humorous ads. NFH can differentiate subjects’ attitudes under varying 
conditions of humor content. Thus, if marketers’ objectives include attitude change, 
humor targeted at audiences high in NFH may produce favorable results. As with 
other “need” traits, it is rarely practical to survey members of target audiences; however, 
market research may identify media vehicles that draw audiences characterized by high 
NFH. For example, National Lampoon readers, Comedy Central watchers, and Twitter 
users may tend to score high in NFH. Advertisers could use this information to deter-
mine which product categories or brands tend to be popular with users of these media. 
For instance, Comedy Central viewers may also be heavy users of B-films and video 
games. In a similar vein, research firms such as SRI-CBI use values and lifestyle data 
(VALS) to identify marketing opportunities by segmenting on the basis of key person-
ality traits that motivate consumer behavior. The premise of VALS is that consumers 
express their personalities through their actions. Accordingly, VALS defines consumer 
segments on the basis of those personality traits that affect consumer behavior. By 
including NFH as a key personality variable, VALS might discover that consumers who 
score high in NFH are more likely to perform karaoke, attend amusement parks, and 
watch comedy. Thus, NFH may be helpful both in media selection and in targeting 
audiences for specific products and services.
Need for Cognitive Closure
When making decisions, consumers must frequently make the difficult trade-off 
 between speed and accuracy. Some decisions require immediate action, and consumers 
must make quick judgments. Other tasks afford consumers the opportunity to think 
about the decision more carefully and for longer periods of time. A quick decisions may 
serve as only a temporary and partial solution to a consumer’s problem. For example, 
consumers may select a brand based on familiarity or other heuristic choice strategies. 
Unfortunately, the brand may not satisfy a consumer’s future needs. Let’s say a consum-
er wanted a docking station to charge and play her Ipod, and she also wanted an alarm 
clock feature built-in. If this consumer purchased an Ihome, she may later discover that 
the sound reproduction is inferior to such brands as Bose. Accordingly, longer delib-
erations generally result in better decisions. Research dealing with the theory of lay 
epistemology, the formation and use of everyday knowledge, suggests that individuals 
differ in the degree to which they make the important trade-off between speed and 
accuracy.75 The need for cognitive closure (NFCC) describes a consumer’s desire for 
definite knowledge of any kind to reduce confusion or ambiguity. As the need for cog-
nitive closure increases, people consider fewer alternatives, consider smaller amounts 
of information about each alternative, make snap judgments that have obvious and 

172 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
immediate implications for action, and are insensitive to evidence inconsistent with 
their judgments. Ironically, they exhibit high levels of confidence in the appropriate-
ness of their judgments, decisions, and actions.
In short, the need for cognitive closure promotes epistemic seizing and freezing. 
Seizing refers to the tendency to attain closure quickly, even if this means oversimplifying 
an issue or failing to carefully consider all sides of an issue. Alternatively, freezing refers 
to the tendency to maintain closure as long as possible, even if this means being closed-
minded or unwilling to consider other options. People differ in their NFCC—some are 
strongly motivated to reach conclusions quickly at the risk of overlooking important 
qualifiers and limiting conditions; others are willing to deliberate carefully for long 
periods of time at the risk of appearing indecisive or to lack confidence. Situations also 
differ in the extent to which they increase or decrease NFCC. Time pressure increases 
the motivation to attain closure quickly. Concerns about accuracy and the long-term 
consequences of one’s actions decrease motivation to attain closure quickly.
Recent research shows that the degree to which price is perceived to predict quality 
(the price-quality heuristic) is overestimated when consumers’ NFCC is high. For peo-
ple with a heightened NFCC, attaining closure quickly and perpetuating that closure is 
paramount. For these consumers, selectively focusing on belief-consistent information 
and ignoring potentially disconfirming evidence promotes closure because it allows 
one to reconfirm and maintain preexisting beliefs.76 Research also reveals that when the 
attributes of a brand under consideration (target brand) cannot be readily compared to 
a previous brand (referent brand), evaluations for the target brand suffer, particularly if 
a consumer has a high NFCC.77 Need for cognitive closure also provides insights into 
criminal investigations. Recent evidence suggests that investigators with high NFCC 
are less likely than those low in NFCC to acknowledge observations that are inconsis-
tent with their hypothesis about the crime.78
Self-concept is the totality of an individual’s thoughts and 
feelings about him or herself, including role identities, 
personal qualities, and self-evaluations. Role identities 
represent the various positions that consumers occupy in 
society. Personal qualities involve personality traits, or ten-
dencies to behave in a certain way across similar situations. 
Self-evaluations are constructed when consumers consider 
the strength of their performances in various roles. The 
sum of all self-evaluations comprises self-esteem, which is 
the overall evaluative component of self-concept. The self-
concept can be broken down into two dimensions—the 
actual versus ideal, each with two parts. The actual self-
concept represents how consumers perceive themselves, 
while the actual public-concept embodies others’ true per-
ceptions of a consumer. The ideal self-concept describes 
how consumers would like to see themselves, and the 
ideal public-concept represents how consumers would like 
others to see them.
Self-concept is important to marketers because con-
sumers’ self-perceptions influence their attitudes towards 
products and subsequent purchase behavior. If marketers 
want consumers to recall something about their brands, 
they should create communications that are consistent 
with consumers’ actual self-concepts. Alternatively, if mar-
keters’ goals involve creating positive attitudes or images 
about their brands, they should communicate informa-
tion that is congruent with consumers’ ideal self-concepts. 
The relationship between a consumer’s self-concept and 
his/her possessions is called the extended self. Possessions 
for which we develop a deep affection are known as “loved 
objects.” Loved objects can help consumers resolve inter-
nal psychological conflicts.
The term “malleable self” refers to the notion that 
consumers can hold various self-concepts about themselves. 
Consumers will employ a particular self-concept, depend-
ing on the situation and their level of self- monitoring, 
which describes the extent to which consumers use situ-
ational cues to guide their social behavior. People who 
change their behavior to meet the expectations of others 
are known as high self-monitors, while people who act pri-
marily on the basis of their internal beliefs and attitudes 
are known as low self-monitors.
Chapter Summary

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
173
self-concept
role identities
personal qualities
traits
self-evaluation
self-esteem
actual self-concept
ideal self-concept
actual public-concept
ideal public-concept
self-schemas
extended-self
loved objects
self-monitoring
malleable self
self- conceptions
impression management
appearance management
ingratiation
self-presentation
opinion conformity
flattery
aligning activities
disclaimers
accounts
personality
personality traits
five-factor model
compulsive buying
brand image
brand personality
brand personification
brand anthropomorphism
cognitive personality variables
locus of control
need for cognition
need for humor
theory of lay epistemology
need for cognitive closure
Key Terms
The process of creating contrived images for others is 
known as impression management. Impression manage-
ment involves our appearance, ingratiation, and align-
ing actions. Consumers control their selection of clothes, 
grooming, habits, language, and possessions. Ingratiation 
is the purposeful attempt to gain benefits or favors from 
others. Aligning activities are attempts to realign our 
behavior so it comes close to matching norms.
A consumer’s personality consists of a set of unique 
psychological characteristics that influence thoughts, 
feelings, and behavior regarding products and services. 
Multiple trait theory holds that individuals’ personality 
traits describe their tendencies to respond in given ways 
across similar situations. Brands also have personalities, 
comprised of the human characteristics we associate with 
them. Brand personalities are derived from the typical 
user, typical use situation, product associations, and brand 
characterization.
Personality differences can affect consumers’ moti-
vation to respond favorably to marketing activities and 
brands. Need for cognition (NFC) describes a consumer’s 
tendency to engage in and enjoy effortful cognitive activi-
ties. Need for humor (NFH) represents an individual’s 
inclination to crave and engage in humor. Finally, need 
for cognitive closure (NFCC) explains a consumer’s desire 
for any kind of knowledge that reduces confusion or 
ambiguity.

174 
Part Two   Consumer Information Processing
Review and Discussion
1. What is the difference between the actual self-
concept and the actual public-concept? How do the 
ideal self-concept and ideal public-concept differ?
2. When consumers try to recall brand information, 
are they more likely to reference their actual or ideal 
selves? When they evaluate brands, which self-
concept is activated? Explain.
3. How do loved objects help consumers resolve inter-
nal (personality) conflicts?
4. How does self-monitoring help explain how 
 consumers use their malleable self?
5. Review the three tactics of impression manage-
ment. When students conjure up excuses for late 
 assignments, what are the best tactics?
6. Review the Five-Factor Model of personality. Explain 
how it might be used to account for consumer 
complaining, compulsive shopping, and binge 
drinking.
7.    As the marketplace becomes more crowded with 
brands, do you think brand personality will be more 
or less important to consumers? Explain.
8.    Select one of your favorite brands and describe it’s brand 
personality based on the model provided in Figure 8.5. 
Be sure to include descriptions of the brand’s typical 
users, typical use situations, product associations, celebrity 
endorser’s personality traits, and brand characterizations.
9.    Explain how brand characters such as Tony the Tiger, 
Captain Morgan, and the Budweiser Clydesdales can 
be useful in global marketing.
10.    Review the cognitive variables, NFC, NFH, and 
NFCC. How can they be used to help marketers 
identify suitable target markets? 
1. On 15 numbered lines, write down 15 different 
things about yourself. Write the answers in the order 
that they occur to you. Do this prior to reading the 
next sentence. Now label each of the 15 descriptions 
about yourself as either:
 
A. Role Identities—personal relationships, ethnic/
religious groups, professional/hobby groups
 
B. Personal Qualities—abilities, attitudes, emotions, 
interests, motives, opinions and traits
 
C. Extended self—tangible objects that refer to your 
body or your possessions. Which of the three catego-
ries of your self-concept is most prevalent?
2. Consider the Ethics Box describing Unilever’s “Real 
Beauty” campaign for Dove. From the viewpoint of a 
marketer, develop a list describing positive and nega-
tive aspects of such a campaign. Make the same list 
from the viewpoint of the consumer. Compare and 
contrast your responses.
3. Identify brands that have become a part of your 
“extended self” in five of the following ten 
categories:
 
 1. body
 
 2. personal space
 
 3. consumable goods
 
 4. durable goods
 
 5. home and property
 
 6. significant others
 
 7. children
 
 8. friends
 
 9. mementos
 
10. pets
 
For example, Boflex or Lean Cuisine may help 
 consumers view their bodies as their extended self. Golf 
lessons for a golf professional’s daughter may allow the 
pro to see his daughter as an extension of himself.
4. Conduct a mini-experiment with 15 friends. First, ask 
each of them to indicate, on a seven-point scale, the 
importance of the brand name versus the warranty 
for a laptop. Then, administer the self- monitoring 
scale to each. Evaluate whether low or high self-
monitors found brand name to be more important.
Short Application Exercises

Chapter 8   Self-Concept and Personality  
175
Imagine you work in the marketing department of 
a major athletic shoe firm. Your supervisor wants to 
understand how consumers view the top competitors 
in terms of brand personality. Use the five dimen-
sions of brand personality discussed in the text as a 
framework (see Figure 8.4).
M a n ag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
1. Conduct a mini-experiment regarding brand personality. Ask 20 friends to write 
down the first several words that come to mind when they hear the brand names Nike, 
Adidas, and Reebok.
2. From these descriptions, summarize each of the three brands’ personalities.
3. Describe the possible differences in target markets based on your research.
4. Select one particular brand and design a magazine ad that reflects what you learned 
from your research.
5. Explain which magazine would be an appropriate media vehicle for your ad.
YOUR CHALLENGE:
The part video is designed to expand and highlight the consumer behavior concepts in this part of the 
book. To view the videos, go to http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes, and click on the student 
companion site link. After viewing the video, answer the following questions to test your knowledge on the 
part content and its application to the video case.
Harley-Davidson
Harley-Davidson has been in the motorcycle business since 1903. According to the company’s website, 
its mission is “. . . in fulfilling dreams and providing extraordinary customer experiences through mutually 
beneficial relationships with our stakeholders.” This video case examines how Harley-Davison uses company-
sponsored activities to deepen relationships with customers.
 
1. What is the Harley-Davidson “experience” in terms of customers’ motivations, attitudes, and 
emotions? How does Harley-Davison foster this “experience” through its marketing strategies?
 
2. What might a Harley-Davidson customer’s associative network look like for the brand? What 
unique characteristics and values are present in an associative network for Harley-Davidson 
that would lead a consumer to pick a Harley-Davidson over a competing brand?
 
3. How important are the firm’s use of H.O.G activities and functions to attract new customers 
(not just engage current customers)? Develop a new face-to-face activity to specifically appeal 
to potential new female customers.

PART
Consumer Decision Making
176
9 | The Consumer Decision Making Process
 10 | Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice
11 | Behavioral Decision Theory
3
c h a p t e r s

177
Text not available due to copyright restrictions

George Loewenstein is the Herbert A. Simon Professor of Economics and Psychology at 
Carnegie Mellon University. He studies intertemporal choice decisions involving trade-offs 
between costs and benefits occurring at different points in time, negotiation, and people’s 
predictions of their own future feelings and behavior.
How does the field of behavioral economics enhance 
our understanding of consumer decision making?
Traditional economics assumes that people make 
rational, self-interested decisions. It doesn’t shed much 
light on commonly observed self-destructive patterns 
of behavior, such as smoking and other forms of drug 
abuse, overeating, and overspending except to say that if 
people are doing them, they must be rational.
Behavioral economics attempts to provide a more 
realistic account of consumer behavior by recognizing 
that people make certain types of systematic mistakes. 
For example, people overweight immediate, relative to 
delayed, costs and benefits (a phenomenon known as 
“present-biased preferences”); they overweight small 
probabilities (which helps to explain the appeal of 
lottery tickets); and they tend to take the path of least 
resistance, going with the status quo or default options 
even when superior alternatives are available. By provid-
ing a more realistic account of human decision making, 
behavioral economics can account for a much wider 
range of consumer behavior, including self-destructive 
patterns of behavior that traditional economics assumes 
don’t exist.
What role does behavioral economics play in the 
 administration of U.S. President Barack Obama?
By assuming that behavior is rational and self-interested, 
traditional economics doesn’t provide many useful ideas 
for policies aimed at helping people overcome self-
 destructive patterns of behavior and is, in fact, generally 
hostile to such interventions. Recognizing these limita-
tions of traditional economics, the Obama administra-
tion, which includes many behavioral economists, has 
incorporated insights from behavioral economics into 
the policies it has been promoting. For example, their 
proposal to require employees to make enrollment in 
tax- protected IRAs  (individual retirement accounts) 
 automatic, i.e., the default upon employment, plays 
Q
Q
AN INTERVIEW WITH 
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
FPO
FPO
178
Professor of Economics and Psychology
Carnegie Mellon University
Courtesy of Anna Jekel
Text not available due to copyright restrictions

on the default bias. Likewise, legislation to encourage 
employers to offer immediate incentives for employees 
to engage in healthy behaviors plays on present-biased 
preferences, because it introduces an immediate reward 
for self-beneficial behavior where the delayed rewards 
of better health seem insufficient to motivate behavior 
change. Yet a third example is the proposal to require 
credit card companies which specify a minimum pay-
ment in the monthly bill to also report how long it 
would take to pay off the credit card balance making 
payments of this magnitude.
How does the field of neuroeconomics enhance our 
understanding of consumer behavior?
Ultimately, knowing how the brain solves the problem 
of consumer decision making cannot fail to enhance 
our understanding not only of the triggers that lead to 
purchasing but also the ways that consumer behavior 
can go wrong. However, the field of neuroeconomics 
is still in its infancy. Despite the rise of firms offering 
to provide retailers and manufacturers with data from 
brain scans and other neuroscience measures, I believe 
that at present this type of information provides, at best, 
limited value to businesses.
What advances do you expect to see in the future 
of neuroeconomics and consumer behavior?
As neuroeconomics matures as a field, we are likely 
to see the emergence of theoretical models of behav-
ior that are much more closely tied to what we know 
about how the brain processes information. Currently, 
behavioral economists tend to begin with the rational 
choice model, modifying it to incorporate the types 
of insights I mentioned above, e.g., present-biased 
preferences, overweighting of small probabilities, 
etc. As neuroeconomics advances, it is likely that we 
will see the emergence of new models of economic 
behavior that bear little resemblance to rational choice 
models and that are able to accommodate the full 
range of economic behavior in more comprehensive 
fashion, rather than as deviations from the rational 
choice model.
Q
Q
179

Kellogg’s Company: Cereal 
with Disclosure
The Consumer Decision 
Making Process
 1 | Define the four primary types 
of consumer decisions
 2 | Describe the traditional model 
of consumer decision making
 3 | Explain the differences among 
consumers’ wants, needs, and 
opportunities
 4 | Understand the nature of information 
search
 5 | Discuss the importance of 
consumer uncertainty in decision 
making
 6 | Provide examples of how marketers 
manage consumer satisfaction
The marketplace is filled with information about brands—some useful, some superfluous. 
In fact, so much brand information exists today that consumers often feel overwhelmed and 
confused. Kellogg’s Company, the Battle Creek, Michigan, breakfast cereal giant known for 
Special K, Froot Loops, and Rice Krispies, is trying to change all of that—for the better. Recently, 
Kellogg’s unveiled new cereal boxes designed to make it easier for consumers to find nutritional 
information about the brands. All Kellogg’s ready-to-eat cereals sold in the United States 
will feature “Nutrition at a Glance” banners on the front of its boxes. Kellogg’s introduced 
similar packaging in Europe as early as 1986. The nutritional banners will display information 
9
CHAPTER
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
objectives
180

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
181
about fat, sugar, sodium, and calorie content. In addition, the banners 
will indicate whether the cereals contain ten percent of an adult’s 
recommended daily allowance of magnesium, calcium, potassium, 
fiber, and vitamins A, C or E.
Kellogg’s hopes to provide easy-to-read graphics of how their cereals 
satisfy requirements of consumers’ daily diets. The new banners will 
accompany the traditional nutrition label found on the side panels of 
boxes. The new packaging follows Kellogg’s effort to raise the nutritional 
value of the cereals and snacks it markets to children. Apparently, the 
Kellogg’s Company is reformulating its products that currently contain 
high levels of sugar, such as Apple Jacks, Corn Pops, and Pop-Tarts 
toaster pastries. The firm expects to have products that meet the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture’s 2,000-calories-a-day guidelines available by 
2010. Perhaps just as important, if reduced-sugar versions of the products 
don’t pass the taste test, Kellogg’s will not market them to children.1
The Consumer Decision Making Process
People make hundreds of decisions each day, from the mundane (e.g., choosing what 
clothes to wear) to the extremely important (e.g., selecting guardians for a child). As 
consumers, people constantly make decisions regarding the purchase of products and 
services. Some of these decisions are trivial, such as clicking a Web site for the daily 
news, and others are complex, like deciding on an anniversary gift. Thus, consumer 
 decision making is a multifaceted process that ranges from automatic to highly struc-
tured problem solving. In this chapter, we discuss how consumers recognize problems, 
define markets of interest, gather information for consideration and purchase deci-
sions, and measure their satisfaction.
Types of Consumer Decisions
One way to characterize consumer decision making is on an effort continuum, rang-
ing from very low to very high. Routine choice is carried out automatically, with 
little conscious effort. As such, it involves no information search or deliberation. 
Frequently purchased, low-cost products, such as chewing gum and milk, generally 
involve habitual responses. These purchase decisions are highly familiar and relatively 
trivial  because they involve little risk. Intermediate problem solving usually in-
volves limited information search and deliberation. Consumers are not motivated to 
rigorously evaluate each alternative, so they engage simple decision rules or heuristics 
ob jec ti ve 1
181
AP Photo/Paul Sancya

182 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
to aid their decision making. Products such as snack foods and soft drinks, for which 
consumers typically have established preferences, generally entail intermediate effort. 
Finally,  extensive problem solving requires a deliberate and systematic effort from 
consumers. Here, consumers generally do not have well-established criteria to evalu-
ate brands or may be unfamiliar with the product category. Consumers generally 
engage in extensive problem solving for infrequently purchased, expensive products 
such as automobiles, graduate schools, and home security systems. Because these 
decisions involve high levels of risk, consumers normally dedicate a great deal of time 
and effort in gathering information and evaluating alternatives prior to actually mak-
ing a purchase.
A more complete way to think about consumer decision making considers two 
separate factors: processing effort and involvement.2 The first factor, processing effort, 
represents a continuum from automatic to systematic processing. At one extreme, 
consumers may process no information and simply respond intuitively. At the other 
extreme, consumers gather and evaluate a great deal of product information prior to 
choice. Processing effort closely parallels the routine—intermediate—extensive con-
tinuum discussed above.
The second dimension, involvement, represents a continuum ranging from 
decisions that entail low levels of consumer involvement or personal relevance to 
decisions that elicit much higher levels of interest and concern. It may be help-
ful to think of processing effort as primarily cognitive or thinking-oriented and 
involvement as more affective or feeling-oriented. Figure 9.1 depicts this two-
dimensional model of consumer decision making, with its quadrants of brand 
laziness, brand loyalty, variety seeking, and problem solving. Figure 9.2 provides 
product examples.
Involvement is the personal relevance or importance of an issue or situation. 
Accordingly, high involvement decisions are characterized as important to consumers. 
High involvement is often associated with emotional outcomes. Consumers seek not 
only functional benefits, such as the warmth of a new jacket, but also the social rewards 
of compliments on their good taste or fitting in with group norms.3 Finally, if a deci-
sion involves a high level of perceived risk, i.e., the possibility of negative outcomes, 
Involvement
Low
High
1. Brand Laziness
Commodity Products
2. Brand Loyalty
Self-Concept Enhancing 
Products
3. Variety Seeking
Parity Products
4. Problem Solving
Complicated big-Ticket Items
Information Processing
High 
Low
SOURCE: Adapted from Assael, H. (1998). Consumer Behavior and Marketing Action. 
Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing.
Figure 9.1 Types of Consumer Decision Making

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
183
then consumers are more likely to demonstrate higher levels of involvement.4 Perceived 
risk comes in a variety of forms: financial, physical, performance, psychological, and 
social. Figure 9.3 provides definitions and examples of these five forms of risk. Next, 
the four quadrants shown in Figures 9.1 and 9.2 are examined in detail.
Involvement
Low
High
1. Brand Laziness
butter, ammonia, salt, flour, 
cheese, toothpaste*
2. Brand Loyalty
jeans, athletic shoes, TV 
programs, cigarettes, 
magazines, toothpaste*
3. Variety Seeking
beer, candy, sports drinks, 
chewing gum, breakfast cereal, 
toothpaste*
4. Problem Solving
automobiles, appliances, 
furniture, airlines, consumer 
electronics, toothpaste*
Information Processing
High 
Low
*some products, such as toothpaste, can appear in multiple quadrants. 
SOURCE: Adapted from Assael, H. (1998). Consumer Behavior and Marketing Action. 
Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing.
Figure 9.2 Product Examples by Decision Type
Risk Type
Risk Capital
Perceived Consequences
Risk Target
Examples
Financial
Time and 
money
The costs of the product 
or service will exceed the 
benefits
Consumers whose 
investment in time or 
money is large relative to 
their resources
1. Real estate 
2. Automobile 
3. Graduate school
Functional
Task 
performance
The product fails to 
provide the desired 
functional benefits
Consumers who are 
dependent on the product 
to do a job, especially 
technologically driven 
consumers
1. Laptop computer 
2. Home security system 
3. Automobile
Physical
Personal 
health and 
safety
Product failure causes 
physical harm
Unhealthy consumers or 
sensation-seeking
1. Pharmaceuticals 
2. Food and beverages 
3. Motorcycles
Psychological
Self-concept
Product will be 
inconsistent with a 
consumer’s self-concept
Compulsive shoppers and 
consumers with low self-
esteem
Privately consumer luxury 
items (e.g., HDTV)
Social
Self-esteem
Product will not meet 
the standards of the 
consumer’s reference group
High self-monitors
Publicly consumed luxury 
items (e.g., fashion 
clothing)
Figure 9.3 Categories of Perceived Risk
SOURCE: Adapted from a variety of sources, including Assael, H. (1998). Consumer Behavior and Marketing Action. Cincinnati, 
OH: South-Western Publishing.

184 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Brand Laziness
When both involvement and information processing are low (Figure 9.1, quadrant 1), 
consumers typically make choices as a matter of habit, requiring little effort. This is 
referred to as brand laziness, a consumer’s natural inertial movement toward a product 
or service based on familiarity and convenience, rather than a fundamental commit-
ment to the brand. Consumers sometimes stick with old, familiar brands for no ap-
parent reason other than the fact that they purchased it before, and it seems fine. Most 
consumers’ daily market decisions lack interest, risk, and emotion; brand laziness is 
quite pervasive.
Consumers have been described as cognitive misers; we rarely think about all the 
cogent arguments or rational claims surrounding a brand choice.5 Furthermore, people 
are often pressed for time, distracted, or confused about brand information. Accordingly, 
consumers reduce their information processing to the bare minimum. Similarly, when 
a purchase decision is not particularly important or relevant, consumers’ emotional 
involvement is low. Most of the time, they just don’t care which brand of ammonia they 
buy. In short, consumers rarely have the motivation, ability, or opportunity to respond 
to marketing communication in a thoughtful manner.6
In fact, brand laziness is not necessarily irrational because carefully evaluating low-
risk decisions could steal valuable time from the consideration of important issues 
and concerns. However, brand laziness is dangerous for marketers because consumers 
quickly shift their preferences when a better deal comes along. With no underlying 
commitment to a brand, competitors can disrupt consumers’ inertia with promotional 
activities such as samples, rebates, by-one-get-one-free offers, price discounts, and end-
of-aisle displays. The result is brand switching and a new cycle of brand laziness.
Although brand laziness varies from consumer to consumer (along with motiva-
tion, ability, and opportunity), commodity-type products such as flour, butter, and 
cheese are often associated with low involvement and minimal processing. It’s impor-
tant to point out, however, that one consumer may be highly involved with the pur-
chase of cheese if s/he is a cheese aficionado. Similarly, another consumer may engage 
in detailed information processing of butters because of nutritional concerns. Notice 
that toothpaste is present in all four quadrants of Figure 9.2, because different consum-
ers may exhibit each of the four decision types for this product category. For example, a 
college student may buy the brand offering the best deal (brand laziness), but a parent 
may be loyal to Crest on the basis of its historical association with cavity prevention 
(brand loyalty). A single professional may seek a variety of brands depending on her 
needs (variety seeking), and a senior citizen may carefully evaluate toothpaste brands if 
he needs something for sensitive teeth (problem solving).
Brand Loyalty
Brand laziness is often confused with brand loyalty. The former describes a habitual 
response that lacks underlying reasons or motivation. In contrast, brand loyalty in-
volves intrinsic commitment to a brand based on the benefits or values it provides 
consumers. Both brand laziness and brand loyalty consist of minimal information 
processing. The difference between the two types of decisions can be explained by 
involvement.7 Consumers who exhibit loyalty are more highly involved in a deci-
sion than those who display laziness. Faced with repetitive but relatively important 
decisions, loyal consumers may perceive that they already possess sufficient informa-
tion to make quick decisions. Thus, limited information processing is likely to oc-
cur, and consumers rely on earlier experience to make decisions. But loyal consumers 

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
185
choose their brands because of previous experience with them, not because of deals 
or convenience.
For example, the purchase of dishwashing detergent and coffee may be highly 
involving as a result of perceived performance risk. If the dishwashing detergent doesn’t 
function well, embarrassment could ensue (Have you ever served dishes with dried 
food stuck to the plate?). Likewise, coffee that disappoints can ruin a consumer’s entire 
morning. Nevertheless, consumers make these purchases (dishwashing detergent and 
coffee) several times a year, and they don’t need to think deeply about the decisions. 
Instead, they rely on prior brand evaluations. If those evaluations are positive, brand 
loyalty is likely to follow. Quadrant 2 of Figure 9.1 depicts brand loyalty as a combi-
nation of low information processing and high involvement. Brand loyalty consists 
of both attitudes and behaviors. Attitudes reflect consumers’ overall feelings toward a 
brand, and behaviors deal with consumers’ tendency to repeat purchase. Consumers 
often exhibit brand loyalty with products that enhance their self-concepts.
Variety Seeking
Thus far, we’ve discussed decisions that involve only low levels of information 
 processing—brand laziness and brand loyalty. Sometimes consumers make low involve-
ment decisions that require somewhat higher levels of information processing. At this 
level of decision making, consumers may understand the criteria for evaluating a product 
category, but they have yet to establish clear brand preferences. Thus, even with low levels 
of interest, consumers’ limited past experience with brands requires moderate to high 
levels of information processing. We refer to this type of decision as variety  seeking, typi-
cally defined as the desire to choose new alternatives over more familiar ones. It is repre-
sented as quadrant 3 in Figure 9.1. Variety seeking is the opposite of brand loyalty. Unlike 
brand loyalists—who have clearly developed preferences—variety seekers must gather 
additional information to 
discriminate among their 
choice alternatives. Also in 
contrast to brand loyalists, 
involvement is low for va-
riety seekers, and they of-
ten switch brands to reduce 
boredom.8
Variety seeking has gen-
erated considerable atten-
tion from researchers. Let’s 
examine two important 
types of variety seeking, 
derived varied behavior and 
intrinsic variety seeking.9 
Derived varied behavior 
describes situations where 
consumers’ brand switch-
ing is either externally 
imposed or extrinsically motivated. In both cases, variety is not its own virtue. Instead, 
variety behavior is a by-product of other constraints or goals.10 For example, a consumer 
may switch brands of candy because her most recently purchased brand is not avail-
able in the vending machine (out-of-stock conditions). Similarly, while enjoying a ball 
game at Bush Stadium, a consumer may switch from Samuel Adams beer to Budweiser 
PRNewsFoto/Sara Lee Bakery Group/AP Photo
Variety seeking can be extrinsically motivated by situation-specific consumption goals, such as 
better health and nutrition.

186 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
because Anheuser-Bush maintains an exclusive contract with the St. Louis Cardinals. 
Both examples depict externally imposed switching behavior, i.e., the consumers had 
little choice in the matter. Consumers also switch brands as a result of situation-specific 
preferences. Perhaps a consumer generally buys white bread, but she purchases whole 
wheat to improve her health. Similarly, consumers may switch brands to obtain specific 
benefits or values not offered by their previous selection. For example, a new brand of 
toothpaste may offer long-term whitening benefits. The last two cases depict extrinsi-
cally motivated switching behavior because the incentive to switch derives not from 
an inherent need for variety, but to avoid or attain a specific consumption goal (better 
health and whiter teeth).11
In contrast, intrinsic variety seeking begins with the consumer who seeks variety 
for the inherent pleasure of change and the positive stimulation it brings.12 Intrinsically 
motivated variety seeking can occur, out of curiosity,13 because of a need for change to 
reduce boredom, or because consumers have become satiated with a particular attribute 
offered by a brand.14 For example, a consumer may wonder what a new chewing gum 
tastes like, or switch to a brand of cereal that contains nuts or raisins. Variety seek-
ing can be a powerful internal force for consumers. Fascinating research shows that 
individuals sometimes switch from their preferred brands to new ones, even though 
they predict that the new brands are likely to bring less enjoyment than their preferred 
brand.15 These findings highlight the inherent value in variety; consumers actually 
forego the satisfaction of a highly predictable, favorable experience just for the sake of 
variety. Change is good, if you will.
Research also reveals that consumers’ positive feelings can lead to increased variety 
seeking within safe, enjoyable product categories such as crackers, soup, and snack 
foods.16 Also interesting, when people make multiple choices for future consumption, 
they seek more variety than if they make each choice in sequence—one at a time.17 For 
example, consumers who buy a year’s worth of canned soups are more likely to buy a 
variety of brands than if they buy the same quantity of soup, but shop weekly for it. A 
recent study provides evidence that consumers expect boredom associated with making 
the same choice to occur more quickly with others than with themselves. Therefore, 
consumers demonstrate more variety seeking when they buy products for others, espe-
cially when they are held accountable for their choices.18
Is there an upper boundary to variety seeking? Research demonstrates that when 
the degree of novelty and complexity in a purchase situation is extreme, consumers 
 diminish these complexities by simplifying their buying decisions.19 Ironically, by 
decreasing information processing, consumers reduce variety seeking and usher in 
brand laziness, i.e., choosing the same brand over and over, with little rationale except 
to reduce unwanted stimulation. Another stream of research argues that most consum-
ers desire an intermediate level of stimulation.20 Thus, clever marketers who provide 
variety on the premises, say in a retail environment, can encourage brand laziness within 
a product class.21 For example, a retailer such as JCPenney may constantly change the 
store décor and limit the number of non-store brands offered. In this way, consumers’ 
needs for stimulation may be satisfied by the shopping environment, and subsequently, 
routine buying behavior is encouraged, i.e., the JCPenney brand becomes the choice. 
Similarly, a restaurant might provide a wide variety of appetizers, but limit the entrée 
choices to high-margin items, such as steak and lobster. Variety seeking can also depend 
on individual differences. Those individuals who need a good deal of variety are more 
likely to engage in variety seeking behavior than in repeat purchasing.21
The introduction of low-involvement product categories and brands can elicit 
 variety seeking behavior. For example, Gatorade’s powder packets, a single-serving water 

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
187
beverage mix, may require more than minimal information processing because con-
sumers have no prior exposure to the product. However, the category is low risk, so 
consumers are likely to exhibit low levels of emotional involvement. Here, consumers 
might examine the package and purchase the product on a trial basis as a substitute for 
a more familiar product (e.g., lemonade or other sports drinks), or as a complement to 
an existing product, like bottled water.
Variety seeking is also prevalent among products offering hedonic rewards, such as 
beer and candy,21 particularly if the category is comprised of parity products, i.e., brands 
that possess functionally equivalent attributes, making one brand a satisfactory substitute 
for most others. Some researchers maintain that advertising and promotional messages 
are especially effective for this type of decision making (quadrant 3 in Figure 9.2). They 
reason that in low-involvement product categories, such as sports drinks and chewing 
gum, consumers either don’t care which brand they buy, or their propensity to seek 
variety leaves them open to minimal processing. Put simply, consumers just look for 
interesting new items. Thus, repetitive advertising and promotional incentives can tip 
the balance in favor of a heavily exposed brand.22
Problem Solving
The fourth type of decision combines high involvement with high levels of information 
processing. Represented in quadrant 4 of Figures 9.1 and 9.2, this is referred to as problem 
solving. Decision making of this type typically involves unfamiliar, expensive products that 
are purchased infrequently. Consumers who shop for automobiles and electronics often 
exhibit problem solving. Because their emotional involvement is high and the search task is 
new, consumers try to collect as much information as possible and carefully evaluate each 
brand. At this level of decision making, consumers need extensive information to under-
stand the various brand attributes as well as the relative performance of these attributes for 
each brand. For example, a consumer who shops for dining room furniture first needs to 
determine which attributes to  include in the decision process. Does furniture construction 
make a difference—veneer or solid? Does the type of wood matter (cherry versus oak)? Is the 
warranty important? Is the source of the wood significant (domestic versus imported)? How 
critical is price? What about architecture, delivery, size, weight, and brand name? Clearly, 
consumers cannot consider all criteria, particularly if competing brands closely resemble 
one  another. Consequently, consumers must identify one or 
more determinant attributes, characteristics of a product that 
are most likely to affect the buyer’s final choice.23 Determinant 
attributes can be described according to their importance and 
uniqueness. Important attributes matter deeply to consumers, 
often producing emotional responses. For instance, a con-
sumer may insist, “I’ve  always wanted oak,” or “I’m not putting 
veneer in my new dining room.” On the other hand, some at-
tributes can be trivial. For example, a consumer may proclaim, 
“Money is no object,” or “Color doesn’t matter much to me.” 
Uniqueness, on the other hand, embodies the perceived varia-
tion among alternatives on a particular  attribute. If all brands 
offer a solid oak finish, then wood type is not a unique at-
tribute. In contrast, if only one brand features Alaskan spruce 
and  another firm exclusively offers wormy chestnut, then wood 
type is a unique attribute. Figure 9.4 provides an overview for 
assessing determinant attributes.24
Courtesy of Callaway Golf Company 
Carbon composite-titanium construction could be a 
determinant attribute for a golf club manufacturer.

188 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Consumers could, potentially, place any attribute in one of the four quadrants of 
this figure. For example, a consumer shopping for a set of golf clubs might consider 
spin-milled technology important to iron play; Titleist, Callaway, and other brands 
offer this important feature. Thus, a spin-milled iron surface is categorized as a defen-
sive attribute, and brands not offering it would be at a disadvantage. Alternatively, 
a consumer may consider forged (versus cast iron) construction inconsequential with 
respect to the performance of an iron. All brands offer this feature. Thus, forged tech-
nology is labeled an irrelevant attribute. In other words, who cares? In contrast, when 
brands provide unique attributes that matter very little to consumers, they are known 
as optional features. For example, if a consumer doesn’t care whether golf clubs feature 
a “blade” style (versus cavity back), then a firm that differentiates itself by offering this 
option may elicit a humdrum “that’s nice” response. Finally, when a firm is fortunate 
enough to develop a unique attribute important to consumers, it has a potentially pow-
erful positioning opportunity. Let’s say that a firm develops a golf club with a carbon 
composite-titanium head that provides extraordinary ball velocity and minimal side 
spin. Most consumers care deeply about the distance and accuracy of their golf shots. 
Thus, if only one firm offers this technology, then it becomes a distinctive competency 
around which the firm is likely to position itself.
Consumer problem solving corresponds closely to the traditional perspective in 
consumer behavior, where consumers are thought to proceed through as series of delib-
erated steps prior to and after making a purchase.25 This approach views consumers as 
highly involved information processors, i.e., problem solvers. Next, we’ll examine the 
traditional model of consumer decision making.
The Traditional Model of Consumer 
Decision Making
All consumer purchase decisions are not alike. Routine decisions involve little risk and 
low involvement. At the other extreme, emotionally involving decisions entail substan-
tial risk and extensive problem solving. Figure 9.5 shows the five sequential stages of 
consumer problem solving:
objec tive 2
Perceived Attribute Variation (Uniqueness)
Low
High
1. Irrelevant Attribute
Who cares?
2. Optional Feature
That’s nice.
3. Defensive Attribute
Keep up with the 
competition
4. Determinant Attribute
A positioning 
opportunity
Perceived 
Attribute 
Importance
High 
Low
SOURCE:  Adapted from Guiltinan, J. P., Paul, G.W., and Madden, T. J. (1997). Marketing Management:  
Strategies and Programs, 6th ed.. New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
Figure 9.4 Assessing Determinant Attributes

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
189
1. Problem recognition
2. Information search
3. Evaluation of alternatives
4. Purchase decision
5. Post-purchase evaluation.26
Problem recognition takes place when consumers experience a disparity between 
what they have and what they want. This inconsistency creates arousal and motivation 
to act, leading to information search, which involves both the active and passive process-
ing of data aimed at solving the problem. Information search is closely linked to evalua-
tion of alternatives, where consumers must determine which characteristics or attributes 
of a product are important and which brands to evaluate on the basis of these criteria. 
Eventually, consumers cease gathering information and comparing alternatives, and they 
make a purchase decision. Purchase decisions do not always result in actual purchases. 
Instead, they represent consumers’ predispositions or intentions to buy a brand. Finally, 
post-purchase evaluation provides an opportunity for consumers to compare their per-
ceptions of a brand with their expectations. This traditional model of consumer decision 
making flows in a linear fashion, one stage following the next. Before introducing a more 
recent model of consumer decision making, let’s examine these stages in detail.
The Nature of Problem Recognition
The first step in the traditional model of consumer decision making is problem recog-
nition. It occurs when a consumer acknowledges a significant difference between what 
is perceived as the desired state and what is perceived as the actual state. In short, a 
discrepancy exists between what the consumer wants the situation to be and what the 
situation really is. We call this discrepancy a want-got gap.27 (See Figure 9.6.)
These gaps between consumers’ acceptable and actual states do not always trigger 
problem recognition. First, the gap must be substantial. After all, consumers rarely 
Figure 9.5 The Traditional Model of Consumer Decision Making
Problem
Recognition
Information
Search
Evaluation of
Alternatives
Purchase
Decision
Post-purchase
Evaluation
Feedback
SOURCE: Adapted from Engel, J. Blackwell, R. D., and Miniard, P. W. (1995). Consumer Behavior, 
8th ed. Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press.
Figure 9.6 The Want-Got Gap
SOURCE: Adapted from Dr. James G. Clawson’s teaching at the University of Virginia’s Darden School.
 “GOT” 
[current situation]
 “WANT” 
[desired situation]
“GAP” 
discrepancy

190 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Figure 9.7 Problem Recognition: Needs, Wants, and Opportunities
Need
Actual
State
Want 
Desired
 State
No Problem Recognition
Opportunity
SOURCE: Adapted from Bruner, G. C. and Pamazal, R. J. (1988). Problem Recognition: The Crucial 
First Stage of the Consumer Decision Process. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 5:53–63.
attend to trivial differences between 
their desired and actual states. For 
example, a consumer may momen-
tarily perceive a gap between her 
actual and desired states of hun-
ger. But, it’s just a small grumble in 
her stomach, and she doesn’t give 
it a second thought. On the other 
hand, sometimes the psychological 
or physical discomfort derived from 
a discrepancy is of sufficient mag-
nitude to compel us to action. For 
example, if the same consumer expe-
riences the effects of low blood sugar 
(e.g., mild shaking, grouchiness), she 
may be motivated to reduce her hun-
ger immediately. Not coincidentally, 
Snickers implemented a successful 
campaign targeting consumers’ mild afternoon hunger. The strategy was simple but 
effective: remind consumers of their want-got gap.
Second, the discrepancy must relate to a problem that is readily solvable. In other 
words, dreams and fantasies do not constitute want-got gaps. As far as the psychological 
process of problem recognition is concerned, consumers must reasonably understand 
the desired state as one that s/he can attain. Let’s say you perceive a want-got gap 
regarding your automobile. You’ve “got” a 1997 Ford, and you “want” a new Bentley. 
Assuming you’re a typical college student, this discrepancy is not likely to be recognized 
as a problem, because college students rarely possess the means to obtain a Bentley. 
Alternatively, if you envision a more realistic trade-up to a 2005 Toyota Camry, true 
problem recognition is more likely to ensue.
Given that the want-got gap is substantial and attainable, problem recognition is trig-
gered in three ways: the actual state changes, the desired state changes, or the actual and 
desired states change simultaneously.28 All three situations are depicted in Figure 9.7.29
Needs
When consumers’ desired and actual states are relatively close together, no problem is 
recognized. However, when consumers’ actual states fall below their desired states, needs 
emerge. A need is a fundamental physical or psychological state of felt deprivation. Thus, 
needs are not created by marketing efforts directly. This is consistent with the marketing 
objec tive 3
®/TM trademarks ©Mars, Incorporated 2009
SNICKERS® is a registered trademark of Mars, Incorporated 
and its affiliates. This trademark and the SNICKERS® adver-
tisement displayed herein are used with permission.  Mars, 
Incorporated is not associated with Cengage/Nelson.
Snickers captured an opportunity by acknowledging consumers’ late 
afternoon hunger.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
191
concept, which describes marketing as an outside-in process  designed to anticipate and 
satisfy consumer needs and wants—not create them. It may be helpful to think of needs 
as internal states that fall below a threshold of acceptability. Consumers possess a vari-
ety of needs, as described by Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. Following Maslow’s approach 
for understanding human motivation, physiological needs, such as hunger and thirst, 
manifest a basic level of adequacy. When you feel hungry or dehydrated, you experience 
a basic physiological need. While marketing cannot make you hungry or thirsty, market-
ing  activities can remind you of your deprivation. For example, Wendy’s “Eat great—
open late” campaign draws attention to consumers’ potential late night hunger. Similarly, 
when you feel deprived of love or affection, you are experiencing a fundamental social 
need. Again, marketing activities cannot directly withhold love and affection from you. 
Those gifts come from people. But marketing activities can indirectly influence percep-
tions about your current state of belonging. Not surprisingly, eHarmony.com advertises 
its patented compatibility matching system designed to reduce loneliness among singles. 
If you perceive personal neglect in your attitude toward conserving the environment, 
then you are experiencing a psychological need, i.e., a gap between a current and desired 
way of thinking. Marketing is not capable of dictating your thoughts, but marketing 
activities often trigger latent psychological problem recognition. For example, BP boasts 
of developing biofuels and new carbon storage “gasification” technologies. Given that 
most consumers consider gasoline brands at parity, BP appears a good choice for environ-
mentally conscious consumers. In the same way, Honda advertises, “Accord drivability 
with a hybrid heart” for those concerned about global warming.
A “need” depicted in Figure 9.7 shows an actual state that has dropped below the 
threshold of acceptability, a baseline ideal state. Given that the need is substantial, prob-
lem recognition occurs, and consumers are motivated to reduce this gap. Some researchers 
describe needs as informational or negative-oriented motives because when a consumer’s 
actual state drops below the ideal, it creates a negative condition and a desire for informa-
tion.30 Motives are internal drives that push people to resolve a problem or reduce a need. 
The greater the disparity between a consumer’s actual and ideal state, the stronger the 
motive is to satisfy the need. Informational motives come in a variety of forms, including 
problem removal, problem avoidance, incomplete satisfaction, and normal depletion.
Although marketing activities cannot create needs directly, marketers are eager to 
identify and satisfy needs. For example, if your car’s transmission breaks down, your 
actual state of affairs will fall dramatically below the acceptable level, and you will fol-
low a problem removal motive. Fortunately, the market stands ready to offer services 
(automobile repair), products (automobiles), and substitutes (public transportation) to 
help bring into equilibrium your ideal and actual states. Similarly, problem avoidance 
motives occur when consumers proactively avoid negative outcomes such as burglary 
(ADT Systems), heartburn (Prevacid), or fatigue (Red Bull). Here, consumers take action 
to prevent their actual states from declining. In contrast, incomplete satisfaction motives 
arise when products fail to live up to our expectations. Perhaps a consumer’s laundromat 
has become too busy, or her hairdresser now keeps odd hours. Maybe a consumer’s favor-
ite restaurant recently increased prices, or a new brand of shampoo makes her hair too 
dry. Each of these examples creates a need on the basis of dissatisfaction. Consequently, 
a consumer’s motive is to reverse this condition, i.e., to bring her actual state back to an 
acceptable level. Consumers also experience normal depletion when they exhaust sup-
plies of products such as aspirin, orange juice, and frozen vegetables. Marketers are eager 
to replenish those supplies through well-established distribution systems.
In some cases marketers come very close to creating consumer needs. For exam-
ple, producers of personal hygiene products, such as mouthwash, antiperspirants, and 
beauty aids, sometimes enlist marketing programs to create insecurities that consumers 

192 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
can resolve by purchasing these products.26 Sports franchises 
regularly alter their logos to encourage the sales of new 
licensed products. Fashion clothiers also change styles in 
order to draw attention to consumers’ outdated wardrobes. 
Nevertheless, assuming that marketers obey the regulatory 
system and follow ethical guidelines set forth by their appro-
priate trade associations, consumers ultimately determine 
whether their actual state has dropped below the threshold 
of adequacy.
Wants
When consumers’ ideal states rise above their actual states, 
wants occur. Wants are need satisfiers that are shaped by a con-
sumer’s personality, experiences, and culture— including mar-
keting. In fact, marketing activities deliberately create wants. 
The distinction between needs and wants is important. Needs 
occur when consumers’ real conditions decline while their 
desired conditions remain stable. On the other hand, wants 
occur when consumers perceive an increase in their desired 
states while their actual states remain constant. As depicted 
in Figure 9.7, wants represent a consumer’s perceptions that 
they can improve their current situations by obtaining better. 
Earlier, needs were depicted as informational motives, because 
they are negatively reinforcing, i.e., the motive is to remove 
something negative. In contrast, wants can be thought of 
as transformational motives and positively reinforcing. Here, 
consumers are driven to purchase products and services that 
will produce benefits beyond their normal states.31
Marketing activities famously influence consumers’ per-
ceptions as to what their ideal states should be via advertis-
ing, promotion, endorsements, product placements, buzz 
marketing, and the like. For example, Dell tells us how 
much more productive we can be with Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and 
mobile broadband options; Verizon elevates our expectations 
regarding mobile communication with unlimited nation-
wide calling; and Toyota raises our perceptions of automo-
bile reliability via exceptional service history.
By exposing consumers to new and better products, mar-
keters induce problem recognition and provide a means for 
consumers to attain their ideal states, or wants. But want cre-
ation also has a dark side. Targeting vulnerable audiences such 
as children, the elderly, and disadvantaged consumers can pro-
duce a wide range of deleterious effects on society. Likewise, a 
plethora of ethical concerns such as puffery and stereotyping 
surround the advertising business. Unscrupulous practices such 
as spamming, spyware, adware, pyramid schemes, planned 
obsolescence, telemarketing fraud, and infomercial schemes 
also dot the marketing landscape with unsightly blemishes. 
Each of these unethical practices, though beyond the scope of 
this text, has generated considerable research in marketing.32
 
“Made in China,” once synonymous for
 
cost-effective, high-quality products,
 
has suddenly become synonymous
 
with “hazardous to your health” to 
many of China’s global trading partners. During 2007, China was ac-
cused of producing faulty, dangerous, and potentially lethal consumer 
goods almost on a daily basis. A series of Chinese ethical meltdowns 
began with contaminated pet food, containing poisoned wheat glu-
ten, followed by counterfeit toothpaste, falsely packaged as “Colgate,” 
containing an antifreeze agent that can poison the liver and kidneys 
and depresses the central nervous system. Within two weeks, nearly 
450,000 Chinese-made tires sold in the United States were recalled 
after federal regulators claimed the tires lacked an important safety 
feature designed to make them durable. Following this, Chinese 
shrimp, catfish, and eel were found to contain illegal antibiotics and 
chemicals and were subsequently banned by the FDA. During the 
same month, American consumer-protection authorities recalled 
Chinese-made children’s necklaces and earrings because they 
contained dangerously high levels of lead. And most recently, Mattel 
Inc. issued recalls for 9.6 million toys, finding magnets that can be 
swallowed by children and hazardous levels of lead paint. Prior to 
2007, there were claims of excessively flammable candles, weakly 
structured hammocks, bad wiring on fake palm trees, poorly made 
saws, and weak bicycle frames.71 These alarming series of health 
scares eventually led to the execution of China’s former head of the 
State Food and Drug Administration on July 10, 2007.
Truth be told, deadly products are not news in China. As early 
as 2004, for example, bad baby formula killed at least a dozen 
infants and sickened many others. According to reports by the Asian 
Development Bank and World Health Organization, approximately 
300 million Chinese citizens suffer from food-borne diseases annually. 
That number is equivalent to the total U.S. population. And accidents in 
China’s infamous coal mines took thousands of lives in 2006.
Why would so many people in China be willing to cut corners to 
make an extra dollar, even at the cost of human lives? According to the 
Wall Street Journal, one former Chinese diplomat described the national 
ideology of China as an “anything-for-a-profit attitude.”72 There seems 
to be widespread agreement among ordinary Chinese and Western 
business people that, in China, ethical considerations become lost in the 
race to get rich. China’s remarkable economic output (GDP) catapulted 
from 7th in 2004 to 4th largest in the world by 2007. Unfortunately, 
 unethical business practices have accompanied this growth.
Some experts argue that China’s “ethical crisis” is simply a func-
tion of the country’s meteoric economic development. Xiaobo Lu, a 
political science professor at Columbia University, predicts that once 
the proper institutions are in place, the Chinese will gradually under-
stand certain “ethical rules of the game.” Other experts claim that 
the Chinese lack an ethical framework. The communists destroyed 
traditional values and beliefs, replacing them with nothing sustainable. 
Now that many Chinese have lost faith in communist ideology, getting 
rich has become the national religion. But until China addresses the 
root causes of these widespread unethical practices, the lives of its 
people—and those of its trading partners—remain at risk.
E T H I C S

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
193
Some researchers have linked marketing to various problems in society, including 
pollution, materialism, alcohol and nicotine addictions, obesity and poor nutrition, 
and the denigration of cultural values.33 Others argue that marketing has positively 
contributed to consumers’ quality of life by reducing search costs, fostering innova-
tion and broad product choices, facilitating product acquisition (e.g.,  e-commerce), 
and reducing prices via increased competition. The overarching philosophy of this text 
maintains that individuals, businesses, and public policy can benefit from the study 
of consumer behavior. Following this perspective, the reader is encouraged to evaluate 
both sides of this complicated, global debate.34
Marketers are not alone in creating wants. Life changes also influence consum-
ers’ perceptions of their actual and ideal states. By virtue of time and circumstance, 
consumers lives do not stand still. Human bodies and minds mature with age; peo-
ple’s relationships change; and consumer preferences shift accordingly. When you 
were in high school, you probably desired less autonomy and independence than 
you do today. If so, your ideal state has increased over time, creating a “want” for 
independence. Also, when you graduate from college, your lifestyle, financial situa-
tion, and employment status will change, altering perceptions of both your ideal and 
actual states. A steady job may trigger a desire for more expensive clothing, a sporty 
automobile, and a wider range of food choices (wants). In short, your standards of 
comparison will change, and firms such as Brooks Brothers, BMW, and Foods of All 
Nations will be eager to provide products and services to help you attain your wants. 
Marketers are also keenly aware of major life changes in the family life cycle, such as 
marriage, having children, and divorce. For example, Procter & Gamble dedicates an 
entire Web site to Pampers, which includes advice on pregnancy and preparing for the 
arrival of new babies. Life insurance firms encourage customers to consider increas-
ing their levels of coverage as family size increases. Taken together, both marketing 
activities and various aspects of consumers’ lives trigger problem recognition in the 
form of wants.
Opportunities
When a consumer’s ideal and actual states simultaneously move in opposite directions, 
opportunities emerge. Depicted in Figure 9.7, this combination creates a sizable want-
got gap. Perhaps disenchantment with a current job is accompanied by a desire to 
experience a more promising future. Many non-traditional students describe their mo-
tivation to attend college in these terms. Alternatively, if a personal relationship begins 
to feel stifling at a time when a person’s need for autonomy increases, she is likely to 
perceive a significant want-got gap and the motivation to close it. In a market context, 
if a consumer’s favorite running shoes split and separate (a reduced actual state), and 
at the same time, Nike introduces shoes with more advanced features and improved 
durability (an elevated ideal state), the consumer may feel motivated to pursue the new 
product offer. In this sense, an opportunity can be viewed as a chance to dramatically 
shift a consumer’s actual state to an elevated, ideal state.
Firms spend considerable time and effort creating opportunities in the marketplace. For 
example, Americans have repeatedly indicated their interest in fitness and health and at the 
same time, have reported feeling time-impoverished. As a consequence, clever marketers 
now offer time-saving, low-calorie foods (e.g., Lean Cuisine and Weight Watchers) and home 
fitness equipment (e.g., Nordictrack and Bowflex). Opportunities to close want-got gaps are 
emerging also in markets like China, whose 800 million rural citizens both need and want 
access to personal computing. In sum, opportunity creation represents the joint interplay of 
needs and wants because consumers’ actual and ideal states diverge concurrently.

194 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Researching consumers’ discomforts and desires enables marketers to design and 
implement strategies that satisfy needs, wants, and opportunities, which is the essence 
of target marketing. Whether our want-got gaps are physiological, safety, social, or psy-
chological in nature, marketers attempt to communicate 
benefits that shrink the gap between our ideal and actual 
states. But marketers are not always successful at clos-
ing these gaps completely. Consumers must perceive the 
benefits to be real (not just fluff), better than what they 
currently possess, and affordable. Furthermore, marketers 
must be able to articulate the benefits of their products. 
For example, despite millions of dollars aimed at educating 
consumers about its benefits, Tivo’s digital video record-
ers (DVRs) initially generated disappointing market share 
because consumers did not understand what problems it 
would solve. Is the benefit of digital recording really worth 
the extra cost? How does “time shifting” work? Can con-
sumers watch other programs while recording their favorite 
shows? Furthermore, many consumers would rather walk 
on hot coals than  program a VCR, and Tivo was perceived 
Special Delivery: Computers for Chinese Farmers
Eye on International
Incorporated in Hong Kong, and headquartered in Raleigh, 
North Carolina, Lenovo Group Ltd. has a personal computer 
for China’s 800 million rural inhabitants. Lenovo Group is the 
world’s third-largest computer company by shipments and wants 
to  increase global market share. 
Enter the bare-bones, low-cost 
PC aimed at China’s farmers. 
The PC will sell for between 
$199 and $399, and include 
only a keyboard and processor. 
Televisions will have to substitute 
as monitors. Software designed 
to help farmers gather informa-
tion about agricultural products 
is included.
As PC sales reach the ma-
turity phase of the product life 
cycle in the United States, computer manufacturers are beginning 
to develop simple, lower-cost products aimed at first-time buyers 
in emerging markets, such as rural areas of China and India. 
China is the world’s second-largest PC market after the United 
States; PC sales in China exceeded $14 billion in 2008. But 
less than ten percent of Chinese people own a computer.
Lenovo’s marketing plan is not without challenges. Although 
a $199 PC may appear to be a bargain to Westerners, it 
may be a difficult sell in rural 
China, where the average an-
nual income is less than $600. 
However, Lenovo hopes to 
establish a dominant presence 
in China, despite new com-
petition from Hewlett-Packard 
Co. and Dell. Currently, about 
one-third of all computers sold 
in China are made by Lenovo. 
Some experts claim that the 
PC may not be the triumphant 
technology in the developing 
world. For instance, in India, the rapid adoption of cell phones 
in rural areas suggests that high-tech handheld  mobile devices 
could surpass the personal computer as the primary method for 
gaining access the Internet.70
AP Photo/Ng Han Guan
AP Photo/Paul Sakuma
Tivo failed to capitalize on an opportunity by inadequately 
communicating its benefits to consumers.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
195
to be more complicated that traditional recording devices. By the time consumers 
understood the benefits of DVRs, cable companies began offering similar features to 
their current customers—a captive audience.
The Nature of Information Search
Once a problem is recognized, consumers often gather information to inform their pur-
chase decisions. Researchers refer to this activity as prepurchase search because the infor-
mation gathered relates directly to a consumption problem at hand.35 Prepurchase search 
follows the linear pattern of decision making outlined by the traditional model, where 
consumers first recognize a want-got gap and subsequently perform search  activities to 
help close it. During prepurchase search efforts, consumers may access information from 
their long-term memories to recall past experiences with brands, potential options, and 
relevant evaluative criteria.36 This deliberate retrieval of information, known as internal 
search, is common with low involvement decisions that  comprise much of consumers’ 
day-to-day activities. When internal search fails to provide  adequate problem-solving in-
formation, consumers actively seek external sources of information. External search can 
engage personal sources (e.g., friends and relatives), market sources such as advertisements 
and brochures, public sources (e.g., Consumer Reports), and product trial, i.e., examining 
or testing the product on a limited basis.
Consumers also obtain product information without recognizing a consumption 
problem. In these situations, consumers are not yet in the market for the products they 
examine and consider. Instead, they simply browse through catalogs, window shop, 
surf the Internet, or read specialty magazines without the intent of making a purchase. 
This type of information gathering, known as ongoing search, involves external search 
activities independent of solving an immediate purchase problem.37
Influences on Search
The extent of information processing is determined by consumer involvement, the 
marketing environment, situational influences, and individual differences. Researchers 
have identified two distinct types of consumer involvement: enduring and situational.38 
Enduring involvement describes a consumer’s long-term and continuous interest in 
a brand or product category. Here, personal relevancy resides in the product itself and 
the inherent satisfaction that consumption or use brings to a consumer.39 Most of us 
maintain enduring involvement with certain products. Fashion-conscious consumers 
enjoy clothes and jewelry, so they sustain long-term relationships with these products. 
Golf professionals are drawn to new golf clubs, training aids, and apparel, and they 
relish the opportunity to play new golf courses. Wine connoisseurs seek out new variet-
ies, build wine cellars, collect rare specimens, and visit vineyards. They are deeply and 
permanently involved with their avocation.
In contrast, situational involvement reflects a consumer’s relatively temporary and 
context-dependent interest in a product or category. For example, an infrequent flyer 
who decides to visit a foreign country may suddenly find airline services and luggage 
products personally relevant. However, the level of involvement is related only to this 
specific context. After returning from her trip, her involvement with travel-related prod-
ucts and services all but disappears—until the next journey. Search in a prepurchase situ-
ation generally derives from situational involvement with the product or consumption 
problem. To a large extent, consumers enlist prepurchase search strategies to reduce per-
ceptions of risk.40 Quite the reverse, ongoing search necessitates enduring involvement. 
ob jec ti ve 4

196 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
This reflects more permanent interest and enthusiasm for a product or category on the 
part of the consumer, and not just a temporary concern triggered by immediate needs.
The marketing environment influences both prepurchase and ongoing search. 
Product information from advertising, salespeople, promotions, and the Internet can 
increase consumers’ search efforts, along with highly accessible distribution channels 
(e.g., stores, retail catalogues, and e-commerce). Research shows that the location, 
availability, and distance between retail stores in a given geographic area can affect 
the number of visits consumers make prior to purchase. Thus, close proximity among 
stores can increases consumers’ external search efforts.41 Consumers’ perceptions of 
wide price ranges can also increase external search. A recent study shows that consum-
ers reduce information search when retailers offer price-matching refunds, because such 
policies are seen as a signal of low store prices. These findings are intuitive.
External information search is not free—it takes time and effort. Traveling, parking, 
and dealing with crowds extract both monetary and psychological costs. Thus, consum-
ers weigh the benefits of additional search against the costs of conducting it. Not sur-
prising, the Internet can be an effective tool at reducing search costs, especially for those 
who are relatively young and well educated.42 As a general rule, the greater the number 
of products in a category, the greater the external search is. More brands require more 
information processing. Too many choices, however, can cause psychological distress for 
consumers, causing them to end their search and select the most recognizable brand, 
a special case of brand laziness. Have you ever felt overwhelmed by the sheer number 
of available brands and as a result quickly grabbed the one most familiar to you? This 
type of information overload is known as brand chaos, a condition brought on by the 
proliferation of brands that offer few distinctive attributes or benefits.
Situational variables (separate from the market environment) can affect consumers’ 
information search. For example, time constraints can pressure consumers into reducing 
their information processing. A recent study demonstrates that, under time constraints, 
consumers evaluate fewer alternatives and tend to ignore moderately important attri-
butes.43 Perceptions of crowding also cause people to reduce external search. As more 
people enter a store or restaurant, or as the store becomes packed with displays and 
merchandise, consumers are likely to experience discomfort. As a result, they process 
less information, make quicker decisions, and spend less time in the store. In addition, 
satisfaction with their shopping experience declines.44 Other research reveals that con-
sumers increase external search efforts when the purchase is important, information is 
highly accessible, and perceived risk is high.35
Individual differences influence both prepurchase and ongoing search activities. In 
general, younger, better-educated consumers expend more effort searching than those 
who are older and less educated. Also, middle-income consumers engage in more exter-
nal search than both lower- and upper-income groups. For some individuals, gathering 
information about products and services is a full-time hobby. If you need to replace 
your cell phone or want a new car, to whom would you turn for product information? 
You might seek out market mavens, people who search, accumulate, and share product 
knowledge with others. In some circles, market mavens are known as “price vigilantes” 
because they keep the marketplace honest through their vigilant watch over marketers’ 
pricing tactics and trends. They are also regarded as product data banks. Market mavens 
are not just passive collectors of information; they also initiate discussions with other 
consumers and eagerly respond to requests for information. They read more magazines 
and newspapers than the average consumer; they examine junk mail; and they regularly 
scrutinize Consumer Reports.45 Because market mavens collect information for future 
use, they are experts at conducting ongoing search.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
197
In contrast, some consumers enjoy shopping just for the sake of shopping. For them, 
it’s the journey that counts. Research reveals that women are more likely to indicate 
that shopping is relaxing and enjoyable than are men. Specifically, only 29 percent of 
men say they enjoy shopping for clothes, compared with 48 percent of women. Stores 
with a wide selection appeal less to men. For men, it’s convenience that counts. Also, 
stores that are easy to browse, that are close to one’s home or office, or have knowledge-
able salespeople, appeal more to men than to women.46 It follows that women typically 
conduct more external search than men.
Prior knowledge and experience also affect the extent to which consumers conduct 
external search. Intuitively, one might expect those with low levels of expertise to spend 
the most time gathering product information. After all, they have the most to learn. On 
the other hand, consumers who possess product expertise might find external search easy 
to process and so, search the most. Research supports neither of these views. In fact, mod-
erately knowledgeable consumers process more product information than either the low 
or high knowledge groups.47 These counterintuitive results can be explained as a function 
of two determinants of information processing: motivation and ability. Those low in 
product knowledge and experience are likely to be motivated to gather information, but 
without requisite knowledge, they couldn’t make sense of the data even if they gathered 
them. Thus, because they view the task as too difficult, they give up searching and seek 
a simple solution. In contrast, those high in experience and knowledge—although per-
fectly capable of understanding the information—are not motivated to search. Instead, 
they rely on their past experiences and memory to guide their decisions. The moderately 
experienced consumer, on the other hand, may possess just enough motivation and abil-
ity to devote substantial search effort to the decision task. Figure 9.8 depicts search effort 
as a joint function of motivation and ability. The inverse U function illustrates that con-
sumers who are both low and high with respect to product knowledge are less likely to 
conduct extensive search than those with moderate levels of product knowledge. This is 
consistent with classic personality research, which demonstrates that the greatest attitude 
change occurs at an intermediate level of a personality trait (e.g., knowledge).48
Figure 9.8 Search Effort and Product Knowledge
Adapted from Kardes, F. (1997). Consumer Behavior and Managerial Decision Making. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ability 
Motivation
Search Effort
Low
Product Knowledge
High
Likelihood of Response
Low         
High

198 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Motivation to Search
Regarding prepurchase search, consumers’ motive is straightforward—to make a bet-
ter purchase decision. For ongoing search, however, two separate motives emerge: to 
acquire a data bank of product information for future use 49 and pleasure or recreation. 
The first motive centers on consumers’ desire for product knowledge, while the sec-
ond motive derives from consumers’ consumption experience.50 Building a warehouse 
of product knowledge involves increasing product expertise for reasons other than 
 optimizing an immediate decision. It can make consumers feel well informed, improve 
future choices, and enhance self-actualization.51 Ongoing search activities can also be 
fun. Many consumers simply enjoy seeking information about products, whether by 
surfing the Internet or browsing through a bricks-and-mortar store. For these consum-
ers, shopping doesn’t need to be purposeful. Shopping represents a leisure pursuit in 
and of itself, similar to attending a concert or movie or participating in a softball game. 
As the weekend approaches, listen to your friends discuss their alternatives plans. They 
are likely to include shopping—in terms of ongoing search—in the same consideration 
set as watching a movie, taking a road trip, or going to a sporting event. Similar to these 
activities that compete for consumers’ time, shopping, literally, is considered an event.
Results of Search
The outcomes or results of information search differ for prepurchase versus ongoing 
search. When consumers search for product information explicitly to solve a problem, 
prepurchase search can increase knowledge, optimize brand choice, and heighten sat-
isfaction. For example, a consumer dedicates considerable prepurchase search effort to 
finding a brand of moisture-rich cosmetics to keep her delicate skin comfortable during 
a grueling business conference. If successful, she will have attained important informa-
tion to reduce her search the next time she’s in the market for cosmetics (e.g., Elizabeth 
Arden’s Flawless Finish Radiant Moisture Makeup SPF 8 works well for her skin type). 
Perhaps most important, this consumer will have made a good choice, giving rise to 
satisfaction, i.e., comfortable skin.
Ongoing search can increase consumers’ efficiency by allowing them to rely on less 
costly internal (e.g., memory) sources of information. For example, most consumers 
realize that they will eventually need to replace their automobile tires. Ongoing search-
ers keep their “antennas” active long before the decision is necessary. They may read 
blogs on the Internet, pay attention to magazine and newspaper ads, and query friends 
who enthusiastically relay their experiences with various brands. Thus, when the deci-
sion is imminent (the tires won’t pass the penny test!), ongoing searchers may be pre-
pared to make a wise choice, without costly external search. Ongoing searchers also like 
to disseminate their stored knowledge to friends and family. Perhaps this is how market 
mavens are born. Being regarded as a product expert or opinion leader can enhance self-
esteem. Finally, ongoing search engenders impulse buying, i.e., purchases made with-
out prior planning. The more frequently consumers surf the Web and browse through 
stores, the higher the probability is that they will eventually purchase on impulse.52
Economics of Search
Economic psychologists often describe two extreme cases of industry structure. In 
perfect competition, there are many firms, but competition among them is so intense 
that anytime one of them achieves a market advantage, the others quickly duplicate it. 

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
199
As a result, the firms end up producing identical products. In perfect competition, 
brands do not have identities because the “sameness” of the products makes the concept 
meaningless. For example, while you are likely to recall the brand of cereal you ate for 
breakfast this morning, you probably do not know the brand of the milk you poured 
on the cereal. Milk comes close to satisfying the requirements of a perfectly competitive 
product; a gallon of milk from one producer is virtually identical to a gallon of milk 
from any other producer. At the other extreme of industry structure is monopoly, in 
which case, there is only one producer. For example, almost everyone who owns a PC 
needs a copy of the Windows operating system, and that is offered by only one pro-
ducer, Microsoft Corp.
What do these two extremes of industry structure have in common? In both cases, 
the consumer decision making process is simple, and information search is virtu-
ally eliminated. In the case of perfect competition, while there are many competing 
brands (e.g., gasoline), the fact that the products are virtually identical means that 
consumers need not compare brands. Instead, consumers only need to answer the 
question, “Do I want this product at the going price?” In the case of monopoly (e.g., 
cable TV), there is only one brand and so again, the only relevant question is, “Do I 
want this product?”
Most consumer choices take place in the intermediate case of industry structure 
known as monopolistic competition. In a monopolistically competitive industry, con-
sumers are faced with many competing brands, each of which is different from the 
other in one or several attributes. Monopolistic competition creates a unique problem 
for consumers: It is nearly impossible to obtain full information about all competing 
brands prior to making a purchase decision. In fact, fully aware that they may choose 
the wrong brand, consumers try to make the best choice, given limited information 
search. In general, researchers refer to this concept as bounded rationality, the idea 
that consumers can only make rational decisions within the limits of time and cog-
nitive capability.53 Economic psychologist Antony Davies has developed a theoreti-
cal model for understanding how consumers interpret the marketplace, given their 
bounded rationality.54 The model provides a framework for examining alternative 
evaluation and choice.
Alternative Evaluation and Choice: 
An Uncertainty-Reduction Model
We have discussed why consumers conduct information search. But exactly what 
 information do consumers need? There are three pieces of information necessary to con-
duct prepurchase and ongoing search: the number of available brands, the determinant 
 attributes for the product category, and how an individual reacts to a brand after it is 
purchased. In practice, consumers almost never know even one of these three pieces of 
 information. For example, how many brands of beer can the average consumer  recall? Beer 
connoisseurs (product experts) might recall as many as 20 or more brands. Nevertheless, 
500 brands of beer exist in U.S. markets alone. Even the most avid beer expert would not 
be aware of all these! Next, suppose that a consumer considers six important attributes for 
the product category, beer: color, aroma, taste, alcohol content, carbonation, and price. 
Can this consumer rate each brand on these six attributes? Probably not (unless the con-
sumer’s list was very short). Lastly, this consumer probably does not know exactly how 
well he would like these brands, even if he could rate them all. For example, he may claim 
not to like dark beer, but it’s possible that he might like a dark beer brewed with a lot 

200 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
of hops, or a dark beer with heavy carbonation. Thus, consumers’ inability to perfectly 
predict how much they will like a brand is another source of uncertainty.
Given enough search effort, consumers could, potentially, acquire all the  information 
necessary to make a rational purchase decision. The term rational means that, with complete 
information, consumers would make decisions that maximize their satisfaction. However, 
the cost of acquiring information often exceeds the benefits of making the best decision.55 
For example, no one is willing to spend five years of research just to find the single best 
cereal. Instead, we settle for the good-though-perhaps-not-best cereal. The consumer deci-
sion process, given incomplete information, is referred to as an  uncertainty-reduction 
process. This approach to decision making involves four stages:
1. Product-market perception
2.  Consideration of a single subset of brands within the perceived product-market
3. Choice of one brand from among the consideration set
4. Consumption experiences relating to the chosen brand
Through this repetitive, back-and-forth process, consumers adjust their percep-
tions of product-markets. Figure 9.9 illustrates this decision model.
Figure 9.9 Uncertainty-Reduction Model of Decision Making53
SOURCE: Adapted from Davies, A., and Cline T. W. (2005). A Consumer Behavior Approach to Modeling Monopolistic Competition. Journal 
of Economic Psychology, 26:797–826.
Stage:  I 
II 
III 
IV 
Brand information reduces external uncertainty 
Consumption experience reduces internal uncertainty 
Perceived Product-Market
 
• Cluster Size
• Cluster Variance 
• Cluster Frontier
• Brand Variance
 
 
 
Consideration
Choice
External Uncertainty
 Partial Information
Measurement Error
Obsolete Information  
 
 
Internal Uncertainty
 Absolute Utility Error 
Relative Utility Error  
 
True Brand
Universe
True Utility 
Function
Perceived
Brand Universe
Perceived
Utility Function

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
201
Consumer Uncertainty
Like the traditional model of consumer decision making, the uncertainty-reduction 
model views consumers as relatively involved problem solvers. Accordingly, con-
sumers must come to terms with the true brand universe. The true brand universe 
is the set of all brands that exist along with measures of each of their attributes. The 
true brand universe is an objective reality. Because it is prohibitively costly to gather 
complete and fully accurate information about all existing brands and their attri-
butes, what is in a consumer’s head is not the true brand universe but a perceived 
brand universe. The perceived brand universe includes only those brands that a 
consumer  acknowledges—whether real or not. Three sources of external uncer-
tainty cause a consumer’s perceived brand universe to differ from the true brand 
universe. The sources of external uncertainty are: incomplete information, measure-
ment error, and obsolete information. Incomplete information suggests that consum-
ers may be unaware of all the brands in the true universe. For example, if you have 
never heard of Castle Rock beer, then your perceived brand universe suffers from 
incomplete information. Quite the reverse, if you mistakenly perceive a brand that 
doesn’t exist, your perceived brand universe also contains incomplete information. 
Measurement error describes a condition in which consumers may measure brands’ 
attributes inaccurately or may be unaware of a particular attribute. For example, you 
may believe that all dark beers are sour tasting. However, because some are actu-
ally sweet, your perceived brand universe suffers from measurement error. Finally, 
obsolete information describes a situation such that consumers fail to update their 
perception of the true brand universe as quickly as the true brand universe evolves. 
Perhaps the last time you purchased an Apple laptop computer, the price was double 
that of other brands. Since then, Apple has lowered its prices to be more competitive 
with Dell and other brands. If you do not revise your perception of Apple’s price 
to match the changed reality, your perceived brand universe suffers from obsolete 
information.
Consumers must also come to understand their true utility functions. Economic psy-
chologists use the term utility to describe the relative happiness, pleasure, or satisfaction a 
consumer gains by using or consuming a product. Every consumer also has a utility func-
tion, which describes how much pleasure s/he will obtain by using various combinations of 
brands or brand attributes. For example, some consumers obtain more utility from coffee 
than tea. In the same way, a consumer may gain more utility from a dark roast Columbian 
variety versus a decaffeinated coffee. A consumer’s true utility func-
tion is the actual satisfaction s/he will obtain from consuming a 
brand, i.e., another objective reality. However, consumers don’t know 
as much about their own preferences as they think they do. It is time-
consuming and expensive to sample every existing brand. So, even 
when consumers fully understand a brand’s attributes, their reactions 
to those attributes may be different from what they anticipated. Thus, 
a consumer’s perceived utility function, what a consumer believes 
his/her reaction will be to a brand with certain attributes, differs from 
his/her true utility function.
Two sources of internal uncertainty—uncertainty about 
the consumer him/ herself—cause a consumer’s perceived utility 
function to differ from his/her true utility function: absolute util-
ity error and relative utility error. Absolute utility error describes 
a consumer’s uncertainty regarding satisfaction that a particular 
objec ti ve 5
sjlocke/iStockphoto.com
Through experience, consumers learn how much 
pleasure they will gain by using or consuming 
various products.

202 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
attribute will deliver. For example, a consumer may have full information about a 
car’s safety features, but she may incorrectly believe that safety is less important than 
it truly is. It may not be until she has driven the car for a while that she realizes side 
airbags are very satisfying. In contrast, relative utility error describes situations where 
consumers are uncertain about the relative influence or weight of each attribute on 
his/her utility functions. For example, a consumer may be fully aware of a car’s gas 
mileage and engine power. However, he may incorrectly gauge his willingness to 
reduce mileage to increase performance. It may not be until he has purchased the car 
and filled it up a few times that he realizes he would have preferred to give up some 
engine power in exchange for more miles per gallon.56 In sum, because consumers 
cannot know every brand in the market or how much they will like those brands, 
they cannot know either the true brand universe or their true utility functions. 
Accordingly, consumers construct a mental picture of their reactions (a perceived 
utility function) and the world around them (a perceived brand universe). Bounded 
by our rationality, consumers then organize that mental picture to form their notion 
of the overall market.
The Perceived Product-Market
Regardless of whether consumers conduct prepurchase or ongoing search, their percep-
tions of the brand universe, along with their perceived utility functions, influence how 
they construe the marketplace. The perceived product-market represents a  patterned 
organization of brands in a consumer’s mind. Consider the market for ice cream. 
Suppose a consumer views the product-market as possessing two determinant attri-
butes: taste and calories. Furthermore, let’s assume she is aware of six brands: Weight 
Watchers, Carnival, Edys, Haagen-Dazs, Ben & Jerry’s, and Breyers. These brands and 
the consumer’s belief about their attributes constitute the consumer’s perceived brand 
universe. Although limited by internal uncertainty, this consumer is also aware how 
she “feels” about ice-cream taste and ice-cream calories. These feelings constitute the 
consumer’s perceived utility function. When the consumer weighs her perceived brand 
universe against her perceived utility function, she forms an intuitive image of the per-
ceived product-market. The perceived product-market for ice cream is represented in 
Figure 9.10. Each dot represents the consumer’s perception as to the utility (pleasure) 
she will obtain from the attributes she perceives each brand to have. The further up and 
to the right a dot is located, the more (perceived) utility the consumer obtains from the 
brand’s attributes.
Notice that in the consumer’s mind, the brands naturally fall into two clus-
ters. The three brands at the top left (Weight Watchers, Carnival, and Edys) score 
high on utility from calories but low on utility from taste. Together, these brands 
comprise the low-calorie cluster. The other three brands (Haagen-Dazs, Ben & 
Jerry’s, and Breyers) score high on utility from taste but low on utility from calories. 
Together, these brands comprise the high taste cluster. This clustering of brands is 
the first step the consumer takes in looking, either consciously or subconsciously, 
for patterns among brands. By clustering, the consumer simplifies the task of 
choosing a brand by thinking not of many individual brands, but of a few clusters 
of brands. Consumers naturally think of brands this way. People talk about domes-
tic versus imported beer, vans versus SUVs, houses versus apartments, city versus 
suburb, etc.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
203
Four important characteristics of the consumer’s perceived product-market describe 
something about the product-market that is relevant to the consumer’s subsequent 
choice:
1.  Cluster size, measured by the number of brands the consumer places in the cluster
2.  Cluster variance, the degree to which brands within a single cluster are 
 dissimilar from each other
3.  Cluster frontier, the best possible combination of attributes observed within a 
cluster
4.  Brand variance, a consumer’s awareness of uncertainty as to a brand’s attributes
Consideration and Choice
After constructing perceptions of the product-
market, consumers follow a two-stage choice 
process of consideration and choice. In the con-
sideration stage, consumers often select a single 
cluster of brands via a non-compensatory pro-
cess.57 A non- compensatory process is a simple, 
although error-prone, way to make a decision in 
which the person does not consider trade-offs. 
For example, it is easier to decide whether to 
Figure 9.10  Two-Dimensional Perceived Product-Market 
for Ice Cream
SOURCE: Adapted from Davies, A., and Cline T. W. (2005). A Consumer Behavior Approach to 
Modeling Monopolistic Competition. Journal of Economic Psychology, 26:797–826.
Utility from Calories 
Utility from Taste
Ben & Jerry’s
Breyers 
Carnival 
Weight Watchers 
Edy’s
Häagen-Dazs
John Nordell/The Christian Science 
Monitor via Getty Images
In the consideration stage, consumers first identify a cluster of brands 
with similar attributes.

204 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
drink a caffeinated drink or a caffeine-free drink (a non-compensatory decision) than it 
is to decide which caffeinated drink or which caffeine-free drink to drink (a compensa-
tory decision). The non-compensatory decision is easy because it is binary—“I want 
caffeine” versus “I don’t want caffeine.”
In the choice stage, consumers select a single brand from among the brands in the 
considered cluster via a compensatory process. The compensatory process is difficult 
because it requires weighing trade-offs—“Red Bull tastes better than Hype, but Hype is 
less expensive,” and “Is Red Bull’s additional taste worth the additional price?” While 
a non-compensatory process requires less thought and fewer facts, a compensatory 
process requires the person to consider and weigh much more information. Why do 
consumers use this two-stage process? When faced with many competing brands, the 
consumer is confronted with the conflicting goals of making a decision with little 
effort and making an optimal decision. The consumer balances these two conflicting 
goals by employing a non-compensatory process so as to “whittle down” the field of 
competing brands to a manageable subset. The consumer then applies a compensatory 
process to the smaller set of brands to select a single brand for purchase.47 For example, 
in looking for housing, one person may begin by considering only apartments with 
three or more bedrooms, but another may begin by considering only locations conve-
nient to a university.
In terms of the perceived product-market, consumers apply non-compensatory 
decision making in selecting a single cluster (“consideration”) followed by compen-
satory decision making to select a single brand from within the considered cluster 
(choice). The product-market characteristics suggest heuristics—or “rules of thumb”—
that the consumer will use in consideration and choice. Let’s focus on a set of heuristics 
that derive from consumers’ perceptions of a product-market.
Cluster Size Consumers may interpret larger cluster size as an indication of 
lesser external uncertainty because:
1.  Observing more brands can imply that a greater proportion of the true universe 
is observed (reducing partial information).
2.  Observing more brands with similar attributes (i.e., brands in the same cluster) 
can provide confirmation that the consumer has correctly observed attribute 
levels (reducing measurement error).
3.  Observing more brands in a specific cluster can imply a lesser probability of a 
brand having altered its attributes; the cluster may be stable over time (reducing 
obsolete information).
For example, suppose a consumer observes ten cars all with reported gas mileage in 
the 25 to 30 mpg range and one car with a reported gas mileage of 50 mpg. All else 
being equal, this consumer is more likely to question the 50 mpg because all the other 
cars she has seen are in the 25 to 30 mpg range. Observing more brands with similar 
 attributes provides confirmation that the consumer has correctly observed the attri-
butes. Interestingly, during the 1970s, consumers may have believed that the VHS 
format would supplant the Betamax format because there were a greater number of 
brands using the VHS format. Similarly, despite being more user-friendly and employ-
ing a more powerful microprocessor, the Apple Macintosh brand lost substantial market 
share to IBM clones during the 1980s. One possible explanation is that there were a 
large number of brands in the IBM clone cluster and so, consumers interpreted this as 
a signal of greater survival probability for the PC cluster.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
205
Consumers may also interpret the number of brands in a cluster as a proxy for 
the demand for brands in that cluster.58 Thus, a larger cluster size can signal less inter-
nal uncertainty because observing more brands implies that consumers’ preferences 
are being satisfied. This is consistent with evidence that consumers make use of other 
people’s experience when making purchase decisions.59 For example, suppose a con-
sumer investigates ten cell phone plans, nine of which come with free texting, with 
one plan charging for texting. All else being equal, the consumer is likely to judge that 
other consumers like free texting and that, consequently, he will also like free texting. 
Additionally, people have inherent motives to justify their decisions to others and to 
themselves,60 i.e., to bolster self-esteem,61 to alleviate cognitive dissonance,62 and to 
reduce anticipation of regret.63 A larger set of brands in a cluster can help consum-
ers justify their behavior to others and confirm their behavior to themselves. In sum, 
because a large cluster size decreases both perceived internal and external uncertainties, 
as the size of a cluster increases, the likelihood that a consumer will consider that cluster 
increases.
Cluster Variance Consumers may interpret larger cluster variance as an 
indication of greater external uncertainty because observing large differences among 
brands within a cluster could indicate that
1.  There are brands within the cluster of which the consumer is unaware.
2.  Consumers have incorrectly grouped dissimilar brands into the same cluster.
3.  Consumers have erroneously measured some of the attributes.
4.  The brands’ attributes are changing as firms search for improved brand 
positions.
Consumers may also interpret larger cluster variance as an indication of greater internal 
uncertainty because
1.  Observing a large difference among brand attributes within a cluster 
implies greater uncertainty regarding the consequences of a purchase from 
this cluster.
2.  High cluster variance may send confusing signals about the importance of the 
various attributes.
For example, suppose a consumer observes four brands of hair coloring. The brands 
require that the coloring treatment be left in for 1 minute, 5 minutes, 10 minutes, and 
20 minutes, respectively. The large variation among the treatment times can make the 
consumer less certain as to the benefit of treatment time, increasing internal uncer-
tainty. In sum, cluster variance increases the likelihood of a consumer making a bad 
purchase decision. Therefore, as cluster variance increases, the likelihood of the con-
sumer considering that cluster decreases.
Cluster Frontier (the ideal brand) Once the consumer has se-
lected a single cluster for consideration, the consumer then employs compensatory 
decision making to select a single brand from within the considered cluster. The 
cluster frontier represents a hypothetical brand that contains the best attributes of 
all brands within the cluster. It may be helpful to think of the cluster frontier as 
the perceived ideal brand in a given cluster. For example, suppose John is selecting 
a marriage partner. He has already selected a cluster of potential mates. The con-
sideration cluster contains people who: have decent-paying jobs and are attractive. 

206 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Within this cluster, John observes three people whom he perceives to have the fol-
lowing attributes. Anna has a salary of $75,000/year and ranks 7 (out of 10) on 
John’s attractiveness scale; Brittany has a job that pays her $100,000/year and ranks 
5 on the attractiveness scale; and Claire’s job pays $50,000/year, and she ranks 9 
on the attractiveness scale. John looks at these three people and imagines the ideal 
partner as being someone who contains the best of the attributes he has observed. 
In this case, it would be someone who earns $100,000 and ranks 9 on the attrac-
tiveness scale. John knows that such a person could exist because he has indepen-
dently observed a $100,000 salary and a 9 on the attractiveness scale, but he hasn’t 
observed this particular combination in the same person. Thus, John will select a 
partner who is closest to that ideal combination. In general, the likelihood of the 
consumer selecting a particular brand increases as the brand comes closer to the 
cluster frontier.
Brand Variance Consumers are rarely certain about a brand’s true attri-
butes. For example, a consumer can see that a water heater is rated to use $400 in 
electricity annually. But the consumer knows that this figure is only an estimate; dif-
ferences in electric rates, in hot water usage, and a unit’s efficiency cause the actual 
electricity usage to vary. The greater the brand variance, the less able the consumer 
is to infer the cluster frontier, or ideal brand. For example, suppose a consumer sees 
two water heaters within a cluster. One has an annual electricity usage of $400 and a 
40-gallon capacity. The second has an annual electricity usage of $500 and a 60-
gallon capacity. If brand variance were zero (i.e., if there was no uncertainty in the 
consumer’s mind as to these attributes), then the consumer would know for certain 
that the perceived ideal water heater would have a 60-gallon capacity and cost $400 
annually to operate.
Now, suppose that the consumer is unsure about the attributes. What if the consumer 
perceives that the operating cost could be off by as much as $200 per year, and that the 
capacity could be off by as much as five gallons? This means that the perceived ideal water 
heater in the best-case scenario could have a 65-gallon capacity and cost $200 per year, 
or, in the worst-case scenario, could have a 35-gallon capacity and a cost of $600 per year. 
Because the consumer is less certain as to the cluster frontier, the consumer is less certain 
as to how far from the cluster frontier these two brands are. Thus, the greater the brand 
variance, the less useful the cluster frontier as a benchmark for making a choice.
In summary, consumers, faced with incomplete information, construct perceptions 
of a product-market. After consuming the chosen product, consumers revise informa-
tion about both the product’s attributes and the utility gleaned from the attributes in an 
attempt to reduce uncertainty. Consumers then adapt their perception of the product-
market via mentally repositioning the consumed brand and, possibly, reforming clus-
ters. The consumer bases the next purchase decision on this revised mental mapping of 
the product-market.
Post-Purchase Evaluation
The uncertainty-reduction model emphasizes that consumers continuously process 
information about brands and their attributes after purchase and consumption. This 
feedback is depicted with dashed lines returning from “choice” to external and inter-
nal uncertainty in Figure 9.9. By potentially reducing uncertainties, consumers allow 
for updated product-market perceptions and, potentially, better future decisions. The 
traditional model also acknowledges consumers’ feedback loop. Figure 9.5 shows that, 

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
207
Ben and Jerry’s and Miller Brewing: Changing Consumer Perceptions
Marketing In Action
At the height of the weight-conscious 1990s, Ben and 
Jerry’s launched an ad campaign highlighting the fact that 
their brand was not low in calories. The ad went on to 
claim that Ben and Jerry’s great taste was worth the higher 
calories. Perhaps unwittingly, the campaign altered con-
sumers’ perceptions of the cluster frontier among premium 
ice creams. Let’s take a look at Figure 9.11, which shows 
a hypothetical consumer’s perceived product-market for 
ice cream.
Among the high taste cluster, the consumer is aware 
of Haagen-Dazs, Ben and Jerry’s, and Breyers. The con-
sumer also perceives that the “ideal” premium ice cream 
is one that has the flavor of Breyers, but the calories of 
Haagen-Dazs. This point is labeled original cluster fron-
tier. The point of the Ben and Jerry’s ad campaign was to 
convince consumers that there is a trade-off between taste 
and calories, such that it is impossible for a brand to pos-
ses the taste of Breyers and the calories of Häagen-Dazs. 
As a result, Ben and Jerry’s hoped that consumers would 
shift their perceptions of the cluster frontier to the point 
labeled new cluster frontier. Why? Given that Ben and 
Jerry’s is positioned between Haagen-Dazs and Breyers, 
moving the cluster frontier in this way puts Ben and Jerry’s 
closer to this ideal point, resulting in an increase in market 
share for Ben and Jerry’s at the expense of Haagen-Dazs 
and Breyers.
Similarly, in the early 1990s, the Miller Brewing 
Company introduced a new brand, Red Dog. With re-
spect to taste and price, two of the most salient attributes 
for beer, Miller positioned Red Dog to be similar, although 
inferior, to its flagship brand, Miller Genuine Draft (MGD). 
Market analysts warned that, by introducing a new brand 
so similar to its flagship brand, Miller risked siphoning 
off market share from the flagship brand, a phenomenon 
known as cannibalization. What happened, however, 
was the reverse—Red Dog attained market presence 
Utility from Calories 
Utility from Taste
Ben & Jerry’s
Breyers
Carnival 
Weight Watchers 
Edy’s
Häagen-Dazs 
New Frontier
Original Cluster Frontier 
Figure 9.11 Cluster Frontiers for Ice Cream
SOURCE: Adapted from Davies, A., and Cline T. W. (2005). A Consumer Behavior Approach to 
Modeling Monopolistic Competition. Journal of Economic Psychology, 26:797–826.

208 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
after consumers conduct “post-purchase evaluation,” they integrate this information 
into their future decisions by informing any of the previous processes. In some cases, 
post-purchase evaluation may send consumers back to the drawing board with prob-
lem recognition. Perhaps the purchase created a new problem or failed to solve the 
old one. In either case, the extensive information processing and high levels of in-
volvement necessitate an entirely new problem-solving process. On the other hand, 
a successful choice may require only that consumers loop back to the “choice” phase. 
Perhaps a successful low involvement purchase decision leads to brand laziness, or a 
higher  involvement purchase encourages brand loyalty. In any event, consumers are 
while increasing MGD’s market share. The uncertainty-
reduction model offers an explanation for these unex-
pected results.
Figure 9.12 shows a hypothetical consumer’s per-
ceived product-market following the introduction of Red 
Dog beer.
By positioning Red Dog as it did, Miller achieved two 
effects: (1) it increased the size of the “affordability” clus-
ter, and (2) it did not alter the affordability cluster’s frontier. 
The first effect increased the probability of consideration 
for the brands in the affordability cluster—a larger cluster 
attracts more consumer interest. Second, because the clus-
ter frontier remained the same, the probability of choice, 
given consideration, did not change for MGD. Miller 
Genuine Draft remained the same distance from the ideal 
point as it was prior to the introduction of Red Dog. Using 
probability notation, the overall impact on the probability 
of choice for MGD is:
Pr (consideration)  Pr (choice | consideration)  Pr (choice)
 
[Increase] 
[No Change] 
[Increase]
Thus, the introduction of Red Dog, an objectively inferi-
or beer, resulted in an increase in market share for MGD. 
This is known as the attraction effect: an inferior brand 
positioned closely to an existing brand makes the existing 
brand more “attractive.”
Figure 9.12 Cluster Frontiers for Beer
Utility from Affordability 
Utility from Taste
Pabst
Budweiser
MGD 
Red Dog 
Heineken 
Guinness 
Samuel Adams 
Foster’s
Coors
Cluster frontier 
SOURCE: Adapted from Davies, A., and Cline T. W. (2005). A Consumer Behavior Approach 
to Modeling Monopolistic Competition. Journal of Economic Psychology, 26:797–826.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
209
not likely to conduct new search or re-evaluate alternatives. The intermediate case of 
variety seeking suggests that, even with a moderately successful post-purchase evalua-
tion, consumers may  return to the “evaluation of alternatives” or “information search” 
phases of decision making, seeking and processing new information that will lead 
to a different choice. How do consumers decide if the purchase was successful? In a 
word—satisfaction.
Consumer Satisfaction
Consumer satisfaction is determined by consumers’ post-purchase evalua-
tion of a product or service. Consumers constantly evaluate the efficacy of 
their choices as they integrate products into their daily lives.64 Satisfaction is 
important to marketers because it influences future purchases. The market-
ing concept suggests that consumer satisfaction should be the focal point 
of marketing activities. Research shows that satisfaction positively influ-
ences consumers’ repeat purchase intentions and leads to higher spend-
ing. However, these effects can be offset by competitive intensity, i.e., the 
number of available alternatives.65 Another study demonstrates that satis-
fied customers are willing to spend more on a brand that they like.66 Recent 
research reveals that extremely high levels of satisfaction can translate into 
brand loyalty, the most important strategic  objective of marketing manag-
ers worldwide. Moreover, consumers who have a longstanding relationship 
with a brand demonstrate a high risk of switching when their loyalty is 
weakly held.67
Dissonance-ReductioN  Consumers ask themselves a number 
of questions after purchasing a brand. Was this brand the right choice? Is 
it better than alternative choices? One of the strategies consumers use to 
assess their satisfaction is to compare the chosen brand with a rejected alter-
native. The chosen brand is the product the consumer actually purchased, 
while the rejected alternative is a brand considered, but not chosen. If the 
chosen brand seems superior to the rejected alternative, then consumers 
experience satisfaction and minimal cognitive dissonance. The converse is also true: 
if the chosen product  appears inferior to a rejected alternative, then cognitive dis-
sonance sets in, leading to dissatisfaction. Evidence of post-purchase dissonance may 
include comments such as, “Gee, I wish I had purchased the other brand,” and, “I 
paid too much. I should have searched more stores.” Cognitive dissonance involves 
behavior-attitude inconsistency and produces an unpleasant tension referred to as dis-
sonance arousal. When it occurs, people are motivated to reduce dissonance arousal 
by changing their attitude to match their behavior. Making almost any decision can 
set the stage for dissonance effects. Consumers employ four strategies to reduce post-
purchase dissonance:
1. Increasing the perceived attractiveness of the chosen alternative
2. Decreasing the perceived attractiveness of the rejected alternative
3. Increasing the perceived similarity among alternatives
4. Revoking the decision
The first strategy, known as sweet lemons, involves attempts to raise the positive 
qualities of the chosen alternative. The second strategy, called sour grapes, entails 
ob jec ti ve 6
PRNewsFoto/Newscom
High levels of consumer satisfaction 
can translate into brand loyalty.

210 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
disparaging the qualities of rejected alternatives. The third strategy attempts to level 
the playing field by interpreting all alternatives as similar. The final strategy involves 
reversing the choice. For example, you might attempt to return the chosen brand in 
exchange for one of the alternatives.
In a classic study of post-purchase dissonance, consumers were asked to rate the 
attractiveness of several products, including a stopwatch, silk screen print, portable 
radio, and fluorescent lamp.68 They were also told that, at the end of the study, 
they would receive one of these products as a gift. In the high-dissonance condi-
tion, consumers were asked to choose between two products they rated nearly equal 
in desirability. In the low-dissonance condition, consumers were asked to choose 
between a product they rated highly and a product they rated much lower in desir-
ability. After receiving their gifts, consumers were asked again to rate all the prod-
ucts. Large shifts in attitude occurred in the high-dissonance condition. The chosen 
product was rated slightly higher and the rejected product was rated much lower 
after the decision was made. In contrast, smaller shifts in attitude occurred for the 
low-dissonance condition. Only the chosen product was rated slightly higher after 
the choice occurred.
Expectancy Disconfirmation Model  In assessing their 
satisfaction, consumers may also want to know the extent to which their chosen 
product lived up to its expectations. The expectancy disconfirmation model 
suggests that consumers form expectations about product performance prior to 
purchasing a brand.69 After buying a product, people compare their perceptions of 
its performance in various determinant attributes against the level of performance 
that was expected on those same attributes. If consumers’ perceptions of the brand’s 
performance are in line with their expectations, they are satisfied. If the brand 
performs more poorly than expected, dissatisfaction sets in, but if performance 
exceeds expectations, consumers may experience supra-satisfaction, or customer 
delight. Note that consumers’ prior expectancies are confirmed if the product 
performs as anticipated, while expectancies are disconfirmed if the brand performs 
more poorly or better than expected. This model can be expressed statistically as:
S  w( p-e), where satisfaction (S) is a function of the importance weight that 
consumers assign to each attribute (w) and the difference between perceptions 
and expectations ( p-e).
When the sum of all the perceptions minus expectations equals zero, consumers are 
perfectly satisfied. When this sum dips below zero, consumers become dissatisfied, and 
when the function returns a value greater than zero, consumers are supra-satisfied. The 
expectancy disconfirmation model suggests that consumers will be dissatisfied with 
excellent products if their expectations are too high. Conversely, consumers can be 
delighted with poor products that exceed expectations. So, whatever expectations exist 
in the minds of consumers prior to purchase are as important as their perceptions of 
a brand’s performance. This line of thinking creates a potential satisfaction paradox, a 
conundrum in which marketers must create sufficiently high expectations to induce 
brand trial, but not so high as to engender disappointment. In other words, brands that 
generate extremely low expectations will experience difficulty in getting consumers to 
try them. Conversely, when marketers build unrealistic expectations for brands, they 
are destined to disappoint.

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
211
This chapter focused on how consumers recognize prob-
lems, define their markets, gather information related to 
their consideration and purchase decisions, and deter-
mine their satisfaction. Consumer decision making can be 
defined by the amount of effort people exert to solve a 
problem. Routine response behavior involves minimal 
effort, intermediate problem solving entails mid-level 
 effort, and extensive problem solving requires a great deal 
of  effort. Consumer decision making can also be charac-
terized as a joint function of processing effort and involve-
ment, which creates four distinct types of decisions. When 
both  involvement and information processing are low, 
consumers typically make choices as a matter of habit, or 
exhibit brand laziness, as opposed to a fundamental com-
mitment to the brand. When consumer involvement is 
high and information processing is low, consumers exhibit 
brand loyalty, an intrinsic commitment to a brand based 
on the benefits or values it provides consumers. When 
consumers experience low involvement and high infor-
mation processing, they exhibit variety seeking behavior, 
the desire to choose new alternatives over more familiar 
ones—just for the sake of change. Finally, when both in-
volvement and information processing are high, consum-
ers engage in genuine problem-solving strategies. Because 
consumers cannot consider all the features of a brand, they 
must identify one or more determinant attributes, charac-
teristics of a product that are both important and unique, 
and thus, most likely to affect the buyer’s choice. Problem 
solving is the focus of the traditional model of consumer 
decision making because the decision involves relatively 
high levels of risk.
The traditional model of consumer decision making 
involves five stages of consumer problem solving. Problem 
recognition takes place when consumers experience a dis-
parity between what they have and what they want. This 
is known as a want-got gap. Needs, wants, and opportuni-
ties trigger problem solving. Information search involves 
both the active and passive processing of data aimed at 
solving the problem. The level of search is determined by 
consumer involvement, the marketing environment, situ-
ational influences, and individual differences. Evaluation 
of alternatives requires consumers to determine which 
product attributes are important and which brands to 
evaluate on the basis of these attributes. Purchase deci-
sions represent consumers’ predispositions or intentions 
to buy a brand. Finally, during post-purchase evaluation, 
consumers compare their perceptions of a brand with their 
expectations and determine their satisfaction.
The uncertainty-reduction model of Consumer 
Decision Making recognizes that consumers can only 
make rational decisions within the limits of time and 
cognitive capability. This approach to decision making 
involves four stages that specifically deal with consumers’ 
bounded rationality. First, consumers develop perceptions 
of what the product-market looks like. Next, they whittle 
down the vast number of brands into a single subset of 
brands for consideration. Then, consumers choose one 
brand from the consideration set. Finally, based on their 
consumption experiences, consumers adjust their percep-
tions of product-markets in an attempt to make better 
future decisions. This model emphasizes that consumers 
continuously sort out and manage information about 
their chosen brands in an attempt to reduce uncertainty. 
One of the ways that consumers evaluate their purchases 
is by assessing their satisfaction. A popular strategy that 
consumers use to assess their satisfaction is to compare the 
chosen brand with a rejected alternative. This strategy is 
known as dissonance-reduction. Another way consumers 
determine satisfaction is by comparing a brand’s perfor-
mance against expectations of that performance. If the 
performance equals expectations, then consumers are sat-
isfied. If it exceeds expectations, consumers are delighted. 
And if the brand fails to live up to expectations, people 
become dissatisfied.
Chapter Summary

212 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Key Terms
routine choice
intermediate problem solving
extensive problem solving
perceived risk
brand laziness
brand loyalty
variety seeking
intrinsic variety seeking
parity products
problem solving
determinant attributes
want-got gap
needs
wants
opportunities
prepurchase search
internal search
external search
ongoing search
enduring involvement
situational involvement
brand chaos
market mavens
impulse buying
bounded rationality
uncertainty-reduction process
true brand universe
perceived brand universe
external uncertainty
true utility function
perceived utility function
internal uncertainty
perceived product-market
cluster size
cluster variance
brand frontier
brand variance
non-compensatory process
compensatory process
expectancy disconfirmation model
Review and Discussion
1. What distinguishes brand loyalty from brand laziness? 
Which of the two is more likely to result in long-term 
repeat purchase behavior?
2. How are consumers’ perceptions of risk related to 
their level of product involvement?
3. Which categories of risk do you think have the great-
est influence on the purchase of: (a) fashion clothing, 
(b) a laptop, (c) real estate, (d) sushi, and (e) a cell 
phone?
4. Why is variety seeking prevalent among parity prod-
uct categories?
5. What’s the difference between a defensive and determi-
nant attribute? Both types of attributes are important 
to consumers.
6. Under what conditions are consumers likely to follow 
the five stages of the traditional model of Consumer 
Decision Making?
7. What are the two conditions necessary for problem 
recognition to occur?
 8.    Discuss the differences among needs, wants, and 
opportunities.
 9.    Predict the level of search for
 
 a. A beginning skier interested in new skis
 
 b. A frequent flyer looking for a flight to New York
 
 c.  A stay-at-home-dad who has moderate 
 knowledge regarding baby foods
10.    How do external and internal uncertainties cloud 
consumers’ perceptions of the true brand universe 
and their true utility functions, respectively?
11.    Review the two types of satisfaction models: 
 dissonance-reduction versus expectancy con-
firmation. Which model would a consumer 
most likely use if she recently switched to a new 
brand after years of loyalty to one brand? Which 
model would a consumer use if he were processing 
 information from advertisements and opinion 
leaders’ word-of-mouth?

Chapter 9   The Consumer Decision Making Process  
213
Imagine that you work for a well-known marketing 
research firm. Your supervisor has asked you to use 
the expectancy disconfirmation model to evaluate 
a consumer’s post-hoc satisfaction level for a recent 
purchase of running shoes.
1. Identify three determinant attributes for this consumer (e.g., comfort, style, 
durability).
2. Determine the consumer’s importance weights for each attribute, such that they total 
100 percent. For example, comfort  thirty percent, style  ten percent, and durabil-
ity  sixty percent.
3. On a 1 to 7 scale, ask the consumer to rate how s/he expected the brand to perform 
on each of these attributes, prior to purchase (for example, comfort  6, style  4, 
and durability  6).
4. Also on a 1 to 7 scale, ask the consumer to rate his/her actual perceptions of how the 
shoe has performed on each of these attributes.
5. Plug in the weights, expectations, and perceptions into the formula: S  w( p-e). 
Does the outcome of the function suggest that this consumer is satisfied, delighted, or 
dissatisfied? Ask the consumer if s/he is satisfied to see if the model is consistent with 
the consumer’s response.
M a nag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
YOUR CHALLENGE:
Short Application Exercises
1. Use Figure 9.4 (Assessing Determinant Attributes) to 
identify attributes in each of the four quadrants for 
blue jeans. On the basis of your analysis, what are the 
determinant attributes?
2. Identify three want-got gaps that you are currently 
experiencing. Characterize one as a need, the second 
as a want, and the third as an opportunity. To illus-
trate these three problems, sketch a figure similar to 
Figure 9.7.
3. Identify a product category for which you feel endur-
ing involvement and a product category for which you 
show only situational involvement. Explain why these 
product categories affect you differently.
4. Interview a friend regarding his/her search activities 
in a recently purchased, high involvement prod-
uct (e.g., automobile, computer, graduate school). 
Identify whether s/he relied primarily on prepurchase 
or ongoing search to make his/her choice.

Sony Has a Television 
for Every Consumer Taste
214
Product Consideration, 
Evaluation, and Choice
 1 | Explain the stages of consumer choice.
 2 | Describe several marketing techniques for 
influencing consumers’ consideration sets.
 3 | Define stimulus-based, memory-based, 
and mixed choice.
 4 | Explain the MODE model.
 5 | Explain how many different heuristics or 
shortcuts are used to simplify prediction 
and choice.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
Objectives
Consumers often are faced with an overwhelming sea of choices in thousands of product 
categories. Consider the television market. Each year, consumers in the United States buy 
about 32 million television sets, and they have plenty of options.1 For example, typical Internet 
shopping site BizRate.com offers 125 different television brands and more than 3,200 models!2 
The Sony Company, one of the world’s leading television manufacturers, offers 248 different 
models of televisions.
Imagine that a consumer wants to purchase a new television. Even if she has narrowed 
her choice to a Sony brand of TV, would she choose a Sony 20-inch, a Sony 27-inch, a 
Sony 35-inch, a Sony 42-inch, a Sony 50-inch, a Sony 57-inch, or an even larger screen? 
Does she want standard definition, enhanced definition, or high definition? Does she want 
10
CHAPTER

215
a conventional, direct view, cathode-ray tube (CRT) TV, a liquid-crystal display (LCD) 
TV, a plasma TV, a rear projection CRT TV, or a rear projection LCD or DLP (digital light 
processing) TV? For relatively small screens, CRT TVs are less expensive than the other 
options, but for big screens, rear projection models are less expensive. Plasma screens 
offer remarkable brightness and contrast, but static images can burn into the screen. 
Burn-in does not occur on LCD screens, but the image may dim as the consumer angles 
away from the center of the screen. This problem also occurs in many rear projection 
models.
With so many options to consider, it is easy to see how someone could become 
overwhelmed trying to choose just one. Sometimes when consumers are faced with too 
many choices, they try to simplify by using a shortcut or “rule of thumb.” We’ll see in this 
chapter that many different shortcuts are possible, such as the price-quality shortcut—the 
idea that you get what you pay for. Consumers often try to simplify, but if choosing a 
product is still too difficult or confusing, they may just postpone decision making or avoid 
making a choice altogether.3 Of course, a purchase like a new television may not be a 
decision consumers want to put off, especially if their old set has stopped working. But you 
can live without television, right?
© Dwayne Newton/PhotoEdit

216 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
This chapter discusses how consumers evaluate brands and make purchase-related deci-
sions. Extensive research on consumer decision making has examined how consumers 
combine and evaluate the information gathered from internal and external searches to 
make a purchase decision, and some of those concepts and processes are discussed here. 
It is important to remember that consumers employ a variety of decision-making pro-
cesses, depending on the nature of the task and other factors that include motivation, 
ability, and opportunity to process the information, the information available, and the 
timing of the decision, to name just a few.
The Consideration Set: Determining 
Choice Alternatives
Before a person can make a purchase, or even make evaluations of various alternative brands, 
they generate a set of brands to consider and evaluate—even if it’s just one. A consideration 
set is the group of brands that consumers think about buying when they need to make a 
purchase. The brands included in the consideration set can come from the evoked set of 
brands, from brands discovered during external information search, and from point-of-
purchase. This is discussed further when we examine consumer choice later in the chapter.
Because consumers can’t select a brand unless it is included their consideration 
sets, the first job of a marketer is to encourage the consumer to consider buying his 
or her brand. This is often difficult because the consideration set for many products 
is quite small. Although consideration set size can range from one (a very brand 
loyal customer may consider only one brand) to as many brands as are available in 
the market— dozens or even hundreds for some products—consumers rarely con-
sider more than seven brands (see Figure 10.1). Besides the fact that consumers just 
don’t have the time or the desire in many cases (given the limited utility of evaluat-
ing 15 different brands of toilet paper, for instance) to carefully consider dozens 
of brands, limited information processing capacity also prevents people from con-
sidering more than Miller’s magic number of seven plus or minus two.4 Although 
there are always exceptions to every rule, this tendency to have small consideration 
ob jec tive 1
Figure 10.1 Consideration Sets
Brands Available
in the Marketplace
(> 20 brands)
Consideration Set
(7+2 brands)
Choice
(1 brand)
Source: Kardes, F. (1997). Consumer Behavior and Managerial Decision Making. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
217
sets exists across product categories, from toothpaste and breakfast cereal to cars 
and computers.
Because people consider so few brands, marketers have to be creative to encour-
age consumers to consider their brands, rather than competitors’ offerings. One way 
marketers get consumers to consider brands is by drawing attention to the brand and 
making it memorable. When a marketer uses the principles of attention, learning, and 
memory to increase the likelihood that a brand is included in a consumer’s consider-
ation set, the marketer is one step closer to a potential sale.
Ensuring that a brand is simply included in consumers’ consideration sets is an im-
portant first step to influencing brand evaluation and ultimate choice, but how many 
and what other brands are also included in the consideration set are also important 
factors. As the number of brands in the consumer’s consideration set increases, the 
likelihood of a brand being chosen decreases. Thus, the next step should be to control 
the number of competitors’ brands in the consideration set. Three techniques for influ-
encing consumers’ consideration sets are part-list cuing, the attraction effect, and the 
compromise effect.
Influencing the Consideration Set
Part-list Cuing  One way marketers influence the consideration set is to 
decrease its overall size while at the same time maintaining their brand presence 
in the set. Marketers can reduce the number of brands considered for a purchase 
through part-list cuing, which involves presenting the names of just some brands 
when consumers are trying to recall as many brands as possible.5 This technique is 
designed to make some brands more prominent than others by using a competitive 
advertisement or by listing the names of only a few competing brands in a pro-
motional campaign or selling situation. As the partial list of brands becomes more 
conspicuous and more strongly connected with the product category, it becomes 
more difficult for the consumer to think of other brands. For  example, let’s imag-
ine that a consumer want to purchase a new car. The consumer knows she wants a 
small, sporty car, but she doesn’t know what brand of car she wants, and she knows 
that at least a dozen brands in the market fit her general purchase criteria. The con-
sumer heads to a nearby new car dealer to “browse around.” Of course, a salesperson 
quickly approaches her. After a few minutes of discussing the features available in a 
new car, the sales associate directs the consumer to a brand model that best fits her 
needs. The salesperson may then proceed to compare his brand to one or two other 
brands in the market. Of course, the salesperson will likely focus on competing 
brands that are inferior in some way to his brand. As the consumer focuses on these 
three brands—the one on the lot and the other two mentioned by the salesperson—
it becomes more difficult for her to recall other brands that might also fit her needs. 
Suddenly, her consideration set has been reduced to three brands. The comparative 
advertisement for ID Patrol on page 218 works in a similar fashion.  The ad tries to 
create a consideration set of just four, one in which ID Patrol is the only brand to 
offer all five, key attributes.
The part-list cuing effect is important because it can help consumers quickly and 
efficiently come to a decision, plus it can also lead them to focus on some brands 
while ignoring others that are potentially better. As a result, consumers may make 
choices they later regret.6
objec ti ve 2

218 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
The Attraction Effect  Marketers also attempt to influence which spe-
cific brands consumers are likely to compare and evaluate. A target brand seems more 
attractive when it is compared to inferior brands and less attractive when compared 
to superior brands. This is called the attraction effect.7 Marketers want consumers to 
compare their brands to inferior brands—remember the car salesperson? Again, this can 
be done in a selling situation or by using comparative advertising and promotion that 
show the target brand as superior to other brands on some dimension. Alternatively, 
the attraction effect can unintentionally  occur when a firm has multiple brands in its 
product line (see Figure 10.2). For example, Williams-Sonoma sold a home bread-
baking machine for $275 and at first, sales were poor. Later, Williams-Sonoma added 
a much more expensive home bread-baking machine to its product line. When con-
sumers compared the $275 machine to the much more expensive machine, the $275 
machine seemed very attractive because of the price, and sales of this machine almost 
doubled! This occurred because $275 seemed like a more reasonable price when it was 
compared to an even higher price, and consumers like to save money.
The Compromise Effect  Another way to improve the evaluation of 
a particular brand is to make the brand appear as an average (or a good compro-
mise) brand against other brands in the consideration set. A compromise brand 
seems average on all important attributes or features. While other brands often 
have some really good and some really bad features, a compromise brand does ap-
pears to not have any very bad features and is at least acceptable on all features. 
Thus, a compromise brand seems like a safe choice. This compromise effect, or 
the increased probability of buying a compromise brand, is especially likely to 
occur when consumers are concerned about making a bad decision (see Figure 
10.2).8 For example, consider a consumer who wants to purchase a camera and 
is deciding between an inexpensive model and a moderately priced model. If a 
third camera, a high-priced model, is added to the consideration set, then the 
moderately priced model seems like a reasonable compromise. Brands that are 
PRNewsFoto/Equifax Inc./Newscom

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
219
intermediate or “average” in terms of price, quality, and number of features are 
frequently chosen from the consideration set. They are chosen even more fre-
quently when consumers need to justify their choice to others, such as a spouse, 
boss, or friends. It is often easier to justify the purchase of intermediate rather 
than extreme brands.
Of course, nearly any brand can appear to be a compromise brand depending on 
the brands to which it is compared. Advertising and promotion campaigns that encour-
age consumers to compare a seemingly average brand to more extreme brands increase 
the influence of the compromise effect.
The choices that consumers make follow their evaluations and judgments 
of the brands in their considerations sets (see Figure 10.1). Now that we have 
 examined how consumers establish consideration sets and how marketers 
 attempt to influence brand evaluations within these considerations sets, we turn 
our  attention to the desired outcome of the consumer decision-making process: 
consumer choice. 
Constructing Evaluations to Make Choices
Consumer choice involves selecting one product or brand from a set of possibilities. 
Marketers who want to influence consumers must understand three critical issues:
1.  The brands in the consideration set
2.  The types of information used to detect and evaluate the differences among the 
considered alternatives
3.  How this information is ultimately used in the choice process9
Figure 10.2 The Attraction Effect and the Compromise Effect
Source: Kardes, F. (1997). Consumer Behavior and Managerial Decision Making. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Two Equally Preferred Brands
 Attraction Effect
Dimension A
Dimension B
Brand  A is better on
dimension A (one attribute
or one cluster of attributes).
Brand B is better on
dimension B. The
dimensions are equally
important.
Adding a decoy similar
but inferior to Brand B
increases preference for
Brand B.
Adding a Brand C, which
is excellent on dimension B
but poor on dimension A,
increases preference
for Brand B.
Dimension B
Dimension B
Dimension A
Compromise Effect
Dimension A
• Brand A
• Brand B
• Brand A
• Brand B
• Decoy
• Brand B
• Brand A
• Brand C

220 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
The first point has already been discussed. The other two issues are discussed 
throughout the rest of the chapter. First, three types of consumer choice based on the 
physical presence or absence of the brand during choice are reviewed: stimulus-based, 
memory-based, and mixed choice.
Consumer Choice: Stimulus-Based, 
Memory-Based, and Mixed Choice
After the consideration set has been determined, consumers need to evaluate the differ-
ences in the attributes among the considered brands to make a choice. When consum-
ers can directly and physically observe all relevant brands in the consideration set and 
their brand attributes, they make a stimulus-based choice.10 For example, in a grocery 
store, it is easy to compare brands and attributes simply by examining the different 
packages on a shelf.
When none of the relevant brands and attributes is directly and physically 
 observable, however, consumers make a memory-based choice. Here, consum-
ers must retrieve brand and attribute information from memory. An example is a 
consumer at home trying to decide what restaurant to go to for dinner. Finally, in 
mixed choice, consumers can see some brands but must remember others. This 
is the most common type of choice scenario. When this occurs, stimulus brands—
the brands that are physically observed—usually have an advantage over memory 
brands—the brands not observed but drawn from memory—because consumers 
tend to forget specific details about memory brands.11 For example, when shop-
ping for a new car, a consumer is likely to visit an automobile dealership. While on 
the premises, the consumer may attempt to compare model brands on the dealer-
ship lot (stimulus brands) to model brands that she examined earlier at a different 
dealership (memory brands). If all the brands are similar in quality, the consumer 
objec tive 3
1001nights/iStockphoto.com
Car shopping typically involves a mixed choice situation.

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
221
is more likely to choose the stimulus brand because she 
might not be able to remember the exact price or the 
exact level of performance on an important attribute of 
the memory brands.
Although consumers usually choose stimulus brands 
over memory brands, marketers can reverse this effect 
when memory brands have a very large number of favor-
able attributes. Consumers are likely to remember that 
these brands are very good even if they can’t remember 
specific details about the brands.12 “Puffery” or exag-
gerated advertising claims about a memory brand such 
as, “This brand is rated number 1 in its class,” can also 
increase the likelihood that consumers will choose it. 
Thus, stimulus brands are preferred over memory brands 
except in special cases where memory brands seem too 
good to be ignored.
Now that we have looked at the differences in stimu-
lus versus memory brands, let’s examine some common 
ways consumers evaluate brand information and how the 
amount of effort expended on the decision-making pro-
cess influences choice.
Attitude versus Attribute-Based 
Choice Strategies
Sometimes, consumers make choices based on general 
impressions about a brand and sometimes on specific 
brand attribute information. In attitude-based choice, 
they form overall evaluations and general impressions of 
brands in the consideration set based on a combination 
of everything they know about all the brands, and then 
select the one with the highest evaluation. Formally, an 
attitude is an evaluative judgment that a person forms 
of people, objects, and issues. In contrast to attitude-
based choice, when consumers make attribute-based 
choices, they compare the specific attributes or features 
of each brand and select the one that performs best on 
key attributes.
When do consumers use attitude-based versus 
 attribute-based choice strategies? One determinant is accessi-
bility, or ease of retrieving either attitude or attribute infor-
mation from memory. Research shows that, when drawing 
information from memory, a person usually finds it easier to 
use attitude-based choice because attitudes are easier to retrieve 
from memory than are specific brand  attributes.13 For exam-
ple, it is easier for consumers to  recall that they generally like 
the Skippy brand of peanut butter more than Jiff than it is to 
recall attributes of both brands (e.g., price, nutty taste, smoothness) and individual prefer-
ences for each attribute. Of course, attitude-based choice can occur only if the attitudes exist; 
a person must have a previously formed attitude toward a brand to pull it from memory.
 
In 1985, John Schnatter founded 
 
a small pizza company named 
 
Papa John’s. Part of the company’s 
 
growth was fueled by its now 
famous advertising slogan, “Better Ingredients. Better Pizza,” A 
few years after introducing the slogan, Papa John’s began an 
advertising campaign centered around the slogan that specifi-
cally compared Papa John’s to Pizza Hut pizza, with the aim of 
“proving” that Papa John’s had better ingredients (on an ingre-
dient-by-ingredient basis) than its competitors. For example, in 
one television commercial, Papa John’s claimed that its dough 
was “better” than Pizza Hut’s because Papa John’s dough was 
made with filtered water, rather than tap water—depicted in the 
ad as less-than-clean and suitable only for washing dishes.
Faced with what they perceived as an attack on their 
brand, Pizza Hut sued Papa John’s claiming that Papa John’s 
claims of better pizza than Pizza Hut’s were false, and that the 
slogan itself had become a comparative statement of superi-
ority.38 What was Papa John’s defense? The company claimed 
the element of puffery. Puffery is an advertising element 
 allowing a company to use general, non-provable, superlative 
claims—like “better,” “faster,” or “larger”—about their prod-
ucts and services because the general public understands that 
these claims are not necessarily true. Initially, the court ruled 
in favor of Pizza Hut, finding that the advertising was false, 
and the slogan had been tainted by the advertising campaign, 
taking it beyond harmless puffery. The finding did not hold up 
under appeal, however. A higher court ruled that, while the 
campaign may have indeed been misleading, Pizza Hut did 
not prove that the campaign had any “material” influence, 
i.e., it did not have an actual influence on consumers’ pur-
chase decisions.39
This case underscores the legal and ethical issues of using 
puffery in advertising. In general, the use of puffery is legal, but 
often only a thin line exists between puffery and deception—
which is illegal. Papa John’s claimed that using puffery is 
acceptable and that consumers expect it. Many critics agree, 
claiming that puffery is harmless.40 Others claim that while puff-
ery is not unethical, marketers still should not use it because it is 
a waste of advertising dollars.41 In other words, consumers have 
become so accustomed to outrageous claims, such as, “We 
have the best selection,” “The Real Thing,” and “ the ultimate in 
clean,” that they have become immune to them. However, even 
when puffery is found to be legal, as in the Papa John’s case, 
how ethical is the use of puffery when it accompanies compara-
tive claims against competitors?
E T H I C S

222 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
On the other hand, usefulness of information is important too. When brands are 
very similar overall, small differences among them are easier to detect when comparing 
them along specific attributes. In this case, attribute-based choice may be preferable 
because the attribute information is more diagnostic, which means it is more relevant 
for distinguishing among brands. Therefore, while attitudes are often more accessible, 
attributes are often more diagnostic. In general, the information that is most accessible 
and diagnostic is the information that is used in a consumer’s choice decision.
The accessibility and diagnosticity of information are not the only factors that 
influence the type of information that consumers use in their choices. The more im-
portant the product choice, the more consumers want to think about it, and this too, 
influences the type of information they use. For example, purchasing an engagement 
ring, selecting a university, or even choosing a new cologne are probably more im-
portant than purchasing a bottle of ketchup or selecting a movie rental. According 
to a theory called the MODE model, Motivation and Opportunity to deliberate are 
key DEterminants of the processes that influence consumer choice.14 Motivation is 
high when the decision is more personally relevant (motivation is synonymous with 
high involvement). Opportunity is high when people can take time and have the 
ability to think carefully and to deliberate about the decision. When both motivation 
and  opportunity are high, consumers are likely to deliberate about the decision. This 
careful deliberation is more consistent with attribute-based choice because brands are 
carefully evaluated along every relevant product attribute. Recall that small differences 
among brands are easier to detect when comparing them along specific attributes, and 
even small differences between brands may be crucial when the purchase choice is very 
important. If either motivation or opportunity is low, attitude-based choice is more 
likely. See Figure 10.3.
PRNewsFoto/Marriott International, Inc./Newscom
PRNewsFoto/Levi Strauss & Co./Newscom
Attitude-based advertisements remind consumers how much they “love” a product in general.  Attribute-based ads 
encourage consumers to choose a brand that performs best on key features.

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
223
Choice Based on Heuristic Processing
The MODE model is an example of a dual process model. This model suggests that 
sometimes consumers think carefully about decisions and sometimes they don’t. 
As we saw in the discussion of the MODE model, motivation and opportunity are 
important  determinants as to how much careful thinking people do when making 
a product choice. Also important are processing factors related to involvement and 
ability and situational factors. In general, when consumers think carefully about 
decisions, using all relevant information and considering all implications, they are 
engaging in systematic processing. In contrast, sometimes people are unwilling 
or unable to use careful and effortful decision-making strategies, such as when 
motivation or opportunity—according to the MODE model—are low. Instead, 
consumers use simple heuristics that enable them to make decisions quickly and 
easily. This is known as heuristic processing.15 Heuristics are mental shortcuts 
that help consumers simplify their decision-making tasks. There are three types of 
heuristics—persuasion, prediction, and influence. All heuristics aid in simplifying 
cognitive tasks, but the type of heuristic consumers use depends on the specific task 
at hand.
Persuasion heuristics influence consumers’ beliefs and attitudes. They come in 
three forms.16 The length-implies-strength heuristic suggests “size matters.” For example, 
advertisements and sales pitches filled with facts and figures appear more compelling 
than just a few claims. So consumers tend to evaluate the quality of the brand according 
to the number of favorable attributes it possesses. The liking-agreement heuristic is based 
on the assumption that consumers usually agree with people they like. This heuristic is 
embodied in balance theory. Finally, the consensus-implies-correctness heuristic is synony-
mous with “the bandwagon effect.” It implies that if everyone is doing it, then it must 
be good, i.e., it offers social validation.
ob jec ti ve 4
Figure 10.3 The MODE Model
Source: Adapted from Fazio, R. H. (1990). Multiple processes by which attitudes guide behavior:  
The MODE model as an integrative framework.  In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental 
social psychology (vol. 23, pp. 75-109).  New York:  Academic Press. Reprinted by permission 
of Elsevier.
Attitude
activation
Selective
perception
Immediate
perceptions
of the
attitude
object
Definition
of the
event
Behavior
Norms
Definition
of the
situation

224 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Prediction heuristics are used to form likelihood judgments (e.g., representa-
tiveness, availability, simulation, and anchoring-and-adjustment). The third heuristic 
type, influence or choice heuristics, affects consumers’ decisions directly (e.g., lexico-
graphic, additive-difference, conjunctive, disjunctive, frequency of good-bad features). 
Prediction and choice heuristics are discussed in detail later in this chapter.
Heuristic processing occurs most often when a decision is perceived as  unimportant— 
which ketchup brand to buy, for instance—or when decision making is stressful or dif-
ficult as a result of time pressure or information overload. Consumers’ use of heuristics 
becomes even more prevalent as the amount of information available to them increases, 
as potential choice alternatives increase, and as the pace of life increases.
There are many ways consumers use heuristics when evaluating brands. Consumers 
often use heuristics to predict what will happen if they buy or don’t buy a particu-
lar product or brand. For example, “If I buy the most expensive laundry detergent, 
my clothes will be extra clean.” Heuristics also influence what and how much choice-
 related information consumers use to make a decision and how they use that informa-
tion. For example, many consumers assume that price and quality are strongly related; 
that is where the idea that “you get what you pay for” comes from. This assumption 
leads consumers to predict that expensive products are high in quality, and inexpensive 
products are low in quality. When consumers use price as a heuristic cue for predict-
ing quality, they base their judgment of quality on price alone. However, many other 
variables also influence quality, such as product reliability, durability, appearance, ease 
of use, cost of use, and the number of different uses of a product. Price is just one vari-
able. Here lies a potential pitfall of using heuristic processing. Although it simplifies 
decision making and enables consumers to make choices quickly and easily, heuristic 
When making decisions, many North Americans are said to be 
analytical, relying on factual information, and individualistic, mak-
ing one choice independently of others. Similarly, the French tend 
to consider many alternatives, and are highly rational and thor-
ough in their decision making, while Russians are said to place 
more emphasis on values and appearance than facts. Germans 
are said to be deductive, and the Danes tend to be pragmatic 
when making decisions. In contrast, in Japan and other Asian 
cultures, logic and rationality seem less important; instead, one’s 
“gut feeling” needs to be right, and the collective consensus is 
more important than the individual’s opinion. Similarly, many 
Saudi Arabians are more intuitive in their decision making and 
avoid persuasion in favor of empirical evidence.36
In recent years, researchers have extensively examined 
cultural differences in decision making. While cross-cultural 
research related to decision making covers a broad range 
of topics, the overall results show that cultural differences are 
pervasive, not just along Eastern and Western philosophies, 
but also between countries and cultures within those countries. 
Additionally, within individuals, cultural influences are thought to 
influence consumers at all stages of the decision process.37
Developing a fuller understanding of how people from dif-
ferent cultures make decisions is essential for marketers as they 
expand globally. As our world becomes smaller as a result of 
information technology and the political opening of borders and 
economies, understanding cross-cultural difference in consumer 
behavior, decision making, and choice will become essential. 
Only by understanding cross-cultural differences can market-
ers effectively craft products and messages to satisfy global 
consumers.
Decision-Making Styles Vary Across Cultures
Eye on International

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
225
thinking often oversimplifies choice and leads consumers to overlook important infor-
mation. Consequently, when consumers focus only on price, they over-simplify pre-
diction and make poor decisions. For example, for many different products, price is 
only weakly related to quality.17 This means that some brands are high in price but low 
in quality, and some brands are low in price but high in quality. Relying too heavily 
on the price-quality heuristic can lead consumers to buy a high-priced brand that is 
low in quality. Of course, price is not the only cue that consumers use to predict the 
quality of a product. People also rely on brand name, store reputation, warranty, the 
Good Housekeeping seal of approval, and company membership in the Better Business 
Bureau, among other heuristic cues.
In addition to using the specific heuristic cues noted above, people also use general 
heuristic cues. In their path-breaking research on the use of general heuristics, Tversky 
and Kahneman researched four important general cues that people use for simplifying 
predictions related to decision making: the representativeness heuristic, the availability 
heuristic, the simulation heuristic, and the anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic (see 
Figure 10.4).18 Each of these heuristics can lead all people, including consumers and 
marketers, to make bad predictions and, thus, bad decisions.
Figure 10.4 Prediction Heuristics
Representativeness Heuristic
Concept
Example
Assessing the likelihood that a particular 
target belongs to a category based on the 
degree to which the target and category 
appear similar.
If a consumer believes that Honda 
automobiles are high quality, he may 
conclude that Honda motorbikes are 
similarly high in quality.
Availability Heuristic
Concept
Example
Searching memory for relevant examples 
of a particular event and basing one’s 
prediction of that event on how easily 
these examples come to mind.
If a consumer recalls many floods, then he 
or she will predict that future floods are 
likely. As a result, this consumer may be 
inclined to buy flood insurance.
Simulation Heuristic
Concept
Example
An event or sequence of events that is 
easy to imagine also seems very likely to 
occur.
Consumers who imagine a brand 
performing well are more likely to believe 
that this brand will actually satisfy their 
needs.
Anchor-and-Adjustment Heuristic
Concept
Example
Random anchors or “starting points” 
influence probability estimates.
Real estate agents’ estimates of the value 
of a property are very close to the prior 
observed list price (anchor).

226 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Prediction Heuristics
Good consumer decision making often requires accurate probability or likelihood judg-
ments about events, such as accurate predictions about future product performance (will 
the product do what I need it to do?), about when a product needs replacement (should 
I buy a new car now or risk future repair bills?), about the behavior of others (will my 
sister like this gift? Will this salesperson try to trick me?), and about one’s own future 
behavior (will I still like this color of paint two years from now?). However,  although 
the ability to make predictions is very important, research suggests that people are not 
very good at making them, largely because they often unknowingly use heuristics to 
generate those predictions.
Representativeness Heuristic  Predictions are sometimes based on 
similarity or representativeness. People using the representativeness heuristic make 
predictions based on perceived similarities between a specific target and a general cat-
egory. For example, if a new product has a similar name, package, or appearance to 
another product we like a lot, we usually predict that we will like the new product, 
too. If a person we just met reminds us of another person that we do not like—perhaps 
because the two people have similar glasses, clothing, gestures, or mannerisms—we 
often predict that we will dislike the new person, as well. Because whales have many 
traits and characteristics similar to those possessed by fish—such as fins, tails, the abil-
ity to swim and live in water—children often believe that whales are fish. Consumers 
make similar mistakes when they focus on superficial similarities between an object 
and a category. In the same way, marketers can use the representativeness heuristic to 
their advantage. For example, a private store brand often packages products in boxes 
with sizes, colors, and graphics similar to that of leading national brands, hoping that 
the superficial package similarities will lead consumers to predict that the store brands 
are similar to leading national brands on more important dimensions. Unfortunately, 
objec tive 5
AP Photo/Al Behrman
Private labels, such as Kroger, can appear to be similar to or representative of national brands.

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
227
consumers often focus on these irrelevant similarities—package color and graphics—so 
their predictions may suffer.
Important information often overlooked because of the representativeness heuristic 
is the base rate, which is the incidence rate of an event. If consumers know that 10 per-
cent of the products in a particular industry fail or need repair, then they can predict 
a 10 percent chance of a randomly selected product from this industry failing. In the 
absence of other information, that prediction should be based entirely on the base rate. 
However, Tversky and Kahneman have shown that even a small amount of marginally 
useful information can lead people to rely too heavily on the representativeness heuristic 
and subsequently neglect, overlook, or ignore the base rate.19 For example, in a classic 
study, Tversky and Kahneman told research participants that a panel of psychologists 
administered personality tests to 30 engineers and 70 lawyers. Participants were asked 
to predict the likelihood that a randomly selected person from this sample was an engi-
neer. When no other information was provided, most participants predicted correctly 
that there was a 30 percent chance that the randomly selected person was an engineer. 
However, in another experimental condition, participants received a brief, marginally 
informative description of the randomly selected person:
Jack shows no interest in political and social issues and spends most of his free time 
on hobbies, which include home carpentry, sailing, and mathematical puzzles,
When participants received this brief description, they categorized Jack as an engineer, and 
they predicted that it was highly likely that Jack was an engineer. Even marginally relevant 
descriptive information can lead people to ignore highly relevant base rate information.
Another bias related to the representativeness heuristic 
deals with the law of large numbers, which states that the larger 
the sample size, the more likely it is that statistics estimated from 
a sub- sample apply to the larger population from which the sub-
sample was drawn. Unfortunately, people expect even very small 
samples to be representative of larger populations, but this may 
not be the case. For example, a small group of friends may tell 
you that a new movie is really good or a particular new restau-
rant is bad. It is very likely that you will rely on this information 
received from a small group and ignore that fact that the opin-
ion of such a small group may not be representative of what the 
 majority of people think.
The representativeness heuristic also encourages people to 
commit the gambler’s fallacy. Gamblers often foolishly  believe that 
events alternate frequently in random sequences and that long 
streaks of the same event must be nonrandom. Consequently, 
if a basketball player makes several baskets in a row, gamblers 
believe the player is more likely to make the next basket.20 The 
streak seems nonrandom because it does not correlate with peo-
ple’s conceptions of chance. Similarly, when betting on whether 
a coin will turn up heads or tails, gamblers often believe that tails 
is more likely after a string of heads (e.g., four heads in a row). 
However, the actual likelihood of tails  after four heads in a row 
is still the base rate: 50 percent. In the long run, the number 
of times tails turns up is 50 percent, but in small samples, ran-
dom streaks are highly likely to be observed. Marketers use the 
gambler’s fallacy to convince people to buy lottery tickets, enter 
PRNewsFoto/Continental Tire North America, Inc./AP Photo
Sweepstakes can appeal to the gambler’s fallacy.

228 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
sweepstakes, and look for winning game tokens, based on the idea that if consumers 
purchase enough tickets, etc. they will eventually win.
In business, a string of successes seems nonrandom, and lucky marketing managers 
often conclude that they have beaten the odds. Consequently, they predict that they 
will continue to beat the odds. This is another example of the gambler’s fallacy. After 
a string of failures, unlucky marketing managers often predict that the odds will even 
out and, therefore, they are due for a success. Again however, marketing managers 
can get lucky or unlucky as a result of chance, and the laws of chance never change. 
Fortunately, many business outcomes are influenced by both skill and by chance. What 
marketers should hope is that the skill component is great enough to increase the prob-
ability of success, regardless of chance. But whenever chance exists, no matter how 
small, the probability of success cannot be 100 percent.
Finally, the representativeness heuristic influences how consumers might use in-
formation prematurely to make decisions. The likelihood of one specific extreme or 
unusual event is very low, by definition. Usually, extreme or unusual events are fol-
lowed by less extreme or less unusual events. This is known as regression to the mean. In 
the long run, the average or typical level of a variable is observed. For example, many 
top athletes have remarkable rookie years, and much less remarkable second years (the 
so-called sophomore slump). Many restaurants seem to serve outstanding meals once, 
but less exciting meals over subsequent visits. Regression to the mean occurs for 
extreme negative events, also. A store where you received terrible customer service when 
you visited it the first time, may offer better service over the long term. In each of these 
examples, an initial extreme or unusual performance is followed by a more moderate, 
typical, or average performance. This is because the initial extreme performance was 
influenced by random factors (e.g., the rookie’s style of play just happened to click 
well with the other players; the chef had especially fresh and delicious ingredients). 
However, in the long run, individuals, groups of people, and organizations perform at 
an average or typical level.
The representativeness heuristic makes it difficult to fully appreciate the statistical 
concept of regression to the mean. Good performances seem to come from skill, and 
skill seems to ensure continued success. Poor performances seem to stem from medi-
ocrity, and mediocrity seems to ensure continued failure. However, chance factors can 
lead consumers to jump to conclusions. Prematurely categorizing customer service, 
products, or organizations on the basis of their initial performance can lead to poor 
predictions. Thus, it is important for marketers to limit the number of unusual events 
that can happen when dealing with customers, and strive for consistently good perfor-
mance from their products and services.
To summarize, the representativeness heuristic encourages people to focus on sim-
ple similarities and to ignore complex but highly relevant statistical concepts, such as 
base rates, gambler’s fallacy, and regression to the mean.
Availability Heuristic  People use the availability heuristic to make pre-
dictions based on how easily they can retrieve information from memory.21 Events that 
are highly memorable because of media exposure, frequent exposure, or recent expo-
sure are easily recalled. Easily recalled events tend to be overestimated. For example, 
let’s suppose a consumer is booking a flight reservation and is trying to determine the 
likelihood that his flight will be delayed. If the last time the consumer flew with a par-
ticular airline, his flight was delayed, then that event will be easily recalled. As a result, 
this consumer will be more likely to predict that his upcoming flight will be delayed, 
also. Likewise, events that are unmemorable tend to be underestimated. For example, 

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
229
is it more likely to be killed by a shark or by falling airplane parts? Most people believe 
that shark attacks are more likely because of movies featuring giant sharks and media 
reports of shark attacks. Deaths resulting from falling airplane parts, however, receive 
much less media attention. In reality, a person is 30 times more likely to die from fall-
ing airplane parts than from a shark attack.22
It is also important to distinguish between the ease with which examples of a to-be-
predicted event can be retrieved from memory and the number of examples of a to-be-
predicted event that can be retrieved from memory.23 If it is easy to retrieve  examples, 
the event seems likely. If it is possible to retrieve many examples, the event also seems 
likely. In many situations, ease of retrieval and the number of examples that can be 
retrieved are confounded. That is, ease and number are either both high or both low. 
When this is the case, it is impossible to determine whether ease of retrieval or the num-
ber of examples that can be retrieved has a stronger influence on predictive judgment.
In some circumstances, however, ease and number are inversely related (i.e., as one 
variable increases, the other variable decreases). In an important experiment that sepa-
rates the effects on prediction of ease of retrieval versus number of examples retrieved, 
participants were asked to generate either ten (difficult task) or one (easy task) reason that 
a BMW is better than a Mercedes-Benz.24 The results revealed that the BMW was more 
strongly preferred over the Mercedes-Benz when one reason was generated than when 
All-in-One Products Offer Consumers a Good Reason to Buy
Marketing in Action
Historically, Business Week’s best new products offer 
multipurpose all-in-one brands that build several different 
products into one unit. For example, the palmOne Treo 
600 is a PDA with a cellular phone, speakerphone, digi-
tal camera, and a music player all-in-one. Similarly, the 
LGE cell phone is not just a cell phone, but also a digital 
camera. The Schick Intuition women’s shaver is not just 
a shaver; it also provides a rich lather so that you can 
lather, shave, and moisturize in one easy step. The razor 
is built into the skin moisturizing solid and this makes it 
simple, easy, and more convenient for women to shave 
their legs while in the shower. Similarly, the Aquafresh 
Floss ‘N’ Cap is a tube of Aquafresh toothpaste with a 
floss dispenser built into the cap. This makes it easier for 
consumers to remember to floss after brushing. Finally, 
General Electric’s Profile and Monogram oven with 
Trifection technology is a conventional oven, convection 
oven, and microwave oven all-in-one. This technology 
greatly reduces cooking times for a wide variety of foods.
Why are all-in-one products so popular? One reason 
is that choice is often reason-based.35 This means that 
consumers often attempt to think of reasons why one 
product is better than all of the others. An all-in-one prod-
uct has many different uses, and this often provides a 
compelling reason for choosing an all-in-one product over 
a product with just one use or purpose. Also, buying one 
all-in-one product often seems more efficient than buying 
many different single-use products that, collectively, per-
form the same functions.
Courtesy of Energizer

230 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
participants offered ten reasons. These results are surprising because ten reasons are better 
than one. However, one reason is easier to retrieve, and ease of retrieval is more impor-
tant than the number of items retrieved when the availability heuristic is used as a basis 
for prediction.25
Simulation Heuristic  People use the simulation heuristic to make predic-
tions based on how easily an event or a sequence of events can be imagined or visual-
ized.26 If an event or sequence of events is easy to imagine, it tends to be overestimated. 
If an event or sequence of events is difficult to imagine, it tends to be underestimated. 
In one study of this phenomenon, participants were asked to imagine how likely they 
were to contract a disease called Hyposcenia-B.27 In the easy-to-imagine condition, par-
ticipants were told that the symptoms of the disease were headaches, muscle aches, and 
low energy. Most of us have experienced these symptoms sometime in our lives, and 
consequently, it is easy to imagine suffering from them. By contrast, in the difficult-to-
imagine condition, participants were told that the symptoms of the disease were disori-
entation, a malfunctioning nervous system, and an inflamed liver. Most of us have not 
experienced these symptoms, so they are difficult to imagine. The results indicated that 
people believed they were personally more likely to contract Hyposcenia-B when the 
symptoms of the disease were easy to imagine as  opposed to difficult to imagine. These 
effects disappeared, however, when participants did not attempt to imagine experienc-
ing any of the symptoms.
These findings have important implications to marketers. For example, the simulation 
heuristic affects healthcare marketing. Consumers with high blood pressure often forget 
to take their medicine because the symptoms usually aren’t that bad, so it is difficult to 
imagine that their condition is serious. Consequently, their health deteriorates, and market-
ers at pharmaceutical firms sell fewer pills. Similarly, consumers suffering from infections 
often take antibiotics for a few days and then stop when they feel better because it is dif-
ficult for them to imagine that they are still sick. Consequently, antibiotic-resistant infec-
tions develop, and pharmaceutical firms have to spend millions on the development of 
new antibiotics.
Anchoring-and-Adjustment Heuristic    People using the 
anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic make predictions based on a first impression 
or an initial judgment (or anchor) and then shift (adjust or fine-tune) this judgment 
upward or downward depending on the implications of the imagined possibilities.28 
Unfortunately, people often do not adjust enough, and as a result, final judgments 
tend to be too close to initial judgments. For example, thinking about big numbers 
leads to big judgments, and thinking about small numbers leads to small judgments. 
Consequently, if you are asked to think of a big number first, such as 975, you would 
be more likely to overestimate the price of an inexpensive product that you don’t buy 
frequently. If you are asked to think of a small number, such as 1, you would be more 
likely to underestimate the price of the same product. Similarly, expert real  estate agents 
who receive a high list price (or high anchor value) for a house overestimate the value of 
a house, while agents who receive a low list price (or low anchor value) underestimate 
the value of the same house.29
The anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic can be used to trick consumers into buy-
ing more at a grocery store. In many cases, consumers intend to buy only one unit of a 
product when they enter the store (e.g., one container of milk); obviously the number 
one is a relatively low anchor. However, merely mentioning larger numbers can encour-
age consumers to consider higher anchors.30 For example, multiple-unit pricing such as 

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
231
3 for $1.99, or 12 for the price of 10, encourages consumers to buy more than one unit 
for two reasons: first, to obtain the volume discount, and second, multiple units sug-
gest an anchor value that is higher than one. Ironically, purchase quantity limits (e.g., 
limit of 10 per customer) can also encourage consumers to think about higher anchors 
and buy more than one unit, even if they do not come close to purchasing the amount 
implied by the limit. Suggestive selling (grab six for studying, buy eight and save a trip, 
buy 12 for your freezer) and expansion anchors (101 uses around the house) also en-
courage consumers to consider larger anchors and to purchase multiple units.
Consumers and marketers could make better predictions and better decisions if they 
relied more heavily on statistics and less on perceptions of similarity, ease of  retrieval, ease 
of imagination, and first impressions. However, statistical knowledge requires training 
and effort, while heuristic thinking does not. Consequently, heuristic thinking is common 
despite the fact that it usually leads to poor predictions and poor decisions. The next sec-
tion examines heuristics further in how consumers use them when selecting products.
Choice Heuristics
The Lexicographic Heuristic  Consumers using the lexicographic 
heuristic (or single-attribute heuristic) compare all brands on one key attribute, such as 
price, size, weight, reliability, durability, calories, sugar, etc., and choose the brand that 
performs the best on that single attribute, while generally ignoring the other attributes.31 
If there is a tie, consumers examine the next most important attribute to break the tie. 
Assume that a particular consumer views style as the most important attribute for a new 
pair of blue jeans and comfort as the second most important attribute. This consumer 
will select the brand that appears to be most stylish, ignoring price, durability, colorfast-
ness, and other attributes. Style is the key attribute; it is all that matters. If two brands 
appear equally desirable with respect to style, then this consumer chooses the brand 
from these two that performs best on comfort.
The lexicographic heuristic is a non- compensatory choice strat-
egy because a high score on one attribute cannot compensate 
for a low score on another attribute. In this particular case, no 
other attribute can compensate for  inadequacy on the key at-
tribute. In fact, most choice heuristics are non- compensatory 
because attributes are evaluated one at a time. Unfortunately, 
this leads consumers to sometimes choose brands that are not 
the best choice because trade-offs are ignored. Consumers typi-
cally don’t like making trade-offs because it is difficult to deter-
mine how much they should give up on one attribute to gain 
on another. For example, it is difficult for a consumer to ex-
press how much he would pay for a 10 percent  improvement 
in the speed of his computer? But ignoring trade-offs can lead 
to bad decisions. Nevertheless, consumers assume this risk 
when they use quick-and-dirty heuristics that oversimplify the 
choice process.
The Elimination-by-Aspects Heuristic 
Another non-compensatory choice heuristic is the elimination-by-
aspects  heuristic. Consumers using the elimination-by- aspects 
heuristic reject all brands that do not have a key feature they 
want.32 For example, if a consumer wants to buy a hybrid au-
tomobile, she might reject all non-hybrid cars. Next, she would 
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Consumers often compare brands on one key attribute.

232 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
focus on a different attribute and reject all brands that did not meet her requirements on 
that particular feature. For example, if the consumer prefers front-wheel drive, she might 
 reject all hybrid automobiles that are rear-wheel drive. The process continues until only 
one brand remains. Rejecting brands is often easier than accepting multiple brands and 
then choosing among them. Consumers rarely need to examine a large set of attributes 
when using this choice heuristic. Furthermore, thinking about the attributes you do not 
want (a rejection frame of mind) often leads to different choices than thinking about the 
 attributes you want (an acceptance frame of mind). The former focuses on avoiding nega-
tive outcomes from the purchase, while the latter emphasizes attaining positive outcomes.
The Additive-Difference Heuristic  Consumers using the additive-
difference heuristic compare two brands at a time, one attribute at a time, and sub-
tract the evaluative differences.33 Subtraction is performed on all relevant attributes, 
and each attribute is weighted for importance, i.e., each difference is multiplied by 
the importance of the attribute. Each weighted score is then summed to arrive at an 
overall score for each brand. The brand that performs the best on the most important 
attributes is selected. For example, if a consumer is evaluating automobiles and Brand A 
gets 35 miles per gallon, but Brand B gets 30 miles per gallon, the difference is 5 miles 
per gallon. If fuel economy is judged to be very important for this consumer (e.g., 5 on 
a scale of 1 to 5), then the weighted difference between Brand A and B  25 (5  5). 
This method of multiplying the weights times the differences continues for all relevant 
attributes, and the differences are summed for a total score. This heuristic requires 
more effort because math (subtraction, multiplication, and addition) is used. However, 
more effort can lead to better decisions.
The Conjunctive and Disjunctive Heuristics  Choice heuristics 
do not always involve making comparisons among brands. Sometimes consumers focus 
on one brand at a time, and no brand comparisons are performed. Examining one brand 
at a time is easy, and if the first brand seems satisfactory, a consumer might buy it without 
examining any other brands. Consumers using the conjunctive heuristic set a minimum 
value for all relevant attributes and select the first brand that meets this value for each 
attribute.34 With this approach, all the attributes are considered together, and one poor 
attribute can eliminate the brand. In other words, if a brand performs unsatisfactorily on 
one or more attributes, it is rejected, and another brand is considered. Typically, how-
ever, the first brand considered has a large advantage over other brands; consumers often 
choose the first brand they consider.
Consumers using the disjunctive heuristic set an acceptable value, rather than 
a minimum value, for all relevant attributes and select the first brand that meets this 
value on one particular attribute—which is not necessarily the most important attri-
bute. In contrast to the conjunctive heuristic, this approach focuses on each attribute 
separately, and one good attribute can save the alternative. Again, the first brand has a 
large advantage and is likely to be chosen unless it is clearly unsatisfactory.
The Frequency of Good and Bad Features Heuristic 
While all the heuristic choice strategies we’ve considered thus far have been non-
 compensatory choice strategies, consumers also use compensatory choice strategies. With 
a compensatory choice strategy, good attributes can compensate for bad attributes. 
When using the frequency of good and bad features heuristic, consumers form a 
simple attitude toward each brand alternative by counting the number of good and 
bad product features and choosing the brand with the greatest difference between good 

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
233
product features and bad product features. For example, if Brand A appears to have six 
good attributes and three bad attributes (6 – 3  3), and Product B has nine good fea-
tures and seven bad features (9 – 7  2), then Product A is chosen. This heuristic is easy 
to apply because counting is easy and relatively little information is needed. Consumers 
are concerned only with the number of attributes, not the importance of each attribute. 
In other words, all attributes are treated equally.
As we’ve seen, choice heuristics help consumers make purchase decisions quickly 
and easily. Unfortunately, these approaches also often reduce the likelihood of mak-
ing the best possible decision because they oversimplify and minimize the amount 
of information involved in the choice task. See Figure 10.5 for a summary of choice 
heuristics.
Figure 10.5 Choice Heuristics
Lexicographic Heuristic
A consumer chooses the brand that appears best on the most important feature, 
ignoring all other attributes. If two or more brands are viewed as equal on this 
important feature, then the consumer chooses the brand that appears best on the 
second most important feature, and so on.
Elimination by Aspects Heuristic
A consumer rejects all brands that lack a key feature or possess an undesirable feature. 
Then, the remaining brands are evaluated on another important dimension in a similar 
manner. Eventually, only one brand remains.
Additive-Difference Heuristic
A consumer assigns important weights to all relevant attributes for a product and then 
compares brands, two at a time. Values for each attribute are then assigned to each 
brand. Next, the importance weights are multiplied by the differences in the values of 
the two brands’ attributes and summed. More formally, P  wi(Ai – Bi), where
P  preference
wi  importance weight for attribute i, 
Ai  value of attribute i for brand A 
Bi  value of attribute i for brand B
A positive score for P indicates a preference for Brand A, a negative score for P 
indicates a preference for Brand B, and a score of zero for P indicates no preference.
Conjunctive Heuristic
A consumer sets a minimum value for all relevant attributes and selects the first brand 
that meets these values for each attribute.
Disjunctive Heuristic
A consumer sets an acceptable value (usually higher than minimum) for all relevant 
attributes and selects the first brand that meets this value on one particular attribute 
(not necessarily the most important attribute).
Frequency of Good-Bad Features Heuristic
A consumer counts both the number of good product features and bad product 
features for each brand. The brand with the largest difference between its number of 
good and bad product features is chosen.

234 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
Consumer choice involves choosing one brand from a set of 
products. The set of products that consumers think about 
and evaluate—the consideration set—usually consists of 
fewer than seven brands, and the best brand is not always 
included in the consideration set. The more consumers 
think about some brands, the more difficult it is to think 
about other brands (the part-list cuing effect). Moreover, 
a given brand can seem attractive (the attraction effect) or 
unattractive depending on what other brands are included 
in the consideration set. Compromise brands, or brands 
that are average on multiple dimensions, often have an 
advantage over brands that are good on some dimensions 
and bad on others (the compromise effect). Attraction and 
compromise effects are often more pronounced when con-
sumers feel the need to justify or explain their decisions to 
themselves or others.
After the consideration set has been determined, con-
sumers need to evaluate the differences in features and 
 attributes between the considered brands in order to make 
a choice. When consumers can directly and physically 
 observe all relevant brands in the consideration set and 
the brand attributes, they make a stimulus-based choice, 
but when brand alternatives are drawn from memory, 
choice is memory-based. Mixed choice combines both 
stimulus-based and memory-based choices. Additionally, 
choice often involves focusing on differences among 
brands and using these differences as reasons or justifi-
cations for  making decisions. These differences may be 
general  (attitude-based choice) or specific (attribute-based 
choice), depending on the accessibility (salience in mem-
ory) and the diagnosticity (relevance) of the information 
used as a basis for choice.
Choice heuristics are mental shortcuts that simplify 
difficult decisions. Consumers use many different choice 
heuristics. Sometimes consumers focus on only one 
 attribute (the lexicographic heuristic), and sometimes 
consumers eliminate brands that do not have a desired 
feature (the elimination-by-aspects heuristic). On other 
occasions, consumers compare two brands at a time and 
subtract the difference in the values of the attributes (the 
additive-difference heuristic). In other circumstances, con-
sumers can focus on only one brand and choose the brand 
if it is satisfactory on all attributes (the conjunctive heuris-
tic) or satisfactory on one attribute (the disjunctive heu-
ristic). Finally, consumers may simply add up a product’s 
good and bad features and choose the best overall brand 
(the frequency of good and bad features heuristic). Choice 
heuristics can lead to bad decisions when consumers over-
look important information. Nevertheless, consumers are 
often forced to use choice heuristics when information 
overload, time pressure, or other stresses make decision 
making difficult.
Chapter Summary
consideration set
part-list cuing
attraction effect
compromise effect
stimulus-based choice
memory-based choice
mixed choice
attitude-based choice
attribute-based choices
MODE model
systematic processing
heuristics
heuristic processing
persuasion heuristics
prediction heuristics
influence or choice heuristics
representativeness heuristic
availability heuristic
simulation heuristic
anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic
lexicographic heuristic
elimination-by-aspects heuristic
additive-difference heuristic
conjunctive heuristic
disjunctive heuristic
frequency of good and bad features 
heuristic
Key Terms

Chapter 10   Product Consideration, Evaluation, and Choice 
235
Review and Discussion
1. How can marketers increase the likelihood that their 
brands are included in consumers’ consideration sets?
2. How can marketers use the part-list cuing effect to 
decrease the likelihood that competitors’ brands are 
included in consumers’ consideration sets?
3. Why does the trade-off contrast occur?
4. Describe a situation in which you purchased a com-
promise brand. Why does compromise seem like 
such a compelling reason on which to base a choice?
5. How does the availability heuristic influence how 
consumers make predictions about products?
6. How might the law of large numbers be related to 
word-of-mouth marketing? (Word-of-mouth market-
ing occurs when marketing messages, product 
 information, and/or people’s opinions of the product 
are passed from person to person through informal 
conversation).
 7. When are consumers likely to use a choice heuristic? 
When are they unlikely to do so?
 8. Choice heuristics are often non-compensatory. 
Explain what this means and how it can lead to bad 
choices.
 9. Some choice heuristics involve comparing several 
brands on the same attribute or set of attributes. 
Describe a situation in which you used one of these 
choice heuristics.
10. Some choice heuristics involve focusing on one brand 
at a time rather than making comparisons across 
brands. Describe a situation in which you used one 
of these choice heuristics.
1. Find three advertisements that use puffery. Do you 
think that puffery or exaggeration is an effective 
advertising tactic? Do you think the use of puffery is 
ethical? Why or why not?
2. Choose three products you purchased recently. 
Identify whether your choice of the product was 
stimulus-based, memory-based, or the result of mixed 
choice. How could a marketer use package informa-
tion to better appeal to you for any of the products 
under conditions of stimulus-based choice?
3. Find two advertisements, one that appeals to con-
sumers using attitude-based choice and one that 
 focuses on attribute-based choice.
4. Identify a product for which you think people gener-
ally use price as a prediction of quality. Design an 
experiment to test this idea. Can you find evidence 
from the Internet that supports or refutes the price-
quality relationship for this product?
Short Application Exercises

236 
Part three   Consumer Decision Making
In the early 1980s, a format war took place between 
VHS and Betamax videotapes for video storage. 
VHS ultimately won. History always repeats itself. 
Between 2000 and 2008, another format war took 
place between Sony’s Blu-Ray and Toshiba’s HD 
DVD (high density optical disc for video storage). 
Blu-Ray ultimately won. But why? HD DVD had 
several advantages over Blu-Ray. HD DVD was the 
pioneering brand, or the first brand to enter the 
market, plus it was less expensive than Blu-Ray. 
Initially, almost as many movie titles appeared in 
HD DVD as did in Blu-Ray. Using the concepts in 
Chapter 10, how would you compare and evaluate 
these differences?
In January 2008, an important event tipped the 
scale in favor of Blu-Ray when Warner Brothers 
Studios decided to support Blu-Ray exclusively. 
Because Sony Blu-Ray already had the exclusive sup-
port of Sony Pictures (including MGM/Columbia 
Tristar), Disney (including Touchstone and Miramax), 
Fox, and Lions Gate, the Warner decision gave Blu-
Ray the support of 70 percent of the movie studios. 
Toshiba was unable to overcome this advantage. In 
 addition, Blu-Ray discs hold more data than HD DVD 
discs (50 GB versus 30 GB). The Sony PlayStation 3 
can also play PS3 games, Blu-Ray discs, and standard 
DVDs. Using the concepts in Chapter 10, how would 
you compare and evaluate these differences?
1. Using the concepts in Chapter 10, what strategies could HD DVD have used to beat 
Blu-Ray?
2. Using the concepts in Chapter 10, what strategies could Blu-Ray have used to beat 
HD DVD more quickly?
3. After Warner Brothers decided to support only Blu-Ray in January 2008, Toshiba re-
duced the price of HD DVD players to $150. Explain why this was too little too late. 
In February 2008, Net Flix, BestBuy, and Walmart announced that they would phase 
out HD DVD. After these announcements, Toshiba announced that they would stop 
producing HD DVD players. Explain why Toshiba needed the support of Warner 
Brothers, Net Flix, BestBuy, and Walmart.
4. In what other product categories do you currently see a format war? What steps can 
competing companies take to try to avoid format wars?
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
YOUR CHALLENGE:

Vioxx
237
Behavioral Decision Theory
 1 | Explain expected value theory and how 
the framing effect violates this theory.
 2 | Develop marketing strategies for 
segregating gains and aggregating losses.
 3 | Explain several different ways preference 
reversals can occur.
 4 | Define singular evaluation and 
comparative evaluation.
 5 | Analyze the pros and cons of selective 
thinking.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
objectives
Merck, the second largest drug manufacturer in the United States, received FDA approval for 
Vioxx in 1999. Vioxx is a painkiller and anti-inflammatory drug used mainly to treat arthritis 
and menstrual cramps. In just a few years, Vioxx became an overwhelming success and was 
generating $2.5 billion in revenue annually. Then disaster struck. Vioxx patient Robert Ernst 
died from heart failure at age 59, and his wife won a $253 million lawsuit against Merck. More 
than 10,000 additional lawsuits followed, and Vioxx was withdrawn from the market in 2004 
as a result of links to heart attack and stroke.
Behavioral decision research focuses mainly on risky decision making, or decision making 
under uncertainty. Decision makers frequently try to predict the future. What will happen if 
we launch Vioxx or another new product? However, the future is almost completely uncertain. 
The managers at Merck were unable to predict that Vioxx would be linked to heart disease. 
11
CHAPTER

238
Expected Utility Theory
How should people think about risk? According to expected utility theory, people 
should think about uncertain events in terms of “gambles,” and all gambles have 
two components: a probability component called p, and a value component called 
v.1 The predicted or expected value of a gamble is simply p times v. For example, 
the expected value of a gamble that offers a 25 percent chance of winning $100 is 
0.25  100  $25. This means that people should be willing to pay up to $25 to 
play this gamble, but no more than $25. Expected utility theory also shows how 
people should rank different gambles. For example, should a person play a gamble 
that offers a 25 percent chance of winning $100 or a gamble that offers a 20 percent 
chance of winning $130? As 0.25  $100  $25, and 0.20  $130  $26, the 
second gamble is the better deal.
People face similar decisions in the marketplace daily. Considering only the dura-
bility of a product, would a consumer rather purchase a $100 brand with a 50 percent 
probability of failure after two years or a $300 brand with a 20 percent probability of 
failure in two years? Perhaps surprisingly, the cheaper product is the better choice. The 
expected replacement cost of the first product is $100  0.50  $50, but the expected 
replacement cost of the second product is $300  0.20  $60.
How should people think about risk? What level of risk is acceptable? What is the 
best way to manage risk? These are the types of questions addressed by behavioral 
decision research.
ob jec tive 1
AP Photo/Daniel Hulshizer

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
239
Expected utility theory suggests that all alternatives can be ranked from worst to 
best. It also suggests that alternatives with higher expected values dominate or are bet-
ter choices than alternatives with lower expected values. In gambles with different stag-
es, such as a game show in which you need to win in stage one in order to advance to 
stage two, stage one should cancel out, or be ignored, if it is identical for two  different 
gambling games. This is called cancellation. Also, preferences should be transitive; in 
other words, if you prefer A to B, and B to C, then you must prefer A to C. Finally, 
according to the invariance principle, preferences should remain the same no matter 
how preferences are measured or no matter how decision alternatives are described.
Framing Effects
In direct violation of the invariance principle, extensive research shows that prefer-
ences change when decision alternatives are described in terms of different frames 
or perspectives.2 For example, imagine you are a manager for a hospital preparing 
Fear Appeals and Insurance
Marketing in Action
Many insurance companies run ads that increase risk 
perceptions. As risk perceptions increase, fear appeals 
become more effective. This is especially true when fear-
appeal ads also provide a useful way for dealing with 
a threatening problem. Buying insurance is one way 
to cope effectively with risk. For example, Nationwide 
Insurance ran several different television ads showing that 
“life comes at you fast.” Each of these ads is designed 
to increase risk perceptions. Similarly, Travelers Insurance 
runs several different television ads showing that “your 
risks can change.” These ads are also designed to 
increase risk perceptions. As risk perceptions increase, 
consumers are more likely to buy insurance products to 
protect themselves.
©2004, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company

240 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
for a flu epidemic that is expected to kill 600 people. Your staff has developed two 
programs to combat the flu but because of cost constraints, you can implement 
only one of these two programs. If program A is selected, 200 people will be saved. 
If program B is selected, there is a 33 percent chance that all 600 people will be 
saved and a 67 percent chance that no one will be saved. Which program would 
you choose?
Now consider the very same problem with a slight change of wording. A flu epi-
demic is expected to kill 600 people. If program A is selected, 400 people will die. If 
program B is selected, there is a 33 percent chance that no one will die and a 67 percent 
chance that all 600 will die. Now which program would you choose? To be consistent, 
if you chose program A for the first version of the problem you must choose program A 
for the second version because the outcomes are identical. And if you chose program B 
for the first version of the problem, you must choose program B for the second ver-
sion. However, most people are inconsistent. Most people choose program A when the 
problem is worded in terms of lives saved, and most people choose program B when the 
problem is worded in terms of deaths. Program A is the sure-thing alternative: 200 will 
be saved for sure and 400 will die for sure. Program B is the risky alternative: There is 
a 33 percent chance all 600 will be saved, and no one will die, and a 67 percent chance 
that no one will be saved, and all 600 will die.
When people think about a choice problem in terms of positive outcomes, such 
as lives saved or money gained, people typically prefer the sure thing. This is known 
as risk aversion; people typically prefer to avoid risky alternatives when outcomes are 
framed positively. However, when people think about a choice in terms of negative 
outcomes, such as deaths or money lost, people typically prefer the risky alternative. 
This is known as risk seeking; people are more likely to accept risk when outcomes 
are framed negatively. When people are inconsistent, i.e., sometimes risk averse and 
sometimes risk seeking, preference reversals occur. A preference reversal means that 
people prefer option A over option B at one point in time but can prefer option B over 
option A at another point in time.
Framing Influences Marketing Decisions  Consider a mar-
keting manager who has experienced a run of product failures in a difficult economy. 
For strategic reasons, the firm continues to maintain one of two poorly performing 
brands in the market. When considering which of these poorly performing brands to 
support, the manager may be evaluating the decision with a negative frame (i.e., the 
firm has already lost money on several products, and the economy is in recession). 
Given a negative frame, would this manager choose to support Brand A, a brand that 
is certain to lose $1 million, or Brand B, a brand that has a 40 percent probability of 
losing $2.5 million and a 60 percent probability of breaking even or losing nothing? 
Framing theory suggest that the marketing manager would choose to support Brand B. 
The manager will choose the riskier option because the decision has been framed 
negatively.
What if the frame were reversed? Consider a marketing manager who has had a 
string of successes with product introductions, and the economy has become robust. 
Given a choice between two brands, would this manager provide additional marketing 
support for Brand A, which is guaranteed to produce $1 million in profits, or Brand B, 
which offers a 40 percent probability of generating $2.5 million and a 60 percent 
probability of breaking even or generating no profits? Given the positive frame, this 
manager is likely to support Brand A and avoid unnecessary risks.

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
241
Reference Dependence and Loss Aversion  Expected utility 
theory cannot explain the framing effect or preference reversals. According to expected 
utility theory, people should be consistent and choose the same alternative regardless 
of how the outcomes are framed or described. Expected utility theory also suggests 
that the pleasure experienced from winning $100 should be just as intense as the pain 
experienced from losing $100. However, prospect theory suggests that all outcomes 
are evaluated with respect to a neutral reference point, and that preferences change as 
reference points change. This is known as reference dependence. For example, $100 
seems like a lot of money to poor people who use low reference points (e.g., $5). 
However, $100 seems like little money to rich people who use high reference points 
(e.g., $1 million). In Figure 11.1, the reference point is in the middle. Outcomes above 
the reference point are perceived as gains or positive outcomes. Outcomes below the 
reference point are perceived as losses or negative outcomes. As Figure 11.1 shows, the 
value function is much steeper for losses than for gains. This means that losses have a 
bigger impact on people, relative to equivalent gains. This is called loss aversion. For 
example, losing $100 has a bigger impact on people’s feelings, relative to winning $100. 
Finally, Figure 11.1 shows that outcomes have weaker effects on people as distance 
from the reference point increases. This is called diminishing sensitivity. For example, 
the difference between $100 and $0 seems larger than the difference between $1,100 
and $1,000.
Loss aversion is so powerful that it can lead people to violate the dominance prin-
ciple.3 For example, when asked to choose between A and B below, most people recog-
nize that B dominates A:
A. 25 percent chance to win $240 and 75 percent chance to lose $760
B. 25 percent chance to win $250 and 75 percent chance to lose $750
Figure 11.1 Reference Dependence and Loss Aversion
Source: Adapted from Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981).  The framing of decisions and the 
psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453–458. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.
Losses
Loss Aversion
(value function
is steeper for losses
than for gains)
Diminishing Sensitivity
(as distance from
reference point
increases)
Value
Subjective Value as a Function of Gains Versus Losses
Gains
Diminishing Sensitivity
(as distance from
reference point
increases)
Reference
Point

242 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
B is better than A because you could win more or lose less with B than with A, so B 
dominates A. However, imagine you were asked to choose among the following back-
to-back options:
C. a sure gain of $240
D.  25 percent chance to gain $1,000, and 75 percent chance to gain nothing 
versus the following back-to-back options:
E. a sure loss of $750
F. 75 percent chance to lose $1,000, and 25 percent chance to lose nothing
Now, most people prefer C over D because focusing on the sure gain makes people 
risk averse. Furthermore, most people prefer F over E because focusing on the sure loss 
makes people risk seeking. This violates the dominance principle because combining C 
and F gives you A in the previous choice problem, and combining D and E gives you 
B in the previous choice problem. But in the previous choice problem, it was obvious 
that B was better than A.
Research on framing also shows that people overestimate the likelihood of very 
small probabilities, which is what makes lotteries seem more attractive than they really 
are. People also underestimate the likelihood of moderate and large probabilities. This 
also leads to violations of the invariance principle, as shown in the following choice 
problem.
Consider the following two-stage game. In the first stage, there is a 75 percent 
chance to end the game without winning anything and a 25 percent chance to move 
into the second stage. If you reach the second stage you have a choice between:
A. A sure win of $30
B. 80 percent chance to win $45
Most people prefer A over B. However, when the gamble is changed to a one-stage 
choice between:
C. 25 percent chance to win $30
D. 20 percent chance to win $45
most people prefer D over C. Because there is a 25 percent chance to move to the sec-
ond stage, the expected value of A is .25  $30, which is the same as C. The expected 
value of B is .25  .80  .20 chance to win $45, which is the same as D. However, 
most people prefer the larger chance to win the smaller amount when considering 
A versus B, and most people prefer the smaller chance to win the larger amount when 
considering C versus D. This occurs because most peo-
ple ignore stage one and this makes A look like a sure 
gain, even though it is not a sure gain; there is only a 
25  percent chance of reaching stage two.
In another famous framing problem, participants 
were asked to imagine that they had decided to see a 
play and paid the admission price of $10 per  ticket. 
As they entered the theater, they discovered they 
had lost the ticket. The seat was not marked, and 
the ticket could not be recovered. Would they pay 
$10 for  another ticket? Only 46 percent said “yes.” 
However, when people were asked to imagine that 
they had decided to see a play where admission is 
$10 per ticket, but as they entered the theater, they 
Photodisc/Getty Images

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
243
discovered they had lost a $10 bill. Would they pay $10 for a ticket? Some 88 
percent said “yes.” In both versions of this problem, people lost the same amount 
($10), but this loss seems like part of the price of the ticket in the first case but 
not in the second. The difference between the response to losing the ticket and 
losing $10 can be explained by psychological accounting. The purchase of an-
other $10 ticket is entered into the “ticket account,” and thus, the cost of seeing 
the play is interpreted as $20. In contrast, the loss of $10 was not specifically 
linked to the “ticket account,” so the cost of seeing the show is interpreted as 
only $10.
The Endowment Effect, the Sunk Cost Effect, and 
Choice Deferral  Even slight variations in the framing or wording of choice 
problems can change people’s preferences dramatically, resulting in surprisingly incon-
sistent choices. Loss aversion and the framing effect also contribute to the endowment 
effect, the sunk cost effect, and choice deferral.4 The endowment effect refers to the 
tendency to view a product as more valuable if one owns it than if one does not own 
it. Obviously, the value of an object should stay the same, but after buying a product 
or receiving it as a gift, consumers are surprisingly reluctant to sell the product or the 
gift. Selling the object is equivalent to losing it, and people are reluctant to give up what 
they have now. Consider the following examples:
•  Example 1. Mr. Jones bought a case of good wine in the late 1950s for about 
$5 a bottle. A few years later his wine merchant offered to buy the wine back for 
$100 a bottle. Mr. Jones refused, although he has never paid more than $35 for 
a bottle of wine.
•  Example 2. A neighbor’s son offers to mow Mr. Smith’s lawn for $8. Mr. Smith 
refuses and mows his own lawn, despite the fact that he wouldn’t mow his 
neighbor’s same-sized lawn for less than $20.
In these examples, consumers are reluctant to sell what they currently own or to 
pay much less for a service than their perceived value of the service. In both cases, 
consumers underestimate the importance of opportunity costs. Selling the wine 
would provide Mr. Jones with the opportunity of buying many bottles of wine in 
his usual price range, and paying the neighbor’s son would provide Mr. Smith with 
the opportunity of doing something more enjoyable or productive than mowing 
his lawn.
The sunk cost effect also results from insensitivity to opportunity costs because 
as the amount of time or money invested in a product or a service increases, peo-
ple are more reluctant to give up the product or service. Consider the following 
examples:
•  Example 1. A family pays $40 for tickets to a basketball game to be played 
60 miles from their home. On the day of the game, there is a snowstorm. They 
decide to go anyway, but note in passing that had the tickets been given to 
them, they would have stayed home.
•  Example 2. A consumer joins a tennis club and pays a $300 yearly membership 
fee. After two weeks of playing, he develops tennis elbow. He continues to play 
(in pain) saying, “I don’t want to waste the $300!”
In poker, there’s a famous saying, “don’t throw good money after bad money.” At 
some point, people should cut their losses and avoid doing what they don’t want to do 

244 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
The drug Ephedra was used to 
increase energy and reduce weight. 
Ephedra was taken off the market 
when some studies suggested 
that taking it resulted in health 
risks. Recently, Ephedra was once again allowed on the market. 
Ephedra ran an Internet ad stating that “Ephedra is back” and 
that “the ultimate energy and weight loss herb once banned for 
being too effective . . . is back.” The ad also states that Ephedra 
provides smooth and confident energy, serious weight loss, and 
enhanced moods and motivation. At the bottom of the ad, the 
text states, “Get your Ephedra now . . . while you can. Click here 
now.” The ad implies that Ephedra might be banned again, so 
consumers should act now and buy Ephedra. This is known as a 
scarcity appeal because it suggests that product availability is lim-
ited. Is it ethical to use scarcity to promote products that may or 
may not be safe? What type of research and how much research 
is needed to convincingly demonstrate that a product is safe?
E T H I C S
even though they already paid for this activity. By performing a less preferred  activity, 
people give up the opportunity to do something they enjoy more. Once again, oppor-
tunity costs are undervalued or neglected.
Choice deferral refers to the reluctance to make any decision even though the 
decision could benefit both parties. For example, Israeli Army soldiers are reluc-
tant to trade patrol assignments, even when it would be convenient for both indi-
viduals to do so. They realize that if they traded assignments and their partner were 
killed, they would feel tremendous guilt and regret. These feelings can be avoided 
by simply refusing to trade patrol assignments. Similarly, when attribute trade-offs 
make it difficult to determine which brand is the best brand in a set of brands, 
consumers often decide not to decide and go home empty-handed.5 Excessive con-
cern about possible future feelings of regret can make consumers reluctant to make 
any choice.
Loss aversion also implies that marketers should segregate gains and aggregate 
 losses.6 Many small gains are more pleasant than one large gain, even when the small 
gains add up to the same value as the large gain. The opposite is true for losses; many 
small losses are more unpleasant than one large loss, even when the small losses add up 
to the same value as the large loss. For example, most people are happier if they win 
$10 five times than if they win $50 once. The opposite is true for losses. So, based 
on these factors, marketers should aggregate losses because asking consumers to pay 
one large payment is less painful to consumers than asking them to pay several small 
payments. For example, based on this information, hotels would likely have better 
guest relations if they charged one fee covering several services, such as HBO, break-
fast, and the use of the hotel’s exercise equipment. Asking consumers to pay for each 
 service  individually is irritating. Most consumers would rather pay one lump sum. 
This one-fee-for-all approach is used by cruise lines, Club Med, and Tire Discounters. 
On the other hand, airlines have become infamous for tacking on separate, annoying 
surcharges for luggage checking, food, and beverages.
Price bundling is used by some firms to aggregate 
losses.7 For example, instead of charging $40 per day for 
four days on ski-lift tickets, a resort could charge one 
lump sum of $160 for a four-day ski pass. If the weather 
is poor on the fourth day, consumers are likely to exhibit 
the sunk cost effect and go skiing anyway. However, the 
sunk cost effect is perceived as smaller to the consum-
er who paid one lump sum than to the consumer who 
bought four separate tickets. Price bundling is also used 
for complementary products, such as razors and razor 
blades and electronic products and batteries.
Although it is usually beneficial to aggregate losses, 
this is not true when the individual losses are extremely 
small.8 For example, in a public service announcement 
for a children’s charity, Sally Struthers tells us that we can 
feed a starving child for “only 72 cents per day,” and a 
mattress retailer tells us that we can sleep comfortably for 
“only 10 cents a night.” This is known as the pennies-a-day 
approach. Segregating losses makes sense, when the indi-
vidual losses are so small, they are trivial. Of course even 
trivial expenses can add up.
objec tive 2

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
245
Preference Reversals
The framing effect is a type of preference reversal. Consumers prefer the safe alternative 
when options are framed in terms of gains. However, consumers prefer the risky alter-
native when options are framed in terms of losses. Thus, preferences reverse or switch 
when consumers think about a choice problem differently. One option looks better at 
one point in time, and the other option looks better at another point in time. Framing 
is not the only way to produce preference reversals, however. Preference reversals can 
occur anytime that consumers weigh information inconsistently.
For example, when evaluating gambles, people sometimes weigh the probability of 
winning higher than the value of the amount of money they can win.9 This is called a 
p-bet, or a probability-based bet. At other times, however, consumers weigh value more 
heavily than probability. This is called a v-bet, or a value-based bet. Of course, there is 
typically a negative correlation between p and v: As p increases, v decreases. Consumers 
prefer a p-bet, or a bet that offers a high probability of winning a small amount of 
money, when they are asked to choose among gambles. However, consumers prefer a 
v-bet, or a bet that offers a low probability of winning a large amount of money, when 
they are asked to indicate a minimum selling price for each bet. Interestingly, this pref-
erence reversal has been documented for gamblers using their own money in Las Vegas. 
Different procedures for measuring preferences can change consumers’ preferences, 
which violates the invariance principle discussed earlier. This pattern of results suggests 
that marketing managers prefer a p-bet when deciding whether to launch a new product 
or service and a v-bet when assessing the value or cost of a new product concept.
How serious is preference reversal? Consider the decision faced regularly by oil 
company executives. Any given drilling site has some probability of success (p) and 
some level of profit potential (v). Research shows that oil companies paid over $1 bil-
lion for the privilege of drilling in the Baltimore Canyon (in the Atlantic Ocean), even 
though leading oil geochemists determined that the probability of finding oil there was 
objec ti ve 3
This billboard erected for Denver Water, “Use Only What You Need,” utilizes minimal wording.
Photodisc/Getty Images

246 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
extremely low. This suggests that oil company executives often focus on the extremely 
large size of potential profits (v) and neglect the probabilities provided by the geochem-
ists.20 Ideally, of course, billion-dollar decisions should be based on both probabilities 
and potential earnings.
Why do different measurement techniques lead to different preferences? One rea-
son is the compatibility principle.10 According to this principle, different measure-
ment techniques highlight different aspects of the choice options. For example, any 
measure that emphasizes money or value increases the importance of v and the likeli-
hood that consumers will make a v-bet. Research also shows that the most important 
attribute seems even more important when a choice measure is used (e.g., choose or 
select the best bet) than when a judgment measure is used (e.g., rate the attractiveness 
of each bet). A choice task encourages consumers to focus on the most important 
attribute, but a judgment task requires them to think about all the attributes.
For many consumers, price is the most important attribute, and consequently, 
consumers are more likely to choose lower-price/lower-quality products (e.g., a $139 
Goldstar microwave oven) when choosing one brand from a set of brands than when 
rating purchase intentions for each brand.11 Purchase intention ratings or judgments 
encourage consumers to consider all the attributes of all the brands—which leads them 
to prefer a higher-price/higher-quality product (e.g., a $179 Panasonic microwave 
oven). This preference reversal occurs even when price range information (e.g., micro-
wave ovens range from $99 to $299) is provided to consumers.
Consumers often evaluate products one at a time, a process known as singular 
evaluation, or singular judgment. Sometimes, however, consumers compare two or 
more products concurrently, which is known as comparative evaluation, or compara-
tive judgment. Surprisingly, consumers’ preferences frequently change depending on 
whether they are forming a singular judgment or a comparative judgment. In singular 
judgment, familiar attributes that are easy to evaluate have a greater impact on prefer-
ence.12 Conversely, in comparative judgment, unfamiliar attributes that are difficult to 
evaluate carry more weight. This leads to a preference reversal when easy-to-evaluate 
attributes favor one brand and difficult-to-evaluate attributes favor a different brand.
For example, in one study, consumers were asked to evaluate two compact disc 
(CD) players:
 
CD capacity 
THD
CD player C: 
Holds 5 CDs 
0.003 percent
CD player S: 
Holds 20 CDs 
0.01 percent
The consumers were told that THD refers to total harmonic distortion, a measure 
of sound quality (smaller numbers are better). However, THD is difficult to evaluate 
because most consumers are unfamiliar with this attribute and do not know if a THD 
of 0.01 percent is good or bad. Consequently, in singular evaluation, most consumers 
ignored THD. Thus, when consumers evaluated each CD player separately, most con-
sumers preferred CD player S. Conversely, in comparative evaluation consumers were 
less likely to ignore THD because they could see that 0.003 percent was better than 
0.01 percent. Consequently, when consumers compared the two CD players, most 
consumers preferred CD player C.
In another study of singular evaluation versus comparative evaluation, consumers 
rated two dictionaries:
 
Number of entries 
Any defects?
Dictionary C: 
20,000 
Yes, the cover is torn
Dictionary S: 
10,000 
No, it’s like new
ob jec tive 4

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
247
In singular evaluation, consumers preferred Dictionary S because the 
presence or absence of defects is easy to evaluate. In comparative evaluation, 
however, consumers preferred Dictionary C because the number of entries is 
difficult to evaluate. However, when comparisons are performed, it is easy to 
see that 20,000 entries are better than 10,000 entries.
In another study, consumers saw a picture of an overfilled cup of ice 
cream (i.e., 7 oz. of ice cream in a 5-oz. cup) or a picture of an underfilled 
cup of ice cream (i.e., 8 oz. of ice cream in a 10-oz. cup):
 
Amount 
Filling
Serving C: 
8 oz. 
Under-filled
Serving S: 
7 oz. 
Overfilled
In singular evaluation, consumers preferred Serving S because an 
overfilled cup looks really good, but an under-filled cup seems stingy. 
In comparative evaluation, however, consumers preferred Serving C 
because directly comparing the brands made it clear that 8 oz. was better 
than 7 oz.
To summarize, consumers are remarkably inconsistent in the way they use dif-
ferent pieces of information. Inconsistency leads to preference reversals when con-
sumers weigh one piece of information heavily at one point in time and weigh 
another piece of information heavily at another point in time. Different frames, 
different measures, and different judgment tasks (singular versus comparative judg-
ment tasks) also lead to different preferences. Consumers are likely to make choices 
that they regret later when they prefer one brand initially and later prefer a different 
brand.
Selective Thinking
Singular versus comparative judgment tasks change the way consumers evaluate prod-
ucts, and these different judgment tasks can lead to different preferences. Singular 
evaluation is easier, so it is therefore more common than comparative evaluation.13 
It is easier to focus selectively on one brand at a time than to compare two or more 
brands on many attribute dimensions concurrently. When consumers attempt to test 
the idea that a particular brand is a good brand, they focus selectively on information 
that confirms or supports this idea, and neglect information that disconfirms or fails to 
support it. Consumers also tend to interpret ambiguous information as supportive and 
to integrate information so a preferred brand is cast in a favorable light. This is known 
as selective thinking, or one-sided thinking, because singular evaluation often leads 
consumers to focus selectively on favorable information while neglecting unfavorable 
information.
In a classic study of selective thinking, people were asked to imagine they were 
serving on the jury of a child custody case following a divorce. Using the information 
below, which parent would you choose?
Parent A: 
average income
 
average health
 
average working hours
 
reasonable rapport with the child
 
relatively stable social life
Ladida/iStockphoto.com
objec ti ve 5

248 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
Parent B: 
above-average income
 
very close relationship with the child
 
extremely active social life
 
lots of work-related travel
 
minor health problems
Most people chose parent B because the best way to choose an alternative is to focus 
on the most favorable information. When people focus selectively on favorable infor-
mation, parent B has the advantage because of some very favorable attributes, while 
parent A has only moderately favorable attributes.
Another group of people were asked a slightly different question. Instead of ask-
ing which parent they would choose, they were asked which parent they would reject. 
The best way to reject an alternative is to focus selectively on unfavorable information. 
When people focus on unfavorable information, they are likely to notice that parent B 
has some very unfavorable attributes, but parent A has only moderately unfavorable 
attributes. Consequently, most people recommend rejecting parent B.
But wait a minute. Why did most people choose parent B when they performed a 
choice task, but reject parent B when they performed a rejection task? How can people 
both choose and reject the same alternative? The answer is selective thinking. Selective 
thinking makes parent B look very good when people focus on the positives, but makes 
parent B look very bad when people focus on the negatives. Thus, parent B is the best 
alternative and the worst alternative.
The same process occurs for products and services. Imagine that you had to choose 
between one of two different ice cream flavors. Flavor A is good, and flavor B is excel-
lent, but high in cholesterol. When asked to choose a flavor, most consumers prefer B 
because it is excellent. When asked to reject a flavor, most consumers reject B because 
it is high in cholesterol. Consumers choose and reject the same alternative because it is 
the best and the worst alternative.
Imagine that you are planning a vacation and have to choose between two vacation spots:
Spot A: 
average weather
 
average beaches
 
medium-quality hotel
 
medium-temperature water
 
average nightlife 
Spot B: 
lots of sunshine
 
gorgeous beaches and coral reefs
 
ultra-modern hotel
 
very cold water
 
very strong winds
 
no nightlife
Which spot would you choose? If you are like most people, you would choose B 
because B has some extremely favorable attributes. Which spot would you reject? If you 
are like most people, you would reject B because B has some extremely unfavorable 
attributes. Focusing selectively on mainly favorable information or on mainly unfavor-
able information leads to biased or lopsided decisions.
Asking consumers to reject alternatives is not the only way to encourage them to 
focus selectively on negative attributes. Whenever consumers attempt to reduce the 
size of their consideration sets, they are likely to focus on negatives. For example, 

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
249
the elimination-by-aspects heuristic reduces consideration sets by rejecting brands 
that do not have a particular feature of interest. Furthermore, recent research shows 
that when consumers expect to fill out a customer satisfaction survey, they focus on 
negatives to help firms improve their products and services.14 Focusing on negatives 
leads consumers to form less favorable evaluations than they would have formed if 
they did not expect to fill out a customer satisfaction survey after using a product or 
service. This result was found for a wide range of products and services, including 
computers, electric utilities, supermarkets, drugstores, and magazines.
Selective thinking influences many other types of judgments as well. For example, 
selective thinking is much more likely in singular evaluation than in comparative eval-
uation. Furthermore, singular evaluation is very common. Non-comparative advertis-
ing encourages singular evaluation. End-of-aisle displays in grocery stores encourage 
singular evaluation. Exclusive dealerships, such as automobile dealerships that offer 
only one brand, also encourage singular evaluation. Even when it is painfully obvi-
ous that many different brands are available, consumers often focus singularly on one 
brand at a time when forming product evaluations.
Recent research on the brand positivity effect shows that consumers form unreal-
istically favorable evaluations of moderately favorable brands when they form singular 
evaluations, but not when they form comparative evaluations.15 In one experiment, con-
sumers were shown the brand names for four first-class hotels. They were told that they 
would be asked to evaluate one hotel, which would be selected randomly. Consumers 
formed unrealistically positive evaluations of the focal hotel no matter which hotel was se-
lected. Furthermore, consumers acknowledged that 
the focal hotel was selected randomly. Similar results 
were found for laundry detergents. Follow-up stud-
ies showed that the brand positivity effect is reduced 
when consumers are encouraged to form compara-
tive evaluations or when consumers happen to be 
very knowledgeable about a product category.
Selective thinking also influences the degree to 
which consumers rely on the price-quality heuris-
tic.16 Most consumers believe that as price increases, 
quality also  increases. This belief becomes stronger 
when consumers are encouraged to test this belief, 
 because the testing process encourages consumers 
to focus on information consistent with this line 
of thinking. For example, consumers often pay 
more attention to and have better memory for high 
price/high quality brands and low price/low qual-
ity brands than for exceptions (i.e., high price/low 
quality brands and low price/high quality brands). 
Thinking selectively about brands that support the 
price-quality heuristic is easier than thinking about 
exceptions that fail to support it. As a consequence, 
consumers often overestimate the magnitude of the 
correlation between price and quality by a factor 
of three! This result is reduced, however, when the 
amount of information presented is small, when 
time pressure is low, or when consumers are moti-
vated or encouraged to consider exceptions.
PRNewsFoto/The Giantto Group/AP Photo
Consumers often fall prey to the price-quality heuristic, assuming 
that higher priced brands offer superior quality and that lower 
priced brands offer inferior quality.

250 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
A great deal of research on behavioral decision 
making shows that decision makers are often 
overconfident. Imagine you were asked trivia 
questions, such as “Which contains more calo-
ries per unit of weight: (a) bread or (b) rice?” 
After selecting an answer, imagine you were 
asked to indicate how confident you were that 
your answer was correct on a scale from 
50 percent confident to 100 percent 
confident.
When the average percentage of correct answers is com-
pared to the average percent confidence ratings, the confidence 
ratings are typically higher than the percentage 
of correct answers. Thus, people are typically 
overconfident about the accuracy of their answers 
to trivia questions. Although overconfidence is very 
common, even among experts, research shows 
that Asian consumers are typically even more 
overconfident than American consumers.17 This 
pattern was found even when participants were 
given the opportunity to win a gift certificate for 
$2.20 at their university’s bookstore if they could 
provide confidence ratings that matched their percentage of 
correctly answered questions.
Culture and Overconfidence
Eye on International
©zhu difeng, 2009/Used under license 
from Shutterstock.com
Behavioral decision research focuses mainly on risky deci-
sion making, or decision making under uncertainty. To 
reduce uncertainty, consumers often attempt to predict 
the future. What will happen if I buy one brand instead 
of another? What will happen if I choose one course of 
action instead of another? Will I be satisfied with my deci-
sion one month from now, one year from now, or several 
years from now? Unfortunately, consumers’ predictions 
are biased by framing effects and by selective thinking. 
Gain frames lead to risk aversion, but loss frames lead 
to risk seeking. The inconsistent weighting of informa-
tion resulting from framing, measurement, or selective 
thinking leads to systematic preference reversals where 
consumers prefer one option initially and another option 
later. Consumers are remarkably inconsistent in their use 
of information, leading to inconsistent preferences and 
choices they later regret.
risky decision making
expected utility theory
dominance
cancellation
transitivity
invariance principle
frames
risk aversion
risk seeking
preference reversal
reference dependence
loss aversion
diminishing sensitivity
endowment effect
sunk cost effect
choice deferral
opportunity costs
price bundling
Chapter Summary
Key Terms

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
251
compatibility principle
singular evaluation
comparative evaluation
selective thinking
brand positivity effect
price-quality heuristic
Review and Discussion
1. What is risky decision making?
2. Why are consumers often unable to explain how they 
arrived at a prediction?
3. Why do consumers often fail to maximize expected 
value?
4. Give an example of a situation in which you chose a 
safe option.
5. Give an example of a situation in which you chose a 
risky option.
6. Why are consumers sometimes risk averse and some-
times risk seeking?
  7. Why do different types of preference measures 
change preferences?
  8. Describe the compatibility principle. How does this 
principle change people’s preferences? Can you think 
of a situation in which this principle changed your 
preferences?
  9. What is a preference reversal?
10. How do preference reversals lead to decisions that 
consumers later regret?
1. Most consumers do not realize that information that 
initially seems really important may seem less im-
portant later. Think of some ways that marketers can 
influence the perceived importance of different types 
of information.
2. Think of some ways marketers can use preference 
reversals to their advantage.
3. Selective thinking occurs frequently. Think of some 
ways marketers can use selective thinking to their 
advantage.
4. Design an ad that gets consumers to think of the 
positive features of products while ignoring the nega-
tive features.
Short Application Exercises

252 
Part Three   Consumer Decision Making
The most recent recession is encouraging consumers 
to focus more on price in their decision making. 
One major consequence of this price focus is an in-
crease in the market share of private labels at the 
expense of name brands.18 The same thing hap-
pened in the U.K. and Canada in the 1970s. Tom 
Falk, CEO of Kimberly-Clark, says, “One thing 
you don’t want to do is create a consumer who 
shifted to private label and then have to spend a lot 
to get them back.” A. G. Lafley, CEO of Procter & 
Gamble, says, “Of course there’s a shift to private la-
bel at this point, but it’s not nicking us.” In the past, 
P&G has fought against private labels by increasing 
promotions advertising, but in the current reces-
sion, consumers are buying private labels in catego-
ries that have been resistant to them in the past, 
such as feminine protection and skin care products. 
Furthermore, even relatively wealthier households 
with annual incomes greater than $100,000 have 
spent more on private labels. Across package-goods 
categories and retailers, private-label market share 
increased by 0.8 percent to 21.9 percent in 2008. 
This trend is likely to continue until the economy 
improves significantly.
1. If you were a brand manager at P&G, what strategies would you pursue to encourage 
consumers to focus less heavily on price?
2. If you were a brand manager at P&G, what strategies would you use to protect prod-
uct categories that are usually resistant to private labels?
3. If you were a manager at The Kroger Co., what strategies would you pursue to 
encourage consumers to focus more heavily on price?
4. If you were a manager at The Kroger Co., what strategies would you use to encourage 
consumers to buy private labels in more product categories? In what product catego-
ries do you see opportunities for private labels?
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
YOUR CHALLENGE:
The part video is designed to expand and highlight the consumer behavior concepts in this part of the book. To 
view the videos, go to http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes and click on the student companion site 
link. After viewing the video, answer the following questions to test your knowledge on the part content and its 
application to the video case.
Marketing Jordan’s Furniture
Jordan’s Furniture is a family-run, regional, furniture retailer that sells mid-priced furniture. The company 
employs lovable spokespersons, humorous ads, and a shopping-as-entertainment mentality to attract 
potential customers.
 
1. Consumers are typically reluctant to buy furniture. What are the purchase obstacles (practical 
and psychological) to purchasing furniture? How has Jordan’s Furniture tried to overcome these 
obstacles? Could they do more, and if so, what?

Chapter 11   Behavioral Decision Theory 
253
 
2. Using the consumer decision process model, describe the typical process of purchasing a piece 
of furniture. What type of consumer decision is this? How does understanding the decision 
process model influence Jordan’s marketing strategy?
 
3. Jordan’s Furniture’s shopping-as-entertainment strategy has worked to make the company’s busi-
ness more successful. Would this strategy work for other product categories? Develop a cam-
paign for another product category, employing some shopping-as-entertainment-style tactics.

PART
4
Consumer Social Influences 
and Contemporary Strategies 
for Marketers
c h a p t e r s
254
 12 | The Influence of Culture and Values
 13 | Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance
 14 | Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers
 15 | Online Consumer Behavior
16 | Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior

255
Thomas O’Guinn is Professor of Marketing at the University of Wisconsin. He is also 
executive director of the Brand and Product Management Center at UW. He studies 
brands and their communication as well as aspects of the sociology of consumption, i.e., 
how membership in various groups and social strata affect consumer behavior. He is the 
author of several award-winning articles and a leading book on advertising and integrated 
brand communication.
Could you comment on the role of the many different 
paradigms or “camps” in the field of consumer behavior 
and on your position with respect to these camps?
I don’t fit particularly well in any of these camps. I had 
the opportunity to study several different paradigms 
when I was in graduate school and did some qualitative 
work on how people watch television and use advertis-
ing. A lot of that work was federally funded to under-
stand how children watch television. Those methods, 
in that context, became very accepted, even with NSF 
money, to really understand how kids watch TV and 
how advertising works in real homes with real kids. 
At the same time, I was working in social and develop-
mental psychology labs doing experiments . . . again, 
federally funded. So, I got a wonderful opportunity to 
cross paradigms in the same substantive domain. That 
was an education. I loved the clean nature of experi-
ments AND the messy nature of in situ observation. 
Television viewing is one of those social behaviors that 
are so hard to replicate in the lab. It’s very hard to bring 
people into a lab and say watch this . . . pretend you are 
at home. And there are long-term processes; the signifi-
cant effects of television do not occur in an hour or a 
day, or even a year. I was always one of those people who 
was inclined, just by virtue of chance and by training, to 
be very multidisciplinary and to use multiple methods. 
I’m very driven by the phenomena, so sometimes it’s 
entirely appropriate to be in the lab; it’s the only way you 
can get it done. Other times, there are phenomena that 
I don’t know how you could possibly do in a lab. So, to 
me, it’s always the question that tells you which are the 
tools out of the toolbox you need to apply. And I think, 
in my work I’ve always been less concerned about, “I 
am an experimentalist; I should do it this way,” than I 
was about, “this is the phenomena; how am I going to 
understand it?” I also like to work with other people 
because they bring something to the project, and they 
make me stay on deadline. I get bored pretty easily.
How did you get interested in the topic of consumer 
compulsiveness, and what insights does your research 
provide on this important topic?
That came about literally when Ron Faber and I were at 
ACR in Las Vegas. And we’re watching people gamble. 
I said to Ron, “I know people who shop like these 
people gamble.” And we started this conversation. And 
on the way home I’m reading an in-flight magazine, and 
there is this woman talking about people who shop too 
much and this and that. So I get back home and I think, 
you know this is a pretty interesting thing. And that 
was one of those things we knew nothing about. And 
we spent a good two and a half years learning it before 
we ever put anything on paper because we didn’t want 
to look like idiots. We found this group out in the Bay 
Area that was the largest self-help group for shopaholics. 
But at first it had this kind of carnivalesque feel about 
it . . . . I didn’t like this. When you really saw the suffering, 
it was no longer funny. And we went out there, and we 
spent a lot of our own money, a lot of time. I remem-
ber sleeping on the floor at San Francisco International 
Airport one night because we were both young and 
didn’t have money. We went out there and got with 
these self-help groups and spent I don’t know . . . a good 
two and a half years doing qualitative work, trying to 
Q
AN INTERVIEW WITH THOMAS O’GUINN
Professor of Marketing 
University of Wisconsin
Executive Director
Brand and Product Management Center
University of Wisconsin
Q
Courtesy of Tom O’Guinn

256
understand what it was and what it wasn’t. And then we 
went into a more quantitative phase where we used our 
qualitative data to develop instruments. And then we 
were able to piece together enough money through dif-
ferent funding to do a big sample—the State of Illinois 
matched to a national list of self-reported compulsive 
buyers. We went to a Survey Research Lab in Illinois 
and did the adjustment to make these comparable. 
Seymour Sudman helped us. When we finally came out 
with a series of papers, we felt really good about them 
because we had done the work. We had used the quali-
tative data largely in a developmental phase. Although 
I don’t want to say that was all it was used for, because 
that would diminish the nature of those data. We did 
use verbatims from it occasionally as exemplars of what 
we were talking about. But, we also used those data as 
you would any data . . . to drive understanding. I came 
out of a survey research background, and Ron came out 
of an experimental background. I think that we both, 
at least on that project, saw that the qualitative results 
could have stood alone. But I don’t think so now. I 
think it needed the numbers side as well; their con-
vergence helped. So when we wrote two or three, four 
or five papers from it, we really felt good about it. We 
thought they were solid. We felt like we could actually 
go talk at a conference and not look foolish because you 
know the topic was so easy to lampoon or dismiss. And 
we didn’t want that because we had actually seen these 
people. You know these people literally had impulse 
control disorders; they couldn’t not do this. And the 
co-morbidity between them and compulsive gamblers, 
most of these people, they just floated from one impul-
sive control to another. These were a lot of people who 
were in a lot of serious trouble. And the other thing 
that we didn’t want made light of was that they were 90 
percent women. There are two reasons for that. One 
is the self-report bias for women: they are much more 
likely to seek therapy (and report it) than men. If you go 
back to the 1940s, a woman is upset with a man, “Here, 
honey, here’s some money, go buy a hat.” We didn’t 
want to contribute to that. Stratification differences in 
income and work status, as well as gender stereotyping, 
kind of made it “a woman’s problem.” So when the New 
York Times and National Public Radio and the Wall 
Street Journal start calling you for interviews, you are 
very aware of the potential for harm. The first thing out 
of our mouths was, “We’re not clinicians, we are not . . .” 
But I think we were able to talk about it in a sensitive 
enough way that we didn’t just run out, do some kind of 
goofy study, make fun of these people and leave, which 
does happen in the field. I think there are people in our 
field that I think regrettably do that. They see some-
thing in the news; they run out; they do a study. And it’s 
topical, but I think sometimes if you don’t do the work, 
if you don’t do the two or three years of homework on 
it, you can either make a fool of yourself or you can 
make light of something that’s actually serious.
Does your work have implications for helping consum-
ers to adopt healthier lifestyles?
Yes, but my co-author Ron Faber is much better at 
talking about that. Ron and I are still working on some 
things together, but he’s more interested in psychologi-
cal issues. He’s hooked up with some people at the 
medical school at [the University of] Minnesota and has 
done some brilliant work on this. I was more interested 
in the why consumption question, the social question. 
Why does this manifest as buying ? And that turned 
out to be a substantive but easy answer: because we live 
in a consumer culture. And I think Ron’s work, the 
work that came out of our work that I have some part 
of, I think it does help. He’s gotten involved in—well, 
our screener that we developed for the second paper, 
third paper. One of the cool things about that is that’s 
becoming the preferred clinical and diagnostic screener. 
The psychometrics of it are just very strong, and it’s a 
lot of luck. Then a guy at the Stanford Medical School 
got very fascinated in this topic. They adopted it as their 
screener. And then once they adopted it, so did a lot of 
folks. And so, that helps people screen for compulsive 
buying. And then I think just what Ron has been able to 
do with understanding the co-morbidity of this with 
other impulse control disorders and their response to cer-
tain anti-depressants. I mean Ron and his MD colleagues 
actually do help people; a lot of these people do respond 
really well to certain antidepressants. And I think our 
work also informs how therapists talk to people about 
compulsive buying. I think the most interesting thing 
we found out is that these people, at least on material-
ism scales, are no more materialistic than anybody else. 
What’s interesting is they don’t use the products. It’s 
all about the acquisition. They store them under their 
beds, they hide them. They will go out and buy ten of 
the same thing. And it is about their relationship with 
the store. It’s about the thrill of shopping; it’s not the 
thrill of owning or using. It’s the buying. To me, that 
really challenged what were then the dominant models 
of consumer behavior. I’m proud of that. The things 
purchased often remain unopened. And their social 
networks often are, not surprisingly, comprised of 
shopping clerks and delivery people. Compulsive buy-
ers often consider the shopping clerks their friends. So 
there’s more to the phenomenon than simple acquisi-
tion. It’s the buying. That, I think, has helped clini-
cians. I think we have helped some consumers and I’m 
proud of that.
Q

257
Let’s switch gears and talk about your work on 
advertising.
You know it’s funny I hardly ever wrote about advertis-
ing until this book and then lately, for whatever reason, 
I’ve started doing more advertising-related research. 
I’ve always been interested in mass media, but mostly 
program content, consumption in program content. 
But now that those lines between ads and content have 
started to disappear, I’ve become interested in branded 
entertainment. Also, I’ve always been fascinated how 
different social strata—stratification issues, social class 
issues—play out in ads and through ads. Target is one of 
the brands I use as an example because of how they have 
leveraged those sociological phenomena and how they do 
it with their ads and other ways. Here’s a retailer that has 
done what was thought to be impossible. Sears tried to 
be everything to everybody for a hundred and something 
years. And I knew a lot of people who worked on Sears’ 
business, and the problem was always that not many 
people wanted to buy a little black dress where they 
bought their socket sets. It just didn’t work.
Target, however, has been able to do that, at least 
much more effectively. Part of the reason they have is 
what has happened demographically and how those 
demographics relate to what we call taste. So, it used 
to be we identified the wealthy through their display 
of certain types of consumption. For a long time, 
handmade had a certain social marker status. Well, 
now robots make much better things than handmade. 
Handmade is actually inferior. Several people write 
about this in sociology—the democratization or collapse 
of traditional status hierarchies in consumption. John 
Seabrook (NOBROW) writes about the case where 
high-end brands are now replicating low-end stuff like 
the sort of torn, beaded jeans for $3,500 from Gucci 
to look like something you would see, you know, in a 
very different social milieu from 5th Avenue. And this 
collapse of traditional status hierarchy is flattening taste 
cultures. Target management picked up on this beauti-
fully, this whole design for the masses that Target has 
done so well.
Some of this matches up with my interest in design 
thought. I got lucky because when I came to the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison to run this brand 
center, one of my donors earmarked some money to 
look into design issues. I took a group out to the design 
school at Stanford, and now UW-Madison is partnering 
with a wonderful design company in Madison, Design 
Concepts, Inc. And one of the things we’re all interested 
in, companies as well, is how do these things convey 
social meaning, map onto strata; how do they convey 
taste and culture? So, here again, a lot of interests: visual 
thought, design thought, social strata, and markers of 
taste all converge. I’m lucky: lots of nice toys.
This leads into the next question. What are some of the 
key implications of the sociological and anthropological 
perspectives for managers?
You don’t have to convince managers of the value of 
qualitative research. It’s one of the funniest things. In the 
academic field, it’s been harder to convince people; they 
want so desperately to be real scientists. Well, maybe 
it’s not that hard now, but there was a time when it was 
difficult to convince academic marketing colleagues that 
there was any value at all in doing fieldwork. I under-
stand that because I came out of that tradition, too, and 
people want to see hard numbers and heavily controlled 
experiments, and I’m a believer in that too. But you 
know, I was listening to Scott Cook from Intuit talk. 
He is such a believer in going out and watching people 
use the product. You have to go see people actually use 
products and figure out what it is that they need. Eric 
von Hippel’s (MIT) early work on using lead users and 
not being trapped by the present was so right. I’ve yet to 
run into a company that thinks that doing fieldwork is 
weird, in fact quite the opposite. It’s more an academic 
concern. Now, the implications I think come in a lot of 
forms. Usually it’s called, you know, consumer insights. 
They almost always think of fieldwork and in-home 
visits and all that as consumer insight. And that’s just a 
big basket term for what they are learning in the field. 
But I think it’s more the exception to hear them say that 
they didn’t do that. They all sort of believe that. Now, 
some of them still do a lot of attitude work, you know 
particularly tracking studies. But I think they drive the 
front end with qualitative work. They all want metrics, 
some remain attitudinal, but I don’t think they get used 
much beyond that sort of behavioral bean-counting. I 
do think, in my experience over the last 20 years, that 
there has been increasing skepticism about some of the 
metrics. Not about doing metrics, but about some of the 
metrics. And how sometimes their internal metrics on a 
brand mix will get in the way. We need to think about 
brands in terms of meaning rather than mere attitudes. 
Now, do I think attitudes and any of those other things 
are valuable? Sometimes.
Academic research often has different goals than 
managerial research. I try not to confuse them, but I 
also try to let one at least partially inform the other 
when that makes sense.
Q
Q

258
How did you get interested in social influence?
As I say at the outset of a book I wrote on the topic, 
I think my initial interest in social influence was 
grounded in a personal weakness: I was always finding 
myself contributing to charities I knew nothing about 
or buying things I didn’t really want from salespeople 
at my door. So, out of self-defense, I figured I’d better 
learn how this worked.
What role does social influence have in consumer 
behavior and marketing?
I believe there is a central role for social influence in 
these areas. After all, social influence involves the ability 
of one person to change the attitudes, beliefs, or behav-
iors of another; and this is frequently the primary goal 
of consumer-related messaging and marketing.
You once told me that the timing of the various ele-
ments of a request is crucial. Can you elaborate on this 
point?
I believe that there are particular moments in the course 
of an interaction when a request, recommendation, or 
proposal is likely to be most successful. In fact, I am 
planning to write a book on the subject titled Moments 
of Power. It will not be so much about what to say for 
optimal influence as when to say it.
There are some publications in the marketing literature 
suggesting that high self-monitors are more effective 
salespersons relative to low self-monitors. Does this 
finding apply to the application of the weapons of influ-
ence, or can anyone learn to apply these tools? Do some 
types of individuals have an advantage in terms of their 
ability to influence consumers?
For a long time, persuasion was thought to be an 
art, something people were just naturally good (or 
not so good) at. I do believe that’s true. At the same 
time, we now know that persuasion is also a science; 
consequently, it can be taught and learned. Therefore, 
even those of us who were not born with the artist’s 
touch of a persuasion master can be trained to use 
scientifically proven principles of persuasion to become 
significantly more influential at work, at home, and 
beyond.
Robert Cialdini is the Regents’ Professor of Psychology and Marketing at Arizona State 
University. He is also a Distinguished Graduate Research Professor at ASU. He is a 
recipient of the Distinguished Scientific Achievement Award of the Society for Consumer 
Psychology; the Donald T. Campbell Award for Distinguished Contributions to Social 
Psychology; and the Peitho Award for Distinguished Contributions to the Science of Social 
Influence. He studies persuasion and influence, altruism, and the tactics of favorable 
self-presentation.
AN INTERVIEW WITH ROBERT CIALDINI
Q
Q
Q
Q
Regents’ Professor of Psychology and Marketing 
Distinguished Graduate Research Professor
Arizona State University
Courtesy of Robert B. Cialdini 

Cheaters Prosper
259
The Influence of Culture and Values
 1 | Define culture, cultural values, and 
subculture.
 2 | Describe how cultural meaning moves 
from society to consumer products and 
eventually to individual consumers.
 3 | Explain the differences among the four 
consumer rituals: exchange, possession, 
grooming and divestment.
 4 | Explain how the Returns Potential 
Model shows the importance of various 
norms.
 5 | Explain how product attributes and 
benefits may lead to instrumental and 
terminal values for consumers.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to...
objectives
12
CHAPTER
Commencement speeches at American universities and high schools typically feature inspirational 
themes designed to encourage freshly minted graduates to pursue honorable life goals. How 
would you feel about a speech that extols the virtues of cheating? Luca Cordero de Montezemolo, 
president of Ferrari and head of the Italian employers’ federation Confindustira, did just this in a 
speech to graduates at Rome’s Luiss University. Mr. Montezemolo recounted his skill at cheating 
in school. “I was the world champion copier when I was in school. I think I had no rivals for 
technique and sophistication. I always found a way to sit near someone clever and generous who 
would let me copy. This goes to show that there is hope even for one who copies, because even 
that way you can learn something.” Mr. Montezemolo is also the president of Luiss University.
Can you imagine Steve Jobs (Apple), Bill Gates (Microsoft), or Jimmy Carter inspiring, 
the graduating class at Yale with such advice? There lies one major difference between 

260
cultures. Americans are told at an early age, “cheaters never prosper” and “honesty is the best 
policy.” Stories about the integrity of George Washington and Abe Lincoln—if mythical—are 
nevertheless American staples. In contrast, other cultures are replete with such Calabrian 
proverbs as “He who behaves honestly, comes to a bad end.”
In fairness, a plethora of websites based in the United States selling term papers 
demonstrate that Americans are both enthusiastic and entrepreneurial in their ability to cheat. 
But at least they have a bad conscience about it. In Italy, the concept of copying schoolwork 
reflects a specific cultural view about competition. Italian culture tends to favor community 
over rivalry. In the United States, the opposite is true. Mr. Montezemolo’s remarks may 
simply describe a cultural attitude that students who allow others to copy their schoolwork are 
expressing loyalty and solidarity with their classmates. Cultural differences in the use of words 
to describe student-to-student plagiarism may explain this apparent inconsistency between the 
Anglo-American and Italian worlds. The U.S. student “cheats” his classmates by stealing their 
work, but the Italian students share their knowledge by letting their peers “copy.” So, although 
it may be true that cheaters never prosper, it may also be true that copiers thrive.1
syagci/iStockphoto.com

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
261
Culture Defined
Culture is a lot like humor—it’s easy to recognize but difficult to define. In fact, 
countless definitions of culture exist in various disciplines such as anthropology, soci-
ology, and social psychology. Some behavioral scientists define culture as the patterns 
of meaning acquired by members of society expressed in their knowledge, beliefs, 
art, laws, morals, customs, and habits. Edward B. Tylor, a British anthropologist, 
introduced this notion of culture in 1871.2 Although we can see the manifestations 
of a culture, its meaning only exists in the collective minds of a society. As a result, 
culture is abstract, fragile, and dynamic. Geert Hofstede conducted a comprehen-
sive study on how culture influences values. He defines culture as “the collective 
programming of the human mind that distinguishes the members of one human 
group from those of another.” In this sense, culture can be thought of as a system of 
collectively held values.3 Cultural values comprise a collective set of beliefs about 
what is important, useful, and desirable. Simply put, culture reflects the personal-
ity of a society. Subcultures are smaller groups of a larger culture that share some 
cultural values with society overall and yet demonstrate unique cultural values and 
patterns of behavior within the individual subgroup. Subcultures provide opportuni-
ties for marketers to segment society into more manageable groups that are likely to 
respond similarly to products and services based on their similar needs and wants. 
Geography, gender, age, race, nationality, religion, and social class form important 
subcultures. This chapter, however, provides a broader focus than a discussion of in-
dividual  subcultures. Instead, we examine, in general, how cultural values move from 
the collective minds of society to individual consumers, with the help of marketing 
efforts and the fashion system.
Although we do not investigate individual groups such as Hispanic and African-
American subcultures, Jewish consumers, Generation Y, or working women, we pro-
vide key references to help understand these important subgroups on our Cengage 
Learning website. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau (www.census.gov) provides 
information regarding the size and trends of all races in the United States, and detailed 
information on the demographic, economic, and social characteristics of individual 
cities and counties throughout the country. We encourage our readers to visit our book 
companion website http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes to find more inter-
esting resources for understanding subcultures.
The opening vignette in this chapter provides a glimpse of cultural differences re-
garding cheating in school. At the very heart of this dissimilarity, differing systems of 
values exist—one culture emphasizes group solidarity, while another culture stresses in-
dividual integrity. Consumers who travel to foreign countries often encounter cultural 
differences. If these differences are extreme, they experience “culture shock,” a state 
of anxiety associated with trying to deal with this new and unfamiliar environment. 
Cultural differences can also create vast differences in consumer behavior.
Consumer behavior is concerned with all consumer activities associated with 
the purchase, use, and disposal of goods and services, including the consumer’s cog-
nitive, affective, and behavioral responses that precede, determine, or follow these 
activities. Accordingly, this chapter discusses the characteristics of culture that are 
most likely to influence consumer behavior: language and symbols, customs and 
rituals, norms, and consumer values. Before discussing these specific aspects of cul-
ture, let’s look as some theories that offer understanding on how culture evolves in a 
consumer society.
ob jec ti ve 1

262 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
A Cultural Framework for Consumer Behavior
Anthropologist Grant McCracken provides a framework that describes the mobility 
of cultural meaning and the instruments that transfer this meaning from society to 
consumer products, and then from consumer products to individual consumers.4 
Figure 12.1 illustrates this movement of cultural meaning.
The Culturally Constituted World
Consumers’ broadest understanding of culture resides in the culturally constituted 
world, where all consumer experiences are shaped by the intangible beliefs and val-
ues of society. This is Station 1 in Figure 12.1. It is helpful to think of the cultur-
ally constituted world as a place where society’s widely shared values are collected 
and stored. But note that these values are ever changing. As a warehouse for society’s 
values, the culturally constituted world supplies meaning for consumers via two in-
terrelated concepts: cultural categories and cultural principles. Cultural categories 
help organize a society by dividing the world into specific and distinct segments of 
time, space, nature, and people. Categories comprising people, such as age, gender, 
social class, and occupation, are most important to the study of consumer behavior. 
Cultural categories are the ancestors of market segments, but their purpose is not 
to identify groups of potential customers. Instead, cultural categories exist to help 
people understand the world in which they live, and although abstract, their mean-
ing can be substantiated through the visible consumption of goods and services. In 
short, consumer products provide a tangible explanation for the existence of intan-
gible cultural categories. For example, in most cultures, women typically use more 
cosmetic products than do men; seniors purchase a majority of health care servic-
es; and the upper class is most likely to own yachts. Here, gender, age, and social 
class categories help us understand the culturally constituted world by allowing us 
objec tive 2
Figure 12.1 The Movement of Cultural Meaning
Station 1:  Culturally Constituted World 
Marketing
Activities
Fashion
System
Station 2:  Consumer Products 
Station 3:  Individual Consumers 
Exchange
Rituals
Possession
Rituals
Grooming
Rituals
Divestment
Rituals
Source: McCracken, G. (1986). Culture and Consumption: A 
Theoretical Account of the Structure and Movement of the Cultural 
Meaning of Consumer Goods. Journal of Consumer Research, 13:71–84.

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
263
to examining specific products chosen by distinct subgroups within each 
category. More subtle differences also exist within each category, such as 
gender. Recent research demonstrates that young men typically stress func-
tional buying motives, whether shopping online or in conventional stores. 
In contrast, young women emphasize the social and experiential value of 
conventional shopping but show similar functional motives as men when 
shopping online.5 Thus, a cultural shift from conventional to online shopping 
requires more attitude change for women, which provides one explanation as 
to why women are often less satisfied than men with online shopping.6
Cultural principles are the ideas that help guide the construction of 
 cultural categories. Consumer products also illustrate cultural principles. 
For example, clothing can communicate “refinement” for the upper class 
and “rebellion” for the hip-hop culture. Similarly, women’s clothing com-
municates something about the “feminine” nature of women, while men’s 
clothing shows the “masculine” characteristics of men. Here, cultural princi-
ples work hand-in-hand with cultural categories. In sum, cultural  principles 
give us the reasons for performing segmentation, and cultural categories 
provide useful descriptors for these segments. Both can be seen in consumer 
products.
Station 2 in Figure 12.1: Consumer Products
Cultural meaning is transferred from the culturally constituted world to consumer products. 
Consumer products represent the second stop in the journey to understanding the move-
ment of cultural meaning. Consumer products serve as Station 2 in Figure 12.1. Marketing 
activities provide one important conduit for this movement. Through deliberate marketing 
efforts, such as advertising, promotion, distribution, and pricing, products take on cul-
tural meaning. For example, cellular phone products reflect society’s desire for convenient, 
global, person-to-person communication. Advanced cellular products offer connection to 
the Internet, email options, and access to a consumer’s home computer. These innovations 
depict a specific cultural category or segment (e.g., high tech-oriented consumers), as well 
as the cultural principle that helped create it (e.g., multi-tasking increases productivity). 
Because culture is dynamic, however, products continually give up old meanings and take 
on new ones. SUVs, a specific category of automobile, once communicated outdoor- and 
sports-related cultural principles. Now, they may also reflect consumer extravagance and 
excessive fuel consumption. Accordingly, the marketplace offers new, smaller, more fuel-
efficient SUVs. As active participants in the marketing process, consumers are informed 
about the most current cultural meanings in consumer products through marketing com-
munication. Marketing activities, particularly advertising, provide a pipeline through which 
cultural meaning moves from the culturally constituted world to consumer products. 4
Although highly complex and more difficult to observe than marketing activities, 
the fashion system is equally important in transferring cultural meaning from the cul-
turally constituted world to consumer products. The fashion system is not just limited 
to clothing and body adornment; it includes various forms of social expression such 
as music, art, architecture, journalism, politics, speech, entertainment, and technol-
ogy. The fashion system transfers meaning to consumer products in three ways. First, 
it takes new styles of clothing, music, etc., and associates them with established cul-
tural categories and principles.7 For example, new styles of dress (e.g., business casual) 
may reflect the existing cultural principle productivity, which is linked to the existing 
cultural category time (work versus leisure). Here, the joint interplay of comfort and 
VikramRaghuvanshi/iStockphoto.com
Consumers’ clothing can communi-
cate cultural categories such as age, 
gender, religion, and social class.

264 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
productivity are reinterpreted within the context of work time, i.e., comfort increases 
productivity in the white-collar world. Similarly, new forms of automobiles (e.g., hy-
brids) highlight a culture’s existing desire for environmental stewardship. Hybrid au-
tomobiles, a new fashion, joins the category fuel-efficient automobiles through the 
principle “the natural environment is worthy of being preserved.” Both category and 
principle existed earlier, but the changing fashion system revised the cultural meaning 
surrounding cars and the environment.
Second, the fashion system invents completely new cultural meaning by enlist-
ing opinion leaders who modestly shape and refine existing cultural principles and 
categories. Opinion leaders are individuals who, by virtue of birth, beauty, talent, 
or accomplishment, are held in high esteem and provide cultural meaning to those 
of lesser standing.8 Rain, a South Korean pop singer, whose albums have topped the 
charts in China, Japan, Thailand, Indonesia, and South Korea, has prompted new 
cultural meaning in music. Nelson Mandela, former president of South Africa, led his 
nation out of apartheid. By virtue of his character and decency, Mandela remains one 
of the most compelling moral and political opin-
ion leaders of our time. Actress Angelina Jolie has 
become an opinion leader regarding humanitar-
ian causes, including eradicating poverty and re-
versing the spread of HIV/AIDS throughout the 
world. She reportedly raised $10 million for chari-
ties by selling pictures of her and Brad Pitt’s baby, 
Shiloh, to popular magazines. Warren Buffet is 
the second richest man in the world, worth over 
$50 billion. He is also the foremost opinion  leader 
in personal investing. Eldrick (Tiger) Woods is 
perennially ranked number one in golf in the 
world and is among the most  successful golf-
ers of all time—at age 34. He has accomplished 
more wins on the PGA tour than any other active 
 golfer. As a multi-racial athlete, he has opened 
the door for minorities to enjoy golf, and his 
rigorous physical training has changed the way 
golfers view strength and conditioning. All these 
opinion leaders invent and deliver new cultural 
meaning by passing along modest changes in their styles, values, and attitudes to other 
members of society, who then imitate them.
The third way the fashion system passes on meaning from the culturally consti-
tuted world to consumer products is via radical reform. According to Claude Levi-
Strauss, Western societies willingly accept—even encourage—radical reform.9 As a 
result, Western cultures constantly undergo systematic change. The fashion system 
serves as an important conduit to capture and move radical and innovative cultural 
meaning. Who are the people responsible for this radical reform? The people respon-
sible are those at the very fringes of society, such as hippies, punks, and rappers.10 
These radical and innovative groups redefined cultural categories by overturning the 
established order. For example, hippies protested the Vietnam War and established 
the recreational drug culture; people in the gay community have reshaped the cultural 
category gender; and rap artists have influenced such cultural categories as clothing, 
jewelry, and patterns of speech.
EDWARD PARSONS/AFP/Getty Images
Actress Angelina Jolie has become an opinion leader for humanitarian 
causes.

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
265
Station 3 in Figure 12.1: Consumers
All high-involvement consumer products (e.g., clothing, body adornment, transporta-
tion, architecture, music, food) express the beliefs and values present in the cultur-
ally constituted world. This meaning continues its journey from consumer products 
into the day-to-day life of consumers. Consumers represent Station 3 in Figure 12.1. 
The instruments that transfer meaning to consumers are known as rituals. Rituals are 
objec ti ve 3
Cultural Change via Hip-Hop Fashion
Marketing in Action
Often, the groups responsible for a radical departure from 
the culturally constituted conventions of Western societies 
are those existing at the margins of society.4 The hip-hop 
culture, broadly recognized by its rap music, beatboxing, 
breakdancing, and urban graffiti, has created an entirely 
new clothing fashion. The diffusion of hip-hop fashion into 
the mainstream illustrates the power that less privileged 
groups can exercise over the whole of society. Today, 
hip-hop fashion is a prominent part of popular global 
fashion for all races and ethnicities. But it 
didn’t start that way. It began with inner city, 
African-American youth in New York and Los 
Angeles.
In the early 1980s, hip-hop fashion was 
novel. LL Cool J wore brightly colored sweat 
suits, bomber jackets, and Adidas sneakers 
with “phats,” i.e., oversized shoelaces. Big 
Daddy Kane wore heavy gold chains, and 
Salt-N-Pepa donned oversized earrings. 
Then came the 1990s. Dance rappers like 
MC Hammer popularized blousy pants, and 
Left Eye helped popularize baseball caps 
and neon-colored clothing. Public Enemy 
wore dreadlocks, matted ropes of hair that 
originated in ancient dynastic Egypt. Polka-dot clothing 
made a brief but impressionable appearance, thanks to 
rapper Kwamé, and Starter jackets and Air Jordan sneak-
ers emerged as status symbols. Hip-hop fashion crossed 
over to high fashion when models began wearing heavy 
gold jewelry and bomber jackets with thick fur collars. 
Among the most interesting hip-hop trends of the early 
1990s, Treach of Naughty by Nature dressed in metallic 
chain-linked padlocks, in apparent solidarity with “all the 
brothers who are locked down.”40 This particular trend 
did not last. Gangsta rap emerged in the mid-1990s with 
black-ink tattoos, bandanas, and baggy pants without 
belts. In addition, new street-slang, such as “homeboy,” 
emerged. Interestingly, gangsta rap was influenced to 
some extent by the gangster styles of the 1930s, shown 
by a resurgence in the wearing of bowler hats, silk shirts, 
alligator-skin shoes, and double-breasted suits.
Fashion design houses Polo, Calvin Klein, and Tommy 
Hilfiger embraced hip-hop fashion in the 1990s. In fact, 
when Snoop Doggy Dogg donned a Hilfiger sweatshirt 
during Saturday Night Live, this article of clothing was 
sold out in New York City stores the next day. The late-
1990s witnessed the rise of platinum jewelry and aviator 
warm-up suits, largely inspired by rap star 
Sean Combs, who is also known as Puff 
Daddy and P. Diddy. Do-rags became a 
hit, supporting the popular African-American 
hairstyles with cornrows and Caesar low-
cuts. Afros also reemerged after 30 years of 
dormancy. Rappers like Jay-Z and The Hot 
Boys started the Bling movement, which fea-
tured ostentatious jewelry, including grills, or 
removable platinum-jeweled teeth covers.
The 2000s ushered in new hip-hop 
styles, including prep-hop, featuring polo 
shirts with popped collars, large, elaborate 
belt buckles, and fitted caps with straight 
bills worn sideways. Shorter, tighter T-shirts 
replaced long Ts in an effort to show off decorative belt 
buckles. More recently, the baggy pants style appears 
to be waning. Today, hip-hop fashion has become main-
stream. It has moved from the inner cities to the suburbs, 
even into the boardrooms of McDonald’s, Coca-Cola, 
and Nautica. Young people of all races and nationalities 
have embraced the hip-hop culture—its music, clothing, 
street-slang, tattoos, jewelry, movies, and magazines. 
Hip-hop artists are “meaning suppliers” for culture. Like the 
hippies and punks who preceded them, hip-hop artists 
utilize the fashion system to overturn the established 
 cultural order and inspire new cultural principles and 
categories. They will not be the last innovative group to 
effect cultural change.41
attator/iStockphoto.com

266 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
symbolic actions that occur in a fixed sequence and are repeated over time.11 Consumers 
use four rituals to affirm or revise cultural meaning: exchange, possession, grooming, 
and divestment. Each represents a different stage by which cultural meaning moves 
from product to consumer.4
Exchange rituals involve one person or a group of people purchasing and present-
ing consumer products to another. This movement of products from giver to receiver 
allows the giver to transfer deliberated cultural properties to the receiver. A son who 
receives books in exchange for good performance in school is also made the recipient of 
a specific concept about himself as intellectually curious. An engaged daughter who re-
ceives a down payment on a new home in lieu of an expensive wedding celebration may 
come to see herself as practically minded. Western gift exchange rituals—particularly 
at birthdays and Christmas—provide powerful opportunities for the giver to pass on 
cultural meanings to the receiver.
Unfulfilled requests can be equally important in passing on cultural meaning. A 
child’s request for and his parents’ subsequent refusal to give him toy guns and soldiers 
signals something about cultural attitudes toward warfare. Similarly, presenting sub-
stitute gifts conveys important cultural meaning. Children who receive Nancy Drew 
computer games as substitutes for World of Warcraft games or Civilization instead of 
Sims may decode messages about acceptable forms of fantasy. Giving a young person 
a mobile phone that does not include text messaging and digital photography options 
may emphasize the serious nature of the mobile communications, i.e., the phone is 
for safety. Substituting a trip to Cedar Point in Ohio for Disney World could high-
light a family’s scarcity of time or money. Recent research suggests that sharing music 
files from sources such as Napster, Limewire, or Itunes represents a special case of gift 
giving.12 Sharing music and movies provides rich insight into the cultural values be-
ing passed to the receiver. What kind of message is being sent along with the “gift” of 
Beethoven? How about Fifty Cent? The Rolling Stones?
Gift-wrapping can also express important cultural meaning. In Japan, for example, 
the economic value of the gift is subordinate to its symbolic meaning. Consequently, 
the wrapping paper and adornments are paramount. Many Japanese view giving gifts 
to friends and family as a reciprocal obligation, known as kosai. They perform ritual-
ized activities when giving gifts to both personal and professional acquaintances, all of 
which can be very stressful. Consistent with the Japanese cultural principle of “saving 
face,” gifts are rarely opened in the presence of the giver, just in case the receiver re-
sponds unfavorably to the contents inside the elaborate packaging.13
Possession rituals occur when consumers discuss, compare, reflect upon, and dis-
play their belongings. “Claiming” takes place when consumers adopt into their existing 
personalities the specific qualities of a product assigned to it by marketing activities.4 
For example, marketing teaches us that motorcycles represent freedom, power, and 
rugged individuality. Thus, discussing one’s motorcycle may transfer the cultural prin-
ciple, freedom, from the product to a consumer’s personality. Friends who compare 
the features of their minivans may be emphasizing the nurturing dimension of their 
personalities—or simply underscoring their pragmatism. Sorting and organizing one’s 
photographs (in traditional scrapbooks or digitally on the computer) reinforces exist-
ing cultural principles and categories. Photos of vacations depict the category, time, 
and offer some insight into the cultural principle surrounding leisure. Photographs of 
the consumer at various stages of her life illustrate the category, age, and the principles 
associated with age-relevant behaviors. Through possession rituals, consumers draw on 
the ability of consumer products to discriminate between cultural categories and prin-
ciples. “He’s a BMW guy,” really means that he’s a yuppie (young urban professional). 

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
267
“She’s a Target woman,” suggests a practical but chic personality. Rolex and Kmart 
signal class categories and the principles associated with upper versus lower class. Work 
boots and hard hats represent more than protection; they are symbolic of blue-collar 
occupations. Trips to Cancun, Mexico, paint a different picture than do excursions to 
Barcelona, Spain. Interestingly, possession rituals can be equally instructive when con-
sumers fail to embrace the cultural properties of their possessions. “I sold the motor-
cycle. It wasn’t me,” provides insight into a consumer’s value system. “I no longer shop 
at Target because they don’t carry the brands that I like” similarly reflects a consumer’s 
attitude regarding brands and shopping. Possession rituals help complete the second 
stage of cultural movement from products to consumers. Consumers extract the mean-
ingful properties of consumer products and adopt or reject them as part of their lives.
Many consumer products do not last indefinitely. Accordingly, grooming rituals 
allow consumers to extract cultural meaning from perishable possessions through re-
peated use. Products such as shampoo, cosmetics, and clothes facilitate daily grooming 
rituals. The ritual of “going out” is an example of a more elaborate grooming ritual. 
Women sometimes describe applying cosmetics as “putting on their faces,” while men 
sometimes behave as though they are preparing for an athletic event when they get 
dressed in the morning. Pep talks, changing and re-changing clothes, painstakingly 
styling one’s hair, and meticulous shaving all demonstrate consumers’ desire to cultivate 
consumer products and absorb the products’ meanings into their personality. “Because 
you’re worth it” (L’Oréal), “Create a storm,” (Monsoon), “Gentlemen prefer Hanes,” 
“Because life is not a spectator sport” (Reebok), and “Every kiss begins with Kay” (Kay 
Jewelers) embody marketing-created meanings that can be transferred from the prod-
uct to the consumer via grooming rituals. In sum, grooming rituals help draw cultural 
meaning out of products and invest them in the consumer.14
Consumers use divestment rituals for two purposes. First, if consumers purchase 
previously owned items such as cars or homes, elaborate cleaning and redecorating ritu-
als help erase meanings associated with the previous owner. This allows the new owner 
to free up the cultural meaning of the product and re-associate it with him/herself. 
Second, when consumers sell or otherwise dispense with a product, they attempt to 
erase the meaning that they invested in the item. Prior to selling a beloved automobile, 
consumers remove all personal artifacts, sometimes even the floor mats, and prepare the 
car for its new owner. Nevertheless, consumers may feel awkward seeing the new owner 
with his/her old possession. If the products provided cultural meaning for consum-
ers, they may feel strange about someone else driving their cars, wearing their jackets, 
playing with their golf clubs, sitting on their lawn furniture, or riding their bicycles. 
Divestment rituals clearly suggest that consumers believe cultural meaning can be trans-
ferred from products to people.
All four personal rituals help the transfer of cultural meaning from consumer prod-
ucts to consumers. Exchange rituals allow one consumer to impart desirable meaning 
to another, while possession rituals help reinforce the relationship between a product 
and its owner. Grooming rituals provide an opportunity to continually extract meaning 
from perishable goods, and divestment rituals empty products of their meaning before 
they assume new ownership.
Cultural meaning, which began in the collective minds of society (the cultur-
ally constituted world), is transferred to consumer products by deliberate marketing 
activities and the fashion system. Cultural meanings “get into” consumer products 
through marketing activities because ads and promotions make clear reference to exist-
ing cultural symbols. Similarly, opinion leaders and reference groups provide meaning 
to products by the associations that consumers hold regarding those groups. Then, 

268 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
consumers extract cultural values from the products they purchase by employing rit-
uals. Through their brand choices, consumers express and build their identities. In 
the end, cultural meaning—beliefs about what is important, useful, and desirable—
resides at all three stations simultaneously: the culturally constituted world, consumer 
products, and consumers. Next, we explore how consumers learn about their cultures.
Enculturation and Acculturation
Anthropologists refer to learning about one’s own culture as enculturation. McCracken’s 
cultural framework includes cultural agents, who help with this process. Cultural agents 
gather meaning in one station and help transfer it to the next. Marketing and fashion 
agents help give meaning to their products. Specifically, marketing agents such as prod-
uct designers and advertisers decide which product benefits—such as convenience, style, 
durability, and economy—reside in the culturally constituted world and then promote 
these benefits to the most responsive consumer markets. Some cultures, such as the 
United States, appear time-impoverished and respond favorably to any innovation that 
saves time. In contrast, Latin American cultures rarely feel pressured by time.
Fashion agents such as architects and artists, clothing creators, and automobile de-
signers use the fashion system to inject their creations with cultural meaning. Media 
agents such as journalists, reporters, and experts observe cultural innovation and de-
cide what is “hot” and what is “not.” Other cultural agents such as parents, peers, and 
teachers impart their cultural values to consumers. Often, these values are reflected in 
consumers’ rituals and help transfer meaning from consumer products to consumers. 
Thus, cultural agents exist at and between every station in the model (Figure 12.1).
The process of acculturation occurs when people in one culture adapt to mean-
ings in another culture.15 Acculturation has become increasingly important as a result 
of global immigration, which can profoundly influence a nation through language 
and other cultural differences. In France, for example, immigration is expected to be a 
major political issue, in no small part because of the 2005 riots in the eastern suburbs 
of Paris involving French Muslims who had immigrated from Northern Africa. In the 
United States, the foreign-born population is growing more than six times faster than 
the native-born population. The most recent census data report 31.1 million immi-
grants, more than twice the 14.1 million recorded in 1980. Nations with large im-
migrant populations, like the United States, must deal with important acculturation 
issues surrounding language.
Language
Perhaps the most obvious differences among cultures lie in their verbal communica-
tion systems. Consumers who travel to foreign countries understand the challenges of 
both oral and written communication. In order for people to function as consumers—
nonetheless in a society—they must be able to interact with the prevailing language. 
Language is not merely a collection of words. Language expresses the beliefs and values 
of a culture. Anthropologist Benjamin Lee Whorf maintained that language actually 
shapes the worldview of consumers, their behavior toward others, and their manners 
of acting.16
Linguists divide the study of verbal language into four categories. Syntax comprises 
the rules of sentence formation; semantics deals with systems of meaning; phonology 
deals with sound patterns; and morphology involves word formation. A fifth category, 
nonverbal communications, includes body language, gestures, and other forms of 

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
269
unspoken communication. Taken together, all five categories comprise the broader 
field known as semiotics. Figure 12.2 provides several examples of linguistic differences 
between English, Russian, Spanish, and Japanese.
Solid communication linkages must be established between 
marketers and customers or translation problems are likely to 
occur. Attempts to translate marketing communications from one 
language to another often fail because of problems with semantics, 
as illustrated by the following examples. During the late 1990s, 
Nike aired a television commercial for hiking shoes in Kenya using 
Samburu tribesmen. The camera closed in on the one tribesman 
who speaks in the native Maa language. As he speaks, the Nike 
slogan “Just do it” appears on the screen. The Kenyan is really say-
ing, “I don’t want these. Give me big shoes.” Similarly, the Dairy 
Association’s huge success with the “got milk?” campaign  prompted 
them to expand their advertising to Mexico. Unfortunately, the 
Spanish translation read “Are you lactating?” Each of these transla-
tion blunders occurred because of semantics, i.e., finding words 
with equivalent meanings.
Phonology frequently complicates cross-cultural  communication. 
Mars, Inc., the $18 billion privately owned candy conglomer-
ate, had difficulty making the M&M’s name pronounceable in 
France, where neither ampersands nor the apostrophe “s” plural form 
exists.Similarly, Whirlpool struggled with a brand name that is  nearly 
impossible to pronounce in Spain, Italy, France, and Germany.17 
The name Coca-Cola in China was first rendered as Ke-ke-ken-la. 
Unfortunately, Coke did not discover until after thousands of 
signs had been printed that the phrase means, “bite the wax tadpole” or “female horse 
stuffed with wax,” depending on the dialect. Coke then researched 40,000 Chinese 
characters and found a close phonetic equivalent, “ko-kou-ko-le,” which translates as 
“happiness in the mouth,” a much better choice.
Figure 12.2 Linguistic Differences43
Linguistic 
Category
Examples
Syntax
English has relatively fixed word order, while Russian has 
relatively free word order. In Spanish, the adjectives follow nouns; 
in English, adjectives precede nouns.
Semantics
Japanese words communicate nuances of feeling for which other 
languages lack exact translations. For example, “yes” and “no” 
can be interpreted with finer distinction in Japanese than in other 
languages
Phonology
Japanese does not distinguish between “L” and “R” sounds. Rs 
are “rolled” in Russian. In Spanish, two Ls, one after another, are 
spoken like a “y.”
Morphology
Russian is a highly inflected language, with six different endings 
for nouns and adjectives.
PRNewsFoto/Milk Processor Education Program/AP Photo
The semantics of the “got milk?” campaign was 
misunderstood in Mexico.

270 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Cultural Translation
Jean-Claude Usunier maintains that many problems in translation are cultural transla-
tion difficulties, i.e., problems related to the spirit of the language. Some words  simply 
have no foreign equivalent because the meaning may not be relevant to a foreign cul-
ture. The English word “upset” for example, does not have a French equivalent, because 
the English meaning of the word suggests something of an inner personal disruption 
and loss of self-control. The French cannot be “upset” because generally they are not 
afraid to show their feelings and emotions to others.18 In contrast, it is well known 
that in the language of peoples who live near the Arctic Circle, nearly a dozen different 
terms are used to describe the English word “snow.” The following translation blunders 
illustrate problems with cultural translations.
Samarin is a Swedish over-the-counter remedy for upset stomachs. It is similar 
to Alka-Seltzer. Several years ago, their ads featured comic strips without text; they 
used three pictures. The first picture showed a man grasping his stomach, obviously 
ill. In the second picture, the man drank a glass of Samarin. In the final picture, he 
appeared smiling. Although the ad campaign was a success in Europe, it failed when 
printed in Arabic-speaking newspapers. Why? Arabic languages are read from right 
to left!
In 2003, the Hong Kong Tourist Board was unable to change an advertising 
campaign that was on billboards throughout Hong Kong and in British versions of 
Cosmopolitan and Condé Nast Traveller. The slogan was, “Hong Kong: It will take your 
breath away.” Unfortunately, the campaign coincided with the SARS epidemic that 
 resulted in numerous deaths. Shortness of breath is one of the main symptoms of 
SARS. Figure 12.3 illustrates 10 classic marketing translation faux pas; most are rooted 
in semantic or cultural translation problems.
Body Language
Although familiarity with verbal language is critical to understanding a culture, it is 
not the only way cultures express their personalities. Derived from the Greek word 
kinein, meaning “to move,” body language involves the silent movement of body parts, 
including facial expressions such as scowls, smiles, and stares, gestures such as hand and 
arm signals, postural shifts such as leaning forward or crossing one’s arms, and forms of 
touching, including slapping and caressing. Interpersonal spacing is also an important 
form of nonverbal communication. Different cultures prefer standing relatively close 
or far away, facing head-on versus to one side. Latin Americans, Arabs, and Africans 
typically stand within 18 inches when speaking to a business acquaintance. To them, it 
is a sign of confidence. In contrast, Germans, Nordics, and Asians generally consider at 
least 36 inches as their personal space.
Like written and spoken language, nonverbal languages are mostly learned rather 
than innate. Consequently, the meanings of nonverbal expressions such as gestures 
can vary from culture to culture. One catalogue retailer learned this the hard way by 
printing the “OK” finger sign on each page of its catalogue. Unfortunately, in many 
parts of Latin America such as Brazil, this sign is considered an obscene gesture. The 
catalogues were scrapped and re-designed to better reflect resident body language. 
Similarly, Mountain Bell Company marketed its telephone services in Saudi Arabia. 
One of the ads portrayed an executive talking on the phone with his feet propped up 
on the desk, showing the soles of his shoes. Arab culture considers the display of one’s 
soles to be disrespectful.

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
271
In contrast, emotion expressed by the face tends to contain universal meaning. 
Research demonstrates that most cultures communicate five different emotions by 
distinct facial expressions: happiness, sadness, fear, surprise, and anger. Happiness is 
easily detected in the lower face, while sadness and fear are best understood from the 
eyes.19 Still, the rules for using these facial expressions may vary from culture to culture. 
For example, Americans consider direct eye contact while speaking a sign of trust. 
South Koreans, however, view this as rude and disrespectful. The French maintain that 
Americans smile too much. In addition to language, both verbal and nonverbal, mar-
keters must understand the social setting of a culture.
High- and Low-Context Cultures
The social setting, or context, can affect intercultural communications. Some cultures 
are low-context and emphasize explicit messages. The meanings of such messages are 
largely independent of the situation and people involved, and the words are relatively 
precise in meaning. Other cultures are high-context and communicate more implicit 
meanings. The meanings of the words change depending on who is speaking to whom 
and under what circumstances. Nonverbal messages such as gestures and body lan-
guage are important in high-context cultures. Figure 12.4 depicts various cultures on 
this message-context continuum.20
 1.  Colgate’s Cue toothpaste sold poorly in France because the term “cue” is slang for 
derrière.
 2.  Managers of an American company were startled when they discovered that the 
brand name of the cooking oil they were marketing in a Latin American country 
translated into Spanish as “Jackass Oil.”
 3.  A firm marketed shampoo in Brazil under the name “Evitol.” The name translates 
into “dandruff contraceptive.”
 4. Esso Oil discovered that its name translates into “stalled car” in Japanese.
 5.  American Motors marketed its car the Matador based on the image of courage 
and strength. However, in Puerto Rico, the name means “killer” and was not well 
received, given the hazardous roads throughout the country.
 6.  In 2002, UK sports manufacturer Umbro had to withdraw its new sneakers named 
Zyklon from German markets. They discovered that Zyklon was the name of the 
gas used in Nazi concentration camps. Hoover made the same mistake when they 
named one of their brands Zykon, which was supposed to translate as “cyclone.”
 7.  Several companies become tangled up with bad translations for products resulting 
from misusing the word “mist.” “Irish Mist” (an alcoholic beverage), “Mist Stick” 
(a curling iron from Clairol), and “Silver Mist” (a Rolls Royce car) all bombed in 
Germany because “mist” translates into “dung” or “manure.”
 8.  Kellogg had to rename its Bran Buds cereal in Sweden; the name roughly translated 
to “burned farmer.”
 9.  PepsiCo advertised in Taiwan using the slogan “Come Alive With Pepsi,” which 
translated into Chinese as “Pepsi brings your ancestors back from the dead.”
10.  In Italy, a campaign for Schweppes Tonic Water translated the name into 
“Schweppes Toilet Water.”
Figure 12.3 Ten Classic Marketing Translation Faux Pas

272 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Highly explicit messages can be thought of as unambiguous computer commands; they 
tend to go with low-context cultures. Conversely, highly implicit messages, usually asso-
ciated with high-context cultures, are more ambiguous. The Swiss are represented at the 
extreme lower-left portion of the graph. There is a great deal of precision in their ver-
bal communication. This suggests that Swiss speed limits, contracts, and appointment 
times should be taken literally. In fact, patients pay a fine if they are late for a doctor’s 
visit. The Germans, Scandinavians, and North Americans also fall in the low-context/
explicit message range. In contrast, the Japanese are represented at the upper-right por-
tion of the graph, where context plays a critical role in communication. For example, 
when a consumer from a Western culture says “no” in negotiating, s/he is usually saying 
“I reject the deal.” The Japanese, however, have at least 14 ways of saying “no.”
The Arab and Latin American cultures also tend to be high-context and implicit 
with their messages. Day-to-day consumer behavior in Arab countries differs greatly 
from that in the West. Consumers are expected to negotiate deals and bargain—even 
for perishable food products. But cultures do not always fall at the extremes. The 
Latin-European countries such as Italy, Spain, France, and England tend to be more 
intermediate in terms of context and message. Language plays a prominent part in 
cross-cultural communication, but it is not the only cause of cultural misunderstand-
ings. To communicate effectively, consumers and marketers must possess a common 
understanding of symbols.
Figure 12.4 Cultural Message-Context Continuum
Swiss
Germans
Scandinavians
North Americans
English
French
Spanish
Italians
Latin Americans
Arabs
Japanese
Explicit
    MESSAGES      
 Implicit
High
Source:  Usunier, J. (1993). International Marketing:  A Cultural Approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall International (UK) Limited.    
CONTEXT
Low 

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
273
Symbols
Objects created by a culture cannot be communicated solely by their 
physical characteristics, and consumer products are no exception. 
Goods and services always contain  symbolic elements such as ex-
clusivity, utility, and style. Symbols are communication devices that 
convey meaning through representation. Important marketing sym-
bols include words such as brand names, images like brand logos, and 
actions such as body language and gestures. Symbols can be verbal or 
nonverbal. Brand jingles are short, catchy tunes—with or without 
words—that represent a brand or organization. Marketers under-
stand that music facilitates recall. Children learn much about their 
world by putting words to songs. Many adults still recall the tune that 
accompanied the alphabet song. Jingles such as “Mm-Mm-Good” 
(Campbell’s Soup) and “Like a Rock” (Chevy) take advantage of 
the “stuck song syndrome,” or “earworm.” Marketing professor and 
professional musician James Kellaris discovered that although peo-
ple generally have their own unique earworms, “YMCA,” “We Will 
Rock You,” and “The Lion Sleeps Tonight” rank in the top-ten list. 
According to Kellaris’ theory of cognitive itch, certain properties of 
music may be analogous to biochemical agents, such as histamines, 
which cause an itch on the skin. Exposure to such music may cause a 
sort of “cognitive itch” in one’s mind. The only way to scratch a cognitive itch is to repeat 
the offending music mentally. But this only exacerbates the itch, trapping the hapless 
victim in an involuntary cycle of repeated itching and scratching.21 Thus, advertisers do 
well to plant their jingles in our heads. But jingles need not contain words to be effective. 
The Nabisco “ding,” the Avon “ding-dong,” and the four musical notes representing Intel 
Inside employ only tones to catch our attention and keep their jingles recycling.
Brand logos take a variety of forms, including colors, shapes, words, and other im-
ages. For example, the McDonald’s brand includes a word mark consisting of the word 
“McDonald’s” written in white lettering across the “golden arches,” and superimposed 
against a red background. The “golden arches” represent a non-word mark logo, or brand 
symbol. Many firms use non-word logos to create a distinctive image designed to catch 
 1. Vague “no.”
 2. Vague and ambiguous “yes.”
 3. Silence.
 4. Counter-offer.
 5. Unrelated response.
 6. Physically withdrawing from the conversation.
 7. Feigning equivocation or making an excuse.
 8. Taking issue with the question.
 9. Refusing to acknowledge the question.
 10. Conditional “no.”
 11. Conditional “yes.”
 12. Delayed response, i.e., “we’ll get back to you.”
 13. Apology.
 14. The (rare) equivalent of an English “no.”
Figure 12.5 Fourteen Ways to Say “No” in Japanese18
Courtesy of the Campbell Soup Company

274 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
a consumer’s eye and trigger positive thoughts about the brand. The AT&T globe, the 
Mercedes-Benz three-pronged star, Captain Morgan’s sea captain, Target’s bull’s eye, 
and the Nike swoosh all transcend language with symbolic meaning. What messages do 
the Hot Wheels flame and pink-scripted Barbie symbolize to consumers? What do the 
Olympic “rings” communicate? What does the NBA logo symbolize? Given the substan-
tial investment of creative energy and resources, firms register their brand names, logos, 
and other brand elements as either trademarks or service marks; both provide a form of 
legal protection for the brand, which is considered intellectual property.
Safeguarding brand logos is an important issue in consumer behavior. On March 
16, 2007, AT&T filed suit in U.S. District Court in Atlanta, demanding that 
NASCAR allow an AT&T-sponsored car to change its rear quarter to reflect the re-
tirement of the Cingular brand name and the introduction of the AT&T global logo. 
The car, No. 31, owned by Richard Childress Racing, was driven by Jeff Burton, 
the third-ranked NASCAR driver.22 The lawsuit claims that by not adding the new 
AT&T logo to the existing Cingular car, NASCAR was doing substantial and irrepa-
rable harm to AT&T.
Failure to recognize the cross-cultural implications of symbols can cause problems 
for marketers and consumers. In Japan, for example, a Western golf ball manufac-
turing company packaged golf balls in packs of four for convenience. Unfortunately, 
items packaged in fours are unpopular because the pronunciation of the word “four” in 
Japanese connotes “death.” Nike may have offended Muslims in 1997 when the “flam-
ing air” logo for its Nike Air sneakers appeared too similar to the Arabic form of God’s 
name, “Allah.” Subsequently, Nike pulled more than 38,000 pairs of sneakers from the 
market. Similarly, a soft drink was introduced into Arab countries with an attractive 
label featuring six-pointed stars. Some Arab people interpreted this symbol as pro-Israel 
and refused to buy it. Consequently, another label was printed in ten languages, one 
of which was Hebrew. Again, it sold poorly. When Pepsodent marketed toothpaste in 
Although registered more then a century ago, 
the Mercedes-Benz brand name initially did 
not have a logo associated with it. The idea 
for the “Star” logo originated with Paul and 
Adolf Daimler, the sons of the company’s 
founder. They recalled that their father had 
once used a star symbol in his family cor-
respondence. Their father, Gottlieb Daimler, 
was technical director of the Deutz gas en-
gine factory from 1872 until 1881. During this time, Daimler 
had marked a star on a postcard of Cologne, and Deutz 
predicted that a star would one day shine over Daimler’s own 
factory, symbolizing its prosperity.
In June, 1909, Mercedes-Benz registered 
both a three-pointed and a four-pointed star 
as trademarks. Although both designs were 
legally protected, only the three-pointed star 
was ever used. Beginning in 1910, the 
three-pronged star appeared as a design 
feature on the radiators of the automobiles. 
Apparently, the three points of the star rep-
resented Daimler’s ambition of universal 
motorization on land, water, and sea. Over the years the logo 
evolved to include the “Benz” laurel wreath. Then in 1923, the 
three-pointed star was enclosed in a circle and registered as a 
trademark. The brand logo has changed very little since 1923.42
The Mercedes-Benz Brand Logo
Eye on International
AP Photo/David Zalubowski

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
275
Southeast Asia, its ad campaign emphasized “teeth whiten-
ing.” However, some local natives chew betel nuts to blacken 
their teeth  because they find dark teeth attractive. A U.S. 
telephone company promoted its products and services in 
Latin America by showing a commercial in which a Latino 
wife tells her husband to call a friend and explain that they 
would be late for dinner. The commercial was not received 
well for two reasons. First, Latino women rarely communi-
cate commands to their husbands. Second, the concept of 
“lateness” in Latin America is viewed differently than in the 
United States. Not arriving on time for dinner is not consid-
ered being “late.”
Even within a culture, the meaning of symbols can 
change over time. Crayola has changed its color names be-
cause of the civil rights movement and other social pressures. 
In 1962, Binney & Smith replaced “flesh” crayons with 
“peach,” in recognition of the global variety of skin tones. In 
1999, they changed “Indian Red” to chestnut. Interestingly, 
the color was not named after Native Americans, but for a 
special pigment originating in the country India. Mercedes-
Benz understands the importance of their symbol. It has re-
mained relatively unchanged for more than a century.
Norms
Earlier, we described cultural values as a collective set of 
beliefs about what is important, useful, and desirable. From 
these cultural values flow norms, which specify appropriate 
responses in specific situations. In short, norms are culture’s 
rules of behavior. Enacted norms explicitly and formally 
prescribe acceptable behaviors. For example, restrooms in 
the United States provide gender placards, indicating fa-
cilities for men to use and for women to use. In contrast, 
in France, the same restrooms can be shared by both sexes. 
Crescive norms are implicit and learned only through inter-
acting with other members of a culture. Crescive norms in-
clude customs, morés, and conventions. Customs are overt 
behaviors that have been passed down from one generation 
to the next. Consumer customs may include routine, every-
day activities that have been handed down from the past, 
such as drinking coffee with breakfast and brushing one’s 
teeth at night. They can also be formal and elaborate, such 
as anniversary celebrations and funerals. Earlier in this book, 
rituals were described as a series of behaviors in a fixed se-
quence. Customs are more broadly defined than rituals. It is 
best to think of a custom as an entire category of behavior 
(e.g., a wedding) and a ritual as the individual parts (e.g., 
each of the steps in exchanging vows).
Another form of custom is a moré (more-ay), which is 
a custom with strong moral implications. Morés typically 
 
 
On May 2, 1989, 15-year-old 
 
 
Michael Thomas, a ninth grader at 
 
 
Meade Senior High School in Anne 
 
 
Arundel County, Maryland, was 
strangled by a fellow student who took Thomas’ two-week-old 
Air Jordan basketball shoes and left Thomas’ barefoot body in 
the woods near the school. Young Thomas love Michael Jordan 
and the shoes Jordan endorsed. He loved them both so much, 
he paid $115.50 (approximately $250 in today’s dollars) to “be 
like Mike.”
This was not the first crime relating to sneakers, but 
perhaps the most infamous. This particular story was told in 
Sports Illustrated’s May 14, 1990, issue. There have been 
other such crimes for not only Air Jordans, but for other 
brands of athletic shoes, jackets, and caps bearing sports 
insignia. If you think killing for sneakers was a 1980s thing think 
again. On February 14, 2004, three 16-year-old teens viciously 
beat and stabbed Huang Chen to death, beyond recognition. 
The teens called a food order into Chen’s family’s takeout shop. 
When Chen delivered the order, the three teens murdered him 
to obtain money for sneakers.
Sociologist Elijah Anderson has argued that crimes among 
young black males involving apparel can be linked to inequali-
ties in class and race. “The uneducated, inner city kids don’t 
have a sense of opportunity. They feel the system is closed 
off to them. And yet they’re bombarded with the same cultural 
apparatus [advertising] that the white middle class is. They don’t 
have means to attain the things offered and yet they have the 
same desire. So they value these ‘emblems,’ these symbols of 
supposed success. The golf, the shoes, and the drug dealer’s 
outfit—those things all belie the real situation, but it’s a symbolic 
display that seems to say that things are all right.” Professor 
Anderson argues that advertising fans the flames of this process 
by presenting images that appeal to inner city, black youth, and 
the shoe companies capitalize on the situation. Anderson stops 
short of laying all of the blame with marketers. “This is, after all, a 
free market,” he notes.
NBA star Stephon Marbury of the New York Knicks is work-
ing on a solution. In September 2006, Marbury announced that 
he was producing a line of less expensive athletic apparel. In 
fact, Starbury brand shoes retail for about $15, a far cry from 
the $150 to $300 for Nike or Adidas shoes. Marbury’s hope 
is to “keep kids a little safer.” He reasoned that children wear-
ing low-priced jackets and sports shoes would be less likely to 
become crime victims. Do you think this will help?
Source: Telander, R. (May 14, 1990). Your sneakers or 
your life. Sports Illustrated, 36-49.
E T H I C S

276 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
prescribe right and wrong ways of behaving and involve  taboos, or forbidden cultural 
activities involving eating, sex, gender roles, vulgarity, and the like. When consumers 
violate customs and morés, they are likely to receive strong sanctions from other mem-
bers of society. For example, in the United States, consumers who “cut in line” at retail 
stores, restaurants, or amusement parks typically receive strong scoldings from other 
shoppers and patrons. In extreme cases, aberrant consumers may be removed from the 
premises. Similarly, in Arab cultures it is forbidden to feature women in advertising. 
Firms that do so risk serious consumer backlash. By contrast, conventions are norms 
that deal less with right or wrong or tradition, but rather with what is more or less 
“correct.” A list of conventions in Western countries might include how to host a 
birthday party, how to complement clothes with scarves, how to maintain one’s lawn, 
and how to coordinate a golf outing.
Customs, morés, and norms interact to guide culturally appropriate behavior. For 
example, a moré might tell consumers what gifts are appropriate for a boss or superior. 
A custom would guide consumers on when the gift should be presented, and a conven-
tion might suggest how to present the gift. In Japan, for example, morés indicate that 
periodically giving gifts to bosses is appropriate—even expected. The giving of year-
end gifts, called oseibo, is a Japanese custom. Spending approximately 5,000 yen (about 
$40) for a store-delivered gift is the convention.
Conducting business in Saudi Arabia can be challenging for Western women. 
Although the environment is changing, gender separation still exists. It is taboo 
for women to dine without their husbands. Therefore, public places, such as hotels 
and restaurants, provide family rooms where women are served with their hus-
bands. Also, women are forbidden to drive. The norm for women is to dress con-
servatively—long skirts, sleeves of elbow length or longer, and unrevealing neck-
lines. Finally it is not customary for Muslim men to shake hands or to engage in 
conversational body contact with women, but such gestures are common when 
speaking with other men.
Return Potential Model
Because norms are based on a group’s cultural values, they not only coordinate the 
behavior of the culture, they also prescribe behaviors that prolong such values. Norms 
can also help define and enhance the identity of a culture through the use of distinct 
clothing, speech dialects, or hairstyles. Perhaps most importantly, norms can provide 
feedback on how much or how little a behavior is desired. The return potential 
model describes norms on two dimensions. The behavioral dimension specifies the 
amount of behavior regulated by the norm, and the evaluation dimension shows the 
cultural response to that behavior.23 To illustrate, Figure 12.6 depicts three norms, A, 
B, and C. Each norm takes a different functional shape based on how much behavior 
relating to that norm is desired. For example, let’s call Norm A “integrity.” Approval 
for Norm A is a positive linear function of the behavior relating to Norm A (e.g., 
honesty), i.e., more is always better. Let’s define Norm B as “infidelity.” Cultural ap-
proval for Norm B is a negative linear function. Here, indifference is returned for the 
lowest level of behavior characterizing infidelity (fidelity is the norm), and increasing 
levels only bring greater disapproval. Let’s call Norm C “sense of humor.” Norm C 
appears as an inverted U-shaped function. Here, cultural disapproval exists for very 
low levels of behavior relating to humor. In other words, lacking a sense of humor 
is met with disapproval. Similarly, very high levels of behavior relating to humor are 
ob jec tive 4

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
277
not approved, either. Too many jokes and funny stories may be considered in bad 
taste. The middle ground is best for Norm C. A moderate level of humor returns the 
greatest approval.
Figure 12.6 also specifies acceptable levels for the three norms at points where the 
functions lie above the horizontal behavioral line. No level of infidelity (Norm B) is 
acceptable. Low levels of infidelity are expected, and clearly more is always worse. In 
contrast, behaviors representing integrity (Norm A) attain acceptance only at moder-
ate or high levels. Sense of humor (Norm C) is like a roller coaster. Too little (slow) is 
no fun, and too much (fast) is overkill. Moderately low to moderately high levels of 
behaviors demonstrating sense of humor return cultural acceptance. Finally, the return 
potential model identifies the various levels of intensity for each norm by observing 
the range from the highest point to the lowest point on the evaluation dimension. For 
example, Norms A and B exhibit large distances between high and low points of ap-
proval. In contrast, Norm C’s range of high and low approval is very small. Thus, one 
could infer that members of this culture feel more strongly about Norms A and B than 
they do about Norm C.
In summary, norms exert tremendous influence on consumer behavior by prescrib-
ing which actions are appropriate in specific situations. The Returns Potential Model 
helps explain how much of these actions are desirable and what return consumers can 
expect. The next section further describes how cultural values are adopted by individual 
consumers.
Figure 12.6 Returns Potential Curves
Source:  Jackson, J. (1965). Structural Characteristics of Norms. In I. D. Steiner and M. Fishbein (eds.).
Current Studies in Social Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.   
Norm C 
Norm B
Norm A 
Evaluation
Dimension  
Approval 
Disapproval 
low
high
Amount of
Behavior  

278 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Consumer Values
Core Values
Pervasive and enduring cultural values are called core values. These important values 
reflect and shape the collective personality of a culture. Organizational anthropologist 
Geert Hofstede identified five dimensions of cultural values. Three of the dimensions 
center on expected social behavior; the fourth describes the search for “truth”; and the 
final dimension deals with the importance of time.24 Power distance describes the extent 
to which the less powerful members of a culture tolerate large gaps in power struc-
ture. For example, the Hong Kong and French cultures exhibit high power distance; 
they expect power to be unequally distributed. In contrast, Germans, Austrians, and 
Scandinavians tend to exhibit low power distance. Individualism reflects the degree to 
which society is partitioned into groups. Individualistic cultures, such as the United 
States, tend not to emphasize group cohesion, while collectivist cultures, such as Japan, 
emphasize group solidity. Masculinity describes the extent to which men are expected to 
be competitive and ambitious and women are expected to be nurturing and concerned 
primarily with children and  family. Japan exhibits high masculinity, while Spain and 
Taiwan rank low on this dimension. Uncertainty avoidance captures the extent to which 
a culture is uncomfortable with  ambiguous and unstructured situations. Cultures such 
as Greece and Portugal tend to believe in absolute truth and so, score high on this 
dimension. Conversely, Southeast Asia and India tend to behave contemplatively, and 
so, score low on this dimension. Long-term orientation (LTO) represents a culture’s 
search for virtue (versus truth). This dimension measures cul-
tural characteristics such as persistence, social hierarchies, thrift, 
and a sense of shame. Hong Kong and Taiwan score very high 
on LTO; Spain and Portugal score low. Differences in cultural 
core values can explain why some marketing efforts succeed in 
one culture and fail in another. For example, research shows that 
North American consumers exhibit more favorable attitudes to-
ward advertising messages that focus on individualistic core val-
ues such as self-reliance, self-improvement, and achievement of 
personal goals. In contrast, South Korean consumers prefer ads 
that emphasize collectivistic core values including goals, family 
integrity, and group harmony.25
At the individual level, core values are central to a consumer’s 
self-concept, i.e., his/her awareness and perceptions about him/herself. As such, core 
values significantly influence consumers’ beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors in the mar-
ketplace. Understanding consumers’ core values helps marketers uncover the basis for 
the customer-product relationship. Means-end chains help explain how consumers 
derive core values in the marketplace.
Means-End Chains
Cultural meaning moves from the broader society to consumer goods, and consum-
ers extract meaning from their products and merge these meanings into their own 
personalities. For example, Red Bull users often differ from Starbuck’s drinkers, and 
Corvette owners exhibit personality characteristics that may differ from Cadillac 
owners. Clearly, consumers do not invite all products to become a part of their 
self-concept.
objec tive 5
©Gina Smith, 2009/ Used under license 
from Shutterstock.com

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
279
A useful approach to understanding how consumers view products is through a means-
end chain. A means-end chain combines three levels of a consumer’s product knowledge—
attributes, consequences, and values—to form a sequential network of meaning.26
Attributes A means-end chain begins with attributes, the basic character-
istics of goods and services. Attributes can be tangible, such as the processing speed 
and memory capacity of a computer, the miles per gallon of an automobile, or the 
fabric of a dress. Attributes can also be intangible, such as the style of a house, the 
design of a jacket, or the comfort of a shoe. Furthermore, attributes are not limited 
to physical goods. Services, such as banks, offer tangible products such as interest-
bearing checking accounts and ATMs and provide intangible attributes such as speed 
of service, friendliness of staff, and convenience of location. Tangible attributes are 
easily measured. For example, miles per gallon is a numeric value calculated from 
gas consumption and distance traveled. Similarly, megahertz is the unit of mea-
sure for computer processing speed. Intangible attributes, although largely abstract, 
can also be measured. Consumers’ attitudes toward quality, comfort, and conve-
nience can be measured by survey instruments such as Likert (agreement) and rating 
scales (1–10).
Benefits Consumers rarely evaluate brands solely on the basis of their physi-
cal or abstract attributes. Instead, they are interested in what these attributes can 
do for them. Benefits represent the second stage in a means-end chain and embody 
consumers’ perceptions about the outcomes or consequences provided by the attri-
butes. Miles per gallon, for example, doesn’t mean much as an attribute. It takes on 
meaning only because it indicates a certain level of economy. Similarly, computer-
processing speed is meaningful because it allows for efficient multi-tasking. Benefits 
can be classified as functional or psychosocial. Functional benefits are tangible out-
comes that result from consuming or using a product. For example, the functional 
benefit of a large engine is greater power and speed, and the func-
tional benefit of consuming 12 ounces of Gatorade is replenishing 
electrolytes lost during exercise.
In contrast, psychosocial benefits include the internal psychological 
and external social consequences of using or consuming a product. 
Often, consumers enhance their self-concepts by purchasing items 
that make them feel stylish or beautiful. Consumers also derive so-
cial benefits from wearing stylish clothes if their peers make positive 
comments about them publically. A consumer may benefit psycho-
logically by eating a vegetarian diet and feeling positive about not 
consuming animals.27 Similarly, a consumer may benefit socially if a 
colleague champions her vegetarian diet to another colleague.
Values Just as cultural values collectively represent what is im-
portant, useful, and desirable, consumer values embody consumers’ 
priorities and preferences about their life goals and how products 
can help them  attain these goals. For example, consumers who place 
a high priority on  education may attend graduate school, despite 
the difficult regimen and foregone income. Consumers who strongly 
prefer American-made products may purchase only American cars 
and trucks. In fact, research shows that values relate to a wide variety 
of consumer behaviors, including automobile purchasing,28 choice 
Functional benefits are tangible outcomes such 
as the electrolytes offered in G.
Reprinted with permission of Stokley-Van Camp, Inc.

280 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
of occupation,29 and media use.30 Broadly speaking, values can be classified as instru-
mental or terminal.31
Instrumental values represent preferred modes of behavior. They are actions or 
“instruments” that provide positive value for consumers. In this sense, instrumental 
values are mostly transitional, i.e., a means to an end. For example, jokes are instru-
ments for amusement; exercising is an action that provides feelings of vigor; and 
studying makes students feel responsible and informed. All these behaviors (jokes, 
exercise, and studying) may be employed to serve higher-level goals (pleasure, 
fitness, and accomplishment) or terminal values, which represent psychological 
states of being. In this sense, terminal values serve as the end points for a set of 
actions. Figure 12.7 provides a list of instrumental and terminal values.32 Whether 
instrumental or terminal, consumer values represent the final destination of the 
means-end chain.
Because means-end chains are constructed at the individual level, they are likely 
to differ greatly among consumers. Also, not every means-end chain leads to a instru-
mental or terminal value. In fact, a functional benefit may represent the conclusion of 
a means-end chain. Consider a consumer who is so thirsty that the functional outcome 
(quenching her thirst) is the only end she is seeking. Any means (e.g., water, juice, soda) 
would suffice. In the same vein, a psychosocial benefit can serve as the final end point 
(e.g., buying a particular hat makes a consumer fit in with his friends). Finally, some 
products may have missing levels in the means-end chain (e.g., I don’t know why, but 
this golf ball really flies a great distance) and some products have multiple means-end 
Figure 12.7 Instrumental and Terminal Values
Instrumental Values
Terminal Values
Ambitious
The good life
Open-minded
An exciting life
Capable
World peace
Cheerful
Equality
Clean
Freedom
Courageous
Happiness
Forgiving
National security
Helpful
Pleasure
Honest
Salvation
Imaginative
Social recognition
Independent
True friendship
Intellectual
Wisdom
Logical
World beauty
Loving
Family security
Obedient
Mature love
Polite
Self-respect
Responsible
Sense of accomplishment
Self-controlled
Peace of mind
Source: Pollay, R. W. (1983). Measuring the Cultural Values Manifest in Advertising. 
Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 6:71–92.

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
281
chains because more than one attribute or benefit is important (e.g., distance and 
feel are important in a golf ball). Figure 12.8 illustrates a detailed means-end-chain 
and provides examples and explanations for each stage.33 Tangible attributes (e.g., silk 
 fabric) typically provide functional benefits (e.g., comfort), and intangible attributes 
(e.g., stylish design) generally lead to psychosocial benefits (e.g., I feel attractive; others 
have complimented my choice of style). Both functional and psychosocial benefits can 
fulfill instrumental values (cheerful), and instrumental values (e.g., cheerful) can lead 
to terminal values (e.g., happiness).
Rokeach Value Survey
Because instrumental and terminal values can help predict consumer attitudes and 
behaviors towards brands, researchers have begun to use value models in consumer 
behavior studies, such as the Rokeach Value Survey (VALS).24 This widely used survey 
instrument is designed to provide insight into global value systems by linking them 
with consumer beliefs, attitudes, preferences, and behaviors. Some evidence suggests 
that differences in values across cultures can translate into product- and brand-specific 
consumer preferences. One interesting study compared adult Brazilians across six ter-
minal value segments using the Rokeach Value Survey.34 Segment A (13 percent of 
the sample) was primarily concerned with world peace, followed by inner harmony 
and true friendship. Relatively less materialistic in their value system, this group was 
more likely to be involved in activities such as reading, gardening, and visiting with 
family members. As consumers, this group was less likely to invest time and money on 
new products. By comparison, the more self-centered, achievement-oriented pleasure 
Figure 12.8 The Means-End Chain Process33
Tangible
Attributes
Source: Adapted from Peter, J. P., and Olson, J. C. (2008), Consumer Behavior & Marketing Strategy, 8th
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.  
Intangible
Attributes
Functional
Benefits
French
Styling
Silk Fabric 
Psychosocial
Benefits
Instrumental Values 
Terminal Values 
Summer
Comfort
Feeling
Attractive
Cheerful Feelings 
Happiness 

282 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
seekers found in Segment B (9 percent of the sample) were extravagant dressers who 
value the latest fashions. This segment was more likely to try new products. A third 
segment (21 percent of the sample) included relatively younger and more educated 
individuals who mostly value inner harmony and freedom. This group was motivated 
to attend artistic and cultural activities and preferred living in large cities. They viewed 
clothing as more than just bodily protection, but they stopped short of using it as a 
fashion statement.
The List of Values (LOV)
Similar in purpose to the Rokeach Value Survey, the List of  Values (LOV) was developed 
at the University of Michigan Survey Research Center to identify nine consumer value 
segments and link them to value-related consumer behavior.35 The nine segments are:
• Security
• Self-respect
• Self-fulfillment
• Accomplishment
• Fun and enjoyment
• Warm relations
• Well-respected
• Belonging
• Excitement36
Research demonstrates that the LOV is easier to administer and performs as well as 
VALS in predicting consumer behavior trends.37 The LOV has been used to show that 
people who emphasize sense of belonging in their value system tend to be older and 
more likely to read Reader’s Digest and TV Guide than people who do not endorse this 
value. People who endorse excitement in their value system are younger and prefer 
Rolling Stone magazine.38 Finally, LOV has been used to help predict the purchase 
of several categories of durable goods. For example, consumers who valued security, 
respect, and sense of belonging showed greater preference for sports, exercise, and lux-
ury products. Those who valued fun and excitement revealed a greater preference for 
home entertainment products and pets.39
Chapter Summary
Culture is often defined as the patterns of meaning acquired 
by members of society expressed in their knowledge, beliefs, 
art, laws, morals, customs, and habits. Put simply, culture 
can be thought of as a system of collectively held values 
or the personality of a society. Cultural values comprise 
a collective set of beliefs about what important, useful, 
and desirable. The meaning of cultural values is mobile 
within a given society. Cultural meaning begins in the 
collective minds of society and is transferred to consumer 
products by marketing efforts and the fashion system. 
Consumers then adopt cultural values from the products 
they purchase by employing exchange, possession, groom-
ing, and divestment rituals. Enculturation refers to learn-
ing about one’s own culture; acculturation occurs when 
people in one culture adapt to meanings resident in 
another culture.

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
283
Written and spoken language is perhaps the most ob-
vious characteristic of a culture. Many of the problems 
in translating languages verbally stem from fundamental 
differences in cultures. Some words and phrases have no 
translation because the meaning may not exist in a dif-
ferent culture. Nonverbal communication, such as body 
language and symbols, is also important to cultures. Facial 
expressions, gestures, postural shift, and touching differ 
among cultures. A familiar hand signal may have an ob-
scene interpretation in another culture. Different cultures 
also prefer standing relatively close or far away, depending 
on their attitudes toward interpersonal spacing. Symbols 
help convey meaning through representation. Important 
marketing symbols include brand names and brand lo-
gos. Because organizations spend considerable money and 
effort creating brand symbols, legal protection for these 
symbols has become paramount.
Norms serve as a culture’s rules for behavior. Enacted 
norms explicitly and formally prescribe acceptable be-
haviors, while crescive norms are implicit and learned 
only through experience; these include customs, morés, 
and conventions. Customs are behaviors that have been 
passed down from previous generations. A moré is a cus-
tom that implies a moral right or wrong way of behaving. 
Conventions are norms that describe the best or “correct” 
way of doing something. Because norms differ greatly across 
cultures, it is important to understand different behavioral 
expectations prior to traveling or doing business with a for-
eign culture. The return potential model describes norms 
on behavioral and evaluation dimensions. Too much or too 
little behavior, such as humor, can be evaluated either posi-
tively or negatively, depending on the cultural norms.
A means-end chain combines three levels of a consum-
er’s knowledge about attributes, consequences, and values 
to form a chronology of product meaning. Attributes are 
the fundamental characteristics of features of a product. 
They can be tangible, such as weight or size, and they can 
be intangible, such as style or quality. Knowledge about 
product attributes leads consumers to evaluate the benefits 
that derive from attributes. Benefits can be functional or 
psychosocial. Functional benefits provide easily measured 
outcomes, such as speed and durability, while psychosocial 
benefits involve the psychological or social consequences 
of using or consuming a product. Product benefits can 
provide value satisfaction for consumers. Values are classi-
fied as instrumental or terminal. Instrumental values rep-
resent actions or modes of behavior, such as imaginative or 
honest. Terminal values represent psychological end states, 
such as happiness or freedom. The Rokeach Value Survey 
and List of Values (LOV) are survey instruments that help 
consumer psychologists and marketers predict consumer 
attitudes and behaviors towards brands.
Key Terms
culture
subcultures
cultural values
culturally constituted world
cultural categories
cultural principles
opinion leaders
exchange rituals
possession rituals
grooming rituals
divestment rituals
enculturation
acculturation
cultural translation
brand jingles
theory of cognitive itch
brand logos
enacted norms
crescive norms
customs
morés
conventions
return potential model
self-concept
attributes
benefits
instrumental values
Rokeach Value Survey (VALS)
List of Values (LOV)

284 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
1. Locate Aesop’s fables (you can find them on the 
Internet). Select your favorite one and explain the 
cultural value being communicated.
2. Cultural values comprise a collective set of beliefs 
about what is important, useful, and desirable, i.e., 
the personality of a society. Select a culture or sub-
culture to which you belong and explain this group’s 
cultural values.
3. Identify the three stations in McCracken’s theory 
regarding the mobility of cultural meaning. Explain 
how marketing activities and the fashion system 
transfer cultural meaning to consumer goods and 
how consumers adopt for themselves that meaning 
via rituals.
4. Think about the last time you sold or gave away an 
important possession (e.g., car, clothing, collection, 
etc.). Identify the divestment rituals that you con-
ducted before giving it up.
5.    Acculturation is a challenge for nations with 
diverse populations. Explain why the United States 
has so much at stake regarding acculturation of its 
immigrants.
 6.    Why is body language so important for a high-
context culture?
 7.    Identify a brand jingle that got “stuck in your 
head.” Why was this jingle successful at creating a 
“cognitive itch”?
 8.    Select your favorite brand logo. Describe its 
elements in detail and explain whether the sym-
bols are likely to translate successfully into foreign 
cultures.
 9.    Identify one of your family customs and describe it 
in one phrase. Next, explain the various rituals in-
volved with this custom in one paragraph.
10.    Construct a means-end chain for the brand 
Ipod. Identify tangible and intangible attributes, 
 functional and psychosocial benefits, and 
instrumental and terminal values that derive from 
this product.
Short Application Exercises
1. If you have traveled to a foreign nation, describe 
specific characteristics of the culture that created for 
you the greatest “culture shock.” Identify specific 
differences in cultural values, verbal language, body 
language and symbols, and norms. If you have not 
traveled abroad, interview someone who has and ask 
him or her to identify the cultural differences above.
2. Select one specific value from your culturally consti-
tuted world (e.g., individuality, freedom, ambition, 
responsibility) and trace its movement from society 
to consumer goods, all the way to consumers. Draw 
on McCracken’s framework for the mobility of cul-
tural meaning. Identify marketing activities and ele-
ments of the fashion system that transfer your select-
ed value to consumer products. Select various rituals 
that subsequently transfer this meaning to individual 
consumers.
3. Conduct an in-depth interview with a consumer 
from your parent’s generation. Ask questions about 
the kinds of gifts they gave their children for their 
birthdays. Try to identify indirectly the cultural 
meaning that resides in their exchange rituals.
4. Research the business practice of using “bribes” in 
Middle Eastern cultures. Explain how this Western 
concept (bribe) does not take on a pejorative mean-
ing among Arabs.
5. Select a popular slogan from an American  product 
and translate it into a foreign language of your 
choice. Identify at least three points of confusion 
regarding the translation. Focus not only on seman-
tics and phonology, but also on cultural translation 
issues.
Review and Discussion

Chapter 12   The Influence of Culture and Values 
285
1. Use the Norm Potential Model as a framework to illustrate the values of (a) politeness, 
(b) cheerfulness, and (c) conscientiousness in your most important college subculture 
(e.g., marketing club, drama club, fraternity, sports team, religious group).
2. Interview several members of this subculture regarding the desirability of these three 
values.
3. Using Figure 12.6 as a framework, draw curves for all three values.
4. Are the functions for politeness, cheerfulness, and conscientiousness simply linear 
(i.e., is more always better) or do diminishing returns exist?
5. With respect to these three values, how would you advise the network to proceed in 
designing the show?
YOUR CHALLENGE:
Imagine you work in the marketing research depart-
ment for a major television network. The network 
is considering developing a new show targeted at 
various college subcultures. The network is inter-
ested in uncovering core values for this subgroup.
M a nag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n

An Influence Agent at Work
286
Social Influence 
and Behavioral Compliance
 1 | Define behavioral compliance
 2 | Explain the automaticity arinciple
 3 | Explain the commitment and 
consistency principle
 4 | Explain the reciprocity principle
 5 | Explain the scarcity principle
 6 | Explain the social validation principle
 7 | Explain the liking principle
 8 | Explain the authority principle
After reading this chapter, you will be able to . . .
objectives
This spring John visited Sears to shop for a new lawn tractor. After several hours comparing a 
number of different models, John was mentally exhausted and ready to return home and cut 
the lawn by hand. Luckily, he encountered an eager salesperson.
The salesperson’s approach was unassuming. “I’m here to help you find the right tractor 
for your needs.” At first, the salesperson seemed more interested in John and his family than in 
selling a tractor. “Where do you live? Tell me about your children. What are your hobbies?” As 
it turns out, the salesperson seemed remarkably similar to John. He enjoyed the same hobbies, 
listened to the same music, and rooted for the same sports teams.
John was initially overwhelmed with all the possible attribute combinations available in 
different models of lawn tractors, such as engine size, deck size, manual versus hydrostatic 
transmission, twin versus triple hi-lift blades, fuel capacity, turning radius, and so on. The 
13
CHAPTER

287
salesperson indicated that he could simplify the decision. He asked John a series of questions 
about his lawn. After a few calculations, the salesperson recommended the Craftsman 80th 
Year Anniversary Edition, which happened to be on sale this weekend only for $1,499, or 
$200 off the original price. In fact, according to a Sears riding equipment brochure, The 80th 
Anniversary Edition was listed as a “best buy” in a leading consumer magazine. “Thousands 
of satisfied customers had already chosen it; they can’t all be wrong,” claimed the salesperson. 
This particular model was so popular the salesperson said he needed to check the remaining 
inventory. “It may be sold out,” he said cautiously. After checking the local warehouse, 
however, the salesperson was able to find just one remaining unit. He said, “If I were you, I’d 
purchase this tractor before another associate with access to our warehouse claims it.”
Now that John had become committed to the 80th Anniversary Model, he seized the 
opportunity to buy the last remaining unit. The salesperson told John, “Standard in The 80th 
Anniversary Edition model is a 46-inch deck. Unfortunately, the only remaining unit has a 
custom 54-inch deck. The price difference is only an additional $190.” The salesperson went 
on, “Delivery and assembly is an additional $90, and the earliest delivery date that I have 
available is in two weeks.” With somewhat diminished enthusiasm, John handed over his (old) 
Sears credit card to commence the transaction. “I assume that you would like the five-year 
extended warranty?” the salesperson asked. “It covers defects, on-site service with no trip charge, 
non-technical service calls, and common repairs due to normal use. That’s an additional cost of 
$399, but it practically pays for itself in two years,” the salesperson noted. John wasn’t expecting 
an expensive warranty fee, so he declined this particular add-on. “I understand,” the salesperson 
remarked sympathetically. “How about the 
one-year warranty for only $199?” John 
quickly accepted this more reasonable deal.
On the way home, John reflected on his 
experience. Shopping at Sears had consumed 
two hours, and he had spent more than 
$2,000 on a tractor that would not be 
delivered for two weeks. How did all of this 
happen? It was the work of a well-trained 
salesperson who understood the principles of 
social influence.
©Mike Heittola, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com
287

288 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Defining Compliance
The Sears salesperson is not the only influence agent in the marketplace. Fund-
raisers, politicians, con artists, bosses, parents, friends, family members, and even 
professors use a variety of techniques to get consumers to say “yes.” The wording of 
their requests is crucial—a request worded one way may be effective, but if the same 
request were worded just a little differently, it may be completely ineffective. Timing 
is also important, as the window of opportunity when people may be susceptible 
to a request is narrow. Consumer psychologists use the word verbal compliance 
to describe a situation where someone says “yes” to a specific request. The term 
behavioral compliance describes a situation where someone actually carries out that 
request. Robert Cialdini has conducted many pioneering scientific investigations 
of behavioral compliance techniques and has uncovered numerous principles about 
their effectiveness. You can be sure that con artists and others who like to persuade us 
wish that Professor Cialdini had kept his findings to himself.1 This chapter discusses 
some findings uncovered by Cialdini and other researchers and offers a glimpse of 
the interesting experiments that generated the principles. Specifically, seven key prin-
ciples of behavioral influence are explained: automaticity, commitment and consis-
tency, reciprocity, scarcity, social validation, liking, and authority. Knowing these 
principles helps consumers become more influential with people. Perhaps even more 
importantly, understanding how these principles work helps consumers stay on guard 
against unwanted influence.
The Automaticity Principle
People often use simple heuristics when evaluating the requests of others, sometimes 
automatically. The automaticity principle is the cornerstone of all influence tech-
niques. As the name suggests, this principle asserts that people often think mindlessly 
and as a result, behave automatically, without fully evaluating the consequences of 
a request. Harvard University psychologist Ellen Langer2 finds that people typically 
spend a large portion of their day in a mindless state. Routine, habitual behaviors (like 
answering a cell phone or responding to “good morning”) are performed over and over 
with relatively little conscious thought because people don’t have the time or resources 
to think carefully about everything they do. Only a few important behaviors receive 
careful consideration; others are carried out mindlessly.
Suppose a student is about to use the photocopier in the school library and another 
student approaches her and says, “Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the copy ma-
chine?” Such a small request typically involves little thought, and many people simply 
agree without considering the consequences. After all, five pages isn’t much. Moreover, 
people are more likely to comply with a small request if you give them a real reason to 
comply. In fact, this is precisely what happened in a classic field experiment conducted 
by Langer and her colleagues.3  (A field experiment is an experimental study conducted 
in the real world, as opposed to a laboratory setting.) When the request was basic (i.e., 
no additional information was provided), compliance was 60 percent. This is called the 
control group. In contrast, when the request included real information (e.g., “Excuse 
me, I have five pages. May I use the photocopier because I’m in a rush?”), compliance 
rates increased to 94 percent. The most interesting results, however, occurred when 
the word because was used without any real information (known as placebic informa-
tion). The request “Excuse me, I have five pages. May I use the photocopier because I 
have to make copies?” generated compliance of 93 percent, statistically equivalent to 
ob jec tive 1
ob jec tive 2

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
289
compliance for the real request. How could this happen? Clearly, placebic information 
is less compelling than real information. According to the because heuristic, however, 
people tend to process small requests mindlessly. So, merely hearing the word because 
may be enough to trigger compliance. With mindless processing, people don’t evaluate 
the specific reasons for a request. If they hear the word “because,” they simply move 
forward with compliance. “Because” is a signal—a green light for carrying out the 
request. But that’s not the entire story. When the request was changed from small 
(5 copies) to large (25 copies) the results also changed. People don’t automatically agree 
to everything. Relatively larger requests tend to encourage more purposeful thinking, 
which reduces the likelihood of using the because heuristic. This is exactly what hap-
pened in Langer’s study. When the request was “Excuse me, I have 25 pages. May I use 
the photocopier?” compliance rates dropped to 24 percent. Furthermore, the because 
heuristic did not increase compliance in this large request condition; it remained at 
24 percent. In contrast, when real information was given with the large request, com-
pliance increased from 24 percent to 42 percent. These findings suggest that when 
people have a substantial request, providing real information is the best strategy. In 
contrast, if a request is relatively small, people may respond favorably simply by hear-
ing the magic word “because.” There’s no need to come up with elaborate excuses. 
Figure 13.1 provides a summary of this interesting study.
The because heuristic involves the use of only one cue or piece of information—
the word “because.” Other, potentially more relevant pieces of information tend to 
be neglected. Although the rationale provided after the word “because” should be 
important, people often ignore it as a result of mindless thinking. They respond 
automatically.
Figure 13.1 Mindless Compliance Experiment
60%
93%
42%
94%
24%
24%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
No Information
Placebic Information
Real Information
Type of Information
Compliance Percentage
Small Request (5 copies)
Large Request (25 copies)
Source: Adapted from Langer, E.J., Blank, A., and Chanowitz, B. (1978). The Mindlessness of 
Ostensibly Thoughtful Action: The Role of ‘Placebic’ Information in Interpersonal Interaction. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 36:635–642.

290 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
The Commitment and Consistency Principle
Pressure to maintain consistency is surprisingly powerful. People are expected to 
 exhibit beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors that are stable and coherent. Inconsistencies 
often invite interpretations of personality flaws or, in extreme cases, mental illness.4  
This principle is known as the commitment and consistency principle. When people 
identify an inconsistency in their pattern of beliefs, they often change one or more 
beliefs to balance the system. People also attempt to keep their relationships and at-
titudes consistent. Similarly, when people initially say “yes” to a request or offer, they 
are likely to continue to say “yes” to subsequent requests regarding the same topic or 
task. After complying with an initial small request, people tend to comply with larger 
requests. And after initially saying “yes” to a deal, people tend to stick with their initial 
commitment—even if the deal changes.
The influence of commitment and consistency extends to fund-raising drives. An 
interesting study shows that consumers’ own self-prophecy can increase their dona-
tions.5  Self-prophecy is founded on two psychological effects. First, asking people to 
make predictions about socially influenced behaviors can cause people to respond as 
they think they should. Second, when later asked to perform those same behaviors, 
people tend to remain consistent with their predictions. In this particular study, when 
asked to predict whether they would donate to their university fund drive, 49 percent 
of the people predicted they would do so. In contrast, only 30 percent of the group that 
was simply asked to donate up front actually did so.
The Foot-in-the-Door Technique
The foot-in-the-door technique involves a making a small 
request followed by a larger one. Telemarketers, sales reps, 
and fund-raisers apply this technique frequently and with 
considerable success. First, they make a small request. Then 
comes the real pitch. For example, some unscrupulous tele-
marketers pretend to be survey researchers. They ask people 
if they are willing to share their opinions about a subject of 
general interest. If people comply with this initial request, 
they are more likely to continue to appear helpful by pur-
chasing a product or service. However, had they known from 
the beginning that the phone call was primarily for sales pur-
poses, they would have been more resistant.
In the same vein, many fund-raisers know that past do-
nors are likely to continue to donate and at greater levels than 
in previous years. Sales reps also understand that customers 
who have recently placed small orders are likely to continue 
to buy and in larger quantities. Are these customers genuine-
ly loyal to the cause or product, or are they simply falling prey 
to the foot-in-the-door technique? “Start small and build” 
foot-in-the-door tactics are surprisingly simple to recognize 
and dangerously effective.6
In another classic field experiment, people went door-to-
door asking California residents to post a large, ugly sign in 
their front lawns.7  The sign read “Drive Carefully.” Not sur-
prisingly, only 17 percent agreed to this target request. The 
ob jec tive 3
©EdBockStock, 2009/ Used under license from Shutterstock.com
Foot-in-the-door tactics often involve asking consum-
ers for their opinions, followed by a sales pitch.

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
291
results changed dramatically, however, when the foot-in-the-door technique was ap-
plied. When people were first asked to carry out a small favor (posting a small “Be a 
Safe Driver” sign in their yards), 76 percent complied with the larger, target request and 
posted the bigger, uglier sign. These results are even more interesting when you realize 
that the large request was made nearly two weeks after the small request and that two 
different people made the requests. In contrast, if the small favor dealt with a topic that 
was unrelated to the large request (e.g., posting a small “Keep California Beautiful” 
sign instead of a “Drive Carefully” sign) or if the initial, small task was different from 
the larger request (e.g., sign a petition instead of posting a small sign), compliance for 
the larger, target request decreased significantly from 76 percent to 48 percent. These 
results demonstrate a critical lesson. The foot-in-the-door technique is not as effective 
if the task or topic of the initial, small request is unrelated to the larger, target request. 
In both cases, people feel less connected to the original request and so, their need to 
behave consistently attenuates.
The most widely accepted psychological explanation for the foot-in-the-door tech-
nique is based on self-perception theory.8 Self-perception theory suggests that com-
plying with a small request leads people to label themselves as helpful, good citizens 
or as reasonable people. Once people have labeled themselves as such, they have a 
strong desire to maintain this self-perception, and they are likely to continue comply-
ing. Figure 13.2 is a bar graph depicting the findings of research on foot-in-the-door 
technique.
Figure 13.2 Foot-in-the-Door Technique
Source: Freedman, J., and Fraser, S. (1966). Compliance without Pressure: The Foot-in-the-door 
Technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4:195–202.
76%
48%
17%
48%
47%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Similar Task
Dissimilar Task
Control (large
request only)
Type of Information
Compliance Percentage
Similar Issue
Dissimilar Issue
The foot-in-the-door technique is surprisingly easy to apply. Complying with 
small requests like “Will you do me a small favor?,” “Would you like to test drive this 
 vehicle?,” “Would you like to try on this suit?,” and “Try a sample of this perfume,” is 
all that is necessary to establish an initial commitment. Once the foot is in the door, 
consumers too often comply with the larger, more substantial request that follows.

292 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
The Low-Ball Technique
Car salespersons are notorious for their use of the low-ball technique. They try to get 
an initial commitment, and then they change the deal. First, the salesperson offers a 
consumer an attractive deal. Next, the consumer completes half a dozen forms and falls 
in love with the car. But after the consumer is committed, the deal changes. The con-
sumer learns that the car is actually more expensive than originally thought. Perhaps 
the salesperson made a mistake, or the cost of an expensive option was not included. 
Maybe the salesperson’s boss did not approve the sale. Sometimes the deal changes at 
the last possible moment, even when the consumer is signing the financial agreement. 
Whatever the case, once consumers commit to a deal, they tend to stick with it, even 
when it is no longer as attractive.
Professor Cialdini first learned about the low-ball technique while pretending to be 
a sales trainee at a Chevrolet dealership. After experiencing the technique first hand, 
he returned to his psychology lab and began conducting a series of experiments.9 Both 
experiments involved college students. In the first study, students were approached on 
their way to classes and asked if they would be willing to participate in an experiment. 
This is a reasonable request. Experiments can be fun, and so most students said, “ Yes.” 
But then the deal changed. After agreeing to participate, students were told that the 
experiment would begin at 7:00 a.m. Saturday morning. That’s a different arrangement 
altogether! Nevertheless, more than half (56 percent) of the students who said “yes” to 
the initial request actually agreed to the target request and showed up for the experi-
ment at 7:00 a.m. This alone, however, doesn’t demonstrate support for the low-ball 
technique. We need to know what proportion of students would have shown up if the 
target request were presented up front, without the low-ball technique. So, a second 
group of students was told that the experiment took place at 7:00 a.m. Saturday morn-
ing. Of those agreeing to participate, only 24 percent showed up at the lab. That’s fewer 
than half the proportion of those who complied in the low-ball condition.
Both the low-ball and foot-in-the door techniques 
involve obtaining initial compliance in hopes of engen-
dering future compliance through mindless consistency. 
But the tactics are slightly different. With the low-ball 
technique, after verbal commitment is obtained, the deal 
changes. With the foot-in-the-door technique, the deal 
does not change. Instead, two separate behavioral requests 
are made. This may seem trivial, but the distinction is cru-
cial. In the low-ball study, students agreed to participate 
in an experiment. Initially, only verbal compliance was 
obtained. Then the deal changed and students’ behavior-
al compliance was sought. Students were asked to carry 
out only the target request (e.g., show up at 7:00 a.m. on 
Saturday). In contrast, the foot-in-the-door experiment 
asked participants to comply behaviorally with two sepa-
rate requests. After first agreeing and complying with a 
small request (posting a small sign), they were asked to 
comply with the second, target request (posting a larger sign). The low-ball technique is 
convincing. But so is the foot-in-the-door technique. Which is more influential? Professor 
Cialdini matched the two techniques, head-to-head, in his second study.
In this field experiment, students were approached in their dorms. In the low-ball 
condition, students were first asked if they would be willing to help with the United 
LeggNet/iStockphoto.com
Would you get up at 7:00 a.m. on a Saturday to participate in 
an experiment?

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
293
Way—a request requiring verbal compliance only. After obtaining the crucial “yes,” 
the deal changed and students were then told that they needed to go to the dormitory’s 
front desk to get the door posters. This was the target request. In the foot-in-the-door 
condition, students were first asked to display a small window poster that was given to 
them—a small behavioral request. If they complied with this small request, they were 
asked to go to the dormitory’s front desk to get the door posters, the same target request 
as in the low-ball condition. In the control group, students were simply asked, up front, 
to go to the dormitory’s front desk to get the door posters. The low-ball technique was 
the winner. Only 10 percent of the students complied with the target request in the 
foot-in-the-door condition, but 60 percent complied when the low-ball technique was 
employed. Interestingly, 20 percent complied in the control condition.
Why is the low-ball technique so effective? Research shows that it works through 
the principle of commitment and consistency. Commitment theory suggests that the 
purpose of obtaining an initial commitment is to impart resistance to change. People 
don’t like to change their minds. It suggests internal contradiction that creates psycho-
logical disharmony. The low-ball technique works by first gaining closure and commit-
ment to an idea or deal. When people become committed to a deal, they feel compelled 
to behave in such a way that maintains their consistency. Thus, they sustain their com-
mitment, even after the deal changes. Let’s return briefly to the opening vignette in 
this chapter. The Sears salesperson applied the low-ball technique when he told John 
that the only model available was the 54-inch deck, and it was $190 more expensive. 
He knew that after more than an hour evaluating various products and settling on a 
particular brand, John was committed.
It is important to recognize that car salespeople and experimenters are not the only 
ones who use the low-ball technique. People get low-balled every day. The low-ball 
technique is particularly effective when the initial agreement is a no-brainer—quick 
and easy. Obtaining public commitment is also crucial. People are especially resistant to 
change when others hear them agree to a deal. People don’t want to appear wishy-washy 
in front of others. Finally, research shows that the low-ball technique is most powerful 
when people believe that they agreed to the initial request by their own free will. So, the 
next time someone asks, “Would you do me a favor?” the correct answer is, “It depends. 
Tell me what the favor is first.”
The bait-and-switch tactic is a special case of the low-ball technique. Sometimes 
known as the lure procedure,10 this approach “lures” customers by advertising a low-
priced product or service. When customers discover that the product is not available, 
a salesperson encourages them to purchase a substitute that, of course, costs more. 
Bait-and-switch is considered fraud if the supplier is not capable of actually selling 
the advertised product. However, if the seller is able to sell the advertised product, 
but simply chooses to aggressively promote a competing product, no fraud exists. The 
bait-and-switch tactic operates under the same principle as the low-ball technique. 
Customers become committed to the low-priced “bait.” When the good deal is taken 
away, customers feel uncomfortable and seek to reduce this discomfort by accepting the 
“switch,” so long as the new offer is a reasonable substitute.
The Reciprocity Principle
When someone does you a favor, you feel obligated to return it in kind. This is the premise 
of the reciprocity principle. It is not just a principle of social etiquette; it’s also a surpris-
ingly powerful influence technique. The problem is that people are often tricked into 
ob jec ti ve 4

294 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
returning much larger favors than they receive. For example, nonprofit organizations often 
give people small gifts—such as flowers, buttons, and books—and then ask for charitable 
donations in return. After accepting a small gift, people have a surprisingly difficult time 
refusing to donate. University groups, such as alumni associations, apply this technique 
extensively. They send free bumper stickers, refrigerator magnets, and calendars to their 
alumni and then follow up with appeals for donations. Sales reps give their clients specialty 
gifts, such as coffee mugs, pens, and t-shirts, in hopes of creating a feeling of reciprocity.
Have you noticed all of the free samples given in shopping malls? Japanese cuisine 
on a toothpick, free makeovers at cosmetic boutiques, demonstrations of stain removal 
products, free bite-sized cookies. It’s hard to walk away after accepting free samples. 
Door-to-door distributors such as Amway also understand the principle of reciproc-
ity. Their salespeople offer free “test drives” of their products. For example, the BUG 
consists of a bag of Amway products (e.g., furniture polish, window cleaner, detergent, 
shampoo, deodorizer, pesticide). Amway salespersons leave the BUG with clients for 
a few days and ask them to try the products for free. After accepting the BUG bait, 
people are more likely to purchase items from Amway.
Infomercial sponsors are particularly skilled at applying reciprocity. Proactive 
Solutions, Boflex Extreme, Total Gym 1500, One-Touch Can Opener, Magic Bullet 
Blender, Hip-Hop Abs, and Core Secrets all offer “no-obligation” deals, which operate 
similar to free samples. Even children’s magazines, such as Highlights®, offer evaluation 
samples to induce trial for their brands. Of course, after consumers use the products in 
their homes for several weeks, the likelihood of returning them is low.
The Door-in-the-Face Technique
Invoking the reciprocity principle need not involve free gifts, samples, or test-drives. 
More subtle approaches are also used. For example, following up a large, unreason-
able request with a smaller, more sensible request usually improves behavioral compli-
ance. This is known as the door-in-the-face technique. The design is opposite of the 
foot-in-the-door technique, which involves a small request followed by a large request. 
Instead, when influence agents make a large request that is rejected, they often follow 
up with a smaller, more sensible request. The smaller request is a concession, and it of-
ten engenders reciprocity. When someone tries to act reasonably with us, we feel com-
pelled to reciprocate and act reasonably in return. The technique is sometimes referred 
to as “rejection followed by moderation.” Salespersons and other influence agents know 
full well that the initial, unreasonable request will be rejected, and the likelihood of 
obtaining compliance will increase with the second, more moderate request. For ex-
ample, salespersons often try to sell expensive three-year service plans and extended 
warranties. Initially, they use fear tactics to sell the general idea of a warranty. After the 
expensive plan is rejected, they offer a less expensive, one-year service plan. On the basis 
of reciprocity, consumers often accept the more reasonable offer. Returning again to the 
opening story in this chapter, the salesperson offered John an expensive three-year war-
ranty for $399. When he rejected it, the salesperson quickly offered a more reasonable, 
one-year warranty for $199—which John accepted without resistance.
A series of interesting field experiments was designed to test the effectiveness of the 
door-in-the-face technique.11 In the first experiment, college students were approached 
on their way to class and asked to work for two years as unpaid volunteers for the 
Juvenile Detention Center. Not surprisingly, no one complied. Immediately after re-
jecting this request, students were asked to volunteer to take a group of juveniles to the 
zoo for two hours. Fifty percent agreed to this more reasonable target request. But is 

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
295
the door-in-the-face technique more effective than simply making the target request 
up front? A control condition was included to test this possibility. A separate group of 
students was simply asked to volunteer to take a group of juveniles to the zoo for two 
hours. Only 17 percent agreed. In other words, the door-in-the-face technique was 
more effective than simply making the target request up front.
Still, it is possible that the 50 percent who verbally complied did so not because 
of their feelings of reciprocity but because of a simple contrast effect. After all, two 
hours of volunteer work looks relatively small when contrasted with two years. A third 
experimental condition tested this hypothesis. A separate group of students was asked, 
up front, to choose directly between the two alternatives (volunteer for two years or two 
hours). In this condition, only 25 percent agreed to take the juveniles to the zoo for two 
hours (half the rate of the door-in-the face technique). This provides strong evidence 
that the door-in-the-face technique does not operate through a simple compare and 
contrast effect.
Although the door-in-the-face technique appears not to operate via contrast, a 
second study evaluated reciprocity as the underlying mechanism. In this experiment, 
students were asked to serve as unpaid volunteers for a group of low-income children 
(not juvenile delinquents). After this request was rejected, students in the door-in-the-
face group were asked to take the children to the zoo for two hours (the same target 
request as in the first study). Again, the door-in-the-face technique was effective, as 
54 percent agreed to the target request. A second group of students was also exposed 
to the door-in-the-face technique, with one critical twist: Two different people made 
the requests. One individual made the initial large request, and a different individual 
made the second, more reasonable request. Consistent with the reciprocity principle, 
the two-requestor condition approach was less effective, as only 33 percent complied. 
Thus, a concession occurs only when the same individual makes both requests. This is 
intuitively appealing. Reciprocity is about relationships. People feel reciprocity to other 
people—not objects or ideas.
Which is more effective, the door-in-the-face technique or the foot-in-the-door 
technique? You probably know the answer already: “It depends.” In a study that 
 directly compared the two techniques, the timing of the requests was varied.12 In a no-
delay condition, the initial and target requests were administered back-to-back, as in 
the previous studies. In the delay condition, however, seven to ten days separated the 
 requests. The target request was the same for both techniques. Participants were asked 
to  distribute 15 traffic safety pamphlets to their neighbors. In the door-in-the-face con-
dition, this request was preceded by a very large unreasonable request: “Would you keep 
a record of traffic flow at a busy intersection for two hours?” In the  foot-in-the-door 
condition, the target request was preceded by a very small request: “Would you answer 
a few short questions about driving safety?” The results of the study clearly indicate that 
the  door- in-the-face technique was more effective than the foot-in-the-door technique 
when there was no delay in the requests. Conversely, the foot-in-the-door technique 
outperformed the door-in-the-face technique when the second request was delayed. 
The illusion of concession is shattered after a period of several days. Consumers’ feelings 
of reciprocity dissipate over time, and thus, the rejection-then-moderation  approach is 
only effective when the requests are close in time. Consistent with the self-perception 
explanation of the foot-in-the-door technique, the start-small-and-build approach 
is effective regardless of the timing of the requests. Labeling oneself as helpful and 
compliant apparently has more long-lasting consequences than does reciprocity. Thus, 
these two multiple-request techniques operate by different psychological processes. 
Figure 13.3 provides a visual summary of the findings.

296 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
The That’s-Not-All Technique
The Ginsu knife, blue-light specials at Kmart, and  vacation 
packages to Cancun, Mexico, are classic examples of the that’s-
not-all technique. Infomercials and shopping networks are 
notorious for applying this technique to drowsy viewers at 
3:00 a.m. How does it work? Opposite of the low-ball-technique, 
the that’s-not-all technique starts high and builds in a downward 
fashion. The initial deal is changed into an even better deal before 
the consumer has an opportunity to reject the first offer. Long 
before the consumer can generate counterarguments, extra gifts, 
deeper discounts, and more attractive financing are incremen-
tally added to the original offer (e.g., “Today only, the Ginsu 
Stainless Block Set has been reduced in price from $129.95 to 
$89.95. But that’s not all. Order today and you get a free pair 
of kitchen shears. And if you order with a credit card right now, 
we’ll make the first payment for you!”). The that’s-not-all tech-
nique invokes the norm of reciprocity: With each increment, the 
sponsor appears to be offering a better and better deal, so the 
customer feels an increasing obligation to comply in response to 
these concessions. It is all part of a social norm—a general rule 
of behavior.
Professor Jerry M. Burger conducted a series of field ex-
periments to test the effectiveness and underlying causes of the 
that’s-not-all technique.13 In the first experiment, customers in 
the that’s-not-all condition were offered a cupcake for 75 cents 
Figure 13.3 Door-in-the-Face vs. Foot-in-the-Door
Source: Cann, A., Sherman, S. J., and Elkes, R. (1975). Effects of Initial Request Size and Timing of a 
Second Request on Compliance: The Foot-in-the-door and Door-in-the-face. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 32:774–782.
78%
90%
70%
29%
50%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Door-in-the-Face
Foot-in-the-Door
Control
Compliance Percentage
No Delay
Delay
Photodisc/Getty Images
Firms that sell knives and other household items via 
infomercials often use the that’s-not-all technique.

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
297
at a college bake sale, but the deal was sweetened (literally) by adding two free cookies 
before the customers had a chance to respond. In the control condition, customers were 
told up front that for 75 cents, they got a cupcake and two cookies. Although the deal 
was identical for both conditions, a larger proportion of customer agreed to the deal 
in the that’s-not-all condition (73 percent compliance) than did those in the control 
condition (40 percent compliance).
In the second experiment, similar results were obtained—this time by reducing the 
price rather than by adding a free product to the deal. In the that’s-not-all condition, 
customers were first offered a cupcake for $1.00, but the price was reduced to 75 cents 
before they had a chance to say “no.” In the control condition, customers were offered 
a 75-cent cupcake up front. The that’s-not-all technique again generated 73 percent 
compliance, while the control condition produced only 44 percent compliance.
Similar to the door-in-the-face technique, the that’s-not-all tactic works by seduc-
ing customers into a negotiating situation. The seller has come down from the original 
price or improved the deal with an additional product. Abiding by the reciprocity 
norm, customers often feel an obligation to reciprocate the seller’s negotiating actions 
and purchase the product. On the other hand, if the seller’s actions are seen as some-
thing they are forced to do, then there should be no need to reciprocate. A third experi-
ment addressed this very hypothesis by including a condition where the seller made 
a mistake in price rather than reducing it of her own free will. The results support 
the reciprocity explanation, as only 37 percent agreed to the deal when the price was 
 reduced as a result of a mistake. On the other hand, 57 percent complied when the 
seller negotiated the price downward.
The next experiment tested a simple contrast-effect explanation. Is reciprocity re-
ally the motivation for complying, or does 75 cents simply compare favorably to $1.00? 
One group of customers was told that the cupcakes sold for 75 cents; a second group 
was told that they cost $1.00. Next, both groups were asked how much they would be 
willing to pay for the cupcakes. The groups estimated similar price points. This indi-
cates that a contrast effect is not driving customers’ decisions.
A follow-up experiment compared the that’s-not-all-technique against a common 
bargain technique. Prices were raised beyond the prices in the earlier studies to reduce 
mindless compliance. In the that’s-not-all condition, $1.25 cupcakes were reduced 
to $1.00 because the students wanted to close down the bake sale. In the bargain 
condition, customers were told, “These are only a dollar now. We were selling them 
for $1.25 earlier.” Compliance was significantly higher in the that’s-not-all condition 
(55 percent) than in the bargain condition (25 percent). This provides evidence that a 
perceived bargain cannot account for the effectiveness of the that’s-not-all technique.
If reciprocity is the underlying motive for both the that’s-not-all and the door-
in-the-face techniques, which tactic is superior? In the final experiment, these two tech-
niques were matched head-to-head. Recall that the door-in-the-face technique allows 
customers the opportunity to refuse the initial deal or request and a second, more 
reasonable offer follows. In contrast, the that’s-not-all technique offers a better deal 
immediately, eliminating the opportunity to refuse the initial offer. In the that’s-not-all 
condition, the price of the cupcakes was reduced from $1.25 to $1.00 as in the previ-
ous study. In the door-in-the-face condition, cupcakes were initially offered for $1.25. 
If customers refused this deal, then the price was reduced to $1.00. In the control con-
dition, cupcakes were sold for $1.00 up front. Compliance was highest in the that’s-
not-all condition, second for door-in-the-face, and lowest in the control condition.
There are two important lessons to learn from Professor Burger’s field studies. 
First, the that’s-not-all technique operates through the principle of reciprocity. When 

298 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
salespeople offer better and better deals, customers often feel obligated to reciprocate 
these acts of concession. So, consumers can avoid unnecessary feelings of reciprocity by 
focusing only on the final deal—without considering the incremental offers. Second, 
similar to the because heuristic, the that’s-not-all technique is only effective when con-
sumers behave mindlessly. Of course, consumers can avoid the negative consequences 
of mindless behavior by concentrating on real information—evaluating the substance, 
not the fluff.
The Multiple-Deescalating-Requests Technique
The door-in-the face technique involves two separate requests—a large request followed 
by a smaller, more reasonable appeal. The multiple-deescalating-requests technique 
involves more than two requests. However, it differs from the that’s-not-all technique in 
that once a request is refused, additional requests follow—one after the other—until one 
is finally accepted. In contrast, the that’s-not-all technique provides multiple offers with-
out allowing customers to respond until the final deal is presented. Research shows that 
the multiple-deescalating-requests technique can be effective in the context of university 
fund-raising.14 Telemarketers initially request $1,000 donations for their university. If 
this request is rejected, a request of $750 follows. If this fails, there is an appeal for $500, 
and so on. This approach yields greater compliance rates and donation amounts com-
pared with a standard request. Moreover, the multiple-deescalating-requests technique 
is more effective than presenting statistical information about typical donation levels 
and ranges (a common fund-raising technique). In fact, presenting statistical informa-
tion is no more effective than the standard request. These results are consistent with the 
automaticity principle and with research on consumers’ tendency to neglect statistical 
information.
The Even-a-Penny Technique
Influence agents can appear to be reasonable and induce clients to comply through 
a wide variety of reciprocity-based tactics: free gifts, concessions, or multiple conces-
sions. Another way to appear reasonable is to make extremely small requests. This 
approach is known as the even-a-penny technique, and it involves the legitimiza-
tion of trivial contributions (a penny, a dollar, one minute of your time). Research 
shows that this approach can be effective 
in increasing compliance rates without 
decreasing the average amount donated by 
contributing individuals in fund-raising 
efforts. One field study tested the effec-
tiveness of the even-a-penny technique by 
soliciting donations door-to-door for the 
American Cancer Society.15 In the control 
group, potential donors were given the 
standard plea, “Would you be willing to 
help by giving a donation?” In the even-
a-penny condition, the solicitor added, 
“Even a penny will help.” The even-a-penny 
technique generated almost twice the com-
pliance rate (50 percent) as the control 
condition (28 percent). More interesting, 
© Craig Wactor, 2009/Used under license from Shutterstock.com

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
299
the median dollar contributions by individuals were identical. This is a powerful 
lesson for nonprofit organizations: The even-a-penny technique does not sacrifice 
dollar contributions for higher compliance rates. Further research shows this tech-
nique can increase donations to the American Heart Association16 and the Reye’s 
Syndrome Foundation. Finally, this reciprocity-based technique appears to be  equally 
effective in both face-to-face and telemarketing contexts.17
The Scarcity Principle
“While Supplies Last,” “Limited Edition,” “Sale Ends Soon,” and “One-Time-Offer” all 
proclaim a sense of urgency to imply scarcity for products and services. Do consumers 
prefer items that are abundant or rare? According to the scarcity principle, people often 
want what they cannot have. Consumers also want things that may not be available in the 
future. Stamp collectors covet the rare Curtis Jenny inverted airmail stamp. Only 100 were 
created in 1918, all on a single sheet created by a printer error. Baseball card collectors 
dream about the scarce 1909 T206 Honus Wagner tobacco card, also known as the “Holy 
Grail of baseball cards.” Incredibly, this 1-7/16"  2-5/8" card was once owned by hockey 
great Wayne Gretzky and recently sold for $2.35 million at a sports memorabilia show in 
Atlantic City.18 The scarcity principle rests on the premise that because valuable objects 
are rare, it follows that rare objects must be valuable. This backwards logic is known as 
 affirmation of the consequent, or confusion of the inverse. In fact, there are lots of scarce 
items that have little value—obsolete mainframe computers, turntable record players, and 
manual typewriters, to name a few. Still, consumers associate scarcity with value. Clever 
marketers create scarcity by limiting production or supply. Some manufacturers, including 
Harley-Davidson and Porsche, deliberately limit production on expensive models. In the 
case of Harley-Davidson, some custom-
ers are willing to wait more than a year 
to take title to their new motorcycles. 
Other marketers influence perceptions 
of scarcity by limiting distribution. Until 
July 2000, L.L Bean resisted expanding 
its bricks-and-mortar retail stores  beyond 
its single outlet in Freeport, Maine. White 
House Black Market (WHBM), a high-
end women’s clothing boutique, does 
not distribute its products through dis-
count retailers such as Walmart. Firms 
like WHBM understand that consumers’ 
perceptions of exclusivity are inversely 
related to distribution intensity and that 
exclusive (or scarce) products command 
higher margins. For decades, the DeBeers 
Company has successfully convinced con-
sumers that diamonds are rare. Diamonds, 
which are basically compressed carbon, 
have not been “rare” since their discovery 
in South Africa in 1867. Today, diamonds 
are mined in about 25 countries, on every 
continent except Europe and Antarctica.
objec ti ve 5
Inverted Jenny postage stamp, courtesy of the Smithsonian National Postal Museum
Stamp collectors covet the extraordinarily rare Curtis Jenny inverted airmail stamp.

300 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Government attempts to limit the availability of a product via prohibition or cen-
sorship often backfire because telling us we cannot have a product makes us want it 
even more. During the Prohibition Era in the United States, alcoholic beverages became 
scarcer and so, more desirable. Consequently, consumers went to great lengths (even 
committing crimes) to obtain alcohol. Similarly, telling us not to do something makes 
the behavior more desirable. For example, some research raises questions about the 
effectiveness of the D.A.R.E. Program (Drug Abuse Resistance Education).19 Similar 
criticisms have been raised against programs aimed at reducing teenage smoking and 
alcohol consumption. In the mind of a teenager, “If everyone is telling us not to do 
it, it must really be good.” Censorship can also increase demand. The publication of 
Salman Rushdie’s The Satanic Verses in 1988 provoked violent reactions from radical 
Muslims because it was perceived as irreverently portraying the prophet Muhammad. 
Rushdie received threats and a fatwa issued by Ayatollah Khomeini, calling for his 
execution. How did the book sell? It headlined on the New York Times bestseller list 
for more than a year and has produced 14 hardcopy editions since, quite a feat for a 
modern-day novel.
Research on the effects of scarcity show that reducing availability increases desir-
ability. Field experiments demonstrate that something as simple as the number of choc-
olate chip cookies in a jar can exert a surprisingly powerful effect on the desirability of 
a product.20 Participants in a field study selected more cookies when there were only 
two (versus ten) cookies in the jar. This effect was more pronounced when limited 
product availability was the result of an accident (i.e., the experimenter grabbed the 
wrong jar). Moreover, desire for the scarce cookies was highest when product availabil-
ity was reduced because of demand (i.e., the product was chosen frequently by previous 
participants). Interestingly, these scarcity effects did not occur because of preferences 
in taste.
It is important to guard against the power of the scarcity effect when marketers in-
undate us with claims of product shortages or limited time offers. Remember the X-box 
360 shortage during Christmas, 2005? Rumors of retail shortages sent consumers scur-
rying to eBay to buy the product for as much as $3,000. The bidding wars that ensued 
only pushed prices higher (the manufacturer’s suggested retail price was about $399). 
Judging by the thousands of X-box 360 listings on eBay during that holiday season, one 
might wonder if the shortage was real or simply crafted to benefit the scalpers.
The Social Validation Principle
Thousands of satisfied customers can’t be wrong, and firms like Procter & Gamble, 
Toyota, and Verizon Communications spend more than $1 billion in advertising each 
year reminding us of the popularity of their brands. For decades, McDonald’s pro-
claimed “over one billion [hamburgers] sold.” Public broadcasting stations, charity 
telethons, and university fund-raisers delight in presenting long lists of names of indi-
viduals who have been involved in their causes in the past. Salespeople often provide 
prospects with their list of clients, emphasizing that some of the names are friends or 
acquaintances of the prospect. In televised fund-raising drives, dozens of telephones 
are ringing and volunteers are answering them, supposedly taking the names of eager 
contributors. Shopping networks show a digital count of the number of units sold 
along with the time remaining, and eBay displays the cumulative number of bids and 
times the page has been visited for each auction item. Bartenders, street musicians, and 
deli-clerks, among others, salt their tip jars to give the impression that many people 
objec tive 6

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
301
leave tips—and large ones. Nightclub ushers limit the number of people allowed into 
the club so that long lines form outside the door, suggesting that the club is extremely 
popular. Canned laugh tracks are still used on television sitcoms to make the shows 
seem funnier (even though people claim not to like canned laughter).21
What do all these examples have in common? They are applications of the social 
validation principle, also know as “proof in numbers.” The social validation principle 
maintains that the perceived validity (or correctness) of an idea increases as the number 
of people supporting the idea increases. In fact, the opinions of other people can be 
extremely informative, especially under conditions of ambiguity or uncertainty.22
Presenting a list of supporters or donors to a prospect is known as the list tech-
nique. Research on the list technique shows that it can significantly increase compli-
ance. In a door-to-door fund-raising campaign for the American Heart Association, 
one group of prospective donors was shown a long list of names of previous donors 
prior to the request. The control group received only the standard request for a dona-
tion. Forty-three percent donated in the list technique condition, but only 25 percent 
donated in the control condition.23
People also look to the behavior of others when they decide not to do something. 
On March 13, 1964, Catherine “Kitty” Genovese parked her car by the Long Island 
Railroad parking lot and began walking home. Winston Mosley chased her down and 
began attacking her. Injured and terrified, Kitty screamed, “Oh my God! He stabbed 
me! Please help me!” Mosley fled when nearby apartment lights went on and a man 
shouted, “Let that girl alone,” but Mosley returned and stabbed Kitty again when no 
one actually came forward to help. At 3:25 a.m., Mosley returned a third time and 
stabbed Kitty as she lay inside the front door of her apartment. It wasn’t until 3:50 a.m. 
that the police finally received a call from one of the 38 witnesses to the murder. 
Tragically, by the time police reached Kitty, she was already dead.24 Why did none of 
the witnesses help? What kind of people would simply watch and not intervene? These 
questions have been asked over and over again. The truth is, the witnesses’ behavior—
though disturbing—is fairly normal. Classic research on bystander nonintervention 
shows that people are less likely to help a person when many other people are present.25 
One explanation for this bystander nonintervention is that people don’t think others 
need help if no one else appears alarmed or concerned. People look for cues from other 
group members. If no one quickly steps forward to act, then the likelihood of anyone 
acting decreases and a snowball of pluralistic ignorance ensues. This peculiar inaction 
among group members is known as the diffusion of responsibility. In fact, people are 
much more likely to help when they perceive themselves to be the only person available 
to help, i.e., responsibility for helping the person in need cannot be diffused.
Do consumers diffuse their responsibilities in the marketplace? Do they ignore good 
causes when few people seem to support them (e.g., world literacy)? Do consumers shy 
away from superior products that lack advertising clout (e.g., blood pressure monitors)? 
Conversely, do they jump on the bandwagon of brands because we see others buying 
them (e.g., Ipods, BlackBerry devices, and Crocs)? Classic research indicates that people 
observe and model (imitate) the behavior of others.26 Moreover, the effects of peer pres-
sure and conformity on consumers’ perceptions of what is correct can be powerful.27
Cultural and Individual Differences
All consumers are not equally susceptible to peer pressure. High self-monitoring 
 individuals (those who are highly sensitive and responsive to social cues) are more sus-
ceptible to social influence than are low self-monitors.28 Individuals from collectivistic 

302 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
(versus individualistic) cultures are also more given to social influence.29 Members of 
individualistic cultures tend to define themselves as independent from groups and fo-
cus on personal goals, while members of collectivistic cultures define themselves in 
terms of group membership and emphasize group goals. In general, Western cultures 
such as North America and Western Europe are individualistic and Eastern cultures 
such as Japan, South Korea, and China are more collectivistic. Even within a culture, 
however, people differ. Those with a strong collectivistic (versus individualistic) ori-
entation tend to be more responsive to social influence, regardless of the prevailing 
culture. In fact, research indicates that individual differences may be more important 
than cultural differences.30
An interesting study tested the effectiveness of social-validation procedures ver-
sus commitment and consistency techniques for influencing consumers in the United 
States and Poland. The United States is considered an individualistic culture, while 
Poland is considered relatively more collectivistic. Individual differences were also 
Collectivistic and individualistic cultures often respond differ-
ently to humorous advertising. When Apple Inc. introduced 
its “Mac versus PC” ads to 
global markets, it faced a 
common but difficult issue: 
What seems funny in one 
culture may seem ill-mannered 
in another. In the American 
ads, a nerdy PC guy (John 
Hodgman, who bears a 
striking resemblance to Bill 
Gates) keeps getting trumped 
by his hip Mac counterpart 
(Justin Long), who unassum-
ingly shows the audience that 
Macs are superior. In one 
spot, PC is proudly getting 
a camera taped to his head 
so he can do video chatting, 
only to discover that Mac 
already has a built-in camera. 
In another spot, PC is flanked 
by an officious security guard who insists on granting (or 
denying) permission each time Mac tries to say something to 
PC. This is meant to represent the cumbersome security func-
tionality in Microsoft’s Vista operating system for PCs.
The ads may elicit humor in America, but in Japanese 
culture, where direct-comparison ads have long been frowned 
upon, it is considered rude to brag about one’s strengths. 
Accordingly, the Japanese versions of the ads include two local 
comedians from a group called the 
Rahmens. In the Japanese ads, the 
dialogue emphasizes that Macs 
and PCs are not that different. 
Instead of clothes that cast PC 
as a nerd and Mac as a hipster, 
PC wears plain office attire and 
Mac wears more casual attire, 
highlighting the work/home divide 
between the devices more than 
brand personality differences. In 
the first ad of the series, Mac even 
gives PC a nickname: waaku, 
which is a playful Japanese ver-
sion of the word “work.” In the 
Japanese spots, PC’s body lan-
guage is the primary source of 
humor. Mac looks embarrassed 
when PC touches his shoulder or 
hides behind Mac’s legs to avoid 
viruses. “PC constantly makes friendship-level approaches that 
Mac rejects in a friendly-
irritated way,” says Oliver Reichenstein, the founder of Tokyo-
based interactive brand consultancy, Information Architects Ltd. 
“The western Mac ads would backfire in Japan, because the 
Mac would appear to lack class.”59
Mac Adjusts Attitude in Japan
Eye on International
ayzek/iStockphoto.com

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
303
measured using an individualistic/collectivistic personality scale. Students were asked 
to imagine that they had been approached by a representative from the Coca-Cola 
Company who wished to ask them some questions about Coca-Cola. In the social-
validation condition, students were told that all (or half) their classmates had agreed 
to participate. In the commitment and consistency conditions, students were told that, 
in the past, their classmates had always (or never) complied with survey requests. Two 
important findings emerged. First, the social-validation procedure was more effective 
with the Polish students, but the commitment and consistency technique worked bet-
ter with the American students. Second, students’ personal orientation (individualistic 
versus collectivistic) had a stronger impact on their compliance than did the overall 
cultural orientation.30
Injunctive Versus Descriptive Norms
Sometimes well-intended communications may actually send the wrong message. In 1971, 
Keep America Beautiful, Inc., created a dramatic public service announcement hoping to 
convince Americans to stop littering. The first spot aired on Earth Day and featured Iron 
Eyes Cody, a famous Native American actor, quietly canoeing through a polluted river. As 
Iron Eyes Cody emerged from the river near a busy highway, a motorist threw a bag of 
garbage, which splattered at the Indian’s feet. The ad ended with a close-up of Iron Eye’s 
solemn face, and a tear trickles down his cheek (this classic PSA can be viewed online at 
www.kab.org, Media Center). Titled “People Start Pollution, People Can Stop It,” the ad 
became a classic and was partially credited with helping to establish the nascent environ-
mental movement in the United States. But did it send the wrong message?
Despite the drama created by the “Iron Eyes Cody spot,” research shows that the 
ad contains features that may encourage behavior opposite of that supported by the 
sponsors.31 Recall that norms serve as important behavioral guidelines for a culture. 
Professor Cialdini’s research suggests that Keep America Beautiful, Inc., may have un-
wittingly pitted two specific types of social norms against one another—descriptive 
and injunctive norms. Descriptive norms involve perceptions of which behaviors are 
common or popular, i.e., what is everyone doing? Previous research has demonstrated 
the powerful influence of descriptive norms. For example, by increasing the number 
of people looking up from a street corner to a bogus image in the sky, experimenters 
increased the number of pedestrians who also stopped and looked up.32 By observing 
what most other people are doing, people can imitate these common actions and usu-
ally make good choices.33 Have you ever attended a church, synagogue, or mosque 
that was foreign to you? If so, you understand the importance of descriptive norms. 
Marketers understand descriptive norms, too. By showing crowded stores, excited cus-
tomers, and declaring their brands as “best sellers,” marketers are implying that their 
products are desirable. The proof is in the numbers.
In contrast, injunctive norms involve perceptions of which behaviors are ac-
cepted or rejected by society. While descriptive norms tell us what is done, injunc-
tive norms tell us what should be done. Injunctive norms motivate us with social 
rewards for appropriate behavior and social punishment for inappropriate ac-
tions. Both kinds of norms motivate human action because people tend to do what 
is popular and what society approves.34 As such, the two norms could be potential 
competitors, descriptive norms pulling consumers in one direction and injunctive 
norms tugging the other way. Could it be that the “Iron Eyes Cody spot” sends a 
mixed message to its audience by showing a regrettable but common behavior? By 
featuring a littered environment, the audience may simply interpret the message 
as validating their belief that everyone litters. Worse, if the ad focuses attention 

304 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
The results of this study are intuitively appealing. The rationale to litter in a dirty 
garage may involve something like, “Littering won’t do much additional damage here; 
it’s already a mess.” Moreover, observing someone else litter in a dirty environment 
increases littering behavior (54 percent). Here the descriptive norm (everyone litters) 
overpowers the injunctive norm (littering is wrong). Conversely, witnessing someone 
litter in a very clean environment may invoke a more powerful injunctive norm, “Why 
would he litter? This place is clean!” The lesson from this research is important. When 
communicating that a particular behavior is socially objectionable, advertisers should 
not portray the undesirable behavior as common. Instead, they should focus their mes-
sage on the desired outcome. Otherwise, they run the risk of emphasizing the descrip-
tive norm (e.g., lots of people perform the unwanted behavior) over the injunctive 
norm (e.g., the unwanted behavior is wrong).
on the undesirable behavior (e.g., showing someone in the act of littering), then the 
effect may be to increase that very undesirable behavior. If everybody’s doing this, it 
must be normal. Here, the descriptive norm (what people actually do) may win the 
battle against the injunctive norm (what people ought to do). Even the voice-over for 
the ad, “People Start Pollution . . .” invokes a descriptive norm—everyone pollutes.
Professor Cialdini tested this hypothesis in a field study.31 Flyers regarding automo-
tive safety week were tucked under the windshield wipers of parking garage patrons. 
One area was filled with litter; the other was clean. In addition, patrons either witnessed 
a person drop a large flyer on the floor (littering condition) or witnessed a person walk 
by (walk-by condition). The results showed that parking patrons were more likely to 
litter in the littered environment than in the clean environment. More important, 
patrons who witnessed a person litter in the littered environment also littered more 
(54 percent) than did those who patrons who saw no littering in the littered environ-
ment (32 percent). Finally, patrons who witnessed a person litter in the clean environ-
ment littered less (6 percent) than did those patrons who saw no littering in the clean 
environment (14 percent). This important interaction is depicted in Figure 13.4.
Figure 13.4 Descriptive vs. Injunctive Norms
Source: Adapted from Cialdini, R. (1996). Activating and Aligning Two Kinds of Norms in Persuasive 
Communications. Journal of Interpretation Research, 1:3–10.
14%
32%
54%
6%
0%
25%
50%
75%
Clean Environment
Littered Environment
Littering Percentage
Person Walks By
Person Litters

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
305
Back by Popular Neglect
Marketing in Action
Research in consumer behavior can be helpful to non-
profit organizations looking for solutions to national 
problems, such as littering. Professor Cialdini’s 1996 
study demonstrates that previous techniques aimed at 
stopping littering may actually endorse and increase lit-
tering behavior.32 Keep America Beautiful, Inc.’s (KAB) 
1971 Iron Eyes Cody public service announcement is a 
perfect example. By showing a littered environment to the 
audience, with an implicit warning that littering is harm-
ful, the audience actually views a scene validating their 
belief that everyone litters. Keep America Beautiful, Inc., 
didn’t know about Cialdini’s research in 1971. But they 
did in 1998.
First aired on April 21 (Earth Day) in 1998, Keep 
America Beautiful’s sequel to the 1971 ad recalls the 
famous face and tear of Iron Eyes Cody. The ad begins 
with a scene at an urban bus stop. Prior to climbing on 
the bus, a young, African American woman prepares to 
litter her gum, a middle-aged Caucasian businessman 
litters his newspaper, an African American man innocently 
places his Styrofoam cup on the ground, while a casually 
dressed white man tosses his cigarette and extinguishes 
it with his foot. After the litterbugs get on the bus, the ad 
focuses on the littered environment, where a breeze tosses 
the trash about. Finally, the camera pans to a large poster 
of Iron Eyes Cody, which is strategically positioned inside 
the bus stop shelter. In high drama, a tear rolls down 
his face—the same tear he cried some 35 years ago. 
Unfortunately, the same effects are also likely to occur. 
Once again, the ad features both a littered environment 
and copious littering behavior, and this time the message 
is even stronger—people of all races, genders, and 
socioeconomic backgrounds litter. It’s a recipe for misin-
terpretation and an invitation to litter. The tagline, “Back 
by Popular Neglect,” refers to environmental neglect. 
However, it could just as easily refer KAB’s disregard for 
consumer research.
So what is the correct approach? According to 
research, the lowest frequency of littering occurs when 
people view one thoughtless person littering in a clean 
environment. This approach would send the message 
that few people litter, and any individual who does so 
significantly harms the environment. How about a scene 
of Iron Eyes Cody wiping away his 35-year-old tear 
and replacing it with a smile as a sole litterbug changes 
his course by picking up not only his litter but also a 
 misplaced item near a tidy and conspicuously positioned 
recycling bin?
KAB isn’t the only organization that appears to 
eschew the recommendations of consumer research. 
In 2007, the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) began a national highway seat-
belt enforcement campaign, “Click It or Ticket.” The ads 
show various scenes of police officers ticketing motorists 
(of all races and ages) who have failed to buckle-up. 
The NHTSA cites the campaign as helping create 
82 percent seat-belt usage nationwide. One can’t help 
but wonder how high usage would be if the NHTSA’s 
ads featured a majority of drivers buckling-up and avoid-
ing traffic tickets.
AP Photo

306 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Changing behavior is important for many nonprofit organizations and cause-
related marketers. Stopping smoking, driving under the influence, and unsafe sex all 
require cessation of a negative behavior. In contrast, getting mammograms, exercising 
regularly, and eating healthy foods all involve the adoption of a positive behavior. In 
both cases, marketers who understand descriptive and injunctive norms are better 
equipped to obtain the desired outcome. In The Tipping Point, Malcolm Gladwell dis-
cusses how social phenomena like fashion trends and crime begin, gather momentum, 
and finally “tip” to become epidemics.35 He also argues that America’s anti-smoking 
messages during the previous two decades may have backfired. Recent data from the 
American Lung Association indicate that approximately 20 percent of college students 
currently smoke. But the American Lung Association notes that smoking rates among 
students fluctuate greatly, and they attribute the most recent decline to higher prices 
for cigarettes and more regulations barring smoking in public areas and  colleges.36 
Gladwell argues, however, that health organizations should stop trying to change 
 attitudes about tobacco. Smoking, per se, has never been cool. But it is the smok-
ers who are cool. From James Dean to Steve McQueen to Sarah Jessica Parker, each 
embodies rebellion, sexuality, and most of all, sophistication. Though Gladwell makes 
a case for limiting the nicotine in cigarettes and reducing smoking by understanding 
its links to depression, he would probably agree that emphasizing injunctive norms 
(smoking is bad) just fuels teenage interest in smoking. Ad campaigns that portray 
teenage smokers as delinquent or antisocial simply acknowledge the frequency of the 
behavior. Besides, teenagers are often drawn to rebellious behavior; it’s part of being 
a teenager. The current anti-smoking campaigns run parallel to the Keep America 
Beautiful’s campaign. Both emphasize the common, descriptive norms over the pre-
scriptive, injunctive norms. And the descriptive norms are likely to win; in other 
words, if everyone is doing it, it must be normal.
The Liking Principle
The liking principle is remarkably simple—we tend to comply with the requests of 
those whom we like. So, the more an individual likes you, the more power you have 
over him or her. Your overall social power is proportionate to the number of people 
who like you. Take Joe Girard, for example. Joe is the famous Chevrolet salesman who 
won the title “Number One Car Salesman” 12 years in a row and earned more than 
$200,000 annually.1 Girard is also listed as the world’s greatest car salesman in the 
Guinness Book of World Records. How does he do it? Joe claims people like him because 
he offers his customers a fair deal. But he does something else. Each month, Joe sends 
more than 13,000 greeting cards to his customers. The message inside is always the 
same three words, “I like you.” Let’s explore the formula for the liking principle. It rests 
on four primary factors: familiarity, attractiveness, similarity, and ingratiation.
Familiarity
The mere exposure effect suggests that the more familiar we become with an object, the 
more we like it. This explains why an initially unfamiliar stimulus such as a new song 
becomes more likable over time. We aren’t too sure about the song the first time we hear 
it. After repeated exposure, however, the tune becomes more familiar; by the third or 
fourth play, we are singing along. Recent research shows that the mere exposure effect 
is also applicable to our familiarity with specific people. In a recent study, participants 
repeatedly viewed photographs of people’s faces and then viewed the same photographs 
ob jec tive 7

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
307
again, along with photographs of new (similarly attractive) faces. The familiar faces 
were rated as more likable and evoked more smiles than did the unfamiliar faces.37 The 
lesson is simple. We tend to like familiar people.
Physical Attractiveness
Of all the factors influencing likeability, physical attractiveness may be the most in-
triguing. Research shows that we automatically assume attractive people to be intelli-
gent, kind, and honest.38 This halo effect suggests that we over-generalize, assuming that 
one positive trait (e.g., physical attractiveness) implies the presence of many other posi-
tive traits. Accordingly, successful salespeople closely attend to the latest fashions and 
try to appear attractive. And they should. Research demonstrates that well-groomed 
job candidates can receive more favorable hiring decisions.39 Another study shows that 
attractive employees earn approximately 12 to 14 percent more income than their less 
attractive colleagues.40
Attractiveness bias doesn’t end in the workplace. A mesmerizing criminal trial, known 
as “The Preppy Murder Trial,” began during 1986. Robert Chambers was charged 
with and tried for the second-degree murder of Jennifer Levin, whose semi-clad body 
was found by a bicyclist near Fifth Avenue and 83d Street, behind the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York. Robert Chambers was an attractive young man. Standing 
6'4" and weighing 200 pounds, his blue eyes and movie-star proportions won favor 
with the media. Chambers was de-
scribed as a handsome “altar boy” with a 
promising future. In contrast, the media 
attacked Levin’s reputation. Although 
the jury was deadlocked for nine days, 
Chambers’ legal team ultimately struck 
a plea bargain—manslaughter. In the 
end, Chambers was sentenced to serve 
only 5 to 15 years in prison. He served 
all 15 years, mostly because of his bad 
behavior while incarcerated.
Does physical attractiveness affect 
the legal process? An experiment dem-
onstrates that attractive defendants who 
serve time are less likely to return to jail 
than their less attractive counterparts.41 
A group of New York City inmates un-
derwent plastic surgery to remove facial 
disfigurements. A second group received 
only the typical rehabilitation services, such as counseling and training. The group 
who received cosmetic surgery was significantly less likely to be re-incarcerated. There’s 
more. Attractive people are more likely to receive help in times of need (from both 
sexes) than are less attractive people.42 Finally, physically attractive politicians have been 
shown to receive more than twice as many votes as their less attractive opponents.43 
Overall, attractive people enjoy significant social advantages in our culture. They are 
viewed as more intelligent, earn higher incomes, and receive preferential treatment. 
Given this background, it’s not surprising that Hooters of America, Inc. quickly settled 
a class action lawsuit for more than $3 million in exchange for the right to hire only 
(attractive) women as waitresses. Men are permitted to work at the Hooters restaurants, 
AP Photo/Mario Suriani

308 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
but only as cooks, dishwashers, and managers. The com-
pany Web site argues that “Hooters Girls” have the same 
right to use their natural female sex appeal to earn a living 
as supermodels. Hooters understands that attractiveness 
generates liking, and liking generates power.
It also should come as no surprise that in 2006, almost 
a quarter of a million cosmetic procedures were performed 
on young people ages 13 to 19, including about 47,000 
nose jobs and 9,000 breast augmentations. This represents 
nearly a 10 percent increase in teen cosmetic surgeries 
since 2002.44 At a more mundane level, how many men 
have grown mustaches or beards, and how many women 
have changed their hair color? How many people wear 
contact lenses to improve their youthfulness or lose weight 
in order to improve their body appearance? Perhaps these 
measures are less extreme than surgery, but they are still 
just a variation on an important theme—attractiveness.
Similarity
For those people who are happy with (or resigned to) their 
perfectly normal appearance, the similarity tactic can be 
tapped to influence liking. People tend like others who are 
similar in terms of appearance, attitudes, opinions, life-
style, personality, or social and educational backgrounds.45 
Of course, the opposite is also true. We tend to dislike 
those who are dissimilar to us, and this finding has im-
portant implications for understanding stereotyping and 
prejudice.46 One classic study from the 1970s shows that 
people are more likely to help those who dress as they do. 
An experimenter dressed either conservatively or in “hip-
pie” getup and asked college students for a dime to make 
a phone call (obviously, the study took place in the pre-cell 
phone era). When the experimenter dressed the same as 
the students, more than two-thirds of the students com-
plied. In contrast, when the experimenter dressed unlike 
the students, fewer than half met his request.47 Even trivial 
similarities can be influential. Salespeople are trained to 
find out what hobbies and leisure activities potential cli-
ents enjoy and to feign similar interests. Car salespeople 
are trained to look in the trunks of potential clients’ cars 
for clues! Remember how the Sears salesperson in the 
opening vignette preferred the same music and sports as 
the customer? What a coincidence that he liked the same 
sports teams as the shopper. Because similarities can easily 
be manufactured and masqueraded, consumers should pay 
special attention to influence agents who claim to be just 
like them.1 In fact, many sales training programs instruct 
trainees to “mirror” their client’s body posture, mood, and 
verbal style.48
 
Plastic surgery has become a family 
 
tradition. Doctors report that children 
 
are more likely to consider a 
 
cosmetic surgery if another family 
member has had the same. Surprisingly, some parents are even 
giving it to their children as graduation gifts. Forget the trip to 
Cancun or even a new car. Some high school graduates are opt-
ing for cosmetic surgery instead. Charlie Baase, a spokesperson 
for the American Academy for Cosmetic Surgery, said the organi-
zation’s member surgeons have reported a slight increase in the 
number of teens wanting to change something about their ap-
pearance around graduation time. The most common procedures 
range from ear pinning and nose jobs to less invasive procedure 
such as microdermabrasion or Botox injections.
There appears to be a slow but steady rise in teens get-
ting cosmetic surgery, with an average annual increase of about 
2.5 percent over the last four years, according to Dr. Richard 
A. D’Amico, president-elect of the American Society of Plastic 
Surgeons. Breast augmentations among young women ages 18 
to 19 increased about 12 percent between 2005 and 2006. 
“I’ve seen an increase in teens having plastic surgery, and cer-
tainly for graduation,” said Dr. Stephen T. Greenberg, a New York 
plastic surgeon and the author of A Little Nip, a Little Tuck.60
“Parents buy this as a gift because the child has everything 
else,” said Dr. Diana Zuckerman, president of the National 
Research Center for Women and Families. “It should be consid-
ered with the same seriousness as any other surgery, not with 
the same seriousness as buying a graduation dress.”
Zuckerman added that there’s a difference between getting 
a nose job, for instance, and wanting breast implants as a teen. 
Liposuction and breast augmentation, she warned, can have more 
immediate and dangerous complications, including allergic reactions. 
She also warned that it is important to recognize that the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration has not approved the marketing and use of 
silicone gel-filled breast implants for women under the age of 22.
Research shows that young people looking to have cosmetic 
surgery may suffer from body dysmorphic disorder, a preoc-
cupation with a perceived flaw in one’s appearance. “Individuals 
who suffer from body dysmorphic disorder and turn to cosmetic 
surgery almost uniformly report no improvement of their bod-
ies after surgery,” said Dr. David Sarwer, associate professor of 
psychology at the Center for Human Appearance at the University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine. “They then become preoc-
cupied with another aspect of their appearance.” But for some 
patients, like 15-year-old Robin Kushner, rhinoplasty surgery (nose 
job) has improved her self-esteem. Her friends say that she looked 
good before, but looks even better now. “It’s easy for people to 
say to look on what’s on the inside, not the outside,” said Antell. 
“That’s being naive. We all judge books by the cover. I’m not say-
ing its right, and I’m not saying it’s wrong. I’m saying it’s reality.”60
E T H I C S

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
309
Ingratiation
If you suspect that someone is paying you compliments because they want a favor, 
you’re probably right. Ingratiation is a tactic commonly used to engender liking. It in-
volves purposefully bringing oneself into the good graces of another person. In fact, we 
tend to like those who like us, and we are hopelessly addicted to compliments. Research 
shows that even when consumers realize that they are being flattered, they still like the 
flatterer. What’s more, the ingratiation doesn’t have to be accurate to work. Research 
shows that compliments by an evaluator produced the same liking whether the com-
ments were true or not.49 Remembering a client’s name50 and asking a person how he 
or she is doing can also facilitate liking and thus, produce compliance.51 Ingratiation, 
however, is not a panacea. It can backfire if the ingratiator goes too far with the flattery, 
making it exaggerated or inappropriate. This is known as the “ingratiator’s dilemma.”52 
Thus, ingratiation should be subtle. Some tactics include paying compliments about 
someone to a third party, agreeing with someone only after expressing some initial 
resistance, and performing useful (versus superfluous) favors, i.e., favors that actually 
help the target of the ingratiation.53
Creating indirect associations to a positively evaluated stimulus (such as a popular 
university, sports team, or brand) can also increase liking for the stimulus. For example, 
when our team wins, we are more likely to wear hats, hoodies, and T-shirts adorned 
with the team’s logo. This is known as basking in reflected glory, or BIRGing. Although 
fans don’t have much to do with the performance of the team, a victory feels like a 
personal triumph. On the other hand, when our team loses, it feels like a personal 
 defeat.54 Simply by wearing NFL gear or drinking from a mug that displays our favorite 
brand, we increase our likeability for that particular organization. If the team or brand 
performs poorly, however, we tend to disassociate the brand or cut off reflected failure, 
also known as CORFing.
People also like to be the first to communicate good news—with good reason. 
The positive feelings created by the good news often transfer to the communicator. 
Affect transfer is a special case of classical conditioning. It occurs when the positive 
affect (or feelings) created by an unconditioned stimulus becomes associated with a 
conditioned stimulus. Advertisers are famous for attempting to transfer the positive 
feelings created by the drama in an ad to the sponsored brand. Conversely, people are 
reluctant to communicate bad news, because the bad feelings created by unfavorable 
news can also be indirectly associated with the communicator. The tendency to keep 
mum about unpleasant messages is called the MUM effect.55 Research demonstrates 
that the MUM effect is more pronounced when future contact with the message re-
cipient is anticipated, because communicators are concerned about the consequences 
of their message.56 In fact, the MUM effect has been around for centuries. Ancient 
Persian kings used to “kill the messenger” when the news was bad. In summary, the 
liking principle suggests that how we look and what we say makes a strong impres-
sion on others.
The Authority Principle
Why do people comply with the requests of police officers, physicians, priests, and 
flight attendants? They all share one important characteristic—uniforms. According to 
the authority principle, authority figures use titles, clothes (such as uniforms), or ex-
pensive possessions that convey status to impress and influence others. Disobeying au-
thority figures can produce obvious negative consequences, but how far will people go 
ob jec ti ve 8

310 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
when following the orders of someone in authority? Yale University professor Stanley 
Milgram attempted to answer this question in one of the most influential and con-
troversial studies in the annals of experimental psychology.57 Participants were told 
that they would take part in an experiment intended to measure the effects of punish-
ment on learning. Participants playing the role of “teacher” read questions to other 
persons who played the role of “learner.” The teacher was directed to inflict a series of 
electric shocks on the learner, increasing the intensity of the shocks with each incor-
rect response. An impressive array of shock switches with very clear labels (i.e., slight 
shock, strong shock, intense shock, danger—severe shock, and maximum 450 volts) 
was positioned directly in front of the teachers. As shock intensity increased, the learner 
screamed louder and louder, begging to be released from the experiment. However, 
anytime the teacher hesitated, an authority figure (dressed in a while lab coat) told the 
teacher that s/he must continue. How many people would administer the shocks, all 
the way to the maximum 450 volts?
These exact experimental procedures were described to a group of 39 psychiatrists 
who were asked to predict how many participants would “go all the way” and use the 
maximum shock on the learner. The psychiatrists predicted that only one person in 
a thousand, or one tenth of a percent, would pull the maximum-volt switch. The ac-
tual results are startling. Sixty-five percent of the participants complied. Fortunately, 
the learner was just an actor, and no real shock was delivered. Milgram was “shocked” 
by the results, and so he conducted the study with different people, using newspaper 
ads to recruit subjects from outside the university. Also, he varied the distance be-
tween the learner and the teacher and he moved the location of the laboratory away 
from the university. Nevertheless, the results were similar. When an authority figure 
in a lab coat was present, a majority of the participants continued to deliver the high-
est shock. Milgram’s experiments showed no significant difference in compliance 
rates between women and men, and other researchers replicated the results in coun-
tries beyond the United States.58 In an attempt to partially explain the Holocaust, 
Milgram originally hypothesized that Germans may be more blindly obedient to 
authority than Americans. In the end, however, Milgram concluded that ordinary 
people, simply doing their jobs, are astonishingly obedient to authority. He warned 
that blind obedience to authority could happen anywhere, not just in Nazi 
Germany.
Do consumers blindly comply with authority figures in the marketplace? 
A physician prescribes a series of complicated medical tests; a computer 
technician instructs consumers to purchase new software; an automobile 
mechanic tells automobile owners that they need new brakes; a beautician 
recommends supplementary hair products; and a cashier tells shoppers to 
move to another check-out line. Usually, consumers comply. Waiters escort 
diners to a table (of the waiter’s choice); credit card companies change their 
lending policies; flight attendants ask customers to switch seats with some-
one; orthodontists tell parents that their children need braces; even profes-
sors change their syllabi. And still consumers comply. In fairness, the cost of 
disobeying can often be greater than the cost of complying. If patients don’t 
submit the complicated (and expensive) medical tests, they may not sur-
vive the consequences. Foregoing anti-virus software may result in the loss 
of valuable data, and so on. Nevertheless, consumers should avoid mindless 
compliance. Two simple questions usually answer the question of whether 
consumers should comply: What is the influence agent’s motive and what 
are the consequences of not complying?
KarenMower/iStockphoto.com
Uniforms signal authority.

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
311
People are susceptible to a wide variety of influence tech-
niques. This chapter identified seven key principles of 
influence on consumer behavior: automaticity, commit-
ment and consistency, reciprocity, scarcity, social valida-
tion, liking, and authority. The automaticity principle 
recognizes that people often think mindlessly, without 
fully evaluating the consequences their compliance. The 
commitment and consistency principle indicates that 
people try to maintain consistency in their belief sys-
tems. The foot-in-the-door and low-ball techniques take 
advantage of consumers’ tendencies to choose courses of 
action consistent with past commitments and decisions. 
The  reciprocity principle shows that consumers often feel 
obligated to return favors—often beyond the value of 
what they  received. The door-in-the-face, that’s-not-all, 
multiple- deescalating-requests, and even-a-penny tech-
niques capitalize on this tendency. The scarcity principle 
suggests that because valuable objects are rare, consum-
ers often assume that rare objects are valuable. Marketers 
create perceptions of scarcity for their goods and services 
by limiting distribution and emphasizing the unique-
ness of their brands. The social validation principle rests 
on the premise that the  validity of an idea increases with 
the number of people supporting it. In the marketplace, 
consumer popularity begets more popularity. Conversely, 
diffusion of responsibility occurs when people look for 
others to react first. Efforts to influence consumers can 
backfire if descriptive norms overpower injunctive norms. 
Likeability is also a powerful weapon of influence, and 
consequently, similarity, attractiveness, and impression 
management can be used to increase liking for a person or 
brand. Finally, most people are compliant with authority 
figures. Understanding these seven key principles of social 
influence can help people avoid being unduly compliant.
Chapter Summary
verbal compliance
behavioral compliance
heuristics
automaticity principle
because heuristic 
bait-and-switch tactics
commitment and consistency 
principle
foot-in-the-door technique
self-perception theory
low-ball technique
commitment theory
door-in-the-face technique
that’s-not-all technique
multiple-deescalating-requests 
technique
even-a-penny technique
reciprocity principle
scarcity principle
affirmation of the consequent
social validation principle
list technique
diffusion of responsibility
descriptive norms
injunctive norms
liking principle
indirect associations
affect transfer
authority principle
MUM effect
Key Terms

312 
Part four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Review and Discussion
1. Do you think the “because heuristic” would be more 
effective when people are busy or in a rush? Explain.
2. Both the door-in-the-face and that’s-not-all tech-
niques apply the principle of reciprocity. In fact, they 
both begin with deals that are eventually improved. 
Explain the difference between the two techniques.
3. Do you think businesses that give out free samples 
are mostly applying the reciprocity principle or the 
foot-in-the door technique? Does it depend on the 
nature of the sample? Explain.
4. Why do you think Cialdini found the low-ball tech-
nique to be more effective than the foot-in-the-door 
technique? Can you think of circumstances where the 
foot-in-the-door technique might be superior?
5. The door-in-the-face technique has two important 
limitations:
 
a. The same person must make both requests.
 
b. The two requests must be close in time.
 
How does the principle of reciprocity explain these 
limitations?
 6. Why do you think Cialdini found the that’s-not-all 
technique to be more effective than the door-in-
the-face technique? Are there situations where the 
reverse might be true?
 7. What does the scarcity principle suggest about the 
legalization of marijuana?
 8. Aren’t fads just a special case of the social validation 
principle? Why do fads lose their appeal?
 9. How does the mere exposure effect work?
10. Drawing on your knowledge of descriptive and in-
junctive norms, how well do you think abstinence 
programs that emphasize the high rate of teenage 
pregnancy will work?
1. Conduct your own mini-experiment using the 
“because heuristic.” Test it in the cafeteria or work-
out room. Compare your findings to those of Langer 
and colleagues.
2. Make a trip to your nearest Barnes & Noble 
Bookstore. Observe the behavior at the bargain 
counter. See if the number of people at the bargain 
counter increases when two or three stop and browse. 
How would you explain this behavior?
3. Conduct a mini-experiment comparing the low-ball 
technique against the door-in-the face technique. 
Make the target requests identical for both tech-
niques. In the low-ball condition, ask a group of 
students for a small favor and then change it to the 
target request after people initially say “yes.” In the 
door-in-the-face condition, ask a different group of 
students to complete a very large request. When they 
say “no,” ask for the target request. See which tech-
nique produces the higher rate of compliance.
4. Watch 60 minutes of network television, uninter-
rupted. Keep a log of the commercials, tallying the 
number using each of the seven principles of influ-
ence. Report the findings in a graph or table.
5. Survey 30 adults to find out how often they question 
their family doctors about a medical prescription. 
Survey 30 fellow students. Ask them if they have ever 
contested a traffic ticket. Do your results support the 
authority principle?
Short Application Exercises

Chapter 13   Social Influence and Behavioral Compliance 
313
Re-read the opening vignette in this chapter. The 
Sears salesperson attempted to apply five different 
behavioral compliance techniques discussed in the 
chapter. Imagine that you are the manager of that 
Sears store and you are observing the salesperson’s 
attempts to persuade the customer.
1. Evaluate each of the five influence techniques attempted by the salesperson. Which 
technique do you think was most effective? Which technique was most important in 
generating revenue for Sears?
2. Assume that Sears’ total variable cost for the lawn tractor is $1,278. Also assume 
that the salesperson makes a 5 percent commission on both the selling price and the 
 warranty. How much unit contribution (selling price–variable cost–commission) did 
the salesperson generate for Sears on this transaction?
3. What could Sears do to reduce the customer’s cognitive dissonance relating to the 
purchase?
4. How could customers like the one at Sears avoid being persuaded by behavioral com-
pliance techniques?
M a nag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
YOUR CHALLENGE:

The E.B. Horn Great 
Diamond Hunt
314
Contemporary Strategies 
in Reaching Consumers
 1 | Define word-of-mouth communication 
and understand why it is so powerful.
 2 | Discuss the ways marketers create and 
promote word-of-mouth through buzz 
marketing.
 3 | Explain how consumer generated 
advertising has become a unique way to 
push the “buzz button.”
 4 | Discuss how celebrity and athlete 
endorsers bring unique value to brands 
and understand how important it is for a 
marketer to pick the right endorser for a 
brand.
 5 | Explain why product placement is an 
essential tool for marketers today.
 6 | Describe the various types of product 
placement.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
Objectives
It was a bright morning in early fall, and a group of 400 eager people gathered at Boston 
Common to take part in a unique event—a day-long, city-wide treasure hunt for a $25,000 
diamond provided by the E.B. Horn Company, a Boston jeweler. The lucky treasure hunters, 
working in teams of two, would spend the day following clever story-like clues to the elusive 
“lost diamond.” By the end of the day, one lucky team would walk away with the gem.
The diamond hunt was a marketing event, designed to generate excitement and positive 
word-of-mouth, raise awareness for the jeweler, and increase sales during the upcoming 
14
CHAPTER

315
Consumers are all too familiar with the traditional methods that marketers use to reach 
and persuade them—advertisements on television, radio, on billboards and signs, in 
newspapers, from telemarketers, in junk mail, and from face-to-face salespeople. But 
today, companies are turning to alternative means to reach consumers in non- traditional 
ways. In this chapter, we examine some of the more unique ways marketers reach out 
Christmas holiday sales season. The campaign actually had started a few weeks earlier when 
500 black velvet ring boxes were scattered around the city, on park benches, sidewalks, 
in restaurants, train stations, and other public places. Inside the boxes were small pieces 
of paper reading, “Nope, it’s not here.” Next came a rotating billboard advertising the 
“GreatDiamondHunt.com” website mounted on a large panel truck that cruised around the 
city. And most bizarre, several mannequins were posed to look like they were searching for 
something in high-traffic locales around Boston, accompanied by signs that read, “Finders 
Keepers.” The buzz campaign was also supported by more traditional online and radio spot 
advertising.1
Campaigns like the Great Diamond Hunt are designed to get people interested and talking 
about a brand, and are an alternative type of campaign that companies hope will cut through 
the clutter of traditional media today.
Courtesy of E.B. Horn.
http://www.greatdiamondhunt.com/home.html

316 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
to consumers, including word-of-mouth marketing, consumer generated advertising 
campaigns, celebrity and athlete endorsers, and product placements. Why study these 
alternative promotional methods and media? Many of the consumer behavior concepts 
we study are usually researched and taught through the lens of conventional marketing 
practices like mass advertising only. Understanding non-traditional marketing tactics 
and strategies enhances our understanding of the nuances of consumer behavior theo-
ries and practices.
Word-of-Mouth: Pushing the Buzz Button
Some say it is the age of clutter. It seems like there are more and more commercials on 
television—12 minutes per hour during network primetime.2 And the costs of those 
commercial are high. The average cost of a 30-second network television commercial 
is around $150,000, with prices for the most popular primetime shows reaching over 
$700,000 per spot. At that kind of investment, companies expect to see results. But 
the system seems to be at a breaking point. According to media researcher AC Nielsen, 
network television viewership has been eroding at a rate of about two percent per year, 
and cable channels now draw larger audiences than network television, resulting in 
greater fragmentation.3 In addition, the proportion of time consumers spend with 
other media, especially the Internet, is growing, as broadband penetration has now 
reached well over half the households in the United States.4 Now armed with digital 
video recorders (DVR’s), video-on-demand channels, and shows that can be streamed 
over the Internet, consumers are skipping over or fast-forwarding through commer-
cials entirely. Thus, it appears that the effectiveness of traditional television advertising 
is faltering. So, marketers are turning more attention to non-traditional tactics. One 
of those tactics is buzz marketing, a technique designed to generate word-of-mouth.
ob jec tive 1
©Mike Margol/PhotoEdit.
Websites like Hulu.com now stream television shows over the Internet, further fragmenting 
 traditional television viewership.

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
317
Why Is Word-of-Mouth So Powerful?
Some marketers claim that word-of-mouth (or “buzz”) is the most powerful form 
of marketing—period. Word-of-mouth is the act of one consumer talking to another 
about a brand, and it can happen face-to-face and indirectly via phone, mail, or the 
Internet. Word-of-mouth has been around as long as human communication (con-
sider one pre-historic hunter telling another where the best hunting spots were). While 
word-of-mouth can be either positive or negative in nature, marketers attempt to gen-
erate positive word-of-mouth about their products and services.
So, why is word-of-mouth so powerful? Word-of-mouth is credible and authentic. 
Word-of-mouth communication is considered believable because consumers talking to 
one another rarely involve advertising or sales pitches. The underlying assumption is 
that the friend, neighbor, co-worker, or chat-room buddy engaged in word-of-mouth is 
someone whom you know and trust, and their opinions are honest and true, free from 
ulterior motives. People want to share the benefits of his/her own experiences with fel-
low consumers. In other words, they want to share their product experiences because 
they have other people’s best interests in mind.
Another reason that word-of-mouth is so powerful is that consumers enjoy discuss-
ing their product and service experiences; they like being “in the know.” It is appealing 
to have your peers view you as being on the cutting-edge of a new trend, or your infor-
mation to be interesting. If a consumer sees a terrific new band play at a local club, he 
immediately texts or emails his closest friends. If the band stinks, the consumer spreads 
the word, saving his friends from spending money on poor entertainment.
Finally, thanks to technology, word-of-mouth can spread faster and farther than 
ever before, through cell phones, email, text messaging, social networking sites, blogs, 
instant messaging, chat rooms, and message boards. Because of the Internet, the word-
of-mouth story can linger for a long time in cyber space. For example, back in the early 
2000s, the Firestone brand of automobile tire went through a massive product recall 
when some of their tires were blamed for causing automobile accidents. Today, a sim-
ple Internet search still yields dozens of postings about that incident. Given the ever-
 increasing power of this marketing medium, it is not surprising that marketers are now 
trying to take better control of the word-of-mouth process through buzz marketing.
Figure 14.1 Traditional Marketing Versus Word-of-Mouth

318 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Buzz Marketing
Word-of-mouth that occurs naturally is called organic word-of-mouth. Historically, 
marketers only hoped for positive word-of-mouth, allowing it to generate naturally, 
as one consumer told another about his/her satisfactory brand experiences. A com-
pany might also try to prevent negative word-of-mouth through good service or service 
recovery following a poor customer experience. In recent years, marketers have become 
more proactive in trying to deliberately generate and direct word-of-mouth. Buzz mar-
keting, also sometimes called word-of-mouth marketing, viral marketing, or stealth 
marketing, is the execution of marketing tactics specially designed to generate positive 
word-of-mouth marketing messages and create a virus-like exponential spread of those 
messages throughout the population of interest. In buzz marketing, the goal is to get 
key, influential people from the target market to talk about a product, service, or brand 
experience. These influencers rapidly spread the word, and then the buzz spreads, get-
ting and bigger and stronger as it goes.
Variations on buzz marketing are viral marketing and stealth marketing. While 
“buzz,” “viral,” and “stealth” marketing are sometimes used interchangeably, there are 
slight variations among them. Buzz marketing is a general term, encompassing any 
campaign designed at generating word-of-mouth. Viral marketing usually involves the 
Internet to facilitate the spread of word-of-mouth and spark buzz.
Marketer can try to spark a “virus” on the Internet in many ways. Viral videos draw 
large audiences and spark talk about the brand and the video, thanks to video sharing 
websites such at YouTube.com. YouTube.com uploads about 30,000 hours of foot-
age every day! For example, T-Mobile, as part of their “Life Is for Sharing” campaign, 
placed a viral video link on YouTube.com, called “The T-Mobile Dance,” that showed 
a large group of people doing a seemingly impromptu dance routine in a London train 
station. At the end of the video, the T-Mobile logo is flashed on the screen, and the 
video has a link to the T-Mobile website. By midsummer, 2009, the video had been 
viewed more than 12 million times. Other viral marketing techniques engage Internet 
users through blogs, chat rooms, and social networking websites.
Stealth marketing is a buzz marketing campaign that specifically relies on spread-
ing word-of-mouth in a covert or clandestine manner.5 While the tactics may not 
differ appreciably in a stealth marketing campaign than in buzz marketing gener-
ally, the consumer is supposed to remain unaware that a company is systematically 
 generating buzz.
Who are the key influencers in buzz marketing campaigns? The popular press gives 
them names like “opinion leaders, influentials, alphas, trend-translators, hubs, bees, 
and magic people.”6 From the viewpoint of new product development, they are tradi-
tionally known as Innovators and Early Adopters. These individuals are the first to try 
new products and technologies within a given product category. They tend to be opin-
ion leaders that later buyers rely on for product information and recommendations. 
Malcolm Gladwell, author of The Tipping Point, expands on the notion of tapping into 
these key influencers and the roles they play by identifying individuals he calls Mavens, 
Connectors, and Salesmen. Mavens (most likely the Innovators and Early Adopters of 
new products) are product experts in a product category. Connectors are individuals 
who hook into and span several social groups. Salesmen feed the fire by adding persua-
sive zeal to the message.7
Regardless of what they are called, marketers try to tap into the influence of those 
who seem to have the ability and willingness to talk about products and brands and 
generate a buzz. Now, let’s examine a few of the strategies and techniques companies 
and marketers use to generate buzz.
ob jec tive 2

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
319
PRODUCT PUSHERS  Product pushers are people re-
cruited by a company to get a product prominently seen and 
talked about in the marketplace. These recruits are usually at-
tractive but approachable and friendly, often from the target 
market’s own key influencer set. A few years ago, Ford Motor 
Company recruited a few popular opinion leaders in some 
key college markets and gave them a Ford Focus to drive for 
six months. In  exchange, the brand pushers were supposed 
to be seen driving the car and hand out Ford promotional 
materials to anyone who expressed an interest in the car. In a 
similar campaign, when Italian scooter maker Piaggio wanted 
to reintroduce a European-style motorbike, it sent beautiful 
people out to ride and generate buzz for the Vespa.8 On col-
lege campuses, exam time brings out the Red Bull patrol, 
and someone hired by that company drives around the cam-
pus in a specially decorated car, handing out free cans of the 
stimulating drink. Throughout the term, college students are 
hired to carry around spare cans of Red Bull and give them 
to friends and fellow students who look like they could use 
a Red Bull.
While brand pushers may really be users of the product 
they are employed to sample, push, and talk about to fellow 
members of the target market, they can also be more obvious. 
For example, beer companies have often hired beautiful mod-
els to “crash” nightclubs and bars dressed in company logo 
attire, hand out coupons for free beer, and otherwise generate excitement. Oscar Meyer 
uses the famous “Weinermobile” to generate excitement and buzz at special events like 
store openings, where employee hand out free samples and coupons. Employees of Lucky 
Strike cigarettes, called “Lucky Strike Forces,” show up outside office buildings offering 
free coffee and beach chairs to smokers who are banished from their offices whenever 
they want to light up.
A special type of brand pusher has emerged on the Web. Companies like 
BzzAgent provide a forum for people who want to be involved in buzz campaigns, 
letting consumers do the legwork. Real people who are real consumers sign up to be 
agents. They volunteer to try to create buzz for a product in their own communi-
ties through grassroots efforts. For  example, they may tell their friends about the 
 product, ask their local store to carry the brand, or hand out coupons to people 
they meet in the street. In exchange, the people who sign up as agents occasionally 
get previews of new products for free and free samples of the brands they promote. 
These agents are not under any obligation to push a product if they don’t like it. 
But there are plenty of ordinary people willing to participate. BzzAgent current-
ly has more than 300,000 members and has run more than 300 buzz campaigns 
for companies like Kraft, American Express, Sony, and Kellogg’s.9 Vocalpoint and 
TremorTeen, word-of-mouth marketing websites run by Procter and Gamble, also 
have memberships in the hundreds of thousands that aim at attracting moms with 
kids and teenagers, respectively.10
IMITATION EVANGELISTS  Imitation evangelists are actors put on the pay-
roll for stealth buzz campaigns. Their task is to slip commercial messages and recom-
mendations into everyday conversations under the consumer’s nose, with the hope of 
igniting a natural buzz. They differ from regular brand pushers because of the stealth 
 jfairone/iStockphoto.com

320 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
nature of the campaigns. The consumer is never supposed to know that the en-
counter is not authentic. For example, when Sony Ericsson Mobile Communication 
Company wanted to promote a new camera-cell phone, they created the “fake tour-
ist” campaign. Young, attractive couples posed as tourists in popular vacation spots 
around the United States. They asked passersby to snap their photo with the phone. 
The chance encounter became a moment to generate interest and buzz about the 
product.
Another popular stealth technique is to use “fake shoppers.” On the Internet, these 
people post on blogs, participate in chat rooms, and post product reviews. The music 
industry has also planted hip shoppers in music stores to chat about new artists so other 
shoppers overhear. Likewise, cigarette manufacturers sometimes hire women to give 
packs of cigarettes to smokers because, they claim, “the pack doesn’t fit in my purse.”11 
Finally, some alcohol manufacturers hire “leaners.” These stealth marketers pose as 
bar patrons, leaning on the bar, ordering the particular brand, and recommending the 
drink to others around them.
STEALTH CELEBRITY ENDORSERS  Celebrities are also sometimes part 
of stealth marketing campaigns. In a standard celebrity endorsement, a celebrity is paid 
to appear in a commercial. The viewer knows that the celebrity is being compensated 
for participating in the commercial. What consumers often don’t realize is that celebri-
ties are also sometimes compensated with fees or free merchandise to use or talk about 
products in their everyday lives as well. For example, when actress Kathleen Turner 
appeared on ABC’s “Good Morning America” and talked about an illness she had, she 
directed people to a website sponsored by a pharmaceutical company. However, she 
said nothing about the fact that the drug manufacturer had paid her for her public ap-
pearances on its behalf.12 Celebrities who have discussed their health ailments in media 
interviews, but have failed to disclose their endorsement deals, have been criticized for 
taking stealth marketing too far.
The next subject, consumer generated marketing, attempts to combine the advan-
tages of good buzz-generating tactics with traditional advertising.
Consumer Generated Marketing
Consumer generated marketing (advertising) is the creation of advertising or 
other marketing content by the customer. Here, companies leverage their own 
customers to generate not only interesting advertisements, but also some resulting 
good press and buzz too. Typically, a company invites participants to create market-
ing content, often an advertisement, for its brand through some kind of promotion 
or contest. The content is usually submitted via the company’s website. Selected 
“winners” may have their advertisements appear on the company website or on 
broad community Internet forums, such as YouTube.com. Occasionally, the con-
tent may cross over to television, radio, magazines, etc. For example, when Frito-
Lay’s Doritos brand chips held its consumer generated advertising campaign, the 
two winning advertisements were shown during the 2007 Super Bowl game. Frito-
Lay also increased customer participation by allowing people to vote to determine 
the winning spots.13
Why would a company solicit consumer generated advertising? The answers are 
 numerous, if not obvious. First, the costs of producing traditional advertising are very 
high. User-generated content is much cheaper. Second, when customers decide to 
ob jec tive 3

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
321
participate, they have to really think about the brand 
creatively, generating a new depth of interaction with 
the brand, something that marketers want. Third, 
the content created is often quite good. A consumer 
who loves a brand enough to produce creative work 
can generate truly inspiring and compelling content. 
Finally, consumer generated advertising is also a great 
marketing research tool: what better way for market-
ers to see how people feel about the brand and how 
the brand is actually positioned in the marketplace? 
In sum, the goal of consumer generated advertising 
campaigns is not always to create award-winning ad-
vertising, although sometimes this happens. Instead, 
the goal is to allow consumers to express, in their own 
words, how they feel about the brand. As a result, 
these authentic, innovative, and entertaining mes-
sages offer greater opportunity for generating positive 
buzz about the brand than do traditional marketing 
communications. When consumers are engaged in 
the process, they feel empowered.
Of course, risk exists in consumer generated 
advertising. First, such advertising may not be ap-
plicable for all products. It is hard to be passionate about toilet paper and fabric 
softeners. Products that are new, unique, or edgy, or brands with an iconic brand 
identity are usually better candidates for this type of campaign. For example, even 
though ketchup is a commodity-type product, the H. J. Heinz Company has man-
aged to inspire a passion and love for its ketchup brand over the years. To cash in on 
these feelings, the company ran a consumer generated campaign called, “Top This 
TV Challenge.” The commercials submitted were shown on YouTube.com, and the 
top 15 ads (selected by the company) were also featured on the company’s website. 
The cyber public then voted for the winners. The top five commercials were shown 
in national television advertising spots, and the winning commercial won $57,000, 
referencing the number “57,” part of the Heinz trademark.
Furthermore, with the good ads also come the bad. When an uncontrollable and 
unqualified public has free rein to submit anything, a company has to spend time 
and money sifting through all the bad content to find a few advertising gems—
and there’s no guarantee there will be any worthy of public display. Heinz had no 
guarantee that any of the advertisements submitted would be any good, but the 
company was committed to running the five finalists on national television. Thus, 
Heinz assumed considerable risk in making the promise to air the winning ads, no 
matter what.
Finally, brands with passionate devotees also tend to attract consumers who hate 
the brand as much as the devotees love it. While a firm may reject negative content for 
its website and marketing activities, harmful information can easily find its way onto 
the Internet and into the press.
Consumer generated advertising is an interesting new form of customer engagement 
that leverages the capabilities of digital communications. Will this new form of market-
ing stick around or will it lose its appeal as the novelty wears off? We don’t know the 
answer to that question, but celebrity and athlete endorsers, our next topic, have secured 
what appears to be a permanent place in the repertoires of marketing managers.
Courtesy of Frito-Lay

322 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Celebrity and Athlete Endorsers
Consumers often think of brands in terms of the famous people who endorse them. A 
celebrity endorser is an individual who enjoys public recognition and uses this recogni-
tion on behalf of a consumer product by appearing in an advertisement or engaging in 
some other marketing tactic. Celebrity endorsements are pervasive, particularly in the 
United States, where some estimates indicate that more than 20 percent of all television 
advertisements feature a celebrity endorser. While this trend is on the rise now, the fact 
is that celebrities have been endorsing brands for more than a century. In 1882, British 
actress Lily Langtrey, a very close friend of King Edward VII,  endorsed Pears Soap. Mark 
Twain promoted his own brands of flour and cigars. Former president Ronald Reagan 
appeared in ads for Chesterfield cigarettes, and Sean Connery endorsed Jim Beam bour-
bon. What benefits does Tiger Woods bring to Nike? How does martial artist Jackie 
Chan help Mountain Dew? What about Ellen DeGeneres and American Express? See 
Table 14.1 for a sample of celebrity endorsements, both classic and contemporary.
Although research is mixed on the value of celebrity endorsements, under certain 
conditions, the use of celebrities can increase message recall14 and aid in brand recogni-
tion.15 Research also shows that celebrities can provide brands with increased levels of 
trustworthiness, likeability, and persuasion.16 One interesting study even demonstrates 
ob jec tive 4
Chevy Tahoe Lets Everyone Have a Say
Marketing in Action
When the marketers of Chevrolet automobiles decided to 
hold an online contest to see who could produce the best 
television commercial for its newly redesigned Tahoe SUV, 
they didn’t necessarily count on Chevy bashers joining the 
game. But that’s what sometimes happens when marketers 
ask to hear from the public.
The contest, which coordinated with a sponsorship 
episode of NBC’s “The Apprentice,” urged viewers to 
create and submit videos about the Tahoe on a special 
Chevy website, Chevyapprentice.com. The response 
was huge, with more than 30,000 videos submitted in 
four weeks and 629,000 visitors to the website. The 
majority of entries were extremely positive, touting the 
auto’s features. But it wasn’t long before negative videos 
started showing up on the site, too, and all over the 
Web, with sharply satirical advertisements talking about 
global warming, a war for oil, social injustice, and even 
connotations related to sexual inadequacies. Chevy was 
now facing a pivotal decision: yank the negative Chevy-
bashing videos off the website or let them stay. The com-
pany let them stay, apparently deciding that it was more 
credible to let everyone who wanted to participate have 
a say. This strategy paid off. The Chevyapprentice.com 
website drove people to the Chevy website, and sales 
rose quickly, outpacing the competition.
In consumer generated advertising, marketers ask 
customer what they think and how they define the brand. 
Is this level of customer interaction and brand co-creation 
risky? While some marketers say it is because it invites 
brand-bashers to the table, many are realizing that con-
trolling the advertising message and trying to force a 
brand image onto the consumer doesn’t necessarily work 
any longer. Consumers want a say.36
General Motors Corp. Used with permission, GM 
Media Archives

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
323
that investors react positively to the announcement of celebrity endorsements.17 Another 
study shows that celebrity endorsers can reduce consumers’ perceptions of risk involved 
in technology products, provided that the celebrity is a good fit with the product (e.g., 
Jerry Seinfeld endorsing American Express).18
Much of the value of employing celebrities derives from their ability to portray 
themselves as typical brand users in typical use situations. Research suggests that when 
a consumer sees a celebrity endorsing a product, the consumer makes correspondent 
inferences. A correspondent inference is the assumption that a person’s behavior is a 
reflection of their beliefs and underlying dispositions, rather than the result of some 
situational variable. So, a celebrity wearing a certain brand of watch leads the consumer 
to infer that the celebrity actually likes the brand and is a typical user of the brand. 
This occurs despite the fact that most consumers are aware that celebrities are paid large 
sums of money to endorse brands. Along with correspondent inferences, research also 
suggests that celebrity endorsers come with “cultural meanings.” If the endorser and 
the product are a good “match” so the transfer of cultural meaning is possible, then 
the endorser is more effective. Consumers usually develop preconceived images about 
celebrity endorsers, resulting in celebrity images transferring to the brand.19 Thus, the 
managerial implication is that the endorser should “fit” the product endorsed.
Beyond the issue of “fit,” celebrity endorsement can be risky. Famous stars can over-
shadow a brand, and celebrity scandals can tarnish a brand’s image. Chrysler dropped 
Celine Dion, believing her sponsorship sold more music than automobiles. Similarly, 
Pepsi broke off its relationship with Beyoncè over concern that the brand didn’t benefit 
from the promotion as much as she did. Firms also drop celebrity endorsers quickly when 
they are linked to negative publicity. In 1989, Pepsi dropped Madonna following the 
 release of her controversial Like a Prayer video. In 1991, Ervin “Magic” Johnson lost his 
endorsement deals after publicly announcing that he was HIV-positive. It was ten years 
before Johnson landed another endorsement deal, this time with Lincoln Mercury. Kobe 
Bryant’s was just beginning to find new endorsement deals in 2009, after accusations in 
2003 regarding sexual misconduct, even though the case against him was ultimately dis-
missed. After years of positioning its brand as youthful and hip, Dell dropped Benjamin 
Curtis (“Dude, you’re getting a Dell”) after he was allegedly involved with marijuana.
Marketers also vigorously avoid negative political fallout. Sears and Federal 
Express pulled their sponsorship of Politically Incorrect after host Bill Maher referred 
to Americans as “cowards” for “lobbing Cruise missiles from 2,000 miles away.” Sadly, 
Table 14.1 Celebrity Endorsements and Brand Personalities
 
Celebrity 
Brand
 
Name 
Claim to Fame 
Name
 
Paula Abdul 
Pop-R&B Singer 
L.A. Gear
 
Halle Berry 
Actress/Model 
Revlon
 
David Beckman 
English Football Star 
Gillette
 
Cameron Diaz 
Actress 
Calvin Klein
 
Hillary Duff 
Actress/Musician 
Got Milk?
 
Jenny McCarthy 
Actress 
Candies
 
Brad Pitt 
Actor 
Tag Heuer
 Justin Timberlake 
Musician 
McDonald’s
 
Tiger Woods 
Professional Golfer 
Nike
 
Bob Dole 
Senator 
Viagra

324 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
there appears to be no end to celebrity misconduct. In 2007, Michael Vick, the popular 
quarterback of the Atlanta Falcons, was indicted on federal conspiracy charges for his 
alleged role in a dog-fighting venture Vick lost about $37.5 million in earnings, includ-
ing a lucrative deal with Coca-Cola. But in the summer of 2009, he was picked up by 
the Philadelphia Eagles.
Not surprisingly, marketers are adamant about protecting their brand images from 
the deleterious impact of celebrity misbehavior. Many firms now include morals clauses 
in celebrity endorsement contracts that allow the company to terminate a deal should 
a celebrity behave in an unbecoming manner. See Table 14.2 for a Forbes Magazine list 
of the most powerful celebrities
Table 14.2 Forbes Most Powerful Celebrities20
Rank 
Celebrity 
$ (millions)
1 
Oprah Winfrey 
$ 260
2 
Tiger Woods 
100
3 
Madonna 
72
4 
Rolling Stones 
88
5 
Brad Pitt 
35
6 
Johnny Depp 
92
7 
Elton John 
53
8 
Jay-Z 
83
9 
Steven Spielberg 
110
10 
Tom Hanks 
74
11 
Howard Stern 
70
12 
Phil Mickelson 
42
13 
David Letterman 
40
14 
Bon Jovi 
67
15 
Celine Dion 
45
16 
Simon Cowell 
45
17 
Michael Schumacher 
36
18 
Ben Stiller 
38
19 
Brian Grazer/Ron 
70
20 
Tim McGraw 
37
21 
Jerry Bruckheimer 
120
22 
Kimi Raikkonen 
40
23 
Jerry Seinfeld 
60
24 
Oscar De La Hoya 
43
25 
Gore Verbinski 
37
Athlete endorsers have become major factors in today’s media culture. Sports 
celebrities—both famous and infamous—have flourished as a result of the tech-
nological advances in broadcast and interactive media.21 Consumers can now view 
sporting events on cell phones, for example. See Table 14.3 for the highest paid 
athletes in the world.
Athlete endorsers’ responsibilities can range from using or wearing specific brands 
(e.g., Tiger Woods and Nike apparel) to offering actual testimonials on behalf of the 
brand (e.g., Payton Manning and Sprint). Despite the widespread use of athlete en-
dorsers, their influence on advertising objectives remains controversial.22 Some research 
suggests that sports celebrities may not connect to intended target markets.23 Recent 
research, however, demonstrates that athlete endorsers positively influence adolescents’ 

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
325
favorable world-of-mouth and brand loyalty. In other words, not only are athletes im-
portant to adolescents making brand choices, but teenagers also talk about the brands 
to their friends and peers. Regardless of whether athletes desire to be role models, re-
search indicates that teenagers consider athletes as important role models—regardless 
of their public behavior.24
Product Placement
What Is Product Placement?
The scene opens; it is an observational viewing gallery in a surgical suite. Two charac-
ters, Jerry and Kramer, sit in the front row, looking down on the operating table. As the 
operation begins, Kramer pulls out a box of candy. The dialogue proceeds:
Jerry: What are you eating?
Kramer: Junior Mints. Do you want one?
Jerry: No
Kramer: I can’t see . . . Pssst . . .
(Kramer motions to the nurse to move out of the way.)
Jerry: Where’d you get those?
Kramer: The machine. You want one? Here, take one.
Jerry: I don’t want any!
objec ti ve 5
Table 14.3 Forbes Best-Paid Athletes25
Athlete 
Sport 
$ (millions)
Tiger Woods 
Golf 
$ 87.0
Michael Schumacher 
Auto Racing 
60.0
Oscar De La Hoya 
Boxing 
38.0
Michael Vick 
Football 
37.5
Shaquille O’Neal 
Basketball 
33.4
Michael Jordan 
Basketball 
33.0
David Beckham 
Soccer 
32.5
Kobe Bryant 
Basketball 
28.8
Lance Armstrong 
Cycling 
28.0
Valentino Rossi 
Motorcycling 
28.0
Alex Rodriquez 
Baseball 
27.5
Phil Mickelson 
Golf 
26.8
Andre Agassi 
Tennis 
26.2
Derek Jeter 
Baseball 
25.5
Manny Ramirez 
Baseball 
24.2
Jeff Gordon 
Auto Racing 
23.4
Walter Jones 
Football 
23.2
Ronaldo 
Soccer 
23.0
LeBron James 
Basketball 
22.9
Matt Hasselbeck 
Football 
22.8
Maria Sharapova 
Tennis 
18.2
Serena Williams 
Tennis 
12.7
Annika Sorenstam 
Golf 
7.3
Venus Williams 
Tennis 
6.5
Lindsay Davenport 
Tennis 
6.0

326 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Kramer: No, they’re good!
Jerry: I don’t want any!
Kramer: Just take one.
Jerry: No! Kramer, stop it!
As the two men struggle with the mint, it flies into the air toward the operating 
table. And so goes the famous “Junior Mint” scene on the popular show, “Seinfeld.”26 
Would the scene have worked with a generic box of candy? Probably. But would it have 
been as funny or memorable? Probably not.
The classic Junior Mint television scene is the essence of great product placement. 
Product placement is the insertion of branded goods and services within the con-
tent of popular media, including television, movies, video games, books, and music. 
When done correctly, product placement adds a sense of continuity and realism to the 
context that a generic, blank “box of candy” cannot. On the flipside, if you have ever 
watched a television show or movie and felt like you were watching one really long 
commercial, you’ve probably been on the receiving end of poor product placement.
Product placement has been around since the beginning of movies and television, 
but has seen explosive growth as an alternative marketing method over the last few 
years. One of the earliest documented product placements was in 1951 for Gordon’s 
Gin in the movie, “The African Queen.”27 Katherine Hepburn didn’t drink the gin 
in the film but threw it overboard. Another classic example is the 1982 film, “E.T. 
The Extra-Terrestrial,” which helped launch Reese’s Pieces from Hershey Foods 
Corporation. While Hershey paid nothing for inclusion, the payoff for Reece’s Pieces 
was significant, with sales for the candy shooting up 40 percent within a week of the 
movie’s premier.28 Interestingly, the producers originally wanted to use M&M’s candy, 
but the company turned down the placement. More recently, BMW paid the produc-
ers of the movie “GoldenEye” to feature James Bond driving a BMW Z3 Roadster as 
Spike Nannarello/NBCU Photo Bank via AP Images
Product placement that is key to advancing the plot is called product integration.  It is one of the 
most powerful forms of product placement.

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
327
Liu Wei, the captain of China’s national basketball team, 
averaged 22.3 points per game in 2006 with the Shanghai 
Sharks, Yao Ming’s former team. Mr. Ming, of course, is 
the center for the National Basketball Association’s Houston 
Rockets. But Liu Wei is not permitted to star in a Chinese 
Coca-Cola ad. In China, it is not clear as to who owns the 
rights to a professional basketball player’s image: the athlete 
himself or the government-run China Basketball Association. To 
be sure, China’s socialist system of state control over athletes’ 
careers is not only problematic 
for the Chinese athletes, but it is 
a headache for global marketers 
who would like to use emerging 
Chinese sports stars to attain cov-
eted market share in a country of 
1.3 billion people. Most Chinese 
athletes join government-run train-
ing programs as kids with the 
promise that they will be taken 
care of for life. In exchange, they 
give up most of their earnings and 
decision-making power to China’s 
sports federations, including those related to appearing in ad-
vertising and public relations activities.
Liu Wei is not alone. In 2004, Olympic diver Tian Liang 
won two gold medals in Athens, Greece. As the marketing 
deals rolled in, Chinese sports officials accused him of engag-
ing in too many commercial activities and suspended him from 
the national team. In a similar case, Liu Xiang, a runner who 
reached fame after his surprising gold medal performance in 
the 110-meter hurdles in Athens, is required to give half the 
money he makes to the athletic association, his coach, agents 
working between the federation and marketers, and his former 
team. Only a sports federation “knows best how to keep or 
maintain the athletes’ good performance, which is regarded as 
the key value for the sports stars,” says Wang Dawei, the vice 
president and treasurer of the CAA.
Only one Chinese star truly enjoys the Western-style 
freedom of a celebrity—Yao Ming, the 7’6” center for the 
Rockets. How does he do it? Yao’s global fame transcends 
even the Chinese Basketball Association; Yao works for the 
NBA. Although he is somewhat overexposed in China, market-
ers claim that Yao’s endorsements are worthwhile because his 
achievements tap into the powerful Chinese national pride. But 
Yao may have company soon. 
Basketball player Yi Jianlian, who 
earlier this year declared his eli-
gibility for June’s NBA draft, looks 
to be the next Chinese superstar 
with global appeal. He already 
has endorsement deals with Nike 
and Amway Corp.
So what is the solution for 
global brand marketers wanting 
to have Chinese sports stars 
other than Yao and Yi endorse 
their products? Develop close 
relationships with sports federations to gain access to their 
stars, of course. Adidas knows this and has been working 
with Chinese federations for 25 years. “We have a very 
deep-rooted relationship with coaches, and we have our own 
scouts within China to help us identify up-and-coming ath-
letes,” notes Marcus Kam, Adidas’s senior manager of sports 
marketing in China. However, Chinese coaches and gov-
ernment bureaucrats can be challenging business partners. 
Scheduling time with some Chinese athletes takes months of 
planning, and sponsors pay as much as $1.3 million to be 
associated with someone like Liu Xiang and then may pay 
nearly $2 million for an ad shoot. Other access to Liu Xiang 
is denied.37
Marketing Athlete Endorsers in China
Eye on International
part of a large promotional campaign introducing the product. Within a month of the 
movie opening, BMW had 9,000 orders for the car.29
While product placement is traditionally associated with movies and television, it 
is now present in all types of media. According to Advertising Age magazine, a few years 
ago, Seagram’s brand gin was able to get a number of rap artists to talk about the brand, 
PRNewsFoto/Newscom

328 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
including Pety Pablo, whose “Freek-a-leek” was a  hip-hop hit. Other brands often men-
tioned in popular music include Cadillac, Lexus, Versace, Porche, Gucci, and Cartier.30 
And, when product placement makes it into the lyrics of a song, the product itself is 
likely to be seen in the song’s music video. Books are not immune to product place-
ment either. Fay Weldon’s book The Bulgari Connection  featured the Bulgari Jewelry 
Company. Product placement is even appearing in more and more video games. Just 
like in movies, video game creators insert real products and brands into their cyber-
environments to lend realism and cohesiveness to the game. Going a step farther, 
 advergaming is the practice of creating a whole game specifically designed around a 
product. For  example, makers of Minute Maid juices, with Skyworks productions, cre-
ated “Minute Maid Maj Jong,” which combines brand messages and gaming.
Why Is Product Placement Growing?
In recent years, product placement has surged as companies search for new ways to 
reach consumers and as the costs of production for traditional advertising have risen. 
While product placement has become an essential tool for marketers, it is also an 
important revenue stream for media providers. Below are just some of the benefits of 
product placement.
ADDED REALISM  Product placements link fictional content to real life, mak-
ing the story more believable. The benefit for the product is that consumers see it 
perform in real life situations (hopefully in ways that improve 
the perception of the brand).
REACH AND LONGEVITY  Product placement is 
 extremely economical when you consider that television shows, 
movies, books, videos, and songs usually have a long shelf life 
and typically cost a fraction of traditional broadcast television 
 advertising. A song may be heard by millions of people many 
times over months or even years. With DVD sales and syndica-
tion, movies and television shows can be watched for decades. 
Viewers still see Tom Cruise wearing Ray-Ban sunglasses in the 
movie, “Risky Business.” Year after year, viewers watch Ralphie 
almost shoot out his eye with his longed-for Red Ryder BB Gun 
in “A Christmas Story.” In addition, when a brand is featured 
in a show, it is definitely seen, but in a broadcast commercial, 
it can be skipped via the fast-forward button on the DVR.
INDIRECT ENDORSEMENTS  When an actor is 
seen in close proximity to a product or shown using a prod-
uct in a dramatic scene or situation, an association between 
the character and/or the celebrity and the brand can be cre-
ated in the consumer’s mind, creating an indirect celebrity 
endorsement. Strategic product placement with the right 
characters or actors can convey ideas about the positioning 
of the brand. Research has shown that when consumers see 
celebrities endorsing a brand, they typically assume they like 
and use the brand “in real life.”31 Recall our earlier  discussion 
of correspondent inferences.
©Warner Brothers/Everett Collection
Tom Cruise helped Ray Ban sunglasses sales skyrocket 
when he wore the glasses in the movie Risky Business.

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
329
COST REDUCTION  Product placement can help reduce the costs of produc-
ing media because producers do not have to purchase set items and props, plus it can 
provide cash to support the creative process. For example, Mark Burnett, creator of 
CBS’s “Survivor” helps finance the show this way.
Types of Product Placement
All product placements are not created equal. They have varying degrees of impact 
on and interaction with the media. Typically, as the involvement of a brand with the 
editorial content increases, so does the value of placement within the media. Types of 
product placement include:
•  Visual Product Placement: Visual placement entails placing the brand on 
screen within the setting or background of a program. While this is probably 
the most common form of product placement in movies, television, and other 
visual media, it is also the easiest to overlook, because 
there is little or no interaction between the actors and 
the product, and the product itself may not be integral 
to the story. Included in this category is a variant on 
product placement called advertisement placement. This 
occurs when an advertisement for a brand is placed in 
the media, rather than the brand itself. Examples include 
a television commercial playing in the background of a 
scene or an actor driving his car past a billboard in an 
 action sequence.
•  Brand Interaction: Brand interaction occurs when 
the characters talk about the product or brand or 
 actually handle the product, i.e., they physically 
 interact with it.
•  Brand Integration: Brand integration occurs when the 
brand is woven into the thread of the story, becoming 
part of the plot or context, in a fashion similar to the 
famous Junior Mint scene in “Seinfeld.”
•  Sponsorship and Branded Entertainment: This type 
of product placement is the most intensive form of 
marriage between content and brand. In this type of 
placement, the brand is the sole sponsor of the content, 
has extensive editorial control of the content, and the 
editorial content or style typically matches closely the 
targeted audience of the brand.
Regardless of the type of product placement used, mar-
keters must be creative to obtain the placement. The most 
straightforward way of placing a brand is for the marketer 
to pay a fee for the brand to appear in the show or program. 
According to a research firm PQ Media, estimated paid 
product placements for 2006 were $3.01  billion.32 Ford 
Motor Co. and Coca-Cola Co. paid at least $30 million 
each for their sponsorship/product placement deals with 
ob jec ti ve 6
 
Is product placement a form of 
 
subliminal advertising? As has been 
 
already discussed in this book, 
 
subliminal perception is the 
unconscious perception of a stimulus. Many subliminal 
 messages actually fall above the absolute threshold of physical 
perception, but are still consciously repressed by the viewer. 
Given this definition, does product placement fall within these 
boundaries? One might argue that this is indeed the case.
Many times, a person may not consciously notice a product 
or brand in the background of a television or movie scene. Even 
so, the brand may be noticed on some subconscious level. 
Other times, while the brand is noticed, it may be integrated so 
seamlessly into the action that viewers may simply not realize 
they are watching a type of advertisement. In addition, product 
placements are not overtly disclosed at the time the good or 
service is featured. Commercial Alert, a consumer advocacy 
group, has called for full disclosure of product placement ar-
rangements both before and during television programs. In fact, 
the group claims that product placements are inherently decep-
tive and subliminal.38
On the flipside, product placements don’t fall below the 
absolute threshold of perception; marketers want them to be seen 
and heard. Also, the appearance of a brand in itself does not call 
the consumer to action. In other words, there is no overt “sales 
pitch.” The Federal Trade Commission has argued that this lack of 
overt adverting messages exempts product placement from full 
disclosure. Also, because some placements are unpaid, consum-
ers cannot know which products are included for the sake of 
advertising and which are there to enhance the entertainment.
So, while most people would agree that product placement 
is some form of advertising, is it actually subliminal advertising? 
You decide.
E T H I C S

330 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Fox’s “American Idol” reality show.33 
This investment has apparently paid off 
because the sponsors keep coming back 
year after year. In fact, the famous red 
Coca-Cola cups that are on the judges’ 
table during the show are reported to 
be the most widely seen product place-
ment on TV, according to an article in 
Advertising Age.34 Although no indus-
try standards exist regarding product 
placement cost and use, marketers usu-
ally have some “veto power” in decisions 
about how their brands are used.
Some companies do not like to pay 
for product placement, preferring in-
stead to provide free merchandise to sup-
port the production of the show through 
a type of barter agreement. In exchange, the producers include the product. More 
than half of all product placements occur through this exchange method. For example, 
Apple Computer, Inc., does not pay for product placements, but Apple computers 
and iPods appear frequently in popular television shows, including CBS’s “CSI: NY,” 
NBC’s “The Office,” and Fox’s “24.”35 In fact, in the early seasons of “24,” the heroes 
in the show used Apple computers, while the villains used non-branded PCs.
Finally, some product placements just appear in some productions, with or without the 
brand’s permission, because the producer or director feels the product enhances the quality 
of the production. For example, in an episode of HBO’s “The Sopranos,” a can of Raid 
bug killer was used in a violent scene without the permission of SC Johnson Company, 
the manufacturer. While some companies have tried to block some product placements 
by suing producers for trademark infringement, there are currently no specific laws that 
directly prohibit a director or producer from placing a product in a scene or context. Most 
disputes have been handled on a case-by-case basis. Given the rapid growth of this prac-
tice, however, more rigid regulation of product placement may be on the horizon.
TM and Copyright © 20th Century Fox Film Corp. All rights 
reserved./Everett Collection.
In today’s technology-driven, cluttered environment, 
companies cannot simply rely on traditional forms of mar-
keting, such as advertising and face-to-face sales. In this 
chapter, we examined some contemporary strategies and 
unique ways marketers reach out to today’s consumers, 
including word-of-mouth marketing, consumer generated 
advertising campaigns, celebrity and athlete endorsers, 
and product placements.
Word-of-mouth or buzz marketing is the execution of 
marketing tactics especially designed to generate positive 
word-of-mouth marketing messages and create a virus-like 
exponential spread of those positive messages throughout 
the population of interest. Marketers want to create and 
direct word-of-mouth because consumers see it as credible 
and authentic and because it is so easy to spread and sustain 
on the Internet. To help execute buzz marketing campaigns, 
companies often hire people to push the brand, either online 
or in person. When these people keep their activities clan-
destine, they are said to be engaging in stealth marketing.
Consumer generated advertising campaigns try to har-
ness the benefits of traditional advertising and buzz market-
ing by encouraging the creation of advertisements by con-
sumers themselves. These campaigns have the advantages of 
generating good advertisements in a relatively inexpensive 
way, engaging the customers in new, meaningful ways, and 
providing the company with valuable consumer insights.
Chapter Summary

Chapter 14   Contemporary Strategies in Reaching Consumers 
331
word-of-mouth
organic word-of-mouth
buzz marketing
word-of-mouth marketing
viral marketing
stealth marketing
consumer generated marketing 
(advertising)
celebrity endorser
correspondent inference
product placement
visual product placement
brand interaction
brand integration
sponsorship and branded 
entertainment
Key Terms
Another contemporary strategy that has become 
standard in marketing, especially in the United States, 
is the use of celebrity and athlete endorsers. Consumers 
often think of brands in terms of the famous people 
who endorse them, and research has shown that celeb-
rity endorsers can have positive persuasive effects. On 
the flipside, marketers must use care when using celeb-
rity and athlete endorsers. Famous stars can overshadow 
a brand, and celebrity scandals can tarnish a brand’s 
image.
Finally, product placement is the insertion of branded 
goods and services within the content of popular media, 
including television, movies, video games, books, and mu-
sic. When done correctly, product placement adds a sense 
of continuity and realism to the story, while promoting 
the brand in subtle but meaningful ways.
Review and Discussion
 1. Why is word-of-mouth so powerful?
 2. Why is buzz marketing also referred to as “viral” 
marketing?
 3. What is the distinction between buzz marketing and 
stealth marketing?
 4. What are some of the potential ethical implications 
of doing a stealth marketing campaign?
 5. What are some of the differences between traditional 
advertising and consumer generated advertising?
 6. What are some of the benefits of a consumer gener-
ated advertising campaign? What are the risks?
 7. Review the Forbes Magazine list of best-paid athletes 
presented in the text. Do you think they are worth 
the money they are paid for endorsements? Explain.
 8. In what type of media is product placement found?
 9. How do product placements add realism to the me-
dia in which they are placed?
10. Describe the differences between brand interaction 
product placement and brand integration product 
placement. Which is better? Why?
1. Think back to your own experiences with word-of-
mouth. Discuss one example of a time when you were 
influenced by word-of-mouth and one example of when 
you influenced someone else through word-of-mouth.
2. In buzz marketing, identifying and leveraging opin-
ion leaders is very important. Choose a group that 
might be influenced by an opinion leader and put to-
gether a photo collage displaying at least five opinion 
leaders for that group. The collage should identify 
who the people are, why they are opinion leaders, 
and what products or brands each of them would 
most successfully endorse.
3. Think about one brand for which you would like to 
create a consumer generated advertisement. What 
would your ad say about the brand?
4. Watch one hour of television. Try to identify one 
example of each type of product placement in the 
program(s) you watch. Justify your example.
Short Application Exercises

332 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
Imagine that you have been hired by a company to 
“promote” their product via stealth marketing. You will 
most likely do this by pretending to be a “regular cus-
tomer” yourself and by trying to influence other cus-
tomers to show interest in or purchase the product.
Team up with a partner. Go to a mall or shop-
ping area and choose a product to secretly pro-
mote. Choose a consumer or group of consumers 
as the object of this exercise. Then, using any kind 
of “stealth technique” you can think of, try to in-
fluence the consumer/consumers to purchase the 
product. You can be overt or subtle. It is up to you. 
Take your time; do not rush. You are successful if 
the person or group is persuaded in any way to take 
interest in the product—sampling it, examining it, 
or purchasing it. You should try this multiple times 
and see the various reactions you receive. For ex-
ample, try it out on different demographic groups 
(e.g., older versus younger, like you versus different, 
etc.) with various approaches.
Next, develop a set of field notes, describing the 
experience. In these field notes, describe what you 
chose to do and the results of the exercise. After you 
have finished describing what took place, offer some 
analysis, explanation, and opinion of your actions 
and the subsequent results. Were you successful? 
Why or why not? Were your results surprising? Lastly, 
offer your opinion as to the ethical appropriateness 
of stealth marketing. Is this form of marketing okay? 
Should it be restricted or not allowed at all?

Yahoo!
Online Consumer Behavior
 1 | Explain the differences between online 
marketing and bricks-and-mortar 
marketing.
 2 | Improve the design of a website.
 3 | Define search goods, experience goods, 
and credence goods.
 4 | Explain the implications of reduced 
search costs for consumer behavior.
 5 | Explain the consumer advocacy 
paradigm.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to…
objectives
Yahoo! is currently battling Google for the number one spot for web search engines. 
However, in 2006, Yahoo!’s stock fell 36% and Google’s ad sales and stock prices increased 
dramatically.1 To compete more effectively against Google, Yahoo! announced in January, 
2007, that Panama would be Yahoo!’s new advertising platform beginning in February, 2007. 
Panama gives advertisers more control by allowing them to change strategies and keywords to 
adapt to changing consumer preferences. Panama also rank orders ads in terms of relevance 
to a consumer’s search rather than in terms of dollars. Yahoo! also underwent a major 
reorganization: 44 business units were reduced to just four. This streamlining redundancies 
and interdepartmental competition.
To compete against Google’s YouTube, Yahoo! acquired Flickr, Answers, and Delicio
.us. Although Yahoo! currently has more users than Google, Google is more profitable. 
15
CHAPTER
333

334
The Age of Interactivity
As the Yahoo! example illustrates, the Internet is changing the way firms do busi-
ness. Manufacturers can now produce custom-made products and services more 
quickly and efficiently. Interactive shopping environments also enable marketers to 
learn more about satisfying consumers’ diverse needs and wants more effectively. 
Consumers are learning that they can obtain a wide variety of products and services 
at a reasonable price. Moreover, the number of choices and amount of information 
available are increasing at a staggering pace. As the number of choice options increases, 
the potential for making better decisions increases. However, too much informa-
tion can be overwhelming and confusing. Search engines like Yahoo! and Google 
attempt to help consumers use the large amount of information available on the 
web more effectively.
ob jec tive 1
Nevertheless, Yahoo! attracts more users than AOL or Microsoft, and Yahoo!’s email is 
the largest in the world with 250 million users. Yahoo! is also ranked first or second in 
17 different web categories. By carefully monitoring rapidly changing consumer behavior 
patterns on the web, Yahoo! may be able to compete more effectively against its number one 
competitor, Google.
AP Photo/Paul Sakuma

Traditional mass marketing uses tools like television, radio, newspapers, and magazines 
to deliver a one-way message to consumers about product benefits. Internet marketing, 
however, uses interactive two-way communications between marketers and consumers 
with fast response times between communications and high levels of response contin-
gency.2 This means that one party’s response depends on the other party’s response, and 
this helps both parties get the information they need when they need it.
High levels of interactivity on the web enables e-tailers (electronic retailers) to 
provide exactly the type of information about products and services that individual 
consumers wish to receive. Interactivity also makes it easy for consumers to provide 
e-tailers with the information that they want—including credit card numbers, email 
addresses, shipping addresses, personal preferences, and purchase histories. E-tailers also 
try to make repeat purchase easy: With the click of a button a consumer can tell e-tailers 
to ship the requested items to the usual address and to bill a credit card which is already 
on file. Shopping becomes quick and easy. Consumers can shop from their homes for 
products from anywhere in the world without driving to traditional bricks-and-mortar 
retail stores, without struggling to find parking spots, and without waiting in lines.
In addition to making shopping easy, the web makes shopping fun, at least for 
some consumers. People are having the most fun when they are in a state of flow.3 
Flow is experienced when people perform an activity skillfully with little thought or 
effort. Golfers and other athletes often talk about being in the “zone,” or performing 
extremely well without thinking. Birdies, touchdowns, baskets, and home runs just 
seem to come naturally, without a great deal of effort. Athletes sometimes say that golf 
balls, footballs, basketballs, or baseballs seem to pop right out at them when they’re 
Marketing in Action
Weblogs, or blogs for short, are frequently updated 
web journals that can be used to transmit cutting-edge 
information about products, services, politics, or just about 
anything. Although blogs have been around nearly as 
long as the web has, they became tremendously popular 
during the 2004 presidential election, and now there are 
over 35 million blogs worldwide covering a wide range 
of topics. Microsoft and many other companies have 
learned that blogs provide a tremendously useful tool for 
reaching consumers and for generating positive electronic 
word-of-mouth communications. Of course, blogs can also 
backfire. On December 1, 2004, Microsoft announced 
that it was planning on releasing a new software product 
called MSN Spaces that would enable consumers to 
easily create and maintain blogs.21 This announcement 
lead to Boing Boing blog’s co-editor Xeni Jardin to write 
a blog called “7 Dirty Blogs,” in which she reported that 
MSN Spaces did not allow her to start a blog called 
“Pornography and the Law,” but did allow her to start 
blogs entitled, “World of Poop,” and “Smoking Crack: A 
How-To Guide for Teens.” Microsoft learned the hard way 
that blogs are difficult to control and can lead to negative 
or positive electronic word-of-mouth.
Mazda learned the same lesson when it created a fake 
blog, allegedly created by 22-year-old Kid Halloween, 
showing a Mazda3 breakdancing, and a Mazda3 flying 
off a ramp like a skateboard. New blogs were quickly 
linked to the Mazda blog saying that the Mazda blog 
must be a fake because the videos were too slick to be 
made by a 22-year-old skateboarder. This led to a great 
deal of negative electronic word-of-mouth about Mazda.
Chapter 15   Online Consumer Behavior 
335
porcorex/iStockphoto.com
Blogs—A Double-edged Sword for Marketers

336 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
in a state of flow, and golf cups, end zones, baskets, and other targets look huge when 
they’re in the “zone.” Similarly, when consumers navigate through a well-designed 
 website, shopping becomes automatic, effortless, and fun.
Features of a Well-Designed Website
Choice and Customization
The biggest difference between online stores (electronic stores on the Internet) and 
bricks-and-mortar stores (physical stores found in shopping plazas, shopping malls, 
etc.) is that online stores offer greater choice and greater customization.4 Online stores 
have virtually unlimited inventory because they enable consumers to shop for products 
across stores, across state lines, and even across international borders. Online stores also 
permit greater customization because sellers can provide as much information as they 
wish, including product samples (e.g., music clips, video clips), comments from other 
customers, and comparisons to competitors’ offerings.
In a recent study of 755 e-tailers from BizRate.com, it was found that online 
 business success depends on brand name reputation, the type of products sold by 
the e-tailer, and the ease with which consumers could navigate the website.5 Brand 
name reputation was perceived to be better if the e-tailer also had well-known 
objec tive 2
Courtesy of JCPenney
E-tailers benefit from having a well known bricks-and-mortar store with the same brand name.

Chapter 15   Online Consumer Behavior 
337
 bricks-and-mortar stores with the same brand name (e.g., JCPenney, Walmart, J. Crew), 
the e-tail sites were created by well-known manufacturers (e.g., Kodak, Casio), or if 
the e-tailer was well-known due to national advertising campaigns (e.g., amazon
.com, pets.com).
Information Search and Navigation
Some types of products are easier to shop for online than others. Information search 
refers to how much information consumers attempt to acquire. Information search 
costs refers to how difficult it is to acquire information in terms of time, money, or 
effort. Information search is greater and information search costs are lower in online 
environments than in offline, bricks-and-mortar environments. Furthermore, it is 
easier to obtain information and to evaluate the quality of search goods, relative to 
experience goods or credence goods.6 The quality of search goods can be examined by 
simply examining a picture of it. The product might have a particularly effective design 
or appearance, or the brand name or the price of the product might be enough to con-
vince consumers that the product is of high quality. The quality of experience goods, 
however, can only be determined by touching, feeling, or using the product. Sensory 
attributes like taste, smell, and touch determine the quality of experience goods. The 
quality of credence goods is even more difficulty to judge, because quality depends 
on years of experience and use. Attributes like reliability and durability determine the 
quality of credence goods. E-tailers are more successful if they primarily sell search 
goods, rather than experience goods or credence goods.
Some creative e-tailers, like landsend.com, have tried to make it easier to shop online 
for experience goods like clothes by providing detailed descriptions of experience and 
credence attributes, and by showing color pictures accompanied by information about 
stitching and construction materials. Landsend.com also uses a risk-free return policy 
to build trust and to assure consumers that its products are of high quality.
Navigation ease depends on ease of ordering, ease of payment, delivery meth-
ods, security, and the ease with which consumers can contact service representatives. 
Consumers prefer many different ordering methods (e.g., online, email, toll free phone, 
fax), many different payment methods (e.g., many different credit cards accepted, per-
sonal check, PayPal), and many different delivery methods (e.g., USPS, UPS, overnight 
shipping, two-day shipping).
Organization of Information
The design of a website also influences whether consumers are more likely to use a 
compensatory decision making strategy or a non-compensatory decision making 
strategy. When consumers use a compensatory strategy, they make trade-offs between 
attributes and this enables a good attribute to compensate for, or at least reduce concerns 
about, a bad attribute. When consumers use a non-compensatory strategy, they do not 
make trade-offs across attributes, and a bad attribute usually leads to the rejection of an 
alternative. Unfortunately, even an alternative that is very good overall can be rejected 
if that alternative has one bad attribute. Consumers often make better decisions if they 
use a compensatory strategy rather than a non-compensatory strategy, and consum-
ers are more likely to use a compensatory strategy if a website is organized by options 
rather than by attributes.7 When a website is organized by options, consumers are also 
likely to click on more options and consider a broader range of alternatives, and this 
also increases the quality of a decision. Consumers also click on more options when the 
objec ti ve 3

338 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
attributes are negatively correlated, because negatively correlated attributes  encourage 
consumers to attempt to make trade-offs between attributes. For example, e-tailers like 
HP provide laptop shoppers with a “customize and buy” option. Consumers click a 
series of options, beginning with components (processor, memory, hard-drive, graphics 
card, and display) and ending with accessories (e.g., mouse, keyboard, carrying case). 
Consumers can easily see the trade-offs between two, negatively correlated attributes 
such as processing speed and price. For instance, an Intel T6400 provides 2.0 GHz, 
whereas as a P8600 processor offers 2.4 GHz of speed for an additional $175. Thus, 
organizing the product by customized options encourages trade-offs and a compensa-
tory strategy. In contrast, if HP organized its laptop offerings by attribute (e.g., by 
processor), consumers would be forced to evaluate one brand featuring an Intel T6400 
processor, a second brand featuring a T6600, and so on. This presentation would dis-
courage consumers from making trade-offs within each alternative and encourage non-
compensatory decision-making. Consumers would tend look at each brand in isolation 
and reject those brands that failed to satisfy a specific criterion.
As noted earlier, e-tailers are more successful if they have bricks-and-mortar or 
offline stores as well as online stores (e.g., Sears.com and Sears). If an e-tailer does not 
have an offline store, managers should consider building an alliance or a partnership 
with an offline store. Research on online-offline brand alliances shows that such alli-
ances encourage consumers to form assimilation effects between online and offline 
In the 1990’s, China and Taiwan were placed on the U.S. and 
the E.U. sanction list for their lack of trademark enforcement. 
According to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 66% of the 
counterfeit products seized at U.S. borders come from China.22 
China produces counterfeit luxury 
watches, designer purses, scarves, 
computer chips, computer software, 
automobile parts, airplane parts, 
cosmetics, fertilizers, sunglasses, 
fragrances, prescription drugs, toys, 
and even automobiles. The Chinese 
Chery QQ Minicar is almost an exact 
copy of the Chevrolet Spark. New 
technology, including new manufac-
turing equipment and new computer 
software, has made pirating easy in 
China, and the Internet has made 
purchasing pirated brands easy.
Famous brand names can be copied via rhyming, 
spelling similarity, and similar fonts or logos. For example, 
France’s La Chemise Lacoste produces leisurewear and 
sportswear featuring Lacoste’s famous crocodile logo. 
The Singapore company 
Crocodile uses a similar 
crocodile logo on their 
leisurewear and sportswear. 
Although Lacoste was founded 
in 1933 and Crocodile was 
founded in 1951, Crocodile 
sued Lacoste for trademark 
infringement in China and 
won its case. The Chinese 
court ruled that the Crocodile 
logo was original in terms of 
the shape and the expression 
of the crocodile.
Internet Aids Counterfeit Brands
Eye on International
Jason Kemplin/Getty Images

Chapter 15   Online Consumer Behavior 
339
brands.8 This means that as online brand quality increases, consumers’ perceptions 
of the quality of offline brands also increase, and vice versa. Similarly, if online brand 
quality decreases, consumers’ perceptions of the quality of offline brands decrease, and 
vice versa. Hence, if an alliance or a partnership is formed, it is important to choose a 
partner that is well known for selling high quality brands.
The Implications of Reduced 
Search Costs for Information
Typically, consumers find it is easier to acquire information about products and services 
by using the click of a button on the Internet than by using phone calls and customer 
visits to several different bricks-and-mortar stores. Of course, so much information is 
available on the Internet that consumers can also become confused or overwhelmed. 
Consumers behave as limited information processors and are only able to consider 
about seven pieces of information at a time. One way consumers deal with this problem 
is by eliminating options that do not meet their requirements in the first stage of the 
decision making process, and then by evaluating the remaining options more carefully 
in the second stage of the decision making process. Consumers also have the option of 
using interactive decision aids (or smart agents or bots) that make it easier to eliminate 
options in the first stage and to evaluate options in the second stage.9 A recommen-
dation agent is an interactive decision aid that helps consumers to eliminate options 
by using information about their personal preferences or about their prior purchase 
histories. Amazon.com uses the latter approach. A comparison matrix is an interac-
tive decision aid that helps consumers to evaluate options by providing a Consumer 
Reports style brand-by-attribute matrix that makes it easy for consumers to compare 
options. Research shows that both types of interactive decision aids improve the qual-
ity of consumers’ decisions by helping them to manage large amounts of information 
more effectively.
Because it is easier to search for information in online environments than in 
offline environments, search costs are lower in online environments. Accordingly, 
consumers tend to search for more information in online environments. Consumers 
also search for more information when the purchase decision is important and con-
sequential10 or when they feel highly uncertain about which product or brand they 
should purchase.11
Purchase decisions are perceived as more consequential as involvement (personal 
relevance) or risk (the chance of negative outcomes) increases. Involvement and risk are 
often positively correlated. For example, involvement is higher for expensive products, 
like cars, because expensive products carry considerable financial risk. No one wants 
to pay thousands of dollars for a car to discover later it’s a lemon. Involvement is also 
higher for publicly consumed products that carry social risks, like clothes. Consumers 
want to buy clothes that look sharp or stylish; they don’t want to buy clothes that 
look ugly or nerdy. Involvement is also higher for products that carry physical risks, 
like lawn mowers, motorcycles, or pharmaceuticals. As involvement increases, it makes 
sense to gather a lot of information about many dealers, brands, and attributes before 
making a decision.
Prior knowledge also influences information search.12 Novices, or consumers who 
are unfamiliar with a particular product category, tend to search for little information 
because they don’t know how to interpret or how to use this information. For example, 
if you don’t know anything about a complex product like plasma TVs, learning that 
ob jec ti ve 4

340 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
a particular model has a resolution of 1080i doesn’t help you to evaluate this prod-
uct. Moderately knowledgeable consumers tend to search for a lot more information 
because they know how to interpret and how to use this information. Surprisingly, 
experts or highly knowledgeable consumers tend to search for relatively little informa-
tion because they often feel confident that they already know everything they need to 
know to make an informed choice. Hence, there’s an inverse-U shaped relationship 
between prior knowledge and search with the greatest amount of search occurring for 
moderately knowledgeable consumers.
Search costs are much higher in offline environments than in online environments. 
It takes planning, time, physical energy, and mental energy to visit many different 
offline stores and to compare many different brands on many different attributes. 
Consequently, consumers often search for relatively little information, even in a single 
offline store. For example, the typical grocery shopper spends only 12 seconds per 
decision, and many shoppers (41%) don’t even bother to check the price of the prod-
ucts they purchased.13 Comparing prices takes time and energy, even when brands are 
located right next to each other on the same shelf.
Conversely, search costs are much lower on the Internet. With the click of a 
button, consumers can scan the prices and features of hundreds of products quickly 
and easily by using interactive decision aids such as those provided by bizrate.com, 
botspot.com, bottomdollar.com, mysimon.com, pricescan.com, and other websites. 
When it is easy to compare prices for a product carried by many different retailers, 
cost transparency increases.14 That is, a seller’s costs become more obvious to buyers, 
and buyers can use this information to determine if a price is fair. Manufacturers 
and retailers are concerned about cost transparency because it decreases their ability 
to charge high prices and earn high margins. For example, when MCI and Sprint 
first started charging lower rates for long-distance phone calls, many consumers 
switched and AT&T was eventually forced to reduce its rates, also.
Cost transparency can potentially turn brands into commodities, subsequently 
reducing brand loyalty. Brokerage firms that rely more on an online presence (e.g., TD 
Ameritrade and E-trade) provide nearly the same products and services as traditional 
brokers (e.g., A. G. Edwards) for much lower fees. If a product or service is perceived 
as pretty much the same no matter who offers it, why not buy the least expensive 
option? Economists refer to this industry structure as perfect or “pure” competition 
because there is little to differentiate the brands and 
firms become “price takers,” i.e., they must sell at the 
going rate. Brand loyalty can also diminish if consumers 
believe that a firm enjoys healthy profit margins, despite 
the presence of a sales promotion or price discount. For 
example, Procter & Gamble relied heavily on sales pro-
motions in the 1980s and early 1990s, but in the mid-
1990s, Procter & Gamble changed its policy to “efficient 
promotion” or no sales promotion. This change encour-
aged many consumers to switch to less expensive  private 
label brands.
Of course, price information is not the only type of 
information available on the Internet. The Internet also 
offers vast amounts of information about product qual-
ity and product reliability (e.g., consumerreports.org, 
epinions.com). The Internet is dramatically reducing 
search costs for many different types of information.
Courtesy of TD Ameritrade

Chapter 15   Online Consumer Behavior 
341
Research on traditional advertising has shown that price advertising—or advertis-
ing that compares prices across brands—increases price sensitivity and encourages con-
sumers to purchase the less expensive brand.15 However, differentiating advertising—or 
advertising that compares specific features and benefits across brands—decreases 
price sensitivity and encourages consumers to purchase the higher quality brand.16 
Differentiating advertising also decreases the size of consumers’ consideration sets.
Similar results have been found for Internet advertising.17 In a highly influential 
experiment, mock web pages were created by systematically varying the design of web 
page similar to the real wine.com web page. Specifically, price comparability (high or 
low), quality comparability (high or low), and store comparability (high or low) were 
manipulated independently, and graduate students and university staff were randomly 
assigned to conditions. In high price comparability conditions, price information was 
presented on the first page and a tool that sorted wines by price was also provided. In 
low price comparability conditions, consumers had to click on a brand name to find its 
price and no sorting tool was provided. In high quality comparability conditions, wines 
could be sorted by grape (e.g., chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon) and detailed infor-
mation about quality was provided (e.g., complexity, acidity, body, dryness). In low 
quality comparability conditions, consumers had to click on a brand name to obtain 
information about the grape and the quality of the wine. In high store comparability 
conditions, a split screen was used so that consumers could easily compare two stores 
(Dionysus and Jubilee). In low store comparability conditions, consumers could only 
visit one store at a time.
The results show that price sensitivity is lower when quality comparability is high 
rather than low. When it is easy to compare brands in terms of quality, the effects of 
price on choice decrease. Furthermore, when one store offered brands not offered by 
the other store, store comparability had no effect on price sensitivity. Store compara-
bility influenced price sensitivity only when both stores offered the same brands. The 
results also demonstrate that consumers enjoy navigating through the website the most 
when all three search costs were low. Not surprisingly, consumers also made better 
decisions when all three search costs were low. These findings suggest that retailers 
should cooperate with smart agents and strive to reduce search costs for price, quality, 
and store information because this increases consumer satisfaction, which subsequently 
increases repeat purchase rates.
In a follow-up experiment, it was shown that using smart agents to reduce search 
costs for quality information can increase price sensitivity when price and qual-
ity are uncorrelated, especially when consumers are highly preoccupied with price.18 
Otherwise, search costs for quality information have opposite effects on price sensitiv-
ity and product differentiation, consistent with the results of the previous experiment. 
Furthermore, the follow-up experiment shows that these results generalize to several 
different product categories.
The Consumer Advocacy Paradigm
The Internet has reduced consumers’ information search costs, reduced transaction 
costs, increased the number of options available, and increased communication among 
consumers. As a result, the Internet has increased consumer power. According to Glen 
Urban, a former Dean of the MIT Sloan School of Management, the best way for 
firms to respond is to become consumer advocates.19 Firms should improve product 
quality, improve customer service, improve privacy and security on the Internet, and 
provide honest and accurate information about their products and their competitors’ 
objec ti ve 5

342 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
products, and should do so even when competitors’ products better serve consumers’ 
wants and needs. For example, automobile insurance firms like Progressive provide 
competitors’ rates even when some of the competitors have better rates. Similarly, 
Bankrate.com provides competitors’ rates for different types of loans, mortgages, CDs, 
and other financial services even when some of the competitors have better rates. 
These companies try to help consumers and build trust even when this involves losing 
business in the short run. Helping consumers and building trust can benefit a com-
pany in the long run.
The famous online auction site, eBay, enjoys billions of dollars worth of business 
every year. eBay builds trust by asking consumers to provide feedback about sellers and 
by presenting this feedback on their website. Reputable sellers receive 99% or higher 
levels of positive feedback and consumers learn to trust sellers with high levels of positive 
feedback. Furthermore, consumers are often willing to pay a little more for products sold 
by highly reputable sellers. eBay also provides excellent fraud protection, and fewer than 
0.01% of the transactions performed on eBay are fraudulent. PayPal is used for making 
purchases on eBay, and PayPal helps protect against fraud by warning consumers about 
potentially suspicious sellers who changed their identification information recently by 
displaying a pair of sunglasses next to the seller. Consumers are also encouraged to com-
municate with sellers via email before buying and to report suspicious activities.
Courtesy of Progressive Corporation
Firms like Progressive use the Internet to build trust with consumers.

Chapter 15   Online Consumer Behavior 
343
Travelers also love to use the Internet to search 
for information and to book flights on Expedia.com, 
Orbitz.com, and Travelocity.com. These companies have 
been driving travel agents out of business and saving con-
sumers money by providing competitors’ rates. Orbitz.com 
even provides information about how much consumers 
can save by changing their travel schedules slightly (e.g., 
leaving or returning a day earlier or later). Some consumers 
use these sites just to gather information. Consumers can 
book their flights on airlines’ websites later, if they wish.
More and more consumers are using eTrade, TD 
Ameritrade, and Charles Schwab to buy stocks online. 
These companies have increased the amount of financial 
information and advice available to consumers and have 
reduced trading costs. Charles Schwab pays its brokers 
salaries rather than commissions to encourage brokers to 
help consumers as much as possible rather than simply 
trying to sell more stock. Commissions impede the devel-
opment of consumer advocacy programs because com-
missions reward salespersons to sell as much as possible 
and to sell more expensive products and services even 
when consumers do not need these more expensive prod-
ucts and services.
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) manufactures 
processors and flash drives and helps customers solve 
their connectivity problems. AMD recently created the 
AMDEdge online customer service program to help 
 customers who want to build their own computer sys-
tems. AMDEdge provides technical tips, news, cutting 
edge information, and access to online forums where 
consumers facing a specific problem can interact with 
other consumers who have faced the same problem and 
have developed possible solutions to the problem.
Relationship marketing involves building stron-
ger relationships with consumers by using information 
technology and improved business processes. The goal 
of relationship marketing is to build consumer trust and 
brand loyalty. L. L. Bean, Land’s End, and Orvis use 
information technology to track consumers’ purchase 
histories and this information is then used to send dif-
ferent customized catalogs to different consumers. These 
companies also collect demographic (e.g., age, gender, 
income) and psychographic (e.g., values and lifestyles) 
information from consumers to learn more about their 
wants and needs. The ideal relationship marketing pro-
gram uses one-to-one marketing or individualized inter-
actions with consumers, loyalty programs that promote 
repeat purchase with points or rewards for frequent trans-
actions, and accurate and unbiased information, advice, 
and recommendations. For example, in 2004, a global 
 
Approximately 25% of all products 
 
sold on the Internet are counterfeit, 
 
resulting in over $25 billion in lost 
 
revenues to the original firms.23 
Cybersquatting and typosquatting are also common on the 
Internet. Cybersquatting occurs when someone registers a 
domain name of another company’s trademark and attempts to 
sell the domain name to the trademark owner. Typosquatting 
occurs when someone registers a domain name that is 
misspelled (e.g., silliconvalley.com) or that has typographical 
errors such as missing words (e.g., www.barnesnoble.com).
In the case of Toronto-Dominion Bank v. Boris Karpachev 
(2002), Karpachev invested in the bank’s TD Waterhouse online 
brokerage service and lost approximately $35,000. Because 
he was angry about his loss, Karpachev registered 16 confusing 
domain names similar to TD Waterhouse (e.g., tdwoterhouse
.com, dtwaterhouse.com) and wrote negative blogs about these 
companies on his sites. The Canadian court ordered Karpachev 
to delete his confusing domain names and to refrain from 
creating new domain names that could be confused with TD 
Waterhouse.
However, typosquatting is not always disallowed by the 
courts. The e-tailer Buy.com created several domain names 
similar to its competitors (e.g., 10percentoffamazon.com, 
10percentoffreel.com, 10percentoffegg.com) that link consum-
ers to Buy.com. Some of these sites have been discontinued, 
but some still exist (e.g., 10percentoffamazon.com).
E T H I C S
Sportstock/iStockphoto.com

344 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
auto manufacturer improved their relationship marketing program by (a) using indi-
vidualized mailings based on consumers’ ratings of safety, style, performance, and 
economy, (b) developing an Internet Auto Choice Advisor, which provided unbiased 
recommendations, (c) developing an Auto Show in Motion competitive test drive 
experience with no sales pressure, and (d) developing a community of 500 consum-
ers who could discuss their concerns with other consumers similar to themselves and 
with product experts.
Many consumers do not trust large corporations because of accounting scandals 
(e.g., Enron, MCI-Worldcom, Tyco, Parmalat), insider trading charges (e.g., Ivan 
Boesky, Dennis Levine, Martin Siegal, Michael Milken), obstruction of justice charges 
(e.g., Martha Stewart), and other abuses of power. Because of the erosion of trust cre-
ated by these problems, consumer advocacy is more important than ever. Nevertheless, 
consumer advocacy is not for all firms. Companies that sell commodities might not 
benefit from consumer advocacy programs because extreme price competition drives 
commodity industries. Monopolies also might not benefit from consumer advocacy 
programs because consumers have little power in monopolistic settings. Consumer 
advocacy is also not for firms facing uncontrollable quality problems. For example, 
airlines cannot control weather problems and air traffic control problems. Consumer 
advocacy is also not for firms with a short-term focus.
Search engines like Yahoo!, Google, MSN, Ask.com, and 
others help consumers to navigate through enormous 
amounts of information stored on the web. Reduced search 
costs have increased consumer power and have encouraged 
companies to adopt more consumer-friendly policies and 
services. The most successful websites are owned by com-
panies with reputable brand names, sell goods and offer 
websites that are easy to evaluate, and have websites that 
are easy to navigate. High levels of interactivity provide 
two-way communication, fast response times between 
communications, and high levels of response contingency 
where the questions and answers of one party depend on 
the questions and answers of the other party. Interactivity 
helps consumers and retailers get the information they 
need when they need it.
Comparing prices and features of products offered 
by different offline or bricks-and-mortar stores is time 
consuming and difficult. Many consumers are unwilling 
to rearrange their schedules to visit many different stores 
to find the product that best meets their needs. Instead, 
consumers often settle for the first satisfactory product 
they encounter. In online environments, on the other 
hand, comparison shopping is quick and easy. With the 
click of a button, consumers can quickly access informa-
tion about virtually any type of product or service that 
they might want. Interactive decision aids reduce search 
costs for price, search costs for quality, and search costs for 
e-tailers. Reduced search costs decrease decision effort and 
lead to better choices.
Reduced search costs also increase consumer power 
and encourage firms to develop consumer advocacy pro-
grams. This involves improving product quality, improv-
ing customer service, improving privacy and security on 
the Internet, and providing honest and accurate informa-
tion about products and services. Some consumer advo-
cacy programs provide information about competitors’ 
products even when competitors’ products better serve 
consumers’ wants and needs than the firm’s own products. 
Advocating for consumers builds trust and can benefit 
a firm in the long run.
Chapter Summary

Chapter 15   Online Consumer Behavior 
345
blogs
interactivity 
e-tailers
flow
information search
information search costs
search goods
experience goods
credence goods
compensatory decision 
making strategy
non-compensatory decision 
making strategy
recommendation agent
comparison matrix
search costs
relationship marketing
Key Terms
Review and Discussion
1. How will interactivity change the way consumers 
acquire, remember, and use product information?
2. What are the key differences between online and of-
fline shopping environments?
3. What are the key features of a well-designed website?
4. What types of products are particularly easy to shop 
for on the web? What types of products have you 
shopped for on the web?
5. How do search costs influence amount of search?
6. What are the consequences of low search costs for 
price-related information?
 7. What are the consequences of low search costs for 
quality-related information?
 8. From a retailer’s perspective, what are the advan-
tages of having unlimited electronic shelf space?
 9. What is the consumer advocacy paradigm? How 
could a company use this paradigm?
10. What future trends are likely to shape the way 
 consumers use the web to shop?
1. Visit a well-designed website, like amazon.com. How 
does the site make searching for information easy? 
What type of recommendation agent does the site 
use?
2. On a blank sheet of paper, draw a well-designed 
home web page that would make navigation easy 
for consumers.
3. Discuss your most favorite and least favorite web 
shopping experiences. What were the key factors that 
lead to these experiences?
4. Use a search engine to find information for a product 
that you have never shopped for and that you know 
little about. Although you know little about this 
product, could you use the web to learn a lot rela-
tively quickly?
Short Application Exercises

346 
Part FoUR   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
M a n ag er i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
YOUR CHALLENGE:
Deanna Brown, President of Scripps Networks 
Interactive, says, “Being in tune with the con-
sumer palette allows us to think smartly about 
what people are thinking about on a day-to-day, 
week-to-week basis.” FoodNetwork.com has grown 
to 11.3 million users in 2009, and big events like 
the Super Bowl encourage many consumers to use 
FoodNetwork.com recipes and products for home 
entertaining. Walmart is one of FoodNetwork
.com’s largest clients, and Stephanie Prager, associ-
ate digital director for Walmart at MediaVest, says, 
“There’s a challenge we’ve seen with other cable 
networks in that they might have a great program 
on-air, but their site is not as robust.”
1. Imagine that you are a manager at FoodNetwork.com and you’ve been asked to ana-
lyze your company’s website. What are the most positive features of FoodNetwork
.com’s website?
2. How could you improve FoodNetwork.com’s website?
3. Besides Walmart, what other new clients would you pursue and why?
4. Does FoodNetwork.com do a good job of serving as an advocate of consumers? 
How could consumer advocacy be improved at FoodNetwork.com?

347
Branding Strategy 
and Consumer Behavior
 1 | Develop new brand entry strategies and 
decrease new brand adoption rates.
 2 | Develop appropriate brand strategies 
for each stage of the product life cycle 
and develop marketing strategies for 
extending the product life cycle.
 3 | Develop a strong brand name.
 4 | Develop appropriate marketing strategies 
for strong brands and weaker brands.
 5 | Develop consumer acquisition and 
retention strategies for a new brand.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to . . .
objectives
Disney is one of the leading brands in the world, standing for excellence in 
children’s entertainment. This brand includes famous cartoon characters 
(e.g., Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck), famous movies (e.g., The Lion King, 
The Hunchback of Notre Dame), and famous theme parks (e.g., Disneyland, 
Disney World, Tokyo Disneyland). In 1998, Disney’s CEO, Michael 
Eisner, was one of the highest paid executives with a compensation package 
of $631 million.1 However, even a formidable company like Disney can 
make blunders, such as the Euro Disney theme park near Paris, France. 
Disney spent $4.4 billion developing Euro Disney, and in its first few years 
of operation, attendance was reasonable. However, visitors spent very little 
after they entered the theme park. Eventually, Euro Disney had to lower 
16
Disney
CHAPTER
PRNewsFoto/Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment/Newscom

348
its prices for entrance to the theme park and its hotels, sell cheaper merchandise (e.g., t-shirts and 
crayons instead of jewelry), and train its employees to speak multiple languages and be responsive to 
people from many different cultures.
Because of its strong brand image, Disney may be able to recover its losses from Euro 
Disney. The Disney case is instructive because it highlights the importance of building a strong 
brand name worldwide, developing a coherent set of brand extensions (i.e., apply the brand 
name to many different products and services that appeal to children), and using a strong 
brand name to recover from bad decisions.
Entry Strategy
Before managers can build a strong brand name for new products, they must develop appro-
priate entry strategies for bringing those products to market. The diffusion of  innovation, 
or the rate a new product spreads or is adopted across the marketplace, differs among prod-
uct categories. For example, diffusion was slow for black-and-white televisions when they 
were first introduced, but fast for color televisions when they hit the consumer marketplace. 
The reason for this is that diffusion is influenced by several factors, especially the relative 
advantage of the new product over the old product.2 The advantages of black-and-white 
television over radio were not immediately obvious when black-and-white television was 
first introduced. However, after enjoying black-and-white television for decades, it was easy 
for consumers to imagine the relative advantages of color television over black-and-white.
Compatibility with consumers’ beliefs, opinions, and lifestyles is another important 
factor. Wealthier consumers traveled and enjoyed active lifestyles; sitting home watch-
ing black-and-white television was incompatible with this way of life. This incompat-
ibility slowed the diffusion of black-and-white TVs in the marketplace—because at the 
time, they were relatively expensive, i.e., only people with higher incomes were able to 
afford TVs. Complexity or user friendliness is another important factor. Black-and-
white television was so novel when it was first introduced that consumers did not know 
how to use it. Incremental innovations, like color television, are often easier to use, so 
incremental innovations usually diffuse more quickly than totally new products.
Perceived risk also reduces the diffusion rate. This is true for financial risks (e.g., 
expensive products, like black-and-white television when it was first introduced), social 
risks (e.g., embarrassment at being unable to use the product successfully), and physical 
risk (e.g., risk of harm). Trialability, or the ease with which consumers can try or use the 
new product, increases the diffusion rate. Trialability tends to be higher for inexpensive 
products than for expensive products, but it can vary across the board; not all products 
can be taken for a test drive. It is very common to test drive a new automobile, and 
now, consumers can try out products like computers, mattresses, and even expensive 
rugs in their homes before finalizing purchases.
The typical diffusion curve is S-shaped; the proportion of potential adopters is low 
initially because it takes time for marketing programs to build awareness and stimulate 
trial. The adoption rate typically increases dramatically during the growth phase as a 
result of the “snowball” effect from word-of-mouth communications. The more con-
sumers talk favorably about a new product to other consumers, the more these other 
ob jec tive 1

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
349
consumers want to try the product. Eventually, however, the market becomes saturated, 
and the product is replaced by a new innovation. See Figure 16.1.
Although the diffusion rate is affected by several factors outside of marketing manag-
ers’ control, they can influence the diffusion rate by identifying innovator consumers and 
targeting marketing programs toward them. Innovator consumers are usually venturesome, 
open-minded, and sensation-seeking. They are willing to try new things. They also tend to 
be highly educated and upwardly mobile. Innovator consumers also tend to be heavy us-
ers of a product category and active seekers of information via specialty magazines and the 
Internet. Focusing on innovator consumers helps firms increase initial sales and acceptance of 
a new product among other members of the channel of distribution, as well. This is especially 
important when a firm is new and has relatively little power in the channel of distribution.
Heavy promotion and advertising can be used to influence early adopters and to 
stimulate word-of-mouth. This is particularly important when a product is expected to 
have a relatively short life cycle as a result of rapidly changing technology (e.g., comput-
ers and other high-tech products). If the product is expected to have a relatively long 
life cycle and if a firm has asymmetrical power in the distribution channel, then a long-
term market leadership strategy should be pursued, including segmentation, targeting, 
positioning, and protection from imitation. Usually only the largest and most powerful 
firms can pursue this strategy (e.g., Disney, Sony, Coca-Cola).
Product Life Cycle Management
The diffusion curve has a powerful influence on the product life cycle, which also is 
typically S-shaped. However, the product life cycle curve is affected by several other 
factors as well, including repeat purchase rates, changes in consumer preferences, envi-
ronmental changes, and other factors (see Figure 16.2).3
As the product life cycle curve indicates, during the introduction stage, managers 
need to focus on creating awareness and stimulating trial. Promotion and advertising 
objec ti ve 2
Figure 16.1 Diffusion Curve
The Diffusion Curve and Entry Strategies
Percent of Potential Adopters
Stage:
Introduction
Growth
Maturity
Decline
Strategy:
Rapid
Takeoff
Rapid
Acceleration
Maximum
Penetration
Long-run
Franchise
Source: Adapted from G.L. Urban and S.H. Star, (1991). Advanced Marketing Strategy: Phenomena, analysis, and decisions, 
p. 97. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.

350 
Part Four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Figure 16.2 Product Life Cycle Curve
The Product Life Cycle Curve and Strategies
Sales
Stage:
Introduction
Growth
Maturity
Decline
Strategy: Create awareness
and induce trial.
Promote and
advertise heavily.
Build share.
Stimulate
word-of-mouth
communication.
Target new
segments. Develop
brand extensions.
Control costs.
Increase production
process efficiency.
Monitor
competition.
Harvest or
rejuvenate.
Source: Adapted from G.L. Urban and S.H. Star, (1991). Advanced Marketing Strategy: Phenomena, analysis, and decisions, 
p. 94. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
European cable companies served over 60 million 
consumers and earned more than 10 billion Euros in 
revenues by 2002.13 The companies borrowed heav-
ily to build networks and acquire new customers. The 
companies bet that many customers would adopt digi-
tal services. However, the lifetime value of the typical 
customer was much lower than the amount of money 
invested by these companies, and several of them 
went bankrupt, including Ish (a German company) 
and NTL (a U.S. company and Europe’s fourth-
largest operator). United Pan-Europe Communi-
ca tions, the third-largest operator, defaulted on its 
bond payments and was removed from one of the 
European stock exchanges.
peaceeye/iStockphoto.com
New Customers Aren’t Free
Eye on International
are important tools for achieving these goals. During the growth stage, managers need 
to build market share by stimulating word-of-mouth communication. New market seg-
ments and brand extensions (i.e., variations on a theme) tend to appear during this stage. 
During the maturity stage, managers need to focus on reducing production and mar-
keting costs. Competition intensity also increases during this stage. Finally, during the 

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
351
decline stage, the product may be approaching obsolescence. If so, harvesting is appropri-
ate; costs should be reduced to the bare minimum so future sales based on the reputation 
of the product yield high profits. Of course, harvesting shortens the product life cycle.
If the product is not yet obsolete, rejuvenation strategies can lengthen the product life 
cycle. One way to rejuvenate a product is to develop new uses for it. For example, Arm & 
Hammer baking soda can be used to deodorize refrigerators, freezers, sinks, carpets, and cloth-
ing. It can also be used as an ingredient in toothpastes, deodorant, and carpet fresheners. In 
other words, there are many uses of baking soda that do not involve baking. Similarly, DuPont 
continually develops new uses for its key product, nylon. Initially, nylon was used to make 
ropes and parachutes. Later, it was used in women’s hosiery, clothing, tires, and carpets.
Commodities, or generic products, can sometimes be rejuvenated via brand-
ing. Sunkist oranges seem better than ordinary oranges. Purdue chickens seem 
better than ordinary chickens, and Idaho potatoes are positioned as high quality. 
Advertising can also rejuvenate a product, under the right circumstances. In the 
past, it was considered distasteful to run television ads for hygiene-related prod-
ucts, such as feminine goods and deodorants. Now such ads are common, and Axe 
and Old Spice grooming products for men and Always feminine hygiene products 
(Procter & Gamble) have benefited greatly from advertising exposure. Effective 
advertising can even turn disadvantages into advantages. For example, “Avis is 
number two so they try harder.” “With a name like Smucker’s, it has to be good.” 
Focusing on the correct advantages is also important. For example, Pampers dis-
posable diapers originally sold poorly when advertising focused on benefits to the 
mother (i.e., convenience). Sales increased dramatically when advertising shifted 
its focus to benefits for the baby (i.e., helps keep baby drier and healthier).
Identifying new market segments or new potential users of a product can also 
rejuvenate a product. For example, Johnson & Johnson baby shampoo is not just 
for babies anymore. It’s also mild and gentle enough for adults to use every day. 
Milk is not just for children anymore. It’s healthy for adults, also. Lipton tea is 
not just for seniors; young people also enjoy Lipton tea. Another way to reju-
venate a product is to reduce its price, as Datril did to compete more effectively 
against Tylenol. Social trends should also be analyzed. Increasing concerns among 
consumers about health, pollution, and the environment have increased sales of 
organic produce, health foods, vitamins, and environmentally friendly products.
Sometimes unused by-products from a manufacturing process can be marketed 
to increase the profitability of a product in the decline stage. For example, kitty lit-
ter is made from disposable sawdust from lumberyards. Mesquite wood was once 
destroyed by Texas farmers, but now they sell it for grilling. Cat food and dog food 
are made from the unused by-products of food for people. Finally, developing a 
new channel of distribution can be used to rejuvenate a product, as Hanes did for 
L’eggs panty hose. Originally, panty hose, and women’s hosiery in general, were avail-
able primarily in department stores. L’eggs became very successful when Hanes sold 
them through grocery stores, drugstores, and mass merchandisers, using a clever egg-
shaped plastic package—which also protected the relatively delicate product from 
damage and simplified display in store aisles. Direct marketing and Internet sales can 
also lengthen a product’s life cycle.
Brand Equity Management
The brand name of a product is often its most important asset.4 A strong brand name 
triggers many important associations stored in consumers’ memories, and a strong 
brand name provides a promise of excellence. Strong brand names give consumers a 
objec ti ve 3
Courtesy of Procter & Gamble
Pampers emphasizes benefits 
to the baby rather than 
benefits to the parent.

352 
Part Four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
good reason for buying. They also increase trust, repeat 
purchase rates, and the willingness of consumers to pay 
more for one brand than for another. Of course, these ef-
fects lead to greater sales, profits, and power in the distri-
bution channel for companies.
How can managers build strong brand names for 
their products? The first step is to establish a strong brand 
identity (who are you?). For example, Disney has a strong 
brand identity; consumers know that Disney stands for ex-
cellence in children’s entertainment. The second step is to 
establish a strong brand meaning (what are you?). Disney 
performs well on this dimension, too. Consumers know 
that Disney creates family-friendly cartoon characters, 
movies, and theme parks. The third step is to foster strong 
brand responses, or feelings, thoughts, and reactions from 
consumers. For example, Disney elicits warm family feel-
ings, thoughts, and reactions. The fourth step is to build a 
strong brand relationship between the brand and the con-
sumer. Many consumers have become so strongly attached 
and committed to Disney that they immediately buy whatever new product Disney 
develops even if they know little about it and despite its expensive price.
Brand identity depends on the strength and the nature of the associations that come to 
mind whenever consumers encounter a brand. These associations can be linked to a prod-
uct category, specific product attributes, specific product benefits, specific usage situations, 
or specific users of the product. When the associations are sufficiently strong, the relevant 
product category, attribute, benefit, usage situation, or user can prime or automatically 
activate thoughts about the brand. This leads to a significant advantage for strong brands.
Brand meaning depends on the strength and the nature of the image of the brand in 
terms of objective quality and performance. Does the brand exceed consumers’ perfor-
mance expectations? Is the brand reliable, durable, and easy to service? Does the brand 
satisfy consumers’ utilitarian, aesthetic, and economic needs and preferences? Building 
brand meaning takes a long time, and just a single bad experience with a product can 
erode many years’ worth of goodwill. So, managers need to ensure that the brand expe-
rience is consistently high in quality.
Brand responses are the feeling and judgments that come to mind when consumers 
think about a brand. Relevant feelings include warmth, fun, excitement, security, approval 
from others (won’t the neighbors be impressed?), and self-esteem (I feel like an important 
person when I use this brand). Disney performs well on the warmth and fun dimensions, 
and BMW performs well on the approval from others and self-respect dimensions. Relevant 
Figure 16.3 Strategies for Extending the Product Life Cycle
• Develop new uses
• Branding
• Advertise more heavily
• Identify new relative advantages
• Identify new users
• Reduce price
• Sell unused byproducts
• Develop new distribution channels
E T H I C S
 
In 2007, 60 million cans of pet 
 
food from China were recalled 
 
because they were allegedly 
 
contaminated with melamine, a 
chemical used to make plastics and fertilizers. Also, in 2007, 
nine million toys from China were recalled because they were 
decorated with paint containing lead or included magnets that 
could be swallowed by small children. Some of the toys were 
well-known brands, including Barbie, Polly Pocket, and char-
acters from the movie Cars.14 Some of the toys were sold by 
Mattel and Fisher-Price. Is it ethical for Chinese companies to 
cut corners in order to make cheaper products? If this practice 
continues, how will it influence the image of products made in 
China? Could this image affect Chinese products that are not 
defective? Could this image influence the willingness of firms in 
the United States to do business with Chinese firms?

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
353
judgments include subjective quality, credibility, consideration, and superiority. To perform 
well on these dimensions, the brand must deliver a unique and consistently high-quality 
experience. Uniqueness is especially important. Many companies have tried to copy Disney 
but have failed because Disney’s uniqueness is preemptive, i.e., it is difficult to copy.
Brand relationships take years to develop and can only occur after strong brand identi-
ties, brand meanings, and brand responses have been established. Brand resonance refers to 
a consumer’s intense and actively loyal relationship with a brand. Brand resonance leads to 
high purchase frequencies and volumes, feelings of attachment, feelings of brand community 
or kinship with other users of the brand (e.g., anyone who uses my brand must be a good 
person), and active engagement, such as joining a fan club for the brand. See Figure 16.4.
Brand equity is the value that a brand accrues based on the goodwill attached to asso-
ciations with the brand name. One simple and direct approach to measuring brand equity 
is to compare consumers’ evaluation of a product with no brand name to their evaluation 
of the same product with a brand name attached.5 This approach is especially useful in the 
early stages of market research when product concepts or ideas are tested for feasibility. For 
example, one group of consumers could be asked to evaluate a series of new product ideas 
(e.g., garden-vegetable flavored potato chips, Cajun-blackened steak frozen dinners, chunky 
peach cottage cheese, smoky bacon-flavored hotdogs, Italian spiced lunch meat, lemon 
mint soda). Another group could be asked to evaluate the same concepts with a brand name 
attached to each (e.g., Nabisco, Sealtest). If the same concepts are evaluated more favorably 
when a brand name is attached, the brand name adds value. Developing brand exten-
sions, or different products with the same brand name (e.g., Coke Classic, Cherry Coke, 
Vanilla Coke, Coke Zero), is more problematic because the brand name becomes more 
variable and ambiguous. Consumers’ perceptions as to why a company launches brand 
extensions are also important. Ideally, firms want consumers to assume that brand extensions 
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

354 
Part Four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
were developed because 
they fit the unique skills 
of the manufacturer—
and not because the man-
ufacturer is simply copy-
ing competitors’ products.
The 
Young 
& 
Rubicam Brand Asset 
Valuator uses a set of 
scales to measure differen-
tiation (How unique is the 
brand?), relevance (How 
useful is the brand?), es-
teem (Is the brand the 
best?), and knowledge 
(Does the brand have 
a clear and consistent 
image?).6 Multiplying dif-
ferentiation scores by rel-
evance scores provides a 
measure of brand strength. 
Usually, a high score on 
one dimension implies 
a low score on the other. 
Consequently, a compromise approach is often best; moderate levels of differentiation and 
relevance lead to high brand strength.
Multiplying esteem scores by knowledge scores provides a measure of brand stat-
ure. Again, a high score on one of these dimensions implies a low score on the other. 
Consequently, a compromise approach is often best; moderate levels of esteem and knowl-
edge result in high brand stature. Brands that are high in both brand strength and brand 
stature are the most successful brands. Of course, relatively few brands are able to achieve 
this high level of excellence. New brands are typically in the low brand strength/low brand 
stature quadrant because it takes time to build brand identity and brand reputation. 
Brands in the high brand strength/low brand stature quadrant are usually strong niche 
brands that have an opportunity to grow by improving their brand stature. Brands in the 
low brand strength/high brand stature quadrant are usually older brands that are resting 
on their laurels. These brands enjoyed high brand equity earlier in their product life cycles, 
but are now perceived as declining and unexciting. See Figures 16.5 and 16.6.
Product Line Management
Many firms are shifting from hiring brand managers to hiring product line managers 
who coordinate marketing and production activities across a product line or a family of 
products. As the number of products added to a product line increases, sales and costs 
increase. Managing the sales/costs trade-off can be difficult. Furthermore, if a product 
line is too large, product cannibalization may occur. This means that sales of one 
product on the line may “eat up” or reduce sales of another product on the same line. 
As a result, net sales do not necessarily increase with product line breadth.
However, research has shown that total market share increases with product line 
breadth.7 For large Fortune 500 companies, however, product line breadth was not 
Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives
Coke Zero is one of Coca-Cola’s recent brand extensions.

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
355
related to inventory costs and actually decreased manufacturing costs. As a result, 
many Fortune 500 companies have learned how to increase their product lines without 
increasing costs (although this study did not measure marketing costs) by incorporating 
cost-cutting procedures. Just-in-time computer-aided supply and ordering procedures 
reduce inventory costs. Flexible manufacturing and manufacturing-cell-group-based 
technologies reduce manufacturing costs. Offering a wide range of products that share 
a large number of common parts also reduces manufacturing costs, especially if the 
common parts are used during the early stages of the manufacturing process.
Although many Fortune 500 companies have learned to control manufacturing 
costs, smaller companies may be less able to do so. Also, the problems of marketing costs 
and product cannibalization remain. Cannibalization is problematic when one product 
takes significant market share away from another product within the same product line. 
For example, Miller Lite takes share away from Miller. Coke Zero takes share away from 
Diet Coke. Cannibalization is more likely to occur when consumers are brand loyal 
as opposed to attribute loyal. Consumers loyal to Miller Lite are likely to drink Miller 
when Miller Lite is unavailable. Consumers loyal to Coke Zero are likely to drink Diet 
Coke when Coke Zero is unavailable. On the other hand, consumers who are attribute 
loyal are less likely to create a cannibalization within a product line. Consumers loyal to 
light beer may switch to Bud Light when Miller Lite is unavailable. Similarly, consumers 
loyal to diet soft drinks may switch to Diet Pepsi when Diet Coke is unavailable. Thus, 
attribute loyalty can create brand-switching, which is worse than cannibalization.
One way to determine if consumers are brand loyal or attribute loyal is to show them a 
set of brands and ask them to indicate their first and second choices.8 Brand-loyal consum-
ers indicate first and second choices with the same brand name (e.g., Pepsi and Diet Pepsi). 
However, attribute-loyal consumers indicate first and second choices with the same attribute 
rather than with the same brand name (e.g., Pepsi and Coke or Diet Pepsi and Diet Coke). 
Figure 16.5 Young & Rubicam Power Grid
The Young & Rubicam Power Grid
Brand Stature
(Knowledge and Esteem)
Low
Low
Brand Strength
(Differentiation
and Relevance)
New dot-coms
High
High
Dove Chocolates
Teddy Grahams
Snapple
Swatch
Molson
Starbucks
Disney
Sesame Street
Doritos
Sony
Ocean Spray
Kodak
Mercedes-Benz
Hallmark
Coca-Cola
Oldsmobile
Bayer
Wesson
Ramada
Source: From D.A. Aaker, Building Strong Brands, Fig. 10.3, p. 309. By David A. Aaker, (1996). Adapted 
with permission of The Free Press, a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc. All rights reserved

Figure 16.6 Young & Rubicam Power Grid
International Application of the Young & Rubicam Power Grid
BRAND STRENGTH
100
• Poland
• Spain
• Holland
• Hungary
• Australia
• Czech Republic
• Germany
• Russia
• Italy
• France
• PRC
• Columbia
• Thialand
• Mexico
• Argentina
• Chile
• USA
• South Africa
• Canada
Brazil
•
• 
Venezuela
•
Japan
 
UK • 
80
60
40
20
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
BRAND STATURE
Switzerland
Italy
Spain
Columbia Poland
Holland Czech Republic
South AfricaUKHungary
Argentina
Germany
Thialand PRC
France USA
Russia
Japan
Chile
Canada
Australia Mexico
Sweden Brazil
Venezuela
•
BRAND STATURE
BRAND STRENGTH
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Source: Adapted from K.L. Keller, (1998). Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and Managing 
Brand Equity, p. 630–631. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
357
If the vast majority of their consumers are brand loyal, marketers should maintain a relatively 
narrow product line to avoid cannibalization. On the other hand, if the vast majority of 
their consumers are attribute loyal, it makes sense to consider increasing a product line so 
all relevant attributes are available under a particular brand name. The number of relevant 
attributes vary across product categories (e.g., diet versus non-diet, vanilla versus chocolate, 
decaf versus full strength, instant versus brewed, spicy versus non-spicy).
Managing Market Leaders 
and Market Underdogs
Market leaders, or the strongest brands with the largest market shares in their product 
categories, are the easiest brands to manage because success breeds success. Market 
leaders have large marketing, production, and R&D budgets. Market leaders often 
have a large segment of loyal consumers, and a great deal of power in the channel of 
distribution. Inertia benefits the market leader, and any change in the marketplace is 
potentially threatening. Market leaders often try to prevent change.9
One way to prevent change is to encourage consumers to “stick with what works”; 
remind them that “you get what you pay for;” and emphasize that “we’re always there 
when you need us.” These types of claims discourage consumers from trying other 
brands because the status quo or current state of affairs seems safe and free of risk. 
Another way to prevent change is to increase ambiguity in the marketplace. Ambiguous 
information, or information that supports many different conclusions, is often inter-
preted as consistent with consumers’ current conclusions. Of course, because most con-
sumers buy the market leader, they have already concluded that the market leader is the 
best brand. Even when consumers try to be objective, they tend to interpret ambiguous 
evidence as consistent with their current beliefs. Known as the confirmation bias, this 
phenomenon occurs because people find it easier to identify and interpret information 
that supports their beliefs as opposed to information that fails to do so.
One way to increase ambiguity in the marketplace is to make it difficult to compare 
the prices of market leaders versus underdogs. This can be achieved through exclusive 
dealerships (e.g., many automobile dealers are allowed to sell only one brand), exclusive 
product displays (e.g., end-of-aisle displays in grocery stores), and confusing models (e.g., 
one dealer has model 505A and another has model 505B). Confusing model numbers, 
such as different numbers for products that are otherwise identical, increase ambiguity. 
Confusing brand names, such as the same appliances being sold under the Whirlpool 
name at H. H. Gregg stores and as Kenmore brand at Sears, also increase ambiguity.
Another way to increase ambiguity in the marketplace is to differentiate market leaders 
using irrelevant attributes. Budweiser beer is “beechwood aged”; Bud Lite offers “drink-
ability”; and Miller Genuine Draft is “cold filtered.” These irrelevant attributes do not 
affect the taste of the beer, but they sound good to consumers who fall prey to confirma-
tion bias. Similarly, Folger’s coffee is “mountain grown,” which is a meaningless attribute. 
Some powdered laundry detergents have blue specks in them that are supposed to give 
you whiter whites. The blue specks actually have no effect, but confirmation bias leads 
consumers to conclude that the blue specks increase the performance of the detergent.
Underdogs, or follower brands, need to do the opposite of market leaders. Market lead-
ers promote the status quo, but underdogs need to disrupt it. Market leaders need to in-
crease ambiguity in the marketplace, but underdogs need to decrease it, One way to disrupt 
the status quo is to encourage consumers to participate in blind taste tests and other evalu-
ations that involve comparing underdogs to market leaders. Free samples; “try it, you’ll like 
it” claims; websites that make it easy to compare prices; comparative ads; and side-by-side 
shelf placements with market leaders in grocery stores can potentially benefit underdogs.
ob jec ti ve 4

358 
Part Four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Encouraging consumers to challenge their current beliefs can also be helpful to 
underdog brands. For example, a Stove Top Stuffing television commercial asked a 
stay-at-home mom if she could predict her family’s preferences for potatoes or stuff-
ing. The stay-at-home mom predicted confidently that her husband, son, and daugh-
ters preferred potatoes. The narrator then asked the family which they preferred. Each 
family member responded, “Stuffing,” much to the housewife’s surprise. Surprise is 
a useful weapon for inducing people to challenge their beliefs. Unusual distribution 
channels, such as home parties (e.g., Tupperware, Mary Kay), and unusual educational 
approaches, such as cooking classes, wine tasting classes, and cosmetic clinics, can also 
disrupt the status quo, increase consumer learning, and benefit underdog brands.
Acquisition Versus Retention Strategies
Managers need to think carefully about their source of volume, or from where future 
purchases of their products will come. As Figure 16.7 indicates, increased volume can 
come from acquisition strategies or retention strategies.10 Acquisition strategies fo-
cus on attracting new customers, while retention strategies focus on keeping current 
ones. This distinction is important because acquisition strategies and retention strate-
gies involve the use of different marketing activities. It is also difficult to forecast sales 
accurately without considering all sources of volume.
One way to acquire new customers is to stimulate demand for an entire category of 
products (e.g., green tea). Essentially, current non-users need to be educated about the 
benefits of a product category over the products they are currently using (e.g., green tea 
is healthier than coffee). However, consumer educational programs are very expensive 
because they require large promotion and advertising budgets. It may also be necessary 
to give away free samples of a product to encourage non-users to become users.
Another way to acquire new customers is to steal market share away from com-
petitors. This approach is generally less expensive because competitors have already 
objec tive 5
Bill Aron/PhotoEdit
Differentiating on irrelevant attributes creates ambiguity that benefits market leaders.

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
359
absorbed the costs of consumer education and of convincing non-users to become 
users. Of course, one risk associated with this strategy is that competitors are likely 
to retaliate. Large competitors, such as Procter & Gamble and Coca-Cola, have 
the resources to retaliate severely. For example, Procter & Gamble’s Ivory soap was 
the market leader for more than 100 years. When Lever 2000 launched a new soap 
that was very similar to Ivory, Procter & Gamble retaliated by offering deeply dis-
counted, 11-pack bundles of Ivory soap that took buyers out of the market for 
several purchase cycles.
Retention strategies can also be used to build volume. One way to stimulate 
demand with current customers is to encourage them to use larger quantities or buy 
more frequently. Both goals can be achieved by selling the product in larger pack-
ages or by providing a price discount for larger packages. Typically, the more people 
buy, the more they consume. Anchoring can also be used to increase the number of 
packages that current customers purchase; claims emphasizing large numbers, such 
as “limit of 4 per household,” “buy 12 for your freezer,” or “101 uses,” encourages 
consumers to buy larger quantities. Another way to stimulate demand is to encourage 
current  customers to trade up. For example, satisfied customers who bought a relatively 
inexpensive cell phone in the past are likely to be interested in more feature-rich—and 
more  expensive—cell phone models when it is time to purchase a new mobile phone.
Retention strategies can also be used to steal market share from competitors. For 
example, rather than eating the same brand of cereal every day, some consumers eat 
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes on some days, Cheerios on others, and Kashi Good Friends on 
still others. Kellogg’s could attempt to steal share by encouraging consumers to eat 
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes more often and other brands less often. Of course, this strategy 
runs the risk of initiating competitive retaliation.
Acquisition and retention strategies influence all marketing activities by integrat-
ing each of the four Ps (product, promotion, price, place). For the acquisition/increase 
demand strategy, the product should be designed so it has a relative advantage over 
other product categories. In addition, it is useful to focus on search attributes because 
Figure 16.7 Acquisition vs. Retention Strategies
Acquisition
Retention
Increase demand
Steal share
Increase demand
Steal share
Goal
Attract new
category users
Attract new
brand users
Increase
consumption
among current
brand users
Increase
consumption
among multi-
brand users
Product 
Strategy
Relative category
advantage
Satisfaction programs
Search attributes
Alignable
differences
Relative brand
advantage
Satisfaction programs
Search attributes
Alignable
differences
New uses
Loyalty programs
Experience attributes
Nonalignable
differences
New uses
Loyalty programs
Experience attributes 
Nonalignable
differences
Promotion 
Strategy
Category advertising
Price advertising
Differentiation
advertising
Differentiation
advertising
Pricing 
Strategy
Trial pricing
Trial pricing
Continuity pricing
Continuity pricing
Place 
Strategy
Short channel
Short channel
Long channel
Long channel

360 
Part Four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
quality can be evaluated more readily for these as opposed to other types of attributes. It 
is also useful to focus on alignable attributes, or attributes that are directly comparable. 
For example, a car that gets 30 miles per gallon is better than another car that gets only 
25 miles per gallon. The quality of alignable attributes is easy to evaluate. A similar 
approach should be used for the acquisition/steal share strategy, except the focus here is 
on individual brand differences, rather than on product category differences.
For retention strate-
gies, consumption among 
current users can be in-
creased by developing new 
uses for the product, as 
Tums was able to do by 
promoting their product 
as a calcium supplement. 
Loyalty (patronage) pro-
grams that provide rewards 
for repeat purchases are 
also important. Examples 
include airline frequent 
flyer programs and hotel 
frequent user programs. 
Many grocery stores also 
provide points for pur-
chases that accumulate and 
can be used for rewards. 
Satisfaction programs that 
provide excellent custom-
er service for brands also 
facilitate retention. Retention strategies should also focus on experience attributes and 
nonalignable attributes. Current users are likely to overvalue their preferred brand’s 
experience attributes because of confirmation bias. Also, nonalignable attributes seem 
unique, and current users are typically reluctant to give up a unique benefit of their 
preferred brand. For example, if one car brand offers rear motion detection systems and 
another offers heated steering wheels, it is difficult to compare these brands because 
these two attributes are not directly comparable.
Managers are free to choose from many different promotion and advertising strate-
gies. For the acquisition/increase demand strategy, category advertising that highlights the 
benefits of an entire product category is likely to attract new users. For the acquisition/steal 
share strategy, price advertising is likely to convince users of other brands to switch, espe-
cially if the brands are similar in quality. For retention/increase demand and retention/steal 
share strategies, differentiating advertising that emphasizes the differences in quality among 
brands may be effective.
A large price discount on a single unit of a particular brand is referred to as trial pricing. 
The goal of trial pricing is to offer a price so low that it encourages potential new users to 
try the product. If they try the product and like it, they are likely to continue purchasing it 
even at a higher price. Trial pricing is useful for acquiring new users for a category or brand. 
Offering a lower price for multiple units of a product or continuity pricing encourages 
current users to continue using a brand. If they buy a large number of units at a discounted 
price, e.g., 11 bars of Ivory soap, these consumers will be committed to this particular brand 
for several purchase cycles. This is an excellent strategy for retaining current users.
PRNewsFoto/KeyCorp/AP Photo
Patronage programs, such as frequent flyer rewards, are used to retain current customers.

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
361
Place strategies require careful planning of channel length, or the number of in-
termediaries (e.g., wholesalers, distributors, and retailers) needed to get the product 
from the manufacturer to the consumer. For example, Apple sells computers directly 
to consumers over the Internet and no intermediaries are used. This is a good example 
of a short channel. Intel, on the other hand, uses many different intermediaries to get 
the product to the consumer, which is an example of a long channel. In general, a short 
channel is useful for acquiring both new category users and new brand users because it is 
easier to educate new users when the manufacturer and the users communicate directly. 
A long channel is risky because consumers are more likely to encounter salespeople who 
may know little about the product. However, a long channel is useful for retaining ex-
isting customers. These customers are already familiar with the benefits of the product 
and, therefore, do not require education. On the other hand, long channels that use 
many different outlets (e.g., grocery stores, drug stores, Walmart, Target, etc.) facilitate 
product availability, which increases current users’ convenience.
After identifying appropriate acquisition and retention strategies, managers need next 
to develop an STP—Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning—strategy. Segmentation 
involves dividing the market into smaller subgroups of consumers with different needs. 
The premise of segmentation is that “not all consumers are alike.” If consumers within a 
specific segment respond similarly to a brand, then the marketer is able to better satisfy 
their needs, rather than attempt to satisfy a broader and more diverse market with the 
same brand. Targeting involves choosing the appropriate segments to pursue. Marketers 
are advised to target segments that are easy to measure, sufficiently profitable, and acces-
sible. Positioning involves communicating the differences and the relative advantages of 
one’s products over competitors’ offerings. Positioning should focus on the firm’s unique 
key competencies or strengths that are lacking in other firms. Importantly, acquisition 
and retention strategies should drive STP strategies, rather than the other way around.
Managing Consumers as Investments
Marketing in Action
Consumers are important assets. Without consumers, 
there would be no profits. Many companies spend 
$100 million or more on con-
sumer satisfaction programs. Is 
this too much or too little? What 
is the best way to measure the 
value of consumers in the long 
run?12 Recent research shows that 
it is possible to estimate customer 
lifetime value (CLV) using a simple 
equation:
CLV  m ( r / 1  I  r)
where
m  margin or profit from a 
customer per quarter or year
r  retention rate
i  discount rate
The retention rate or repurchase rate is a function 
of product quality, price, service, etc. For most compa-
nies, retention rates are 
between 60 and 90 percent. 
The discount rate is a function 
of the company’s cost of capi-
tal, which depends on its risk 
and debt-equity structure. For 
most companies, discount rates 
are between 8 and 16 percent. 
This equation can be used to 
determine if a firm is spending 
too much or too little on market-
ing programs. It can also be 
used to value firms to determine 
if stock prices are too high or 
too low.
C.J. Burton/Corbis

362 
Part Four   Consumer Social Influences and Contemporary Strategies for Marketers
Chapter Summary
Product management involves monitoring and nurtur-
ing a product as it progresses through its life cycle. At 
first, managers must focus on building brand awareness. 
Later, promotion and advertising are used to stimulate 
growth. For mature products, it is important to reduce 
costs. Finally, during the decline phase, managers must 
decide whether to harvest the product or attempt to 
rejuvenate it.
Many managers view the reputation and image of a 
brand as its most important asset. Strong brand names 
help products through difficult times and provide unique 
opportunities during good times. Managers must also 
determine whether to reduce a product line to decrease 
brand cannibalization, or increase a product line through 
brand extensions to increase sales. In general, when con-
sumers are brand loyal, the product line should be reduced 
to avoid cannibalization and diluting brand equity. When 
consumers are attribute loyal, firms should consider in-
creasing their product lines to offer products that encom-
pass all attributes under one brand name.
Acquisition strategies attempt to increase overall 
demand for a product category or to steal share from 
competing brands. Retention strategies attempt to 
increase consumption among current brand users or 
among multi-brand users. Acquisition and retention 
strategies influence all aspects of brand management, 
including product strategy, promotion strategy, pricing 
strategy, and place strategy.
Key Terms
entry strategy
diffusion of innovation
brand resonance
brand equity
brand extension
Young & Rubicam Brand Asset 
Valuator
cannibalization
confirmation bias
source of volume
acquisition
retention
brand loyalty
attribute loyalty
trial pricing
loyalty program
differentiation advertising
pricing strategy
place strategy
continuity pricing
channel length
Review and Discussion
1. Name and describe the four basic entry strategies that 
can influence the diffusion curve.
2. What type of entry strategy should be used to 
 promote HDTV?
3. Think of a brand to which you are loyal. 
What  experiences led to your brand loyalty in 
this case?
4. How can marketers extend the product life cycle of 
a worn-out product?
5. How does the Young & Rubicam Brand Asset 
Valuator help marketers?
 6. What factors increase the likelihood of brand 
cannibalization?
 7. How should marketers of a leading brand of coffee 
try to maintain their leadership position?
 8. How should marketers of an underdog brand of 
furniture try to gain a stronger position in the 
marketplace?
 9. What strategies should marketers use to acquire 
new customers?
10. What strategies should marketers use to retain old 
customers?

Chapter 16   Branding Strategy and Consumer Behavior 
363
Short Application Exercises
1. Create a category advertisement, a price advertise-
ment, and a differentiating advertisement.
2. Use the Young & Rubicam Brand Asset 
Valuator to evaluate the brand equity of 
Starbucks coffee.
3. Think of brand extensions that should be considered 
by KFC (fast-food restaurants), Panasonic 
(electronics), and Saturn (automobiles).
4. Think of strategies to increase ambiguity in the mar-
ketplace to help Disney retain its leadership position.
M a nag e r i a l  A p p l i c at i o n
One of the authors (FRK) had the pleasure of 
meeting Les Behrens, the owner of Behrens and 
Hitchcock, in 2008. Previously, Les Behrens had 
owned a restaurant, and Bob Hitchcock was an ac-
countant. Both gave up these relatively secure jobs 
to make wine on top of Spring Mountain in Napa 
Valley. Many of their wines received high ratings 
from Robert Parker, the most influential wine critic 
of all time (he has been nicknamed the Emperor of 
Wine), and the label very quickly became a success. 
Hitchcock retired and left the partnership in 2005, 
and Behrens changed the name of the label to Erna 
Schein, after his mother. According to Parker, Erna 
Schein wines are “fun-filled, fruit-driven, amazingly 
delicious wines.” 11 Annual, production is around 
3,000 cases, which is quite small.
1. What are the dangers of changing the brand name of an already successful brand?
2. What strategies can be taken to try to minimize these dangers?
3. What marketing strategies would you recommend to Mr. Behrens for acquiring new 
customers?
4. What marketing strategies would you recommend to Mr. Behrens for retaining old 
customers?
YOUR CHALLENGE:
The part video is designed to expand and highlight the consumer behavior concepts in this part of the 
book. To view the videos, go to http://www.cengage.com/marketing/kardes and click on the student 
companion site link. After viewing the video, answer the following questions to test your knowledge on the 
part content and its application to the video case.
Online Marketing at Travelocity.com
Travelocity.com is the pioneer brand in the Internet travel business. This video case examines how the 
company re-energized its growth through the development of a new value proposition coupled with creative 
and innovative marketing tactics.
 
1. Think about what consumers want from online travel services providers. Develop five criteria that 
you think are key to satisfying customers. Compare and contrast Travelocity.com and two other 
online travel providers along the criteria you developed. Is Travelocity.com on the right track?
 
2. How could Travelocity.com take advantage the social influence heuristics discussed in Chapter 13 of the 
textbook? Develop a new promotional effort that leverages a social influence heuristic for Travelocity.com.
 
3. In the video case, Travelocity.com executives discussed the importance of co-branding with 
companies like Amazon.com and American Express. Develop a “piggyback” campaign for 
Travelocity.com that would reach you as a potential customer.

This page intentionally left blank 

365
Chapter 1
 1 Agrell, S. (2004, May 8). Her field of scholarship is real-
ity TV: “The whole dynamic of humiliation is central to 
reality TV,” says communication professor Alison Hearn. 
“There’s a certain car-wreck mentality.” Saturday Post, 
p. SP7. Frankel, J. (2004, April 20). Networks pile it on 
with more reality TV. Capital Times (Madison, WI), p. 1B. 
Johnson, A. (2004, April 4). Speakers reveal reality hooks. 
Daily Illini [Online]. Available: www.uwire.com.
 2 Recent television ratings news. (2009, June 6). Reality TV 
World [Online]. Available: www.RealityTVWorld.com.
 3 There’s no sign that reality TV is about to die. (2003, 
December 6). Canberra Times (Federal Capital Press of 
Australia Pty. Limited), p. B3.
 4 Johnson, A. (2004, April 4). Speakers reveal reality hooks. 
Daily Illini [Online]. Available: www.uwire.com.
 5 Aoki, N. (2004, March 23). Where reality TV, commerce 
meet. The Boston Globe, p. A1.
 6 Aoki, N. (2004, March 23). Where reality TV, commerce 
meet. The Boston Globe, p. A1.
 7 Gunelius, S. (2008, January 18). Ford, Coke and AT&T 
pay more to sponsor American Idol. Brandcurve, [Online]. 
Available: http://www.bizzia.com/brandcurve/ford-coke-
att-pay-more-to-sponsor-american-idol.
 8 Definition adapted from, Kerin, R. A., Berkowitz, E. N., 
Hartley, S. W., & Rudelius, W. (2003). Marketing (3rd ed.). 
New York: McGraw-Hill, p. 150.
 9 Zeithaml, V. A. (1988). Consumer perceptions of price, 
quality, and value: A means-end model and synthesis of 
evidence. Journal of Marketing, 52 (July), 2–22, p. 14.
10 Chairman’s address: 2002 annual meeting of Procter & 
Gamble shareholders. (2002, October 23). Procter & 
Gamble Management Speeches and Perspectives [Online]. 
Available: www.pg.com.
11 Keiningham, T., & Vavra, T. (2001). The customer delight 
principle. New York: McGraw-Hill.
12 Obrec, L. (1999, December). Marketing, motives and 
Dr. Freud. Detroiter Magazine [Online]. Available: www
.moline-consulting.com.
13 Dichter, E. (1960). A strategy of desire. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday. Dichter, E. (1964). Handbook of consumer 
motivations. New York: McGraw-Hill.
14 Durgee, J. F. (1991). Interpreting Dichter’s interpreta-
tions: An analysis of consumption symbolism in the 
handbook of consumer motivations. In H. Hartvig-
Larsen, D. G. Mick, and C. Alstead (Eds.), Marketing and 
semiotics: Selected papers from the Copenhagen symposium 
(as cited in Solomon, M. R. (2002). Consumer behavior 
(5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.).
15 Blackwell, R. D., & Miniard, P. W. (2003). Consumer 
behavior (9th ed.). New York: South-Western, p. 20. 
Dichter, E. (1964). Handbook of consumer motivations. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
16 Kardes, F. R. (2002). Consumer behavior and manage-
rial decision making (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education/Prentice Hall.
17 Clancy, K. J., & Krieg, P. C. (2003). Surviving Innovation. 
Marketing Management, March/April, 14–20.
18 Cronley, M. L., Houghton, D. C., Goddard, P., & Kardes, 
F. R. (1998). Endorsing products for the money: The role 
of the correspondence bias in celebrity advertising. Advances 
in Consumer Research, 26, 627–631. McCracken, G. 
(1989). Who is the celebrity endorser? Cultural founda-
tions of the endorsement process. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 16 (December), 310–321.
19 Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1991). Essentials of be-
havioral research: Methods and data analysis (2nd ed.). 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
20 Assmus, G., Farley, J. U., & Lehmann, D. R. (1984). 
How advertising affects sales: Meta-analyses of economet-
ric results. Journal of Marketing Research, 21, 65–74.
21 Kardes, F. R. (2002). Consumer behavior and manage-
rial decision making (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education/Prentice Hall.
22 Geary, S. P. (Producer). (1999). Sell and spin: A history 
or advertising [Film]. (Available from A&E Home Video, 
A&E Television Network, Cat. No AAE-17607).
23 Mcfarland, J. (2001, September 24). The consumer an-
thropologist. Harvard Business School: Working Knowledge 
[Online]. Available: www.hbswk.hbs.edu. Wellner, A. S. 
(2002, October 1). The test drive—ethnographic re-
search and marketing research. Amercian Demographics 
[Online]. Available: www.findarticles.com.
24 For more information, visit the company website at 
www.harris.com.
Endnotes

366 
Endnotes
25 Irving, J. (1972). Victims of groupthink. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. Irving, J. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological studies 
of policy decisions and fiascos (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
26 Malhotra, N.K., Peterson, M., & Kleiser, S.B. (1999). 
Marketing research: A state-of-the-art review and direc-
tions for the twenty-first century. Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, 27 (2), 160–184.
27 Chairman’s address: 2002 annual meeting of Procter & 
Gamble shareholders. (2002, October 23). Procter & 
Gamble Management Speeches and Perspectives [Online]. 
Available: www.pg.com.
28 Johnson, B. A., and Nunes, P. F. (2002, December 12). 
Bah, humbug!: Study shows retailers pay the price for poor 
customer contact and lack of innovation. CRMGuru.com 
[Online], p. 2. Available: www.crmguru.com.
29 All of the sources for this article: Chairman’s address: 
2002 annual meeting of Procter & Gamble sharehold-
ers. (2002, October 23). Procter & Gamble Management 
Speeches and Perspectives [Online]. Available: www.pg.com. 
Crest Whitestrips the most recommended OTC tooth 
whitener by US pharmacists (2003, January 20). Procter 
& Gamble Press Release Archive [Online]. Available: www
.pg.com. Giving an innovative product extra bite (2001). 
Procter & Gamble 2001 Annual Report—Stories from our 
Brands [Online]. Available: www.pg.com. Johnson, B. A., 
and Nunes, P. F. (2002, December 12). Bah, humbug!: 
Study shows retailers pay the price for poor customer 
contact and lack of innovation. CRMGuru.com [Online], 
p. 2. Available: www.crmguru.com.
30 Inner beauty (2004, June 1). L’Oréal Active Cosmetics 
[Online]. Available: www.loreal.com.
31 Sources for the entire article include: A year of strong growth 
(2004, June 1). L’Oréal Annual Report for 2003 [Online], 
pp. 48–50. Available: www.loreal.com. Inner beauty (2004, 
June 1). L’Oréal Active Cosmetics [Online]. Available: www
.loreal.com. Morthished, C. (2003, April 3). L’Oréal: The 
perpetual beauty machine (2004, June 6). Times Online 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.timesonline.co.uk. 
Nutra-
cosmetics: A timely market enjoying obvious growth (2004) 
Cosmeeting [Online]. Available: www.cosmeeting.com.
32 Sources for the entire article include: Rigging a promo-
tion cost Coca-Cola big bucks and trigger grand-jury 
investigation (2003, August 13). By No Other—Business 
Law Lessons and Stories: Embarrassments and Bad Career 
Moves [Online]. Available: bynoother.com. Day, S. (2003, 
August 13). Coke to pay Burger King $21 million over 
rigged test. The New York Times [Online]. Available: www
.nytimes.com. Howard, T. (2003, June 4). Burger King, 
Coke may face off in frozen Coke suit. USA Today [Online]. 
Available: www.usatoday.com. Howard, T. (2003, August 
1). Burger King, Coke deal may reach $20M. USA Today 
[Online]. Available: www.usatoday.com.
Chapter 2
 1 Sangiacomo, M. (2004, November 3). Jungle Jim’s Exotic 
Journey. Cleveland Plain Dealer [Online]. Available: www.
junglejims.com.
 2 Hartinger, Debby. Jungle Jim’s International Market 
(personal communication, August 11, 2009). Bianco, A. 
(2005, April 18). The Wizard of Odd. BusinessWeek, 82-83.
 3 Aaker, D. A. (1998). Strategic Market Management (5th 
ed.). New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc.
 4 For more information, visit the company’s website at 
www.pepsi.com.
 5 Geary, S. P. (Producer) (1999). Sell and Spin: A History 
of Advertising [Film]. (Available from A&E Home Video, 
A&E Television Network, Cat. No AAE-17607).
 6 Crow, J. J. (2005). Factors Influencing Product 
Customization. International Journal of Internet 
Marketing and Advertising, (April). Crow, J. J., & 
Shenteau J. (2005). Online product customization. In 
C. P. Haugtvedt, K. Machleit, R. Yalch (Eds.), Online 
Consumer Psychology: Understanding and Influencing 
Behavior in the Virtual World. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, in press.
 7 For more information, visit the company’s website at 
www.bmw.com.
 8 Japan: A nation of coffee lovers (2003, August 12). 
Euromonitor [Online]. Available: www.euromonitor.com.
 9 Edmondson, B. (1999). The Dawn of the Mega City. 
Marketing Tools, 64.
10 Claritas Products and Services: Segmentation Analysis 
(2005, May 1) [Online]. Available: www.claritas.com.
11 Understanding U.S. consumers (2003). VALS™ Program 
SRI Consulting Business Intelligence.
12 Reis, A., & Trout, J. (1981). Positioning: The Battle for 
Your Mind. New York: McGraw-Hill.
13 Kardes, F. R., & Gurumurthy, K. (1992). “Order of entry ef-
fects on consumer memory and judgment: An information 
integration perspective.” Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 
343–357. Kardes, F. R., Gurumurthy, K., Chandrashekaran, 
M., & Dornoff, R. J. (1993). “Brand retrieval, consider-
ation set composition, consumer choice, and the pioneering 
advantage.” Journal of Consumer Research, 20, 62–75.
14 Carpenter, G. S., & Nakamoto, K. (1989). “Consumer 
preference formation and pioneering advantage.” Journal 
of Marketing Research, 26, 285–298.
15 Carpenter, G. S., & Nakamoto, K. (1989). “Consumer 
preference formation and pioneering advantage.” Journal 
of Marketing Research, 26, 285–298.
16 Reis, A., & Trout, J. (1994). The 22 Immutable Laws of 
Marketing. New York: Harper Business.
17 Reis, A., & Trout, J. (1994). The 22 Immutable Laws of 
Marketing. New York: Harper Business.

Endnotes  
367
18 Reis, A., & Trout, J. (1994). The 22 Immutable Laws of 
Marketing. New York: Harper Business.
19 Reis, A. (2005), The battle over positioning still rages to 
this day. Advertising Age, April, 31, 88.
20 Reis, A. (2005), The battle over positioning still rages to 
this day. Advertising Age, April, 31, 88.
21 Cronley, M. L., Posavac, S. S., Meyer, T., Kardes, F. R., & 
Kellaris, J. J. (2005). A selective hypothesis testing per-
spective on price-quality inference and inference-based 
choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 15 (2), 159–169. 
Kardes, F. R., Cronley, M. L., Kellaris, J. J., & Posavac, S. S. 
(2004). The role of selective information processing in 
price-quality inference. Journal of Consumer Research, 31 
(2), 368–374. See also, Kardes, F. R., Posavac, S. S., and 
Cronley, M. L. (2004). Consumer inference: A review 
of processes, bases, and judgment contexts. Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 14 (3), 230–256.
22 Reis, A., & Trout, J. (1981). Positioning: The battle for 
your mind. New York: McGraw-Hill.
23 Source for Eye on International: Mordin, C. (2005, May). 
Connecting with consumers. 4Cs Overview [Online]. 
Available: www.4cs.yr.com.
24 All information for this section taken from: Schumann, 
D. W. (1999, February 19). The transmission of preju-
dice: What do our marketing strategies really reinforce? 
Presidential address presented to the membership of the 
Society for Consumer Psychology.
Chapter 3
 1 Parmar, A. (2004). Marketers ask: Hues on first? Marketing 
News, Feb. 5, 8, 10.
 2 Hesseldahl, A. (2000). Ten o’ clock tech: Colorful com-
puters here to stay. Forbes.com [Online], 1. Available: 
www.forbes.com.
 3 Parmar, A. (2004). Marketers ask: Hues on first? Marketing 
News, Feb 5, 8, 10. See also www.apple.com.
 4 Statistics on U.S. media gathered from the following 
sources (2007, July): http://www.global computing.com; 
http://radio.about.com; http://www.naa.org; http://www
.magazine.org. Shenk, D. (1997). Surviving the informa-
tion glut. New York: Harper Edge.
 5 Nielsen report Americans watch TV at record levels 
(2005, September 29). Nielson Media Research [Online]. 
Available: http://www.neilsonmedia.com. The source: 
Newspapers by the numbers (2006). Newspaper 
Association of America [Online]. Available: http://www
.naa.org. Almost three-quarters of all U.S. adults—An 
estimated 163 million—Go online (2005, May 12). 
Harris Interactive Online [Online]. Available: http://
www.harrisinteractive.com. AT&T survey reveals that 
guys still gab more—barely (2007, June 12). AT&T 
Newsroom [Online]. Available: http://www.att.com/
gen/press-room.
 6 Howard, T. (2003). Pay the same, get less as package vol-
ume falls. USA Today, March 17, 3b. Winter, G. (2001). 
What keeps a bottom line healthy? Weight loss. New York 
Times, Jan. 2, 1.
 7 Howard, T. (2003). Pay the same, get less as package vol-
ume falls. USA Today, March 17, 3b.
 8 Based on anecdotal evidence collected by two of this 
book’s authors over five years.
 9 Zanot, E. J., Pincus, J. D., and Lamp, E. J. (1983). 
Public perceptions of submliminal advertising. Journal of 
Advertising, 12, 37–45. Pratkanis, A. R., Eskenazi, J., and 
Greenwald, A. G. (1994). What you expect is what you 
believe (but not necessarily what you get): A test of the 
effectiveness of subliminal self-help audiotapes. Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology, 15 (3), 251–276.
10 Pratkanis, A. R., Eskenazi, J., and Greenwald, A. G. 
(1994). What you expect is what you believe (but not 
necessarily what you get): A test of the effectiveness of 
subliminal self-help audiotapes. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 15 (3), 251–276. Haberstroh, J. (1994). Ice 
cube sex. Notre Dame: Cross Roads Books. Rogers, S. 
(1993). How a publicity blitz created the myth of sub-
liminal advertising. Public Relations Quarterly, 12–17.
11 Key, W. B. (1973). Subliminal seduction. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Signet. Key, W. B. (1976). Media sexploitation. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Signet. Key, W. B. (1980). The 
clam-plate orgy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Signet.
12 Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or 
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing 
information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.
13 Newell, A. and Simon, H. A. (1972). Human Problem 
Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
14 Alba, J. W. and Hutchinson, J. W. (1987). Dimensions 
of consumer expertise. Journal of Consumer Research, 13, 
411–454.
15 Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and Effort. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
16 Pavelchak, M. A., Antil, J. H., and Munch, J. M. (1988). 
The Super Bowl: An investigation into the relationship 
among program context, emotional experience, and ad 
recall. Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 360–367.
17 Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and Effort. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
18 Greenwald, A. G. and Leavitt, C. (1984). Audience in-
volvement in advertising: Four levels. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 11, 581–592. Nisbett, R. E. and Ross, L. (1980). 
Human inference: Strategies and shortcomings of social judg-
ment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
19 Pisani, J. (2006, August 1). Ad placement gets extreme. 
BusinessWeek [Online]. Available: BusinessWeek.com.

368 
Endnotes
20 Haugtvedt, C. P., Schumann, D. W., Schneier, W. L., and 
Warren, W. L. (1994). Advertising repetition and varia-
tion strategies: Implications for understanding attitude 
strength. Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 176–189. 
Schumann, D. W., Petty, R. E., and Clemons, D. S. 
(1990). Predicting the effectiveness of different strategies 
of advertising variation: A test of the repetition-variation 
hypotheses. Journal of Consumer Research, 17, 192–202. 
Unnava, R. H. and Burnkrant, R. E. (1991). An imagery-
processing view of the role of pictures in print advertise-
ments. Journal of Marketing Research, 28, 226–231.
21 Kisielius, J., and Sternthal, B. (1984). Detecting and 
explaining vividness effects in attitudinal judgments. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 21, 54–64. Kisielius, J. 
and Sternthal, B. (1986). Examining the vividness con-
troversy: An availability-valence interpretation. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 12, 418–431. Taylor, S. E. and 
Thompson, S. C. (1982). Stalking the elusive’ vividness’ 
effect.’ Psychological Review, 89, 155–181.
22 Nisbett, R. E. and Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: 
Strategies and shortcomings of social judgment. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 45.
23 MacKenzie, S. B. (1986). The role of attention in medi-
ating the effect of advertising on attribute importance. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 13, 174–195.
24 Herr, P. M., Kardes, F. R., and Kim, J. (1991). Effects 
of word-of-mouth and product-attribute information 
on persuasion: An accessibility-diagnosticity perspective. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 17, 454–462.
25 Harrods introduces scent marketing (2009, March 19). 
UTalkMarketing.com 
News 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.utalkmarketing.com; see also http://www
.brandsenseagency.com.
Chapter 4
 1 Gilovich, T. (1991). How We Know What Isn’t So: The 
Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life. New York: 
Free Press.
 2 Wyer, R. S. (2004). Social Comprehension and Judgment: The 
Role of Situation Models, Narratives, and Implicit Theories. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; Wyer, R. S. and Srull, T. K. 
(1989). Memory and Cognition in Its Social Context. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
 3 Darby, M. R. and Karni, E. (1973). Free competition 
and the optimal amount of fraud. Journal of Law and 
Economics, 16, 66–86; Wright, A. and Lynch, J. G. (1995). 
Communication effects of advertising versus direct expe-
rience when both search and experience attributes are 
present. Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 708–718.
 4 Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, Attitude, 
Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and 
Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
 5 Kardes, F. R., Posavac, S. S., and Cronley, M. L. (2004). 
Consumer inference: A review of processes, bases, and 
judgment contexts. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14, 
230–256.
 6 Kardes, F. R., Cronley, M. L., Kellaris, J. J., and Posavac, S. S. 
(2004). The role of selective information processing in 
price-quality inference. Journal of Consumer Research, 
31, 368–374; Cronley, M. L., Posavac, S. S., Meyer, T., 
Kardes, F. R. and Kellaris, J. J. (2005). A selective hypoth-
esis testing perspective on price-quality inference and 
inference-based choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
15, 159–169.
 7 Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Kardes, F. R., and Sansone, C. 
(1991). Remembering less and inferring more: The effects 
of the timing of judgment on inferences about unknown 
attributes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 
546–554.
 8 Sujan, M. (1985). Consumer knowledge: Effects on evalu-
ation processes mediating consumer judgments. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 12, 31–46; Sujan, M. and Dekleva, C. 
(1987). Product categorization and inference making: 
Some implications for comparative advertising. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 14, 372–378.
 9 Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T. and Zanna, M. P. (Eds.) 
(2005). The Handbook of Attitudes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
10 Fazio, R. H. (1989). On the Power and Functionality 
of Attitudes: The Role of Attitude Accessibility. In 
A. R. Pratkanis, S. J. Breckler, and A. G. Greenwald (eds.), 
Attitude Structure and Function, 153–179. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum; Kruglanski, A. W. and Stroebe, W. (2005). 
The Influence of Beliefs and Goals on Attitudes: Issues 
of Structure, Function, and Dynamics. In D. Albarracin, 
B. T. Johnson, and M. P. Zanna (eds.), The Handbook of 
Attitudes, 323–368. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
11 Zanna, M. P. and Rempel, J. K. (1988). Attitudes: A 
New Look at an Old Concept. In D. Bar-Tal and A. W. 
Kruglanski (eds.), The Social Psychology of Knowledge, 
315–334. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
12 Kardes, F. R., Kim, J. and Lim, J. S. (1994). Moderating 
effects of prior knowledge on the perceived diagnostic-
ity of beliefs derived from implicit versus explicit product 
claims. Journal of Business Research, 29, 219–224.
13 Clore, G. L. and Schnall, S. (2005). The Influence of 
Affect on Attitude. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, 
and M. P. Zanna (eds.), The Handbook of Attitudes, 
437–489. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; Kruglanski, A. W. 
and Stroebe, W. (2005). The Influence of Beliefs and 
Goals on Attitudes: Issues of Structure, Function, 
and Dynamics. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson, and 
M. P. Zanna (eds.), The Handbook of Attitudes, 323–
368. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
14 Chaiken, S. and Trope, Y. (eds.) (1999). Dual-process 
Theories in Social Psychology. New York: Guilford; 

Endnotes  
369
Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T., and Zanna, M. P. (eds.), 
The Handbook of Attitudes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 
Zaichowsky, J. (1985). Measuring the involvement con-
struct, Journal of Consumer Research, 12, 341–352.
15 Chaiken, S. and Trope, Y. (eds.) (1999). Dual-process 
Theories in Social Psychology. New York: Guilford.
16 Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, Attitude, 
Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and 
Research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
17 Anderson, N. H. (1981). Foundations of Information 
Integration Theory. New York: Academic Press; Anderson, 
N. H. (1982). Methods of Information Integration Theory. 
New York: Academic Press; Lynch, J. G. (1985). Uniqueness 
issues in the decompositional modeling of multiattribute 
overall evaluations: An information integration perspec-
tive. Journal of Marketing Research, 22, 1–19.
18 Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., and Schumann, D. (1983). 
Central and peripheral routes to advertising effectiveness: 
The moderating role of involvement. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 10, 135–146; Petty, R. E. and Wegener, D. T. 
(1999). The Elaboration Likelihood Model: Current 
Status and Controversies. In Chaiken, S. and Trope, Y. 
(eds.). Dual-process Theories in Social Psychology, 41–72. 
New York: Guilford.
19 Chen, S. and Chaiken, S. (1999). The Heuristic/
Systematic Model in Its Broader Context. In Chaiken, S. 
and Trope, Y. (eds.). Dual-process Theories in Social 
Psychology, 73–96. New York: Guilford; Maheswaran, D., 
Mackie, D. M., and Chaiken, S. (1992). Brand name as 
a heuristic cue: The effects of task importance and expec-
tancy confirmation on consumer judgments. Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 1, 317–336.
20 Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T., and Zanna, M. P. (eds.) 
(2005). The Handbook of Attitudes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
21 Wyer, R. S. and Albarracin, D. (2005). Belief Formation, 
Organization, and Change: Cognitive and Motivational 
Influences. In Albarracin, D., Johnson, B. T., and Zanna, 
M. P. (eds.) (2005). The Handbook of Attitudes, 273–322. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
22 Kruglanski, A. W. and Orehek, E. (2007). Partitioning 
the domain of social inference: Dual mode and systems 
models and their alternatives. Annual Review of Psychology, 
58, 291–316.
23 Villanueva, J., Yoo, S. and Hanssens, D. (2008). The 
impact or marketing-induced versus word-of-mouth cus-
tomer acquisition on customer equity growth. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 45, 48–59.
24 Gupta, S. and Lehmann, D. R. (2005). Managing 
Customers as Investments: The Strategic Value of Customers 
in the Long Run. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School 
Publishing, a division of Pearson Education.
25 Hempel, J. (2006). Selling a cause? Better make it pop. 
BusinessWeek, 3972, 75.
Chapter 5
 1 Holbrook, M. B. (1993). Nostalgia and Consumption 
Preferences: Some Emerging Patterns of Consumer 
Tastes. Journal of Consumer Research, 20:245–256.
 2 Brendl, C. M., Markman, A. B., and Messner, C. (2003). 
Devaluation of goal-unrelated choice options. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 29:463–473. Markman, A. B., and 
Brendl, C. M. (2005). Goals, policies, preferences, and 
actions. In Kardes, F. R., Herr, P. M., and Nantel, J. (eds.), 
Applying Social Cognition to Consumer-Focused Strategy, 
183–199. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
 3 Hull, C. L. (1943). Principles of Behavior. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
 4 Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and Personality. New 
York: Harper.
 5 Ryan, R. M., and Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-Determination 
Theory and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social 
Development, and Well-Being. American Psychologist, 
55:68–78.
 6 Cialdini, R. B., Trost, M. R., and Newsom, J. T. (1995). 
Preference for Consistency: The Development of a Valid 
Measure and the Discovery of Surprising Behavioral 
Implications. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
69:318–328.
 7 Katz, D. (1960). The Functional Approach to the Study 
of Attitudes. Public Opinion Quarterly, 24:163–204; 
Petty, R. E., and Wegener, D. T. (1998). Matching 
versus Mismatching Attitude Functions: Implications for 
Scrutiny of Persuasive Messages. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 24:227–240; Smith, M. B., Bruner, 
J. S., and White, R. W. (1956). Opinions and Personality. 
New York: Wiley.
 8 Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and Prevention: 
Regulatory Focus as a Motivational Principle. In Zanna, 
M. P. (ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press; Higgins, E. T. (2002). 
How Self-Regulation Creates Distinct Values: The Case 
of Promotion and Prevention Decision Making. Journal 
of Consumer Psychology, 12:177–192.
 9 Kardes, F. R. (2005). The Psychology of Advertising. 
In Brock, T. C., and Green, M. C. (eds.), Persuasion: 
Psychological Insights and Perspectives. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications; Kardes, F. R., and Cronley, M. L. 
(2000). The Role of Approach/Avoidance Asymmetries in 
Motivated Belief Formation and Change. In Ratneshwar, 
S., Mick, D. G., and Huffman, C. (eds.), The Why of 
Consumption: Contemporary Perspectives on Consumer 
Motives, Goals, and Desires. London: Routledge.
10 Fazio, R. H., Herr, P. M., and Powell, M. C. (1992). 
On the Development and Strength of Category-Brand 
Associations in Memory: The Case of Mystery Ads. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 1:1–13.

370 
Endnotes
11 Heider, F. (1958). The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations. 
New York: Wiley.
12 Festinger, C. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. 
Evanston, IL: Row and Peterson.
13 Brehm, J. W. (1956). Post-Decision Changes in 
Desirability of Alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology, 52:384–389.
14 Isen, A. M. (2001). An Influence of Positive Affect on 
Decision Making in Complex Situations: Theoretical Issues 
with Practical Implications. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
11:75–86; Isen, A. M. (2008). Positive Affect and Decision 
Processes: Some Recent Theoretical Developments with 
Practical Implications. In C. P. Haugtedt, P. M. Herr, and 
F. R. Kardes (eds.), Handbook of Consumer Psychology, 
273–296. New York: Psychology Press.
15 Cohen, J. B., Pham, M. T., and Andrade, E. B. (2008). The 
Nature and Role of Affect in Consumer Behavior. In C. P. 
Haugtedt, P. M. Herr, and F. R. Kardes (eds.), Handbook 
of Consumer Psychology, 297–348. New York: Psychology 
Press; Pham, M. (1998). Representativeness, Relevance and 
the Use of Feelings in Decision Making. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 25:144–159; Schwarz, N., and Clore, G. L. (2007). 
Feelings and Phenomenal Experiences. In A. W. Kruglanski, 
and E. T. Higgins (eds.), Social Psychology: Handbook of 
Basic Principles, 385–407. New York: Guilford.
16 Yeung, C. W. M., and Wyer, R. S. (2004). Affect, 
Appraisal, and Consumer Judgment. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 31:412–424.
17 Adaval, R. (2001). Sometimes It Just Feels Right: The 
Differential Weighting of Affect-Consistent and Affect-
Inconsistent Product Information. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 28:1–17.
18 Watson, D., and Tellegen, A. (1985). Toward a Consensual 
Structure of Mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98:219–235.
19 Schwarz, N., and Clore, G. L. (2007). Feelings and 
Phenomenal Experiences. In A. W. Kruglanski, and 
E. T. Higgins (eds.), Social Psychology: Handbook of 
Basic Principles, 385–407. New York: Guilford.
20 Schacter, S., and Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, Social, 
and Physiological Determinants of Emotional State. 
Psychological Review, 69:379–399.
21 Mandler, G. (1982). The Structure of Value: 
Accounting for Taste. In M. S. Clark, & S. T. Fiske 
(eds.), Affect and Cognition: The 17th Annual Carnegie 
Symposium on Cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; 
Meyers-Levy, J., and Tybout, A. M. (1989). Schema 
Congruity as a Basis for Product Evaluation. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 16:39–54. Stayman, D. M., 
Alden, D. L., and Smith, K. H. (1992). Some Effects 
of Schematic Processing on Consumer Expectations 
and Disconfirmation Judgments. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 19:240–255.
22 Zillmann, D. (1978). Attribution and Misattribution 
of Excitatory Reactions. In J. H. Harvey, W. Ickes, and 
R. F. Kidd (eds.), New Directions in Attribution Research, 
vol. 2. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
23 Kardes, F. R., Cronley, M. L., and Posavac, S. S. (2005). 
Using Implementation Intentions to Increase New Product 
Consumption: A Field Experiment. In F. R. Kardes, 
P. M. Herr, and J. Nantel (eds.), Applying Social Cognition 
to Consumer-Focused Strategy, 219–233. Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
24 Aaker, J. L., and Lee, A. Y. (2001). “I” Seek Pleasures 
and “We” Avoid Pains: The Role of Self-Regulatory Goals 
in Information Processing and Persuasion. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 28:33–49.
Chapter 6
 1 West, P. M., Brown, C. L., and Hoch, S. J. (1996). 
Consumption Vocabulary and Preference Formation. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 23:120–135.
 2 Mackintosh, N. J. (1974). The Psychology of Animal 
Learning. London: Academic Press.
 3 Gorn, G. J. (1982). The Effects of Music in Advertising 
on Choice Behavior: A Classical Conditioning Approach. 
Journal of Marketing, 46:94–101; Kim, J., Allen, C. T., and 
Kardes, F. R. (1996). An Investigation of the Mediational 
Mechanisms Underlying Attitudinal Conditioning. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 33:318–328; McSweeney, 
F. K., and Bierley, C. (1984). Recent Developments in 
Classical Conditioning. Journal of Consumer Research, 
11:619–631; Shimp, T. A., Stuart, E. W., and Engle, R. W. 
(1991). A Program of Classical Conditioning Experiments 
Testing Variations in the Conditioned Stimulus and 
Contents. Journal of Consumer Research, 18:1–12.
 4 Cacioppo, J. T., Marshall-Goodell, B. S., Tassinary, L. G., 
and Petty, R. E. (1992). Rudimentary Determinants 
of Attitudes: Classical Conditioning Is More Effective 
When Prior Knowledge about the Attitude Stimulus Is 
Low Than High. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
28:207–233.
 5 van Osselaer, S. M. J., and Janiszewski, C. (2001). Two 
Ways of Learning Brand Associations. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 28:202–223.
 6 van Osselaer, S. M. J., and Alba, J. W. (2000). Consumer 
Learning and Brand Equity. Journal of Consumer Research, 
27:1–16.
 7 van Osselaer, S. M. J., and Alba, J. W. (2003). Locus 
of Equity and Brand Extension. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 29:539–550.
 8 Feinburg, R. A. (1986). Credit Cards as Spending 
Facilitating Stimuli. Journal of Consumer Research, 
13:348–356.

Endnotes  
371
 9 Nord, W. R., and Peter, J. P. (1980). A Behavior 
Modification Perspective on Marketing. Journal of 
Marketing, 41:36–47; Skinner, B. F. (1969). Contingencies 
of Reinforcement: A Theoretical Analysis. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
10 Alba, J. W., and Hutchinson, J. W. (1987). Dimensions 
of Consumer Expertise. Journal of Consumer Research, 
13:411–454.
11 Bransford, J. D., and Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual 
Prerequisites for Understanding: Some Investigations of 
Comprehension and Recall. Journal of Verbal Learning 
and Verbal Behavior, 11:717–726.
12 Bransford, J. D., and Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual 
Prerequisites for Understanding: Some Investigations of 
Comprehension and Recall. Journal of Verbal Learning 
and Verbal Behavior, 11:717–726.
13 Harris, R. J. (1977). Comprehension of Pragmatic 
Implications in Advertising. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
62:603–609; Harris, R. J., and Monaco, G. E. (1978). 
Psychology of Pragmatic Implications in Advertising: 
Information Processing between the Lines. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 107:1–22.
14 Preston, I. L. (1977). The FTC’s Handling of Puffery and 
Other Selling Claims Made “By Implication.” Journal of 
Business Research, 5:155–181.
15 Mazis, M. B., and Adkinson, J. E. (1976). An Experimental 
Evaluation of a Proposed Corrective Advertising Remedy. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 13:178–183. Mazursky, 
D. and Schul, Y. (1988). The Effects of Advertisement 
Encoding on the Failure to Discount Information: 
Implications for the Sleeper Effect. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 15:24–36; Schul, Y., and Mazursky, D. 
(1990). Conditions Facilitating Successful Discounting 
in Consumer Decision Making. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 16:442–451; Wilkie, W., McNeill, D., and 
Mazis, M. (1984). Marketing’s “Scarlet Letter”: The 
Theory and Practice of Corrective Advertising. Journal of 
Marketing, 48:11–31.
16 Gilbert (1991). How Mental Systems Believe. American 
Psychologist, 46:107–119.
17 Anderson, J. R. (1983). The Architecture of Cognition. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Atkinson, 
R. C., and Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human Memory: A 
Proposed System and Its Control Processes. In K. W. 
Spence, and J. T. Spence (eds.), Advances in the Psychology 
of Learning and Motivation Research and Theory, vol. 2. 
New York: Academic Press.
18 Schacter, D. L. (1999). The Seven Sins of Memory: 
Insights from Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience. 
American Psychologist, 54:182–203.
19 Craik, F. I. M., and Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of 
Processing: A Framework for Memory Research. Journal of 
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11:671–684; Craik, 
F. I. M., and Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of Processing and 
the Retention of Words in Episodic Memory. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 104:268–294.
20 Slamecka, N. J., and Graf, P. (1978). The Generation Effect: 
Delineation of a Phenomenon. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 4:592–604.
21 Brown, A. S. (1991). A Review of the Tip-of-the-Tongue 
Experience. Psychological Bulletin, 109:204–223; Schacter, 
D. L. (1999). The Seven Sins of Memory: Insights from 
Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience. American 
Psychologist, 54:182–203.
22 Bahrick, H. P., Bahrick, L. E., Bahrick, A. S., and 
Bahrick, P. E. (1993). Maintenance of Foreign Language 
and the Spacing Effect. Psychological Science, 4:316–321; 
Bahrick, H. P., Bahrick, H. P., and Hall, L. K. (1991). 
Lifetime Maintenance of High School Mathematics 
Content. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
104:54–75.
23 Nelson, T. O. (1971). Savings and Forgetting from Long-
Term Memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 
Behavior, 10:568–576; Nelson, T. O. (1978). Detecting 
Small Amounts of Information in Memory: Savings for 
Nonrecognized Items. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Learning and Memory, 4:453–468.
24 Anderson, J. R. (1983). The Architecture of Cognition. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Tybout, 
A. M., Calder, B. J., and Sternthal, B. (1981). Using 
Information Processing Theory to Design Marketing 
Strategies. Journal of Marketing Research, 18:73–79.
25 Aaker D. A. (1996). Building Strong Brands. New 
York: Free Press; Burke, R. R., and Srull, T. K. (1988). 
Competitive Interference and Consumer Memory for 
Advertising. Journal of Consumer Research, 15:55–68.
26 Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press; Keller, K. L. (1987). 
Memory in Advertising: The Effect of Advertising 
Memory Cues on Brand Evaluations. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 14:316–333.
27 Johnson, M. K., and Rahe, C. L. (1981). Reality 
Monitoring. Psychological Review, 88:67–85; Johnson, 
M. K., Hastroudi, S., and Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source 
Monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114:3–28; Pham, M. T., 
and Johar, G. V. (1997). Contingent Processes of 
Source Identification. Journal of Consumer Research, 
24:249–265.
28 Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C. M., and Dywan, J. (1989). Memory 
Attributions. In H. L. Roediger and F. I. M. Craik (eds.), 
Varieties of Memory and Consciousness: Essays in Honor 
of Endel Tulving, 391–422. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates; Schwarz, N. (2004). Metacognitive 
experiences in consumer judgment and decision making. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14:332–348.

372 
Endnotes
29 Hawkins, S. A., and Hoch, S. J. (1992). Low-
Involvement Learning: Memory Without Evaluation. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 19:212–225; Hawkins, 
S. A., Hoch, S. J., and Meyers-Levy, J. (2001). Low-
Involvement Learning: Repetition and Coherence in 
Familiarity and Belief. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
11:1–12; Law, S., Hawkins, S. A., and Craik, F. I. M. 
(1998). Repetition-Induced Belief in the Elderly: 
Rehabilitating Age-Related Memory Deficits. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 25:91–107; Skurnik, I., Yoon, C., 
Park, D. C., and Schwarz, N. (2005). How Warnings 
about False Claims Become Recommendations. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 31:713–724.
30 Roediger, H. L. III. (1996). Memory Illusions. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 35:76–100; Roediger, H. L. III. 
(1995). Creating False Memories: Remembering Words 
Not Presented in Lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21:803–818.
31 Braun, K. (1999). Postexperience Advertising Effects 
on Consumer Memory. Journal of Consumer Research, 
25:319–334; Loftus, E. F. (1993). The Reality of 
Repressed Memories. American Psychologist, 48:518–537.
32 Ha, Y., and Hoch, S. J. (1989). Ambiguity, Processing 
Strategy, and Advertising-Evidence Interactions. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 16:354–360; Hoch, S. J., and 
Ha, Y. (1986). Consumer Learning: Advertising and the 
Ambiguity of Product Experience. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 13:221–233.
33 Alba, J. W., and Hasher, L. (1983). Is Memory Schematic? 
Psychological Bulletin, 93:203–231; Alba, J. W., and 
Hutchinson, J. W. (1987). Dimensions of Consumer 
Expertise. Journal of Consumer Research, 13:411–454; 
Hoch, S. J., and Deighton, J. (1989). Managing What 
Consumers Learn from Experience. Journal of Marketing, 
53:1–20; Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Posavac, S. S., Kardes, 
F. R., and Mantel, S. P. (1998). Selective Hypothesis 
Testing. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5:197–220.
34 Kardes, F. R., Chandrashekaran, M., and Kellaris, J. J. 
(2002). Preference Construction and Reconstruction. In 
R. Zwick, and A. Rapoport (eds.), Experimental Business 
Research, 301–327. Boston, MA: Kluwer.
35 Kellaris, J. J. (2008). Music and Consumers. In 
C. P. Haugtvedt, P. M. Herr, and F. R. Kardes (eds.), 
Handbook of Consumer Psychology, 837–856. Psychology 
Press: New York.
36 Greenwald, A. G., Spangenberg, E. R., Pratkanis, A. R., 
and Eskanazi, J. (1991). Double-Blind Tests of Subliminal 
Self-Help Audiotapes. Psychological Science, 2:119–122.
37 Harris, R. J. (1977). Comprehension of Pragmatic 
Implications in Advertising. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
62:603–608; Harris, R. J. & Monaco, G. E. (1978). 
Psychology of Pragmatic Implications in Advertising: 
Information Processing Between the Lines. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 107:1–22; Preston, I. L. 
(1977). The FTC’s Handling of Puffery and Other 
Selling Claims Made “By Implication.” Journal of Business 
Research, 5:155–181.
Chapter 7
 1 Kardes, F. R. (2005). The Psychology of Advertising. In 
T. C. Brock & M. C. Green (eds.), Persuasion: Psychological 
Insights and Perspectives, 281–303. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications.
 2 Bargh, J. (2002). Losing Consciousness: Automatic 
Influences on Consumer Judgment, Behavior, and 
Motivation. Journal of Consumer Research, 29:280–285.
 3 Nisbett, R. E., and Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling More 
Than We Can Know: Verbal Reports on Mental Processes. 
Psychological Review, 84:231–259.
 4 Gilbert, D., Gill, M. J., and Wilson, T. D. (2002). 
The Future Is Now: Temporal Correction in Affective 
Forecasting. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 88:430–444.
 5 Fazio, R. H., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Powell, M. C., and 
Kardes, F. R. (1986). On the Automatic Activation of 
Attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
50:229–238.
 6 Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, 
and the Human Brain. New York: Grosset/Putnam.
 7 Ambady, N., Krabbenhoft, M. A., and Hogan, D. (2006). 
The 30-Sec Sale: Using Thin-Slice Judgments to Evaluate 
Sales Effectiveness. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 16:4–13.
 8 Wilson, T. D., and Schooler, J. W. (1991). Thinking 
Too Much: Introspection Can Reduce the Quality of 
Preferences and Decisions. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 60:181–192.
 9 Wilson, T. D., Lisle, D. J., Schooler, J. W., Hodges, 
S. D., Klaaren, K. J., and LaFleur, S. J. (1993). 
Introspecting About Reasons Can Reduce Post-Choice 
Satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
19:331–339.
10 McMackin, J., and Slovic, P. (2000). When Does Explicit 
Justification Impair Decision Making? Journal of Applied 
Cognitive Psychology, 14:527–541.
11 Kardes, F. R. (2006). When Should Consumers and 
Managers Trust Their Intuition? Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 16:20–24.
12 Wyer, R. S. (2008). The Role of Knowledge Accessibility 
in Cognition and Behavior: Implications for Consumer 
Information Processing, 31–76. In C. P. Haugtvedt, 
P. M. Herr, and F. R. Kardes (eds.), Handbook of Consumer 
Psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
13 Herr, P. M. (1989). Priming Price: Prior Knowledge and 
Context Effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 16:67–75.

Endnotes  
373
14 Yi, Y. (1990). The Effects of Contextual Priming in 
Print Advertisements. Journal of Consumer Research, 
17:215–222.
15 Shrum, L. J., Wyer, R. S., and O’Guinn, T. C. (1998). 
The Effects of Television Consumption on Social 
Perceptions: The Use of Priming Procedures to Investigate 
Psychological Processes. Journal of Consumer Research, 
24:447–458.
16 Dijksterhuis, A., Smith, P. K., van Baaren, R. B., and 
Wigboldus, D. H. J. (2005). The Unconscious Consumer: 
Effects of Environment on Consumer Behavior. Journal 
of Consumer Psychology, 15:193–202.
17 Johnston, 
L. 
(2002). 
Behavioral 
Mimicry 
and 
Stigmatization. Social Cognition, 20:18–35.
18 Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., and Burrows, L. (1996). The 
Automaticity of Social Behavior: Direct Effects of Trait 
Concept and Stereotype Activation on Action. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 71:230–244.
19 Dijksterhuis, A., and van Knippenberg, A. (1998). The 
Relation Between Perception and Behavior or How to 
Win a Game of Trivial Pursuit. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 74:865–877.
20 Shen, H. (2008). Procedural Priming and Consumer 
Judgments: Effects on the Impact of Positively and 
Negatively Valenced Information. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 34:727–737.
21 Dhar, R., Huber, J., and Khan, U. (2007). The Shopping 
Momentum Effect. Journal of Marketing Research, 
44:370–378.
22 Xu, A. J., and Wyer, R. S. (2007). The Effect of Mindsets 
on Consumer Decision Strategies. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 34:556–566.
23 Xu, A. J., and Wyer, R. S. (2008). The Comparative 
Mindset: From Animal Comparisons to Increased 
Purchase Intentions. Psychological Science, 19:859–864.
24 Hirt, E. R., Kardes, F. R., and Markman, K. D. (2004). 
Activating a Mental Simulation Mindset through 
Generation of Alternatives: Implications for Debiasing in 
Related and Unrelated Domains. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 40:374–383.
25 Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. C., and Schwarz, J. 
(1998). Measuring Individual Differences in Implicit 
Social Cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 74:1464–1480; 
Maison, D., Greenwald, A. G., and Bruin, R. H. (2004). 
Predictive Validity of the Implicit Association Test in 
Studies of Brands, Consumer Attitudes, and Behavior. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14:405–415.
26 Brunel, F. F., Tietje, B. C., and Greenwald, A. G. (2004). 
Is the Implicit Association Test a Valid and Valuable 
Measure of Implicit Consumer Cognition? Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 14:385–404.
27 Schwarz, N. (2004). Metacognitive Experiences in 
Consumer Judgment and Decision Making. Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 14:332–348.
28 Hawkins, S. A., and Hoch, S. J. (1992). Low-Involvement 
Learning: Memory Without Evaluation. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 19:212–225; Hawkins, S. A., Hoch, 
S. J., and Meyers-Levy, J. (2001). Low-Involvement 
Learning: Repetition and Coherence in Familiarity and 
Belief. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 11:1–12; Law, S., 
Hawkins, S. A., and Craik, F. I. M. (1998). Repetition-
Induced Belief in the Elderly: Rehabilitating Age-Related 
Memory Deficits. Journal of Consumer Research, 25:91–
107; Skurnik, I., Yoon, C., Park, D. C., and Schwarz, N. 
(2005). How Warnings about False Claims Become 
Recommendations. Journal of Consumer Research, 
31:713–724.
29 Richter, T., Schroeder, S., and Wohrmann, B. (2009). You 
Don’t Have to Believe Everything You Read: Background 
Knowledge Permits Fast and Efficient Validation of 
Information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
96:538–558.
30 Strahan, E. J., Spencer, S. J., and Zanna, M. P. (2002). 
Subliminal Priming and Persuasion: Striking While the 
Iron Is Hot. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
38:556–568.
31 Shiv, B., Carmon, Z., and Ariely, D. (2005). Placebo 
Effects of Marketing Actions: Consumers May Get 
What They Pay For. Journal of Marketing Research, 
37:383–393.
32 North, A. C., Hargreaves, D. J., and McKendrick, J. (1997). 
In-Store Music Affects Product Choice. Nature, 390:132.
33 Gilbert, D. T., Tafarodi, R. W., and Malone, P. S. (1993). 
You Can’t Not Believe Everything You Read. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 65:221–233.
Chapter 8
 1 Freling, T. H. and Forbes, L. P. (2005). An Empirical 
Analysis of the Brand Personality Effect. Journal of Product 
& Brand Management, 14:404–413.
 2 Crab, N. (2007, April 20). Transforming Trousers. The 
Wall Street Journal [Online]. Available: http://online.wsj
.com/article/SB117703659888376491.html
 3 Rosenberg, M. (1979). Conceiving the Self. New York: 
Basic Books, Inc.
 4 Gordon, C. (1968). Self-conceptions: Configurations 
of Content. In C. Gordon and K. J. Gergen (eds.), The 
Self in Social Interaction, I: Classic and Contemporary 
Perspectives, 115–136. New York: Wiley.
 5 Michener, H. A., and DeLamater, J. D. (1994). Social 
Psychology (3rd ed.). Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace 
& Company.

374 
Endnotes
 6 Richins, M. L. (1991). Social Comparison and the 
Idealized Images of Advertising, Journal of Consumer 
Research, 
19:303–316; 
Richins, 
M. 
L. 
(1995). 
Materialism, Desire, and Discontent. Contributions of 
Idealized Advertising Images and Social Comparison. In 
R. P. Hill (ed.), Marketing and Consumer Research in the 
Public Interest, 109–132. London: Sage Publications.
 7 Lockwood, P., and Kuna, Z. (1997). Superstars and Me: 
Predicting the Impact of Role Models on the Self. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 73:91–103.
 8 Kiran, K., Zinkhan, G. M. and Lum, A. B. (1997). 
Brand Personality and Self-concept: A Replication and 
Extension. AMA Summer 1997 Conference, 165–171.
 9 Sirgy, M. J. (1980). Self-Concept in Relation to Product 
Preferences and Purchase Intentions. In V. V. Bellur 
(ed.), Developments in Marketing Science, 3, 350–355. 
Marquette, MI: Academy of Marketing Science; Sirgy, 
M. J. (1982). Self-Concept in Consumer Behavior: 
A Critical Review. Journal of Consumer Research, 
9:287–300.
10 Sirgy, M. J. (1987). The Moderating Role of Response 
Mode in Consumer Self-esteem/Self-consistency Effects. 
AMA Winter Educator’s Conference, 5–55.
11 Zinkhan, G. M., and Hong, J. W. (1991). Self Concept 
and Advertising Effectiveness: A Conceptual Model of 
Congruency, Conspicuousness, and Response Mode. 
Advances in Consumer Research, 18:348–354.
12 Belk, R. W. (1988). Possessions and the Extended Self. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 15:139–168.
13 James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology vol. 1., New 
York: Henry Holt.
14 McClelland, D. (1951). Personality. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart, & Winston.
15 Ellis, L. (1985). On the Rudiments of Possessions and 
Property. Social Science Information, 24:113–143.
16 Rosenblatt, P. C., Walsh, R, P., and Jackson, D. Q. (1976). 
Grief and Mourning in Cross-cultural Perspective. New 
Haven, CT: Human Relations Area Files.
17 McLeod, B. (1984). In the Wake of Disaster. Psychology 
Today, 18:54–57.
18 Niederland, W. G., and Sholevar, B. (1981). The Creative 
Process—A Psychoanalytic Discussion. The Arts in 
Psychotherapy, 8:71–101.
19 Sherry, J. F., and McGrath, M. A. (1989). Unpacking 
the Holiday Presence: A Comparative Ethnography of 
Two Gift Stores. In E. C. Hirschman (ed.), Interpretive 
Consumer Research, 148–167. Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research.
20 Ahuvia, A. C. (2005). Beyond the Extended Self: Loved 
Objects and Consumers’ Identity Narratives. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 32:171–184.
21 Snyder, M. (1974). The Self-monitoring of Expressive 
Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
30:526–537.
22 Snyder, M., and Tanke, E. D. (1976). Behavior and 
Attitude: Some People Are More Consistent Than Others. 
Journal of Personality, 44:501–517.
23 Graeff, T. R. (1996). Image Congruence Effects on 
Product Evaluations: The Role of Self-monitoring and 
Public/Private Consumption. Psychology & Marketing, 
13:481–499.
24 Becherer, R. C., and Richard, L. M. (1978). Self-
monitoring as a Moderating Variable in Consumer 
Behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 5:159–162.
25 Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons.
26 Markus, H., and Kunda, Z. (1986). Stability and 
Malleability of the Self-concept. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 51:858–866.
27 Aaker, J. (1999). The Malleable Self: The Role of Self-
expression in Persuasion. Journal of Marketing Research, 
36:45–47.
28 Snyder, 
M. 
(1987). 
Public 
Appearances, 
Private 
Realities: The Psychology of Self-monitoring. New York: 
W. H. Freeman.
29 Tetlock, P., and Manstead, A. S. (1985). Impression 
Management versus Intrapsychic Explanations in Social 
Psychology: A Useful Dichotomy? Psychological Review, 
92:59–77.
30 Stone, G. P. (1962). Appearances and the Self. In 
A. Rose (ed.), Human Behavior and Social Processes, 
86–118. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
31 Von Baeyer, C. L., Sherk, D. L., and Zanna, M. P. 
(1981). Impression Management in the Job Interview: 
When the Female Applicant Meets the Male (Chauvinist) 
Interviewer. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
7:45–51.
32 Schlenker, B. R., and Leary, M. (1982). Audiences’ 
Reactions to Self-enhancing, Self-denigrating, and 
Accurate Self-presentations. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 18:89–104.
33 Baumeister, R. F., Hutton, D. G., and Tice, D. M. (1989). 
Cognitive Processes during Deliberate Self-presentations: 
How Self-presenters Alter and Misinterpret the Behavior 
of Their Interaction Partners. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 25:59–78; Frey, D. (1978). Reactions 
to Success and Failure in Public and Private Conditions. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14:172–179.
34 Harlow, R. E., and Cantor, N. (1994). Social Pursuit 
of Academics: Side Effects and Spillover of Strategic 
Reassurance Seeking. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 66:386–397.

Endnotes  
375
35 Jones, E. E., and Wortman, C. (1973). Ingratiation: 
An Attributional Approach. Morristown, NJ: General 
Learning Press.
36 Tice, D. M., Butler, J. L., Muraven, M. B., and Stillwell, 
A. M. (1995). When Modesty Prevails: Differential 
Favorability of Self-presentation to Friends and 
Strangers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
69:1120–1138.
37 Schlenker, B. R. (1975). Self-presentation: Managing 
the Impression of Consistency When Reality Interferes 
with Self-enhancement. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 32:1030–1037.
38 Byrne, D. (1971). The Attraction Paradigm. New York: 
Academic Press.
39 Cline, T. W., Mertens, D. P., Vowels, N. S., and Davies, A. 
(2009). All Ingratiation Is Not Equal: A Two Dimensional 
Model of Consumer Ingratiation, Society for Consumer 
Psychology 2009 Winter Conference.
40 Hunter, C. H. (1984). Aligning Actions: Types and Social 
Distribution. Symbolic Interactions, 7:155–164.
41 Hewitt, J. P., and Stokes, R. (1975). Disclaimers. American 
Sociological Review, 40:1–11.
42 Riordan, C. A., Marlin, N. A., and Kellogg, R. T. (1983). 
The Effectiveness of Accounts Following Transgression. 
Social Psychology Quarterly, 46:213–219.
43 Blumstein, P. W. (1974). The Honoring of Accounts. 
American Sociological Review, 39:551–566.
44 Referred to as the “father of psychoanalysis,” Sigmund 
Freud (1856–1939) popularized such notions as the 
unconscious, defense mechanisms, dream symbolism, 
psychosexual development, and Freudian slips. Freud 
maintained that a person’s personality is developed based 
on a fundamental, internal conflict between physical grat-
ification and appropriate social behavior. Freud’s work is 
preserved in the 24-volume The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. (2001). 
London: Hogarth Press.
45 Horney, K. (1950). Neurosis and Human Growth. New 
York: Norton; Jung, C. G. (1959). The Archetypes and 
the Collective Unconscious. In H. Read, M. Fordham, 
and G. Adler (eds.), Collected Works, vol. 9, part 1. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
46 Cattell, R. B. (1957). Personality and Motivation: Structure 
and Measurement. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.
47 Goldberg, L. R. (1992). The Development of Markers 
for the Big Five-Factor Structure. Psychological Assessment, 
4:26–42.
48 Wiggins, J. S. (1996). The Five-Factor Model of Personality. 
New York: Guilford Press.
49 Mowen, J. C. (1999). Understanding Compulsive Buying 
among College Students: A Hierarchical Approach, 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 8:407–430.
50 Faber, R. J., and O’Guinn, T. C. (1988). Compulsive 
Consumption and Credit Abuse. Journal of Consumer 
Policy, 11:97–109.
51 Harris, E. G., and Mowen, J. C. (2001). The Influence of 
Cardinal-, Central-, and Surface-level Personality Traits 
on Consumers’ Bargaining and Complaint Behaviors. 
Psychology & Marketing, 18:1155–1185.
52 Schoen, H., and Schumann, S. (2007). Personality Traits, 
Partisan Attitudes, and Voting Behavior: Evidence from 
Germany. Political Psychology, 28:471–498.
53 Hopwood, C. J., Morey, L. C., Skodol, A. E., Stout, R. L., 
Yen, S., Ansell, E. B., Grilo, C. M., and McGlashan, T. H. 
(2007). Five-Factor Model Personality Traits Associated 
with Alcohol-Related Diagnoses in a Clinical Sample. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol & Drugs 68:455–460.
54 Aaker, J. L. Dimensions of Brand Personality. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 35:347–356.
55 Park, B. (1986). A Method for Studying the Development 
of Impressions of Real People. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 51:907–917.
56 McCracken, G. (1989). Who Is the Celebrity Endorser? 
Cultural Foundations of the Endorsement Process. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 16:310–321.
57 Batra, R., Lehmann, D. R., and Singh, D. (1993). The 
Brand Personality Component of Brand Goodwill: 
Some Antecedents and Consequences. In D. A. Aaker 
and A. Biel (eds.), Brand Equity and Advertising, 83–96. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
58 Keller, K. (1993). Conceptualizing, Measuring, and 
Managing Customer-based Brand Equity. Journal of 
Marketing, 57:1–22.
59 Gecko-mania Sweeps Country. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.geico.com/about/background/geico
WordSponsor.htm. Retrieved July 27, 2007.
60 M&M Characters Are US Favourites. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.bandt.com.au/news/89/0c027889.asp. 
Retrieved September 23, 2004.
61 Forbes, June 17, 1996.
62 Ogilvy, D. (1983). Confessions of an Advertising Man. 
New York: Dell.
63 Fennis, B. M., Pruyn, A. T., and Maasland, M. (2005). 
Revisiting the Malleable Self: Brand Effects on Consumer 
Self-perceptions of Personality. Advances in Consumer 
Research, 32:371–377.
64 Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized Expectancies for Internal 
versus External Control of Reinforcement. Psychological 
Monographs, 80, (1, Whole No. 609).
65 Sherman, S. J. (1973). Internal-external Control and Its 
Relationship to Attitude Change under Different Social 
Influence Techniques. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 26:23–29.

376 
Endnotes
66 Cacioppo, J. T., and Petty, R. E. (1982). The Need for 
Cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
42:116–131.
67 Haugtvedt, C. P., Petty, R. E., and Cacioppo, J. T. (1992). 
Need for Cognition and Advertising: Understanding the 
Role of Personality Variables in Consumer Behavior. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 1:239–260.
68 Tuten, T. L., and Bosnjak, M. (2001). Understanding 
Differences in Web Usage: The Role of Need for Cognition 
and the Five-Factor Model of Personality. Social Behavior 
and Personality, 29:391–398.
69 Venkatraman, M. P., Marlino, D., Kardes, F., and Sklar, 
K. B. (1990). The Interactive Effects of Message Appeal 
and Individual Differences on Information Processing 
and Persuasion. Psychology & Marketing, 7:85–96.
70 Carnaghi, A., Cadinu, M., Castelli, L., Kiesner, J., and 
Bragantini, C. (2007). The Best Way to Tell You to Use 
a Condom: The Interplay between Message Format and 
Individuals’ Level of Need for Cognition. AIDS Care, 
19:432–440.
71 Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R., Feinstein, J., and Jarvis, B. 
(1996). Dispositional Differences in Cognitive Motivation: 
The Life and Times of Individuals Varying in Need for 
Cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119:197–253.
72 Cline, T. W., Machleit, K., and Kellaris, J. J. (1999). 
Is There a Need for Levity? In K.A. Machleit and 
M. Campbell (eds.), Proceedings of the Society for Consumer 
Psychology 1998 Winter Conference. Austin, TX: American 
Psychological Association.
73 Cline, T. W., Altsech, M. B., and Kellaris, J. J. (2003). 
When Does Humor Enhance or Inhibit Ad Responses? 
The Moderating Role of Need for Humor, Journal of 
Advertising, 32:31–46.
74 Kellaris, J. J., and Cline, T. W. (2007). Humor and 
Ad Memorability: On the Contributions of Humor 
Expectancy, Relevancy, and Need for Humor. Psychology 
& Marketing, 24:497–509.
75 Kruglanski, Q. W., and Webster, D. M. (1996). 
Motivated Closing of the Mind: “Seizing” and “Freezing.” 
Psychological Review, 103:263–283.
76 Cronley, M. L., Posavac, S. S., Meyer, T., Kardes, F. R., 
and Kellaris, J. J. (2005). A Selective Hypothesis 
Testing Perspective on Price-Quality Inference and 
Inference-based Choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
15:159–169.
77 Zhang, S., Kardes, F., and Cronley, M. (2002). Comparative 
Advertising: Effects of Structural Alignability on Target 
Brand Evaluations. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
12:303–311.
78 Ask, K., and Granhag, P. A. (2005). Motivational Sources 
of Confirmation Bias in Criminal Investigations: The 
Need for Cognitive Closure. Journal of Investigative 
Psychology and Offender Profiling, 2:43–63.
79 Army Insight (2001, Spring) [Online]. Available: http://
www.blackprwire.com/clients/Army/index.html.
80 Burns, Robert (2006, October 9). Army Launching 
“Army 
Strong” 
Campaign. 
Boston.com 
National 
News [Online]. Available: http://www.boston.com/
news/nation/washington/articles/2006/10/09/
army_launching_army_strong_ad_campaign/.
81 Rochelle, C. (2001, January 10). Army Retires “Be All 
You Can Be” Jingle. CNN.com U.S. News. Available: 
http://archives.cnn.com/2001/US/01/10/new.army/
index.html.
82 Chan, P. Y. L., Saunders, J, Taylor, G. and Souchon, A. 
(2003). Brand Personality Perceptions: Regional or 
Country Specific? In D. Turley and S. Brown (eds.), 
European Advances in Consumer Research, 6:300–307.
83 Rothenberg, R. (2007, March 5). Dove Effort Gives 
Package-goods Marketers Lessons for the Future. 
Advertising Age [Online]. Available: http://adage.com/
columns/article?article_id=115370&search_phrase=%2
Bdove+%2Breal+%2Bbeauty.
84 Clegg, Alicia (2005, April 18). Dove Gets Real. 
Brandchannel.com 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www
.brandchannel.com/features_effect.asp?pf_id=259#more.
85 Howard, Theresa (2005, August 28). Dove Ads Enlist 
All Shapes, Styles, and Sizes. USAToday.com [Online]. 
Available: http://www.usatoday.com/money/advertising/
adtrack/2005-08-28-track-dove_x.htm.
86 Howard, Theresa (2006, November 11). Dove Ad 
Gets Serious for Super Bowl. USAToday.com [Online]. 
Available: http://www.usatoday.com/money/industries/
retail/2006-01-11-dove-usat_x.htm.
87 Clegg, Alicia (2005, April 18). Dove Gets Real. 
Brandchannel.com 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www
.brandchannel.com/features_effect.asp?pf_id=259#more.
Chapter 9
 1 Associated Press (2007, August 17). Reported in The Wall 
Street Journal [Online]. Available: http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB118737017784201124.html.
 2 Assael, H. (1998). Consumer Behavior and Marketing 
Action. Cincinnati, OH: South-Western Publishing.
 3 Laurent, G. and Kapferer, J-N. (1985). Measuring 
Consumer Involvement Profiles, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 22:41–53.
 4 Dowling, G. R., and Staelin, R. (1994). A Model of 
Perceived Risk and Risk-handling Activity. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 21:119–134.
 5 Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., and Kao, C. F. (1986). 
Central and Peripheral Routes to Persuasion: An 
Individual Difference Perspective. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 51:1032–1043.

Endnotes  
377
 6 Batra, R., and Ray, M. L. (1986). Situational Effects 
of Advertising Repetition: The Moderating Influence 
of Motivation, Ability, and Opportunity to Respond. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 12:432–445.
 7 Robertson, T. S. (1976). Low-commitment Consumer 
Behavior. Journal of Advertising Research, 16:19–27.
 8 Venkatesan, M. (1973). Cognitive Consistency and 
Novelty Seeking. In S. Ward and T. S. Robertson (eds.), 
Consumer Behavior: Theoretical Sources, (354–384). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 9 Van Triip, H. C. M., Hoyer, W. D., and Inman, J. J. 
(1996). Why Switch? Product Category-level of 
Explanations for True Variety-seeking Behavior. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 33:281–292.
10 Holbrook, M. B. (1984). Situation-specific Ideal Points 
and Usage of Multiple Dissimilar Brands. In J. N. Sheth 
(ed.), Research in Marketing, vol. 7, 93–131. Greenwich, 
CT: JAI Press.
11 McReynolds, P. (1971). The Nature and Assessment of 
Intrinsic Motivation. In P. McReynolds (ed.), Advances in 
Psychological Assessment, vol. 2, (157–177). Palo Alto, CA: 
Science and Behavior Books.
12 McAlister, L., and Pessemier, E. A. (1982). Variety 
Seeking Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Review. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 9:311–322.
13 Sheth, J. N., and Raju, P. S. (1974). Sequential and 
Cyclical Nature of Information Processing Models in 
Repetitive Choice Behavior. In S. Ward and P. Wright 
(eds.), Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 1,(348–358).
14 Zuckerman, M. (1979). Sensation Seeking: Beyond the Optimal 
Level of Arousal. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
15 Ratner, R. K., Kahn, B. E., and Kahneman, D. (1999). 
Choosing Less-preferred Experiences for the Sake of 
Variety. Journal of Consumer Research, 26:1–15.
16 Kahn, B. E., and Isen, A. M. (1993). The Influence of 
Positive Affect on Variety Seeking among Safe, Enjoyable 
Products. Journal of Consumer Research, 20:257–270.
17 Simonson, I. (1990). The Effect of Purchase Quantity and 
Timing on Variety Seeking Behavior. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 27:150–162.
18 Choi, J., Kim, B. K., Choi, I., and Yi, Y. (2006). Variety-
seeking Tendency in Choice for Others: Interpersonal 
and Intrapersonal Causes. Journal of Consumer Research, 
32:590–595.
19 Howard, J. A. and Sheth, J. N. (1969). The Theory of 
Buyer Behavior. New York: Wiley.
20 Leuba, C. (1955). Toward Some Integration of Learning 
Theories: The Concept of Optimal Stimulation. 
Psychological Reports, 1:27–33.
21 Menon, S., and Kahn, B. (1995). The Impact of Context 
on Variety Seeking in Product Choices. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 22:285–295.
22 Sutherland, M. and Sylvester, A. K. (2000). Advertising 
and the Mind of the Consumer, 2nd ed. St. Leonards NSW, 
Australia: Allen & Unwin.
23 Myers, J. H., and Alpert, M. (1968). Determinant 
Buying Attitudes: Meaning and Measurement. Journal of 
Marketing, 32:13–20.
24 Guiltinan, J. P., Paul, G.W., and Madden, T. J. (1997). 
Marketing Management: Strategies and Programs, 6th ed. 
New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
25 Dewy, J. (1910). How We Think. Boston, MA: D. C. 
Health; Brim, O. G. Jr., Glass, D. C., Lavin, D. E., and 
Goodman, N. (1963). Personality and Decision Processes. 
The American Journal of Sociology, 69:96.
26 Engel, J. Blackwell, R. D., and Miniard, P. W. (1995). 
Consumer Behavior, 8th ed. Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press.
27 We credit James G. Clawson with popularizing the 
“want-got gap” model while teaching organizational 
behavior at the University of Virginia’s Darden School 
of Business.
28 Bruner, G. C. II (1986). Problem Recognition Styles and 
Search Patterns: An Empirical Investigation. Journal of 
Retailing, 62:281–297.
29 Bruner, G. C. and Pamazal, R. J. (1988). Problem 
Recognition: The Crucial First Stage of the Consumer 
Decision Process. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 
5:53–63.
30 Rossiter, J. R., Percy, L., and Donovan, R. J. (1991). A 
Better Advertising Planning Grid. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 31:11–21.
31 Rossiter, J. R., and Percy, L. (1997). Advertising 
Communications and Promotion Management. New York: 
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
32 Gundlach, G. T., Block, L. G., and Wilkie, W. L. 
(2007). Explorations of Marketing in Society. Mason, OH: 
Thomson Higher Education.
33 Pollay, R. W. and Banwari, M. (1993). Here’s the Beef: 
Factors, Determinants, and Segments in Consumer 
Criticism 
of 
Advertising. 
Journal 
of 
Marketing, 
57:99–114.
34 Wilkie, W. L., and Moore, E. S. (2007). Marketing’s 
Contributions to Society. In G. T. Gundlach, L. G. 
Block, and W. L. Wilkie (eds.) Explorations of Marketing 
in Society, 2–39. Mason, OH: Thomson Higher 
Education.
35 Punj, G. N., and Staelin, R. (1983). A Model of 
Consumer Information Search for New Automobiles. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 9:366–380.
36 Bettman, J. R. (1979). Memory Factors in Consumer 
Choice: A Review. Journal of Marketing, 43:37–53.
37 Bloch, P. H., Sherrell, D. L., and Ridgeway, N. M. (1986). 
Consumer Search: An Extended Framework. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 13:119–126.

378 
Endnotes
38 Houston, M. J., and Rothschild, M. L. (1978). Conceptual 
and Methodological Perspectives on Involvement. In 
S. C. Jain (ed.), Educator’s proceedings, 184–187. Chicago, 
IL: American Marketing Association
39 Celsi, R. L., and Olson, J. C. (1988). The Role of 
Involvement in Attention and Comprehension Processes. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 15:210–224.
40 Clarke, K. and Belk, R. (1979). The Effects of Product 
Involvement and Task Definition on Anticipated 
Consumer Effort. In W. L. Wilkie (ed.). Advances 
in Consumer Research, vol. 6, 313–318. Ann Arbor, 
MI: Association for Consumer Research.
41 Dellaert, B. G. C. (1998). Investigating Consumers’ 
Tendency to Combine Multiple Shopping Purposes 
and Destinations. Journal of Marketing Research, 
35:177–189.
42 Ratchford, B.T., Lee, M-S, and Talukdar, D. (2003). 
The Impact of the Internet on Information Search 
for Automobiles. Journal of Marketing Research, 
40:193–209.
43 Weenig, M. W. H., and Maarleveld, M. (2002). The 
Impact of Time Constraint of Information Search 
Strategies in Complex Choice Tasks. Journal of Economic 
Psychology, 23:689–702.
44 Machleit, K. A., Eroglu, S. A., and Mantel, S. P. (2000). 
Perceived Retail Crowding and Shopping Satisfaction. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 9:29–42.
45 Gladwell, M. (2002). The Tipping Point: How Little 
Things Can Make a Big Difference. New York: Back Bay 
Books.
46 Klein, M. (1998). He Shops, She Shops. American 
Demographics, 20:83–95.
47 Bettman, J. R., and Park, C. W. (1986). Effects of Prior 
Knowledge and Experience and Phase of the Choice 
Process on Consumer Decision Processes: A Protocol 
Analysis. Journal of Consumer Research, 7:234–248.
48 McGuire, W. J. (1968). Personality and Susceptibility to 
Social Influences. In E. F. Borgatta and W. W. Lambert 
(eds.), Handbook of Personality Theory and Research, 
(1130–1187). Chicago, IL: Rand McNally; McGuire, 
W. J. (1972). Attitude Change: The Information-
processing Paradigm. In C. G. McClintock (ed.), 
Experimental Social Psychology, (108–141). New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston; McGuire, W. J. (1976). Some 
Internal Psychological Factors Influencing Consumer 
Choice. Journal of Consumer Research, 2:302–319.
49 Hirschman, E. C. and Wallendorf, M. R. (1982). Motive 
Underlying Marketing Formation Acquisition and 
Transfer. Journal of Advertising, 11:25–31.
50 Hirschman, E. C. (1980). Innovativeness, Novelty 
Seeking, and Consumer Creativity. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 7:283–295.
51 Fleischmann, G. (1981). Sources for Product Ideas: 
A Proactive View on the Consumer. In K. B. Monroe 
(ed.), Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 8, (386–390). 
Ann Arbor, MI: Association for Consumer Research.
52 Bellenger, D. N. and Korgoankar, P. (1980). Profiling the 
Recreational Shopper. Journal of Retailing, 58:58–81.
53 Simon, H. A. (1982). Models of Bounded Rationality. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
54 Davies, A., and Cline T. W. (2005). A Consumer Behavior 
Approach to Modeling Monopolistic Competition. 
Journal of Economic Psychology, 26:797–826.
55 Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and Effort. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall; Beatty, S.E. and Smith, S. M. 
(1987). External Search Effort: An Investigation across 
Several Product Categories, Journal of Consumer Research, 
14:83–95; Brucks, M. (1985). The Effect of Product Class 
Knowledge on Information Search Behavior. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 12:1–6.
56 Simonson, I. (1989). Choice Based on Reason. The 
Case of Attraction and Compromise Effects. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 16:158–174.
57 Bettman, J. R. (1979). An Information Processing Theory 
of Consumer Choice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley; 
Kardes, F. R., Kalyanaram, G. Chandrashekaran, M., and 
Dornoff, R. J. (1993). Brand Retrieval, Consideration 
Set Composition, Consumer Choice, and the Pioneering 
Advantage. Journal of Consumer Research, 20:62–75.
58 Dhar, R., and Glazer, R. (1996). Similarity in Context: 
Cognitive Representation and Violation Preference and 
Perceptual Invariance in Consumer Choice. Organization 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 67:280–293; 
Nosofsky, R. M. (1987). Attention and Learning Processes 
in Identification and Categorization of Integral Stimuli. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 13:87–108.
59 Pinsky, J., and Slade, M. E. (1998). Contracting in Space: 
An Application of Spatial Statistics to Discrete Choice 
Models. Journal of Econometrics, 85:125–154.
60 Baumeister, R. E. (1982). Self-esteem, Self-preservation, 
and Future Interaction: A Dilemma of Reputation. 
Journal of Personality, 50:29–45.
61 Hall, C. S., and Lindzey, G. (1978). Theories of Personality. 
New York: Wiley.
62 Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. 
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson & Company.
63 Bell, D. E. (1982). Regret in Decision Making under 
Uncertainty. Operations Research, 30:961–981.
64 Tse, D. K., Nicosia, F. M, and Wilton, P. C. (1990). Consumer 
Satisfaction as a Process. Psychology & Marketing, 7:177–193.
65 Seiders, K., Voss, G., Grewal, D., and Godfrey, A. L. 
(2005). Do Satisfied Customers Buy More? Examining 
Moderating Influences in a Retail Context. Journal of 
Marketing, 69:26–43.

Endnotes  
379
66 Homburg, C. Koschate, N., and Hoyer, W. D. (2005). 
Do Satisfied Customers Really Pay More? A Study of 
the Relationship between Customer Satisfaction and 
Willingness to Pay. Journal of Marketing, 69:84–96.
67 Chandrashekaran, M., Rotte, K., Tax, S. S., and Grewal, R. 
(2007). Satisfaction Strength and Customer Loyalty. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 44:153–163.
68 Brehm, J. W. (1956). Postdecision Changes in the 
Desirability of Alternatives. Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology 52:384–389.
69 Oliver, R. L. (1980). A Cognitive Model of the 
Antecedents and Consequences of Satisfaction Decisions. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 17:460–469; Oliver, R. L. 
(1981). Measurement and Evaluation of Satisfaction 
Process in Retail Settings. Journal of Retailing, 57:25–48; 
Oliver, R. L., and DeSarbo, W. S. (1988). Response 
Determinants in Satisfaction Judgments. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 14:495–507.
70 Spencer, J. (2007, August 6). In China, Lenovo 
Sets Sights on Rural Market. The Wall Street Journal 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB118634998647088589.html.
71 Farooq, S. F. (2007, August 10). Economic Superpower in 
Crisis. United News of Bangladesh. Reported in Manufacturing 
Business Technology. [Online]. Available: http://www
.mbtmag.com/articleXml/LN653394652.html.
72 Parker, E. (2007, July 12). Made in China. The Wall Street 
Journal [Online] Available: http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB118420252485564055.html.
Chapter 10
 1 4.7% of TV sets Sold in the US are US-made. (2003, 
December 3). ITFacts [Online]. Available: www.itfacts.biz.
 2 All Brands in Television (TV). (2004, November 4). 
BizRate Shopping Search [Online]. Available: www
.Bizrate.com.
 3 Dhar, R. (1997). Consumer Preference for a No-choice 
Option. Journal of Consumer Research, 24:211–231.
 4 Miller, G. A. (1956). The Magical Number Seven, Plus or 
Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing 
Information. Psychological Review, 63:8–97. Russo, J. E. 
(1977). The Value of Unit Price Information. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 14l:193–201.
 5 Alba, J. W., and Chattopadhyay, A. (1985). Effects of 
Context and Part-category Cues on Recall of Competing 
Brands. Journal of Marketing Research, 22:340–349. Alba, 
J. W., and Chattopadhyay, A. (1986). Salience Effects on 
Brand Recall. Journal of Marketing Research, 23:363–369.
 6 Nedungadi, P. (1990). Recall and Consumer Consideration 
Sets: Influencing Choice without Altering Evaluations. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 17:263–276.
 7 Huber, J., Payne, J. W., and Puto, C. (1982). Adding 
Asymmetrically 
Dominated 
Alternatives: 
Violations 
of Regularity and the Similarity Hypothesis. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 9:90–98. Huber, J., and Puto, C. 
(1983). Market Boundaries and Product Choice: Illustrating 
Attraction and Substitution Effects. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 10:31–44. Simonson, I., and Tversky, A. (1992). 
Choice in Context: Trade-off Contrast and Extremeness 
Aversion. Journal of Marketing Research, 29:281–295.
 8 Simonson, I. (1989). Choice Based on Reasons: The 
Case of Attraction and Compromise Effects. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 16:158–174; Simonson, I., and 
Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in Context: Trade-off Contrast 
and Extremeness Aversion. Journal of Marketing Research, 
29:281–295.
 9 Kardes, F. R. (2002). Consumer Behavior and Managerial 
Decision Making, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Education/Prentice Hall.
10 For a discussion of stimulus-based, memory-based, and 
mixed choice, see Lynch, J. G., and Srull, T. K. (1982). 
Memory and Attentional Factors in Consumer Choice: 
Concepts and Research Methods. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 9:18–37.
11 Biehal, G. J., and Chakravarti, D. (1983). Information 
Accessibility as a Moderator of Consumer Choice. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 10:1–14.
12 Alba, J. W., Marmorstein, H., and Chattopadhyay, 
A. (1992). Transitions in Preference over Time: The 
Effects of Memory on Message Persuasiveness. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 29:406–416.
13 Kardes, F. R. (1986). Effects of Initial Product Judgments 
on Subsequent Memory-based Judgments. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 13:1–11.
14 Fazio, R. H. (1990). Multiple Processes by Which Attitudes 
Guide Behavior: The MODE Model as an Integrative 
Framework. In M. P. Zanna (ed.), Advances in Experimental 
Social Psychology, (75–109). New York: Academic Press; 
Sanbonmatsu, D. M., and Fazio, R. H. (1990). The Role 
of Attitudes in Memory-based Decision Making. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 59:614–622.
15 Chaiken, S., and Trope, Y. (eds.) (1999). Dual-process 
Theories in Social Psychology. New York: Guilford.
16 Stec, A. M., and Bernstein, D. A. (1999). The Scope 
of Psychology: More Than Meets The Eye. In Stec, A. 
M. and Bernstein, D. A. (eds.), Psychology: Fields of 
Application, (1–16). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin 
Company.
17 Kardes, F. R., Posavac, S. S., and Cronley, M. L. (2004). 
Consumer Inference: A Review of Processes, Bases, and 
Judgment Contexts, Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14:3, 
230–256; Kardes, F. R., Cronley, M. L., Kellaris, J. J., and 
Posavac, S. S. (2004). The Role of Selective Information 
Processing in Price-quality Inference, Journal of Consumer 

380 
Endnotes
Research, 31:2, 368–374; Lichtenstein, D. R., and 
Burton, S. (1989). The Relationship between Perceived 
and Objective Price-quality. Journal of Marketing Research, 
26:429–443.
18 Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under 
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 185:1124–
1131; Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and Kahneman, D. 
(2002). Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive 
Judgment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.
19 Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment 
under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 
185:1124–1131; Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and 
Kahneman, D. (2002). Heuristics and Biases: The 
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
20 Gilovich, T., Vallone, R., and Tversky, A. (1985). The Hot 
Hand in Basketball: On the Misperception of Random 
Sequences. Cognitive Psychology, 17:295–314.
21 Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment 
under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 
185:1124–1131; Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and 
Kahneman, D. (2002). Heuristics and Biases: The 
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
22 Plous, S. (1993). The Psychology of Judgment and Decision 
Making. New York: McGraw-Hill.
23 Schwarz, N. (1998). Accessible Content and Accessibility 
Experiences: The Interplay of Declarative and Experiential 
Information in Judgment. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 2:87–99.
24 Schwarz, N. (1998). Accessible Content and Accessibility 
Experiences: The Interplay of Declarative and Experiential 
Information in Judgment. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 2:87–99.
25 Schwarz, N. (1998). Accessible Content and Accessibility 
Experiences: The Interplay of Declarative and Experiential 
Information in Judgment. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 2:87–99.
26 Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1984). Choice, Values, 
and Frames. American Psychologist, 39:341–350.
27 Sherman, S. J., Cialdini, R. B., Schwartzman, D. F., and 
Reynolds, K. D. (1985). Imagining Can Heighten or 
Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: 
The Mediating Effect of Ease of Imagery. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 11:118–127.
28 Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment 
under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 
185:1124–1131; Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and Kahneman, 
D. (2002). Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive 
Judgment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
29 Northcraft, G. B., and Neale, M. A. (1987). Experts, 
Amateurs, and Real Estate: An Anchoring and Adjustment 
Perspective on Property Pricing Decisions. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 39:84–97.
30 Wansink, B., Kent, R. J., and Hoch, S. J. (1998). An 
Anchoring and Adjustment Model of Purchase Quantity 
Decisions. Journal of Marketing Research, 35:71–81.
31 Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., and Johnson, E. J. (1993). 
The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
32 Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., and Johnson, E. J. (1993). 
The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press; Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by Aspects: 
A Theory of Choice. Psychological Review, 79:281–299.
33 Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., and Johnson, E. J. (1993). 
The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press; Tversky, A. (1969). Intransitivity of 
Preferences. Psychological Review, 76:31–48.
34 Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., and Johnson, E. J. (1993). 
The Adaptive Decision Maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
35 Shafir, E., Osherson, D. N., & Tversky, A. (1993). 
Reason-based Choice. Cognition, 49, 11–36.
36 Ardichvili, A., and Kuchinke, K. P. (2002). Leadership Style 
and Cultural Values among Managers and Subordinates: 
A Comparative Study of Four Countries of the Former 
Soviet Union, Germany, and the US. Human Resources 
Development International, 5:1, 99–117; DuPraw, M. E., 
and Axner, M. (2005, January 11). Working on Common 
Cross-cultural Communication Challenges. A More Perfect 
Union [Online]. Available: www.wwcd.org; Guss, C. D. 
(2002). Decision Making in Individualistic and 
Collectivistic Cultures. In W. J. Lonner, D. L. Dinnel, S. A. 
Hayes, and D. N. Sattler (eds.), Online Readings in 
Psychology and Culture, ch. 3. Center for Cross-Cultural 
Research, Western Washington University, Bellingham, 
Washington, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.wwu.edu; 
Schramm-Nielsen, J. (2001). Cultural Dimensions of 
Decision Making: Denmark and France Compared. 
Journal of Managerial Psychology, 16:6, 404–423.
37 Ardichvili, A., and Kuchinke, K. P. (2002). Leadership 
Style and Cultural Values among Managers and 
Subordinates: A Comparative Study of Four Countries of 
the Former Soviet Union, Germany, and the US. Human 
Resources Development International, 5:1, 99–117.
38 Morrison, T. C. (2002, Spring). How a Seemingly 
Innocuous Slogan Led to the Pizza Wars. IP on Trial 
[Online]. Available: www.pbwt.com.
39 Gindy, D. M. (2001, June 26). Dual between Pizza Hut 
and Papa John’s Comes to an End. Los Angeles Daily 
Journal [Online]. Available: www.gindylaw.com.

Endnotes  
381
40 Milloy, S. (2000, January 22). Pepperoni, Cheese and 
Whining; Pizza Hut Targets the Competition. Cato.org 
[Online]. Available: www.cato.org; Harshaw, R. (2004, 
October 15). Do You Really Believe That? Rising Media 
[Online]. Available: www.risingmedia.com.
41 Harshaw, R. (2004, October 15). Do You Really 
Believe That? Rising Media [Online]. Available: www
.risingmedia.com.
Chapter 11
 1 von Neumann, J., and Morgenstern, O. (1947). Theory of 
Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
 2 Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: 
An Analysis of Decision under Risk. Econometrica, 
47:263–291; Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1981). 
The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice. 
Science, 211:453– 458.
 3 Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, Values, 
and Frames. American Psychologist, 39:341–350.
 4 Thaler, R. H. (1985). Mental Accounting and Consumer 
Choice. Marketing Science, 4:199–214.
 5 Dhar, R. (1997). Consumer Preference for a No-Choice 
Option. Journal of Consumer Research, 24:215–231; 
Dhar, R., and Nowlis, S. M. (1999). The Effect of 
Time Pressure on Consumer Choice Deferral. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 25:369–384.
 6 Thaler, R. H. (1985). Mental Accounting and Consumer 
Choice. Marketing Science, 4:199–214.
 7 Soman, D., & Gourville, J. (2001). Transaction 
Decoupling: How Price Bundling Affects the Decision to 
Consume. Journal of Marketing Research, 38:30–44.
 8 Gourville, J. (1998). Pennies-a-Day: The Effect of 
Temporal Reframing on Transaction Evaluation. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 24:395–408.
 9 Grether, D. M., and Plott, C. R. (1979). Economic 
Theory and the Preference Reversal Phenomenon. 
American Economic Review, 69:623–638; Lichtenstein, S., 
and Slovic, P. (1971). Reversal of Preferences between 
Bids and Choices in Gambling Decisions. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 89:46–55.
10 Tversky, A., Sattah, S., and Slovic, P. (1988). Contingent 
Weighting in Judgment and Choice. Psychological Review, 
95:371–384.
11 Nowlis, S. M., and Simonson, I. (1997). Attribute-
Task Compatibility as a Determinant of Consumer 
Preference Reversals. Journal of Marketing Research, 
34:205–218.
12 Hsee, C. K. (1996). The Evaluability Hypothesis: An 
Explanation of Preference Reversals Between Joint and 
Separate Evaluations of Alternatives. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 46:247–257; 
Hsee, C. K., and LeClerc, F. (1998). Will Products 
Look More Attractive When Evaluated Jointly or When 
Evaluated Separately? Journal of Consumer Research, 
25:175–186; Hsee, C. K, Loewenstein, G. R., Blount, S., 
and Bazerman, M. H. (1999). Preference Reversals 
Between Joint and Separate Evaluation of Options: A 
Review and Theoretical Analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 
125:576–590.
13 Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Posavac, S. S., Kardes, F. R., 
and Mantel, S. P. (1998). Selective Hypothesis Testing. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5:197–220.
14 Shafir, E. (1993). Choosing Versus Rejecting: Why 
Some Options Are Both Better and Worse Than Others. 
Memory & Cognition, 21:546–556.
15 Ofir, C., & Simonson, I. (2001). In Search of Negative 
Customer Feedback: The Effect of Expecting to Evaluate 
on Satisfaction Evaluations. Journal of Marketing Research, 
38:170–182.
16 Posavac, S. S., Kardes, F. R., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., 
and Fitzsimons, G. J. (2005). Blissful Insularity: 
When Brands Are Judged in Isolation from Competitors. 
Marketing Letters, 16:87–97; Posavac, S. S., Sanbonmatsu, 
D. M., Kardes, F. R., and Fitzsimons, G. J. (2004). 
The Brand Positivity Effect: When Evaluation Confers 
Preference. Journal of Consumer Research, 31:643–651.
17 Cronley, M. L., Posavac, S. S., Meyer, T., Kardes, F. 
R., and Kellaris, J. J. (2005). A Selective Hypothesis 
Testing Perspective on Price-Quality Inference and 
Inference-Based Choice. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 
15:159–169; Kardes, F. R., Cronley, M. L., Kellaris, 
J. J., and Posavac, S. S. (2004). The Role of Selective 
Information Processing in Price-Quality Inference. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 31:368–374.
18 Neff, J. (2009). Private Label Winning Battle of 
Brands; Marketers Face Moment of Truth as Retailers’ 
Lines Soar to Historic Sales High. Advertising Age, 
February 3, 1.
19 Yates, J. F., Lee, J. W., and Bush, J. G. (1997). General 
Knowledge Overconfidence: Cross-National Variations, 
Response Style, and “Reality.” Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 70:87–94.
20 Kerr, R. A. (1979). Petroleum Explorations: Discouragement 
about the Atlantic Outer Continental Shelf Deepens. 
Science, 1069–1072.

382 
Endnotes
Chapter 12
 1 Francis X. Rocca, “Italians Cheat to Win,” The Wall Street 
Journal, June 28, 2007.
 2 Tylor, E. B. (1871). Primitive culture. New York: Brentano’s.
 3 Hofstede, G. (2001), Culture’s Consequences, 2nd ed. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
 4 McCracken, G. (1986). Culture and Consumption: A 
Theoretical Account of the Structure and Movement of 
the Cultural Meaning of Consumer Goods. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 13:71–84.
 5 Dittmar, H, Long, K., and Meek, R. (2004). Buying 
on the Internet: Gender Differences in Online and 
Conventional Buying Motivations. Sex Roles: A Journal of 
Research, 50:423–444.
 6 Rogers, S., and Harris, M. A. (2003). Gender and 
E-commerce: An Exploratory Study. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 43:322–329.
 7 Barthes, J. (1983). The Fashion System. New York: Hill 
and Wang.
 8 McCracken, G. (1985). The Trickle-down Theory 
Rehabilitated. In M. Solomon (ed.), The Psychology of 
Fashion, (39–54). Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
 9 Levi-Strauss, C. (1966). The Savage Mind. Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press.
10 Blumberg, P. (1974). The Decline and Fall of the Status 
Symbol: Some Thoughts on Status in Post-industrial 
Society. Social Problems 21:480–498.
11 Rook, D. W. (1985). The Ritual Dimension of Consumer 
Behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 12:251–264.
12 Giesler, M., and Pohlmann, M. (2003). The 
Anthropology of File Sharing: Consuming Napster as 
a Gift. In P. Keller and D. Rook (eds.), Advances in 
Consumer Research, vol. 30. Provo, UT: Association for 
Consumer Research.
13 Green, R. and Alden, D. (1988). Functional Equivalence 
in Cross-cultural Consumer Behavior: Gift Giving in 
Japan and the United States. Psychology & Marketing, 
5:155–168.
14 Rook, D. and Levy, S. (1983). Psychological Themes 
in Consumer Grooming Rituals. In R. Bagozzi and 
A. Tybout (eds.), Advances in Consumer Research, 
vol. 10, (329–333). Provo, UT: Association for Consumer 
Research.
15 Faber, R. J., O’Guinn, T. C., and McCarty, J. A. (1987). 
Ethnicity, Acculturation, and the Importance of Product 
Attributes. Psychology & Marketing, Summer, 121–134.
16 Carol, J. (1956). Language, Thought and Reality: 
Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
17 Steinmetz, G. and Quintanilla, C. (April 10, 1988). Tough 
Target: Whirlpool Expected Easy Going in Europe, and It 
Got a Big Shock. The Wall Street Journal, A1, A6.
18 Usunier, J. (1993). International Marketing: A Cultural 
Approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall International 
(UK) Limited.
19 Ekman, P., and Friesen, W. V. (1975). Unmasking the 
Face. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
20 Hall, E. (1959). The Silent Language. New York: Doubleday.
21 Kellaris, J. (2003). Dissecting Earworms: Further Evidence 
on the ‘Song-stuck-in-your head’ Phenomenon, presenta-
tion to Society for Consumer Psychology, Feb. 22, 2003.
22 Cuneo, A. (2007, March 16). AT&T sues NASCAR 
over Logo: Wants to Rebrand Cingular Car in Nextel-
sponsored Racing Series. Advertising Age. Available at: 
http://adage.com/abstract.php?article_id=115626.
23 Jackson, J. (1965). Structural Characteristics of Norms. In 
I. D. Steiner and M. Fishbein (eds.). Current Studies in Social 
Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
24 Hofstede, G., and Bond, M. H. (1988). The Confucius 
Connection: From Cultural Roots to Economic Growth. 
Organizational Dynamics, Spring, 5.
25 Han, S-P., and Shavitt, S. (1994). Persuasion and Culture: 
Advertising Appeals in Individualistic and Collectivistic 
Societies. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
30:326–350.
26 Gutman, J., and Reynolds, T. J. (1979). An Investigation 
of the Levels of Cognitive Abstraction Utilized by 
Consumers in Product Differentiation. In J. Eighmey 
(ed.), Attitude Research under the Sun, (125–150). 
Chicago, IL: American Marketing Association.
27 Alternatively, vegetarianism could serve as a functional 
benefit for consumers who have improved their health 
through this diet.
28 Henry, W. (1976). Cultural Values Do Correlate with 
Consumer Behavior. Journal of Marketing Research, 
13:121–127.
29 Rosenberg, M. J. (1957). Occupations and Values. Glencoe, 
IL: The Free Press.
30 Becker, B. W. and Conner, P. E. (1981). Personal Values 
of the Heavy User of Mass Media. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 21:37–43.
31 Rokeach, M. J. (1979). The Nature of Human Values. 
New York: Free Press.
32 Pollay, R. W. (1983). Measuring the Cultural Values 
Manifest in Advertising. Current Issues and Research in 
Advertising, 6:71–92.
33 Peter, J. P., and Olson, J. C. (2008), Consumer 
Behavior & Marketing Strategy, 8th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin.

Endnotes  
383
34 Kamakura, W. A. and Mazzon, J. A. (1991). Value 
Segmentation: A Model for the Measurement of  Values and 
Value Systems. Journal of Consumer Research, 18:208–218.
35 Kahle, L. R. (1983). Social Values and Social Change. New 
York: Praeger.
36 Kahle, L. R., Beatty, S. E., and Homer, P. (1986). Alternative 
Measurement Approaches to Consumer Values: The List 
of Values (LOV) and Values and Life Style (VALS). The 
Journal of Consumer Research, 13:405–409.
37 Beatty, S. E., Kahle, L. R., Homer, P. and Misra, S. (1985). 
Alternative Measurement Approaches to Consumer 
Values: The List of Values and the Rokeach Value Survey. 
Psychology & Marketing, 2:181–200.
38 Kahle, L. R., & Kennedy, P. (1988). Using the List of 
Values (LOV) to Understand Consumers. Journal of 
Consumer Marketing, 2:49–56; Kahle, L., Poulos, B., and 
Sukhdial, A. Changes in Social Values in the United States 
during the Past Decade. Journal of Advertising Research, 
28:35–41.
39 Corfman, K. P., Lehmann, D. R., and Narayanan, S. (1991). 
Values, Utility, and Ownership: Modeling the Relationships 
for Consumer Durables. Journal of Retailing, 67:184–204.
40 Pareles, Jon (1993, March 22). Review/Pop; A Party 
Based on the Grid of Rap. The New York Times [Online]. 
Available: http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?re
s=9F0CE4DD103BF931A15750C0A965958260.
41 The mid-1990s hip-hop style of wearing sagging pants 
without a belt originated in prison, where new inmates are 
immediately stripped of their belts as a safety precaution, 
i.e., the belts cannot be used as weapons or substitutes for 
a noose. This particular hip-hop trend reemerged in the 
2000s, except this time, youth began wearing baggy denim 
below their waistlines, often exposing their underwear. 
When the Virginia State House of Representatives passed 
House Bill No. 1981 (February 8, 2005) establishing a 
$50 penalty for any person who exposes his below-waist 
undergarments in a lewd or indecent manner, the hip-
hop culture adjusted. This time, trendsetters used belts 
and long T-shirts to avoid the fine; the jeans were still 
worn below the belt.
42 [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.pakwheels.com/
forumreply_az_TopicID!74106~ForumID!28~pw.html
43 Keegan, W. and Green M. (2005). Global Marketing, 
4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice 
Hall.
Chapter 13
 1 Cialdini, R.B. (2007). Influence: The Psychology of 
Persuasion. New York: HarperCollins.
 2 Langer, E. J. (1978). Rethinking the Role of Thought 
in Social Interaction. In J. H. Harvey, W. I. Ickers, 
and R. F. Kidd (eds.), New Directions in Attribution 
Research, vol. 2, (35–38). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
 3 Langer, E.J., Blank, A., and Chanowitz, B. (1978). The 
Mindlessness of Ostensibly Thoughtful Action: The Role 
of ‘Placebic’ Information in Interpersonal Interaction. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36:635–642.
 4 Dawes, R. M. (1994). House of Cards: Psychology and 
Psychotherapy Built on Myth. New York: Free Press.
 5 Obermiller, C. (2004). Improving Telephone Fundraising 
by Use of Self-prophecy. X Forum of International 
Association of Jesuit Business Schools, Bilbao Spain.
 6 Cialdini, R.B. (2007). Influence: The Psychology of 
Persuasion. New York: HarperCollins.
 7 Freedman, J., and Fraser, S. (1966). Compliance with-
out Pressure: The Foot-in-the-door Technique. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 4:195–202.
 8 Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception Theory. In L. 
Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, 1:199–218.
 9 Cialdini, R. B., Cacioppo, J. T., Bassett, R., and Miller, J. A. 
(1978). Low-ball Procedures for Producing Compliance: 
Commitment Then Cost. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 36:463–476.
10 Gouilloux, F., and Weber, F. (1989). The Lure: A New 
Compliance Procedure. Journal of Social Psychology, 
129:741–749.
11 Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K., Catalan, 
J., Wheeler, D., and Darby, B. L. (1975). Reciprocal 
Concessions Procedure for Inducing Compliance: The 
Door-in-the-face Technique. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 31:206–215.
12 Cann, A., Sherman, S. J., and Elkes, R. (1975). Effects of 
Initial Request Size and Timing of a Second Request on 
Compliance: The Foot-in-the-door and Door-in-the-face. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32:774–782.
13 Burger, 
J. 
M. 
(1986). 
Increasing 
Compliance 
by 
Improving 
the 
Deal: 
The 
That’s-not-all 
Technique. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
51:277–283.
14 Comer, J. M., Kardes, F. R., and Sullivan, A. K. (1992). 
Multiple Deescalating Requests, Statistical Information, 
and Compliance: A Field Experiment. Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 22:1199–1207.
15 Cialdini, R. B., and Schroeder, D. A. (1976). Increasing 
Compliance by Legitimizing Paltry Contributions: When 
Even a Penny Helps. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 34:599–604.

384 
Endnotes
16 Reingen, P. H. (1978). On Inducing Compliance with 
Requests. Journal of Consumer Research, 5:96–102.
17 Brockner, J., Guzzi, B., Kane, J., Levine, E., and Shaplen, 
K. (1984). Organizing Fundraising: Further Evidence on 
the Effect of Legitimizing Small Donations. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 11:611–614.
18 Johnson, A. (2007, February 27). Honus Wagner Card 
Sells for $2.35 Million. ABC News [Online]. Available: 
http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory?id=2907128.
19 Research Triangle Institute (1994). Past and Future 
Directions of the D.A.R.E. Program: An Evaluation 
Review. Supported under Award # 91-DD-CX-K053 
from the National Institute of Justice, Office of Justice 
Programs, U.S. Department of Justice.
20 Worchel, S. Arnold, S. E. and Baker, M. (1975). The 
Effect of Censorship on Attitude Change: The Influence 
of Censor and Communicator Characteristics. Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology, 5:222–239.
21 Nosanchuk, T.A., and Lightstone, J. (1974). Canned 
Laughter and Public and Private Conformity. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 29:153–156.
22 Kruglanski, A. W., and Mayseless, O. (1990). Classic and 
Current Social Comparison Research: Expanding the 
Perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 108:195–208.
23 Reingen, P. H. (1982). Test of List Procedure for Inducing 
Compliance with a Request to Donate Money. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 67:110–118.
24 Rosenthal, A. M. (1969). Thirty-eight Witnesses. New 
York: Free Press.
25 Latane, B. and Rodin, J. (1969). A Lady in Distress: 
Inhibiting Effects of Friends and Strangers on Bystander 
Intervention. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
5:189–202.
26 Bandura, A. and Menlove, F. L. (1968). Factors 
Determining Vicarious Extinction of Avoidance Behavior 
through Symbolic Modeling. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 8:99–108.
27 Asch, S. (1948). The Doctrine of Suggestion, Prestige, 
and Imitation in Social Psychology. Psychological Review, 
55:250–276.
28 Bearden, W. O. and Roase, R. L. (1990). Attention 
to Social Comparison Information: An Individual 
Difference Factor Affecting Consumer Conformity. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 16:461–471.
29 Han, S. and Shavitt, S. (1994). Persuasion and Culture: 
Advertising Appeals in Individualistic and Collectivistic 
Societies. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
30:326–350.
30 Cialdini, R. B., Wosinska, W., Barrett, D. W., Butner, J., 
and Gornik-Durose, M. (1999). Compliance with a 
Request in Two Cultures: The Differential Influence 
of Social Proof and Commitment/Consistency on 
Collectivists and Individualists. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 25:1242–1253.
31 Cialdini, R. (1996). Activating and Aligning Two Kinds 
of Norms in Persuasive Communications. Journal of 
Interpretation Research, 1:3–10.
32 Milgram, S., Bickman, L., and Berkowitz, O. (1969). 
Note on the Drawing Power of Crowds of Different 
Size. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
13:79–82.
33 Cialdini, R.B. (1993). Influence: Science and Practice. 
New York: HarperCollins.
34 Deutsch, M. and Gerard, H. B. (1955). A Study of 
Normative and Informational Social Influences upon 
Individual Judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 51:629–636.
35 Gladwell, M. (2002). The Tipping Point. New York: Back 
Bay Books.
36 Smoking by Students Declines (2008, September 8). 
Inside Higher Ed [Online]. Available: http://www
.insidehighered.com/news/2008/09/08/smoking.
37 Harmon-Jones, E., and Allen, J. J. B. (2001). The 
Role of Affect in the Mere Exposure Effect: Evidence 
from Psychophysiological and Individual Differences 
Approaches. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
27:889–898.
38 Eagly A. H., Ashmore, R. D., Makhijani, M. G., 
and Longo, L. C. (1991). What Is Beautiful is Good, 
But…: A Meta-analytic Review of Research on the 
Physical Attractiveness Stereotype. Psychological Bulletin, 
110:109–128.
39 Mack, D. and Rainey, D. (1990). Female Applicants’ 
Grooming and Personnel Selection. Journal of Social 
Behavior and Personality, 5:399–407.
40 Hamermesh, D. S., and Biddle, J. E. (1994). Beauty 
and the Labor Market. American Economic Review, 
84:1174–1194.
41 Kurtzburg, R. L., H. Safar, and N. Cavior (1968). 
Surgical and Social Rehabilitation of Adult Offenders. 
Proceedings of the 76th Annual Convention of the American 
Psychological Association, 3:649–650.
42 Benson, P. L., Karabenic, S. A., and Lerner, R. M. (1976). 
Pretty Pleases: The Effects of Physical Attractiveness, 
Race, and Sex on Receiving Help. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 12:409–415.
43 Efran, M. and Patterson, E. (1974). Voters Vote Beautiful: 
The Effect of Physical Appearance on National Debate. 
Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 6:352–356.
44 American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS), cited in 
Clayton V. (2007, May, 11). Way to Go, Grad! Here’s 
a Check for a New Nose. Is Cosmetic Surgery an 
Appropriate Commencement Gift for Teens? MSNBC 

Endnotes  
385
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/
id/17932515/.
45 Byrne, D. (1971). The Attraction Paradigm. New York: 
Academic Press.
46 Rosenbaum, M. E. (1986). The Repulsion Hypothesis: 
On the Nondevelopment of Relationships. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 51:1156–1166.
47 Emswiller, T., Deaux, K., and Willits, J. (1971). Similarity, 
Sex, and Requests for Small Favors. Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 1:284–291.
48 LaFrance, M. (1985). Postural Mirroring and Intergroup 
Relations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
11:207–217.
49 Drachman, D., deCarufel, A., and Insko, C. A. (1978). 
The Extra Credit Effect in Interpersonal Attraction, 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14:458–465.
50 Howard, D. J., Gengler, C., and Jain, A. (1995). What’s 
in a Name? A Complimentary Means of Persuasion. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 22:200–211.
51 Howard, D. J. (1990). The Influence of Verbal Responses 
to Common Greetings on Compliance Behavior: The 
Foot-in-the-mouth Effect. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 20:1185–1196.
52 Jones, E. E., & Wortman, C. (1973). Ingratiation: 
An Attributional Approach. Morristown, NJ: General 
Learning Press.
53 Shari, C. (1997). The Fine Art of Ingratiation. Industry 
Week, 246:41.
54 Hirt, E. R., Zillmann, D., Erickson, G. A., and Kennedy, 
C. (1992). Costs and Benefits of Allegiance: Changes 
in Fans’ Self-ascribed Competencies after Team Victory 
versus Defeat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
63:724–738.
55 Tesser, A., and Rosen, S. (1975). The Reluctance to 
Transmit Bad News. In L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances 
in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 8, 193–232. 
New York: Academic Press.
56 Kardes, F., and Kimble, C. E. (1984). Strategic Self-
presentation as a Function of Message Valence and the 
Prospect of Future Interaction. Representative Research in 
Social Psychology, 14:2–11.
57 Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral Study of Obedience. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67:371–378.
58 Meeus, W. H. J., and Raaijmakers, Q. Q. W. (1986). 
Administrative Obedience: Carrying Out Orders to Use 
Psychological-Administrative Violence. European Journal 
of Social Psychology, 16:311–324.
59 Fowler, Geoffery A., Steinberg, Brian, and Patrick, 
Aaron O. Mac and PC’s Overseas Adventures, The Wall 
Street Journal, March 1, 2007.
60 Moraski, Lauren. Happy Graduation! Enjoy Your New 
Nose: Plastic Surgeons See More Teens Getting Work 
Done at Milestones Like Graduation, ABC News 
Internet Ventures, May 19, 2007. Available: http://
abcnews.go.com/Health/Story?id=3190279&page=1.
Chapter 14
 1 Sources for E.B. Diamond Hunt include: Van Der 
Pool, L. (2006, October 27). Bling Buzz Campaign: 
Jeweler Launches Treasure Hunt. Boston Business 
Journal [Online]. Available: www.boston.bizjournals.
com/boston/stories/2006/10/30. See also: http://www
.greatdiamondhunt.com/home.html.
 2 Based on one of the authors’ anecdotal research.
 3 Garfield, B. (2005, April 4). The Chaos Scenario. 
Advertising Age, 1:57–59.
 4 Garfield, B. (2005, April 4). The Chaos Scenario. 
Advertising Age, 1:57–59.
 5 Kaikati, A. M., and Kaikati, J. G. (2004). Stealth 
Marketing: How to Reach Consumers Surreptitiously. 
California Management Review, 46 (4):6–22.
 6 Walker, R. (2004, December 4). The Hidden (in Plain 
Sight) Persuaders. New York Times Magazine, vol. 154, 
68–75.
 7 Gladwell, M. (2000). The Tipping Point. New York: Little, 
Brown and Company.
 8 Khermouch, G. and Green, J. (2001, July 30). Buzz-z-z 
Marketing. BusinessWeek, Issue 3743, 50–56.
 9 For information on BzzAgent: www.bzzagent.com. 
See also: Walker, R. (2004, December 4). The Hidden 
(in Plain Sight) Persuaders. New York Times Magazine, 
vol. 154, 68–131.
10 For information on Vocalpoint and TremorTeen: 
www.tremorteam.com.
11 Kaikati, A. M., and Kaikati, J. G. (2004). Stealth 
Marketing: How to Reach Consumers Surreptitiously. 
California Management Review, 46 (4):6–22.
12 Kaikati, A. M., and Kaikati, J. G. (2004). Stealth 
Marketing: How to Reach Consumers Surreptitiously. 
California Management Review, 46 (4):6–22.
13 For 
more 
information 
on 
the 
campaign, 
see: 
www.fritolay.com.
14 Friedman, H. H. and Friedman, L. (1979). Endorser 
Effectiveness by Product Type. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 19:63–71.
15 Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., and Schumann, D. 
(1983). Central and Peripheral Routes to Advertising 
Effectiveness: The Moderating Role of Involvement. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 10:135–146.

386 
Endnotes
16 Freiden, J. B. (1984). Advertising Spokesperson Effects: 
An Examination of Endorser Type and Gender on Two 
Audiences. Journal of Advertising Research, 24:33–41.
17 Agrawal, J., and Kamakura, W. A. (1995). The Economic 
Worth of Celebrity Endorsers: An Event Study Analysis. 
Journal of Marketing, 59:56–62.
18 Dipayan, B. Abhijit, B., and Das, N. (2006). The 
Differential Effects of Celebrity and Expert Endorsements 
on Consumer Risk Perceptions. Journal of Advertising, 
35:17–31.
19 Atkin, C., and Block, M. (1983). Effectiveness of Celebrity 
Endorsers. Journal of Advertising Research, 23:57–61.
20 Goldman, L., Burke, M., and Blakeley, K. (2007, June 
14). The Celebrity 100. Forbes.com [Online]. Available: 
http://www.forbes.com/2007/06/14/best-paid-celebrities-
07celebrities_cz_lg_0614celeb_land.html.
21 Jones, M. J., and Schumann, D. W. (2000). The Strategic 
Use of Celebrity Athlete Endorsers in Sports Illustrated: 
An Historic Perspective. Sports Marketing Quarterly, 
9:65–76.
22 Miciak, A. R., and Shaklin, W. L. (1994). Choosing 
Celebrity Endorsers. Marketing Management, 3:51–58.
23 Sukhdial, A. S., Aiken, D., and Kahle, L. (2002). Are 
You Old School? A Scale for Measuring Sports Fans’ 
Old-school Orientation. Journal of Advertising Research, 
42:71–81.
24 Bush, A. J., Martin, C. A., and Bush, V. D. 
(2004). Sports Celebrity Influence on Behavioral 
Intentions of Generation Y. Journal of Advertising 
Research,44:108–118.
25 Rose, L. (2006, March 22). The World’s Best Paid 
Athletes. Forbes.com [Online]. Available: http://www
.forbes.com/business/2006/03/22/woods-sharapova
-nike_cx_lr_0322athletes_2.html.
26 Script taken from: http://www.seinfeldscripts.com.
27 Duffy, J. (2005, March 30). Well Placed. BBC News 
Magazine [Online]. Available: http://www.news.bbc
.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/4391955.stm.
28 A Look at Some of the Biggest Hits in Film and TV 
Product Placement (2005, April 28). Hollywood Reporter 
[Online]. Available: www.hollywoodreporter.com.
29 A Look at Some of the Biggest Hits in Film and TV 
Product Placement (2005, April 28). Hollywood Reporter 
[Online]. Available: www.hollywoodreporter.com.
30 Graser, M. (2005, March 28). McDonald’s on Lookout 
to Be Big Mac Daddy. Advertising Age, 76(13):123.
31 Cronley, M. L., Houghton, D. C., Goddard, P., and 
Kardes, F. R. (1999). Endorsing Products for the Money: 
The Role of the Correspondence Bias in Celebrity 
Advertising. Advances in Consumer Research, vol. 26, 
627–631.
32 Edwards, J. (2006, August 17). PQ Media Releases 
New 
Numbers. 
Brandweek 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.brandweek.com.
33 Atkinson, C. (2007, January 8). “Idol” Juggernaut Passes 
$2.5 bil and Hits the Gas. Advertising Age, 78(2):1–29, 2p.
34 Atkinson, C. (2007, January 8). “Idol” Juggernaut Passes 
$2.5 bil and Hits the Gas. Advertising Age, 78(2):1–29, 2p.
35 Goo, S. K. (2006, April 15). Apple Gets a Big Slice of 
the Product-placement Pie. WashingtonPost.com [Online], 
D01. Available: www.washingtonpost.com.
36 All information for the Marketing In Action box was drawn 
from the following sources: Rose, F. (2006, December). In a 
Risky Experiment, Chevrolet Asked Web Users to Make Their 
Own Video Spots for the Tahoe. A Case Study in Customer 
Generated Advertising, Wired [Online], issue 14.12. Available: 
www.wired.com; Donaton, S. (2006). How to Thrive in the 
New World of User-created Content: Let Go. Advertising Age, 
77(18): 38; see also: www.YouTube.com.
37 Fowler, G. (2007, May 15). In China, Sports Stars Face 
Hurdles in the Race for Ad Riches. The Wall Street Journal 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://archives.cnn.com/2001/
US/01/10/new.army/index.html.
38 For information on Commercial Alert, see: http://www
.commercialalert.org/issues/culture/product-placement.
Chapter 15
 1 Caplan, J. (2007). How Yahoo! aims to reboot. Time, 169 
(7), 52–53.
 2 Alba, J., Lynch, J., Weitz, B., Janiszewski, C., Lutz, 
R., Sawyer, A., & Wood, S. (1997). Interactive Home 
Shopping: Consumer, Retailer, and Manufacturer 
Incentives to Participate in Electronic Marketplaces. 
Journal of Marketing, 61, 38–53.
 3 Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of 
Optimal Experience. New York: Harper & Row.
 4 Bellman, S., Johnson, E. J., Lohse, G. L., & Mandel, N. 
(2006). Designing Marketplaces of the Artificial with 
Consumers in Mind: Four Approaches to Understanding 
Consumer Behavior in Electronic Environments. Journal 
of Interactive Marketing, 20, 21–33.
 5 Weathers, D., & Makienko, I. (2006). Assessing the 
Relationships Between E-Tail Success and Product and 
Website Factors. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 20, 
41–54.
 6 Darby, M. R., & Karni, E. (1973). Free Competition 
and the Optimal Amount of Fraud. Journal of Law and 
Economics, 16, 66–86; Nelson, P. (1970). Information 
and Consumer Behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 78, 
311–329; Nelson, P. (1974). Advertising as Information. 

Endnotes  
387
Journal of Political Economy, 81, 729–754; Wright, 
A., & Lynch, J. G. (1995). Communication Effects 
of Advertising Versus Direct Experience When Both 
Search and Experience Attributes Are Present. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 21, 708–718.
 7 Fasolo, B., McClelland, G. H., & Lange, K. A. (2005). 
The Effect of Site Design and Interattribute Correlations 
on Interactive Web-Based Decisions. In C. P. Haugtvedt, 
K. A. Machleit, & R. F. Yalch (Eds.), Online consumer 
psychology: Understanding and influencing consumer 
behavior in the virtual world (pp. 325–342). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
 8 Levin, A. M., Levin, I. P., & Heath, C. E. (2005). Finding 
the Best Ways to Combine Online and Offline Shopping 
Features. In C. P. Haugtvedt, K. A. Machleit, & R. F. 
Yalch (Eds.), Online Consumer Psychology: Understanding 
and Influencing Consumer Behavior in the Virtual World 
(pp. 401–417). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
 9 Haubl, G., & Trifts, V. (2005). Consumer Decision 
Making in Online Shopping Environments: The Effects 
of Interactive Decision Aids. Marketing Science, 19, 4–21; 
Murray, K. B., & Haubl, G. (2005). Processes of Preference 
Construction in Agent-Assisted Online Shopping. In C. P. 
Haugtvedt, K. A. Machleit, & R. F. Yalch (Eds.), Online 
consumer psychology: Understanding and influencing 
consumer behavior in the virtual world (pp. 265–283). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
10 Beatty, S. & Smith, S. (1987). External Search Effort: An 
Investigation Across Several Product Categories. Journal 
of Consumer Research, 14, 83–95.
11 Urbany, J. E., Dickson, P. R., & Wilkie, W. L. (1989). 
Buyer Uncertainty and Information Search. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 16, 208–215.
12 Johnson, E. J., & Russo, J. E. (1984). Product Familiarity 
and Learning New Information. Journal of Consumer 
Research, 11, 542–550.
13 Dickson, P. R., & Sawyer, A. G. (1990). The Price 
Knowledge and Search of Supermarket Shoppers. Journal 
of Marketing, 54, 42–53.
14 Sinha, I. (2000). Cost Transparency: The Net’s Real Threat 
to Prices and Brands. Harvard Business Review, 43–50.
15 Popkowski-Leszczyc, P. T. L., & Rao, R. C. (1990). 
An Empirical Analysis of National and Local 
Advertising Effects on Price Elasticity. Marketing Letters, 
1, 149–160.
16 Mitra, A., & Lynch, J. G. (1995). Toward a Reconciliation 
of Market Power and Information Theories of Advertising 
Effects on Price Elasticity. Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 
644–659; Mitra, A., & Lynch, J. G. (1996). Advertising 
Effects on Consumer Welfare: Prices Paid and Liking for 
Brands Selected. Marketing Letters, 7, 19–29.
17 Lynch, J. G., & Ariely, D. (2000). Wine Online: 
Search Costs Affect Competition on Price, Quality, and 
Distribution. Marketing Science, 19, 83–103.
18 Diehl, K., Kornish, L. J., & Lynch, J. G. (2003). Smart 
Agents: When Lower Search Costs for Quality Information 
Increase Price Sensitivity. Journal of Consumer Research, 
30, 56–71.
19 Urban, G. (2005). Don’t Just Relate–Advocate: A Blue 
Print for Profit in the Era of Customer Power. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing.
20 Hampp, A. (2009). Food Network Seeing Huge Growth 
from Web Offerings. Advertising Age, March 2, p. 8.
21 Wright, J. (2006). Blog Marketing: The Revolutionary New 
Way to Increase Sales, Build Your Brand, and Get Exceptional 
Results. New York: McGraw-Hill; Kirkpatrick, D. (2005). 
Why There’s No Escaping the Blog. Fortune, January 10, 
2005.
22 Zaichowsky, J. L. (2006). The Psychology Behind Trademark 
Infringement and Counterfeiting. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
23 Zaichowsky, J. L. (2006). The Psychology Behind Trademark 
Infringement and Counterfeiting. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chapter 16
 1 Hartley, R. F. (2001). Marketing Mistakes and Successes. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
 2 Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of Innovations. New York: 
Free Press.
 3 Urban, G. L., and Star, S. H. (1991). Advanced Marketing 
Strategy: Phenomena, Analysis, and Decisions. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 4 Aaker, D. A. (1991). Managing Brand Equity. New 
York: Free Press; Aaker, D. A. (1996). Building Strong 
Brands. New York: Free Press; Keller, K. L. (2007). 
Strategic Brand Management: Building, Measuring, and 
Managing Brand Equity, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.
 5 Kardes, F. R., and Allen, C. T. (1991). Perceived Variability 
and Inferences about Brand Extensions. Advances in 
Consumer Research, 18:392–398.
 6 Keller, K. L. (2007). Strategic Brand Management: 
Building, Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity, 3rd ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
 7 Kekre, S., and Srinivasan, K. (1990). Broader Product 
Line: A Necessity to Achieve Success? Management 
Science, 36:1216–1231.
 8 Urban, G. L., Johnson, P. L., and Hauser, J. R. (1984). 
Testing Competitive Market Structures. Marketing 
Science, 3:83–112.

388 
Endnotes
 9 Hoch, S. J., and Deighton, J. (1989). Managing What 
Consumers Learn From Experience. Journal of Marketing, 
53:1–20.
10 Nordhielm, C. L. (2006). Marketing Management: The 
Big Picture. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
11 Parker, R. M. (2008). Parker’s Wine Buyer’s Guide, 7th ed. 
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1121.
12 Gupta, S., and Lehmann, D. R. (2005). Managing 
Customers as Investments: The Strategic Value of Customers 
in the Long Run. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School 
Publishing (division of Pearson Education).
13 Gupta, S., and Lehmann, D. R. (2005). Managing 
Customers as Investments: The Strategic Value of Customers 
in the Long Run. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School 
Publishing (division of Pearson Education).
14 usatoday.com (04/02/2007).
15 msnbc.msn.com (08/14/2007).

389
absent-mindedness forgetting as a result of shallow or 
superficial processing of information during encoding or 
retrieval (127)
absolute threshold minimum level of stimuli needed for an 
individual to experience a sensation (66)
accessibility easy to retrieve (127)
accounts excuses and justifications. The former reduce or 
deny one’s responsibility for inappropriate actions; the lat-
ter acknowledge responsibility but rationalize the behav-
ior as appropriate, given the circumstances (161)
acculturation the process when people in one culture adapt 
to meanings in another culture (268)
acquisition strategies that focus on attracting new custom-
ers, while retention strategies focus on keeping current 
ones (364)
actual public-concept embodies others’ true perceptions of 
a consumer (153)
actual self-concept represents how consumers in fact per-
ceive themselves (152)
adaptation process of becoming desensitized to sensual 
stimuli (69)
adaptive unconscious the unconscious mind trained to per-
form routine mental activities (137)
additive-difference heuristic comparing two brands at a 
time, one attribute at a time, and subtract the evaluative 
differences (232)
adjustment function the hedonic (or pleasure/pain) appeals 
which are useful for changing attitudes (107)
advertising wear-out when an advertisement is overexposed, 
it loses the ability to attract attention and interest (69)
affect confirmation model the affect or mood that 
 influence how consumers use product attribute 
information (113)
affect transfer a special case of classical conditioning, occurs 
when the positive affect (or feelings) created by an uncon-
ditioned stimulus becomes associated with a conditioned 
stimulus (309)
affirmation of the consequent the backwards logic or con-
fusion of the inverse (299)
aligning activities consist of comments that attempt to 
realign our behavior with norms (161)
anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic making predictions 
based on a first impression or an initial judgment (or 
anchor) and then shift (adjust or fine-tune) this judgment 
upward or downward depending on the implications of 
the imagined possibilities (230)
appearance management the decisions regarding how 
consumers control their physical appearances and 
surroundings (159)
applied research examines variables within a specific con-
text of interest to a marketer (20)
approach a movement towards a desired object or 
outcome (104)
arousal a state of physical wakefulness or alertness, also 
influences consumers’ attention (73)
arousal triggers the physical changes in the body; non-
 specific with respect to emotion (103)
assimilation effect participants who completed the puzzle 
with expensive brand names rated the ambiguous auto-
mobile as expensive (141)
associative interference the interference which is commonly 
observed in advertising and in which the new associations 
compete with and block old associations (129)
attention focusing on one or more environmental stimuli 
while potentially ignoring others (64)
attitude-based choice overall evaluations and general 
impressions of brands in the consideration set based on a 
combination of everything (221)
attitude function theory A theory that describes four major 
types of attitudes such as, knowledge function, value-
expressive function, ego-defensive function, and adjustment 
function. These attitudes help consumers to make deci-
sions, to interact, to feel good about themselves, to enjoy 
pleasure rather pain more quickly, respectively (107)
attitudes evaluative judgments, or ratings of how good or 
bad, favorable or unfavorable, or pleasant or unpleasant 
consumers find a particular person (e.g., salesperson, 
spokesperson), place (e.g., retail outlet, website, vacation 
site), thing (e.g., product, package, advertisement), or 
issue (e.g., political platform, economic theory) (86)
attraction effect a target brand seems more attractive when 
it is compared to inferior brands and less attractive when 
compared to superior brands (218)
attribute loyalty consumers who indicate first and second 
choices with the same attribute rather than with the same 
brand name (361)
attribute-based choices comparing the specific attributes or 
features of each brand and selecting the one that performs 
best on key attributes (221)
attributes the basic characteristics of goods and services (279)
authority principle the principle that uses titles, clothes 
(such as uniforms), or expensive possessions that convey 
status to impress and influence others (309)
Glossary

390 
Glossary
automatic information processing the mental processes 
that occur without awareness or intention, but nevertheless 
influence judgments, feelings, goals, and behaviors (136)
automaticity principle the cornerstone of all influence 
techniques, where it asserts that people often think mind-
lessly and as a result, behave automatically, without fully 
evaluating the consequences of a request (288)
availability heuristic making predictions based on how eas-
ily they can retrieve information from memory (228)
avoidance a movement away from an undesired object or 
outcome (104)
backward conditioning the conditioned stimulus (the adver-
tised brand) is presented after the unconditioned stimulus 
(e.g., likable music, people, places, or things) (121)
bait-and-switch a special case of the low-ball technique (293)
balance theory the theory that focuses on the degree of 
 consistency among three elements such as p—the person, 
o—the other person, and x—a stimulus (110)
basic research looks for general relationships between vari-
ables, regardless of the specific situation (19)
because heuristic processing small requests mindlessly by 
people (289)
behavioral compliance a situation where someone actually 
carries out that request (288)
behavioral science applies the scientific method, relying on 
systematic, rigorous procedures to explain, control, and 
predict consumer behavior (15)
behavior-based segmentation groups consumers based on 
their preference for a particular product attribute or ben-
efit, usage occasion, user status, rate of product usage, and 
loyalty status (46)
beliefs nonevaluative judgments or ratings about product 
attributes and benefits (83)
benefits the second stage in a means-end chain and embody 
consumers’ perceptions about the outcomes or conse-
quences provided by the attributes (279)
bipolar adjective scales (87)
blocking the first predictive stimulus blocks or prevents learn-
ing for other predictive stimuli encountered later (122)
blogs frequently updated Web journals that can be used to 
transmit cutting-edge information about products, ser-
vices, politics, or just about anything (335)
bounded rationality the idea that consumers can only make 
rational decisions within the limits of time and cognitive 
capability (199)
brand anthropomorphism both human form and human 
traits to non-humans (168)
brand chaos a condition brought on by the proliferation of 
brands that offer few distinctive attributes or benefits (196)
brand equity the value that a brand accrues based on the good-
will attached to associations with the brand name (359)
brand extension different products with the same brand 
name (e.g., Cherry Coke) (359)
brand images comprises all the thoughts and feelings con-
sumers have about a particular brand (165)
brand integration occurs when the brand is woven into the 
thread of the story, becoming part of the plot or context, 
in a fashion similar to the famous Junior Mint scene in 
“Seinfeld” (329)
brand interaction occurs when the characters talk about the 
product or brand or actually handle the product, i.e., they 
physically interact with it (329)
brand jingles short, catchy tunes—with or without words—
that represent a brand or organization (273)
brand laziness a consumer’s natural inertial movement toward 
a product or service based on familiarity and convenience, 
rather than a fundamental commitment to the brand (184)
brand logos a variety of forms, including colors, shapes, 
words, and other images (273)
brand loyalty consumers who indicate first and second 
choices with the same brand name rather than within the 
same attribute (361)
brand loyalty intrinsic commitment to a brand based on the 
benefits or values it provides consumers (184)
brand personality the set of human characteristics associ-
ated with a brand. Brand personality comprises the human 
side of a brand’s image (165)
brand personification giving non-humans human-like 
traits (168)
brand positivity effect consumers form unrealistically 
favorable evaluations of moderately favorable brands 
when they form singular evaluations, but not when they 
form comparative evaluations (249)
brand resonance a consumer’s intense and actively loyal 
relationship with a brand (359)
brand variance a consumer’s awareness of uncertainty as to 
a brand’s attributes (203)
buzz marketing buzz marketing is a general term, encom-
passing any campaign designed at generating word-of-
mouth (318)
cancellation a game show in which you need to win in stage 
one in order to advance to stage two, stage one should 
cancel out, or be ignored, if it is identical for two different 
gambling games (239)
cannibalization occurs when consumers are brand loyal as 
opposed to attribute loyal (361)
cannibalization occurs when products offered by the same 
firm are so similar that they compete among themselves, 
thus creating a case of oversegmentation (37)
causal relationship between two variables means that the 
variables are correlated and that one variable influences 
the other, but not vice versa (21)
celebrity endorser an individual who enjoys public recogni-
tion and uses this recognition on behalf of a consumer 
product by appearing in an advertisement or engaging in 
some other marketing tactic (322)
central route when involvement is high, and when the abil-
ity to think about a marketing claim is high, consumers 
are likely to follow the central route to persuasion by 
focusing on information most central to or important for 
forming an accurate attitude (94)

Glossary 
391
channel length number of intermediaries (e.g., wholesalers, 
distributors, and retailers) needed to get the product from 
the manufacturer to the consumer (367)
choice deferral the reluctance to make any decision even 
though the decision could benefit both parties (244)
classical conditioning a learning theory centered on creating 
associations between meaningful objects or ideas (121)
closure tendency for a person to perceive an incomplete pic-
ture as complete, either consciously or subconsciously (76)
cluster frontier the best possible combination of attributes 
observed within a cluster, or the ideal combination of 
attributes.
cluster size the number of brands the consumer places in 
the cluster (203)
cluster variance the degree to which brands within a single 
cluster are dissimilar from each other (203)
cognitive capacity ability to pay attention to and think 
about information is limited (65)
cognitive dissonance theory a theory that suggests con-
sumers shift their attitudes to increase behavior-attitude 
consistency (111)
cognitive personality variables the personality traits that 
describe an individual’s mental responses to objects (169)
commitment and consistency principle inconsistencies 
often invite interpretations of personality flaws or, in 
 extreme cases, mental illness (290)
commitment theory the purpose of obtaining an initial 
commitment is to impart resistance to change (293)
comparative evaluation comparing two or more products 
concurrently by the consumers (246)
comparison matrix an interactive decision aid that helps 
consumers to evaluate options by providing a Consumer 
Reports style brand-by-attribute matrix that makes it easy 
for consumers to compare options (339)
compatibility principle the principle in which different 
measurement techniques highlight different aspects of the 
choice options (246)
compensatory decision making strategy making trade-offs 
between attributes and this enables a good attribute to 
compensate for, or at least reduce concerns about, a bad 
attribute (337)
compensatory process the process which the consumers 
select a single brand from among the brands in the con-
sidered cluster (204)
comprehension ability to interpret and assign meaning to 
the new information by relating it to knowledge already 
stored in memory (65)
compromise effect the increased probability of buying 
a compromise brand, is especially likely to occur when 
consumers are concerned about making a bad decision 
(218)
compulsive buying the drive to consume uncontrollably 
and to buy in order to avoid problems (163)
conditioned response the response evoked the original 
unconditioned stimulus (121)
conditioned stimulus the other object that paired with the 
meaningful object used in unconditioned stimulus (121)
confirmation bias occurs when people find it easier to iden-
tify and interpret information that supports their beliefs 
as opposed to information that fails to do so (363)
conjunctive heuristic setting a minimum value for all rel-
evant attributes and select the first brand that meets this 
value for each attribute (232)
consideration set the group of brands that consumers think 
about buying when they need to make a purchase (216)
consumer behavior entails all consumer activities associated with 
the purchase, use, and disposal of goods and services, including 
the consumer’s emotional, mental, and behavioral responses 
that precede, determine, or follow these activities (8)
consumer generated marketing (advertising) the creation 
of advertising or other marketing content by the customer 
(320)
consumer preference heterogeneity the extent to which 
tastes and preferences differ among consumers (35)
continuity pricing a lower price offered for multiple units 
of a product or encouraging current users to continue 
using a brand (366)
continuous reinforcement the reinforcement occurs every 
time the desired response occurs (124)
contrast effect participants who were primed with inexpen-
sive brands rated the moderately priced target (with a clearly 
visible brand name) as expensive, while participants who 
were primed with expensive brands rated the target as inex-
pensive (141)
conventions the norms that deal less with right or wrong or tra-
dition, but rather with what is more or less “correct” (276)
core benefit proposition relies on a single attribute or 
benefit that differentiates the brand from competitors’ 
offerings (51)
correlated when a statistically testable and significant rela-
tionship exists between two variables (20)
correspondent inference the assumption that a person’s behav-
ior is a reflection of their beliefs and underlying dispositions, 
rather than the result of some situational variable (323)
credence attributes a special case of experience attributes, 
are attributes that can be judged or rated only after 
extended use (84)
credence goods goods which is even more difficulty to 
judge, because quality depends on years of experience and 
use (337)
crescive norms implicit and learned only through interact-
ing with other members of a culture (275)
cultural categories help organize a society by dividing the 
world into specific and distinct segments of time, space, 
nature, and people (262)
cultural principles the ideas that help guide the construc-
tion of cultural categories (263)
cultural translation the difficulties and problems related to 
the spirit of the language (270)

392 
Glossary
cultural values a collective set of beliefs about what is 
important, useful, and desirable (261)
culturally constituted world the place where all consumer 
experiences are shaped by the intangible beliefs and values 
of society (262)
culture the patterns of meaning acquired by members of 
society expressed in their knowledge, beliefs, art, laws, 
morals, customs, and habits (261)
customer delight goes a step beyond customer perceived 
value, suggesting customer benefits that not only meet, 
but also exceed expectations in unanticipated ways (13)
customer perceived value consumer’s overall assessment of 
the utility of a product based on perceptions of what is 
received and what is given (13)
customs the overt behaviors that have been passed down 
from one generation to the next (275)
demographic characteristics popular demographic char-
acteristics that include age, gender, income, education, 
occupation, social class, marital status, household size, 
family life cycle, and culture or ethnicity (37)
descriptive beliefs are based on direct experience with a 
product or what we see with our own eyes or hear with 
our own ears (84)
descriptive norms involve perceptions of which behaviors 
are common or popular, i.e., what is everyone doing? 
(303)
determinant attributes characteristics of a product that are 
most likely to affect the buyer’s final choice (187)
devaluation effect when consumers are extremely hungry, 
they rate non-food products as less desirable (104)
differentiation advertising emphasizing the differences in 
quality among brands (366)
diffusion of innovation the rate a new product spreads or 
is adopted across the marketplace, differs among product 
categories (354)
diffusion of responsibility the peculiar inaction where peo-
ple look for cues from other group members. If no one 
quickly steps forward to act, then the likelihood of anyone 
acting decreases and a snowball of pluralistic ignorance 
ensues (301)
diminishing sensitivity the outcomes having weaker effects 
on people as distance from the reference point increases 
(241)
disclaimers verbal assertions, made in advance, to offset the 
potential negative effects of a behavior (161)
discrepancy-interruption theory discrepancies or surprises 
and interruptions or unexpected events that prevent 
us from pursuing a goal that we are currently trying to 
achieve also increase arousal and emotion (115)
disjunctive heuristic setting an acceptable value, rather 
than a minimum value, for all relevant attributes and 
select the first brand that meets this value on one particu-
lar attribute—which is not necessarily the most important 
attribute (232)
divestment rituals the ritual in which consumers who 
believe cultural meaning can be transferred from products 
to people (267)
dominate better choices than alternatives with lower 
expected values (239)
door-in-the-face technique following up a large, unreason-
able request with a smaller, more sensible request usually 
improves behavioral compliance (294)
drive the tension that influences the urgency with which 
actions are taken to return to the desired goal-state (104)
drive theory one of the earliest theories of motivation that 
deals with several basic physiological needs of people, such 
as food, water, air, etc (104)
dual-process models of attitude formation assume that 
consumers think a great deal when involvement is high 
but they don’t think much when involvement is low (90)
ego-defensive function the function in which authority and 
fear appeals are useful for changing attitudes (107)
elaboration likelihood model a high involvement route in 
which consumers think a lot (i.e., the central route of the 
elaboration likelihood model and the systematic route of 
the heuristic/systematic model) (90)
elimination-by-aspects heuristic rejecting all brands that 
do not have a key feature they want (231)
emotion a person’s affect—feelings and moods—plus 
arousal (102)
enacted norms explicitly and formally prescribe acceptable 
behaviors (275)
encoding the attention, comprehension, and the transfer-
ence of information from short-term memory to long-
term memory (127)
encoding-specificity principle memory is context depen-
dent (129)
enculturation referred by anthropologists in learning about 
one’s own culture (268)
endowment effect the tendency to view a product as more 
valuable if one owns it than if one does not own it (243)
enduring involvement a consumer’s long-term and contin-
uous interest in a brand or product category (195)
entry strategy developing appropriate strategies for bringing 
new products to market (354)
e-tailers electronic retailers (335)
evaluative-cognitive consistency strong attitudes tend to 
be highly accessible from memory, maintained with high 
confidence, held with little uncertainty, and highly cor-
related with beliefs (86)
even-a-penny technique the legitimization of trivial contri-
butions (a penny, a dollar, one minute of your time) (298)
exchange rituals the ritual that involve one person or a 
group of people purchasing and presenting consumer 
products to another (266)
excitation transfer theory the theory that rests upon four 
key principles of emotion (115)

Glossary 
393
expectancy disconfirmation model the model in which 
consumers form expectations about product performance 
prior to purchasing a brand (210)
expectancy-value models suggest that attitudes toward a 
product depend on consumers’ subjective evaluation of 
the product’s attributes multiplied by the expectancy that 
the product possesses each attribute (90)
expected utility theory the theory in which the alternatives 
can be ranked from worst to best (239)
experience attributes are attributes that can be judged or 
rated only by using a product (84)
experience goods goods determined only by touching, feel-
ing, or using the product (337)
experiments manipulate variables in a controlled setting to 
determine their relationship to one another (26)
explicit attitudes attitudes that consumers express con-
sciously (144)
explicit memory searching for information stored in mem-
ory (139)
extended self the relationship between a consumer’s self-
concepts and his/her possessions (155)
extensive problem solving a deliberate and systematic effort 
from consumers, where they generally do not have well-
established criteria to evaluate brands or may be unfamil-
iar with the product category (182)
external search search which involves personal sources (e.g., 
friends and relatives), market sources such as advertise-
ments and brochures, public sources (e.g., Consumer 
Reports), and product trial, i.e., examining or testing the 
product on a limited basis (195)
external uncertainty causing consumer’s perceived brand 
universe to differ from the true brand universe (201)
extinction the absence of a reward which decreases the prob-
ability of a response (124)
figure-and-ground principle from a perception perspec-
tive, when a stimulus is salient, it is figural or focal, and 
everything else fades into the background. This is known 
as the figure-ground principle of perception (74)
Five-Factor Model the most popular multiple trait theory 
taxonomies (163)
flattery excessive compliments or praise designed to make 
someone feel good about her/himself (161)
flow an activity performed by people skillfully with little 
thought or effort (335)
focus group consists of 6 to12 current or potential custom-
ers run by a facilitator who monitors and guides the group 
discussion (25)
foot-in-the-door technique making a small request fol-
lowed by a larger one (290)
forward conditioning the conditioning occurs when the 
conditioned stimulus is presented before the uncondi-
tioned stimulus (121)
frames perspectives that guide the decision making 
process (239)
frequency of good and bad features heuristic consumers 
form a simple attitude toward each brand alternative by 
counting the number of good and bad product features and 
choosing the brand with the greatest difference between 
good product features and bad product features (232)
geo-demographic segmentation combines geography and 
demographic segmentation bases (39)
geographic based segmentation marketers split the market 
based on physical location of potential customers (37)
goal a state of tension created that energizes a person to reduce 
or eliminate the need, returning to a preferred state (103)
grooming rituals the ritual allowing consumers to extract 
cultural meaning from perishable possessions through 
repeated use (267)
grouping tendency to arrange stimuli together to form well-
organized units (77)
hedonic products the products consumers use to enjoy pos-
itive experiences (113)
heuristic processing mental shortcuts that help consumers 
simplify their decision-making tasks (223)
heuristic/systematic model a low involvement route in 
which consumers think very little (i.e., the peripheral 
route of the elaboration likelihood model and the heuris-
tic route of the heuristic/systematic model) (90)
heuristics enables consumers to make decisions quickly and 
easily (223)
heuristics people often use simple heuristics when evaluat-
ing the requests of others, sometimes automatically (288)
ideal public-concept represents how consumers would like 
others to see them (153)
ideal self-concept describes how consumers would like to 
be (153)
Implicit Association Test a new procedure for measuring 
sensitive beliefs, including those held without awareness 
or intention (143)
implicit attitudes more favorable for sneakers endorsed by 
white spokespersons than for sneakers endorsed by black 
spokespersons (144)
implicit memory the memory is used as a tool without 
awareness or intention (140)
impression management the process of creating desirable 
images of ourselves for others (159)
impulse buying purchases made without prior planning 
(198)
in-depth interview a one-on-one interview of at least one 
hour in length, but sometimes considerably longer (25)
individual consumers purchase goods and services to satisfy 
their own personal needs and wants or to satisfy the need 
and wants of others (8)
inferential beliefs are beliefs that go beyond the informa-
tion given (85)
influence or choice heuristics the choice which affects 
 consumers’ 
decisions 
directly 
(e.g., 
lexicographic, 

394 
Glossary
 additive-difference, conjunctive, disjunctive, frequency of 
good-bad features) (224)
information integration theory type of expectancy-value 
model that explains how beliefs are combined to influ-
ence attitudes (90)
information search consumers attempting for information 
to acquire (337)
information search costs acquire information in terms of 
time, money, or effort (337)
informational beliefs are based on indirect experience or on 
what other people tell us (84)
ingratiation one of the tactics people use to get others to 
like them (160)
injunctive norms perceptions of which behaviors are 
accepted or rejected by society (303)
instrumental product products that consumers use to solve 
a problem (113)
instrumental values represent preferred modes of behavior. 
They are actions or “instruments” that provide positive 
value for consumers (280)
interactivity providing exactly the type of information 
about products and services that individual consumers 
wish to receive (335)
intermediate problem solving involves limited information 
search and deliberation (181)
internal search the deliberate retrieval of information which 
is common with low involvement decisions that comprise 
much of consumers’ day-to-day activities (195)
internal uncertainty uncertainty about the consumer him/-
herself—cause a consumer’s perceived utility function to 
differ from his/her true utility function: absolute utility 
error and relative utility error (201)
interpretivism (or postmodernism) alternative research 
approach to behavioral science that relies less on scientific 
and technological methodology (17)
intrinsic variety seeking consumer seeking variety for the 
inherent pleasure of change and the positive stimulation 
it brings (186)
intuition knowing or understanding without purposeful 
thinking (139)
invariance principle preferences should remain the same no 
matter how preferences are measured or no matter how 
decision alternatives are described (239)
involvement the personal relevance and importance of an 
issue or situation (88)
judgments the evaluation of information in the decision 
making process (83)
just noticeable difference (j.n.d.) amount of incremen-
tal change required for a person to detect a difference 
between two similar stimuli, also called the differential 
threshold (67)
knowledge function the information and facts which are 
useful for changing attitudes (107)
lexicographic heuristic comparing all brands on one key 
attribute, such as price, size, weight, reliability, durability, 
calories, sugar, etc., and choose the brand that performs 
the best on that single attribute, while generally ignoring 
the other attributes (231)
Likert scales also called agree/disagree scales. Marketers ask 
consumers to indicate how much they agree or disagree 
with several statements about a product’s attributes (87)
liking principle complying with the requests of those whom 
we like (306)
List of Values (LOV) the process developed at the University 
of Michigan Survey Research Center to identify nine con-
sumer value segments and link them to value-related con-
sumer behavior (282)
list technique a list of supporters or donors to a prospect 
(301)
locus of control the extent to which an individual possesses 
internal or external reinforcement beliefs (169)
loss aversion the losses have a bigger impact on people, rela-
tive to equivalent gains (241)
loved objects a special subset of all possessions that comprise 
the extended self, play a central role in our knowledge of 
who we are as people (157)
low-ball technique trying to get an initial commitment, 
and then changing the deal (292)
loyalty program programs that provide rewards for repeat 
purchases (366)
majority fallacy the tendency wherein because it is logical 
to assume that size of the potential market segment is pos-
itively correlated to profit, it is often easy for a company 
to focus exclusively on large average segments, where the 
majority of customer preferences lie, and neglect smaller 
less typical segments (36)
malleable self a multifaceted self-concept that includes a 
good self, bad self, not-me self, desired self, ideal self, ought-
to-be self (158)
market mavens people who search, accumulate, and share 
product knowledge with others (196)
market segmentation the process of dividing the large and 
diverse mass market into subsets of consumers who share 
common needs, characteristics, or behaviors, and then 
targeting one or more of those segments with a distinct 
marketing mix (32)
marketing concept idea that firms should discover and satisfy 
customer needs and wants in an efficient and profitable man-
ner, while benefiting the long-term interests of society (13)
marketing research is a systematic process of planning, 
collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data and infor-
mation relevant to marketing problems and consumer 
behavior (18)
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs the highest level of self-
 actualization, which is the state of mind of people who 
feel that they have reached their full potential after their 
physiological needs, safety and security needs, social needs 
are met, however, in theory, only few people have reached 
this ultimate level (104)
memory-based choice consumers’ retrieval of brand and 
information from memory (220)

Glossary 
395
Miller’s rule according to famous Harvard psychologist 
George Miller (1956), people are able to consider approxi-
mately five to nine (seven plus/minus two) units of infor-
mation at one time (72)
mindset priming effect the cognitive activity performed 
during the first session tends to be performed again in the 
second, even if the products considered during the two 
sessions are completely different (143)
misattribution distortion as a result of confusion (131)
mixed choice the choice where consumers can see some 
brands but must remember others (220)
MODE model Motivation and Opportunity to deliberate 
are key DEterminants of the processes that influence con-
sumer choice (222)
mood-as-information model mood is often treated like any 
other piece of information and is integrated along with 
other information when consumers form an overall evalu-
ation of a product (113)
moré a custom with strong moral implications (275)
motivation a driving force that moves or incites us to act 
and is the underlying basis of all behavior (102)
multiple-deescalating-requests technique the technique 
that involves more than two requests (298)
MUM effect the tendency to keep mum about unpleasant 
messages (309)
need a fundamental physical or psychological state of felt 
deprivation (190)
needs desires that arise when a consumer’s current state does 
not match the consumer’s preferred state (103)
need for cognition measures an individual’s natural tendency 
to engage in and enjoy effortful cognitive activities (169)
need for cognitive closure describes a consumer’s desire for 
definite knowledge of any kind to reduce confusion or 
ambiguity (171)
need for humor an individual’s tendency to crave, seek out, 
and enjoy humor, a construct more motivationally driven 
than sense of humor (170)
negative reinforcement the absence of punishment which 
increases the probability of a response (124)
non-compensatory decision making strategy not making 
trade-offs across attributes, and a bad attribute usually 
leads to the rejection of an alternative (337)
non-compensatory process a simple, although error-prone, 
way to make a decision in which the person does not con-
sider trade-offs (203)
ongoing search the search involves external search activities 
independent of solving an immediate purchase problem 
(195)
operant conditioning the conditioning in which the stimu-
lus follows the response (124)
opinion conformity expressing insincere agreement on 
important issues (161)
opinion leaders the individuals who, by virtue of birth, 
beauty, talent, or accomplishment, are held in high esteem 
and provide cultural meaning to those of lesser standing 
(264)
opportunities a consumer’s ideal and actual states simulta-
neously move in opposite directions (193)
opportunity costs hidden or unseen costs, including non-
monetary costs such as the lost time and pleasure asso-
ciated with choosing one course of action over another  
(243)
organic word-of-mouth word-of-mouth that occurs natu-
rally (318)
organizational consumers purchase goods and services in 
order to produce other goods or services, resell them to 
other organizations or to individual consumers, and help 
manage and run their organization (9)
parity products brands that possess functionally equivalent 
attributes, making one brand a satisfactory substitute for 
most others (187)
partial reinforcement the reinforcement occurs only some 
of the times the desired response occurs (124)
part-list cuing the names of just some brands when 
consumers are trying to recall as many brands as possible 
(217)
perceived brand universe prohibitively costly to gather 
complete and fully accurate information about all existing 
brands and their attributes, what is in a consumer’s head 
is not the true brand universe (201)
perceived product-market patterned organization of brands 
in a consumer’s mind (202)
perceived risk the possibility of negative outcomes where 
consumers are more likely to demonstrate higher levels of 
involvement (182)
perceived utility function a consumer believes his/her reac-
tion will be to a brand with certain attributes, differs from 
his/her true utility function (201)
perception a process of receiving, selecting, and interpreting 
environmental stimuli involving the five senses (63)
peripheral route when consumers are unable to think about 
a marketing claim, they focus on peripheral cues or super-
ficial information that makes it easy to form an opinion 
without much thought (94)
persistence the inability to forget what one wants to forget 
(132)
personal qualities modes of interpersonal behavior that dis-
tinguish people from one another, such as sense of humor 
or friendliness (151)
personality a set of unique psychological characteristics that 
influence how a person responds to his or her environ-
ment, including cognitive, affective, and behavioral ten-
dencies (162)
personality traits consumers’ tendencies to respond in a 
certain way across similar situations (163)
persuasion heuristics influencing consumers’ beliefs and 
attitudes (223)
phenomenal absolutism erroneous assumption that every-
one else perceives the world as we do (64)

396 
Glossary
place strategy careful planning of channel length, or the 
number of intermediaries (367)
placebo effect the pricing information influences consum-
ers’ expectations, which then influence behavior without 
awareness and without intention (138)
positioning the process of communicating with our tar-
get market(s) through the use of marketing mix vari-
ables—a specific product, price, distribution channel, 
and promotional appeal—in such a way as to help con-
sumers differentiate a product from competitors and 
understand how a particular product best satisfies their 
needs (33)
positive affect simple feelings that have powerful and com-
plex effects on behavior (113)
positive reinforcement presenting of a reward that increases 
the probability of a response (124)
possession rituals the ritual that occur when consumers dis-
cuss, compare, reflect upon, and display their belongings 
(266)
prediction heuristics used to form likelihood judgments 
(e.g., representativeness, availability, simulation, and 
anchoring-and-adjustment) (224)
pre-exposure effect the effect of using unconditioned 
stimuli that are ineffective because they were previously 
encountered alone without pairing (122)
preference reversal a reversal that people prefer option A 
over option B at one point in time but can prefer option 
B over option A at another point in time (240)
premium pricing pricing the brand at the high end of prod-
uct category’s price range (51)
prepurchase search Once a problem is recognized, consum-
ers often gather information to inform their purchasedeci-
sions if a problem is recognized (195)
price bundling the process used by some firms to aggregate 
losses (244)
price-quality heuristic belief of the consumers that if the 
price increases, quality also increases (249)
primary data new data collected specifically for the research 
purpose at hand (22)
priming effect a strong association that leads consumers to 
think about a brand name, like McDonald’sand they start 
thinking about associations to the brand (129)
proactive interference the information learned earlier 
blocks memory for information learned later (129)
problem solving the type of decision combines high involve-
ment with high levels of information processing (187)
procedural priming effects the effect that occurs when sit-
uations are linked to cognitive or motor processes via “if 
X, then Y” linkages, where X refers to a specific situation 
and Y refers to a cognitive or behavioral activity (142)
product placement the insertion of branded goods and ser-
vices within the content of popular media, including tele-
vision, movies, video games, books, and music (326)
projective techniques are an unstructured, indirect form of 
questioning that encourages respondents to project their 
underlying beliefs, attitudes, feelings, and motivations in 
an apparently unrelated or ambiguous scenario (26)
psychographics the measurement of lifestyle, often combined 
with measures of attitudes, beliefs, and personalities (41)
punishment the negative reinforcement (124)
qualitative research methods descriptive, non-empirical 
data are collected that describe an individual consumer’s 
subjective experience with the product or service (17)
quantitative research methods methods that involve 
the collection of empirical data on which sophisticated 
 statistical analyses can be preformed and generalization 
can be made (15)
reciprocity principle someone does you a favor, you feel 
obligated to return it in kind (293)
recommendation agent an interactive decision aid that 
helps consumers to eliminate options by using informa-
tion about their personal preferences or about their prior 
purchase histories (339)
reference dependence prospect theory that suggests, all 
outcomes are evaluated with respect to a neutral reference 
point, and that preferences change as reference points 
change (241)
regulatory focus theory consumers regulate or control their 
behavior by using either a promotion focus or a preven-
tion focus (107)
relationship marketing building stronger relationships 
with consumers by using information technology and 
improved business processes (343)
repositioning attempts to change the way consumers 
perceive a brand, either their own brand or a competi-
tor’s (52)
representativeness heuristic predictions based on perceived 
similarities between a specific target and a general cat-
egory (226)
retention strategies strategy that increases consumption among 
current brand users or among multi-brand users (364)
retrieval the transference of information from long-term 
memory to short-term memory (127)
retroactive interference the information learned later blocks 
memory for information learned earlier (129)
return potential model the model that describes norms 
on two dimensions. The behavioral dimension specifies 
the amount of behavior regulated by the norm, and the 
evaluation dimension shows the cultural response to that 
behavior (276)
risk aversion the choice problem in terms of positive out-
comes, such as lives saved or money gained, people typi-
cally prefer the sure thing (240)
risk seeking a choice in terms of negative outcomes, such 
as deaths or money lost, people typically prefer the risky 
alternative (240)
risky decision making decision making under uncertainty 
(237)
Rokeach Value Survey (VALS) the study that researchers have 
begun to use value models in consumer behavior studies 

Glossary 
397
since instrumental and terminal values can help predict 
consumer attitudes and behaviors towards brands (281)
role identities the numerous positions that people occupy 
in society such as student, friend, son or daughter, and 
consumer (151)
routine choice carried out automatically, with little con-
scious effort. As such, it involves no information search 
or deliberation (181)
sales-cost trade-off this trade-off recognizes that, as market 
segmentation increases, sales increase because a firm’s offer-
ings align more closely to consumers’ preferences (36)
salient stimuli draw consumers’ attention involuntarily (74)
scarcity principle people often want what they cannot have 
(299)
search attributes are attributes that can be judged or rated 
simply by examining a product without necessarily buy-
ing it (84)
search costs searching information in online environments 
than in offline environments, are lower in online environ-
ments (339)
search goods obtaining information and to evaluate the 
quality of goods (337)
secondary data data that already exist and is readily acces-
sible (22)
selective thinking interpretation of ambiguous information 
as supportive and to integrate information so a preferred 
brand is cast in a favorable light (247)
self-concept one’s awareness and perceptions about him/
herself (278)
self-concept the beliefs and attitudes we hold about our-
selves and it is complicated and multidimensional (151)
self-conceptions any one of these self-concept that includes 
a good self, bad self, not-me self, desired self, ideal self, ought-
to-be self (158)
self-determination theory when intrinsic motivation is 
high, the autonomy, belongingness, and competence (the 
ABCs of self-determination) are high (106)
self-esteem the overall evaluative component of a person’s 
self-concept (152)
self-evaluations describe idiosyncratic parts of the self-
 concept that are not so clear-cut (151)
self-monitoring the extent to which consumers use situ-
ational cues to guide their social behavior (158)
self-perception theory complying with a small request leads 
people to label themselves as helpful, good citizens or as 
reasonable people (291)
self-presentation involves either self-enhancement or self-
deprecation (160)
self-schemas the cognitive structures that help us make 
sense of who we are (154)
semantic differential scale beliefs about attributes and over-
all attitudes can be measured on these scales, also called 
bipolar adjective scales (87)
sensation body’s first and immediate response to a stimulus 
(64)
shaping the reinforcement of successive approximations of 
the desired response (124)
short-term memory part of memory where small bits of 
information are stored for short periods of time (72)
simulation heuristic making predictions based on how eas-
ily an event or a sequence of events can be imagined or 
visualized (230)
singular evaluation a process in which consumers often 
evaluate products one at a time (246)
situational involvement a consumer’s relatively temporary and 
context-dependent interest in a product or category (195)
social validation principle the perceived validity (or 
 correctness) of an idea increases as the number of people 
supporting the idea increases (301)
sponsorship and branded entertainment the most inten-
sive form of marriage between content and brand. In this 
type of placement, the brand is the sole sponsor of the 
content, has extensive editorial control of the content, and 
the editorial content or style typically matches closely the 
targeted audience of the brand (329)
stealth marketing a buzz marketing campaign that specifi-
cally relies on spreading word-of-mouth in a covert or 
clandestine manner (318)
stimulus-based choice the choice where consumers can 
directly and physically observe all relevant brands in the 
consideration set and their brand attributes (220)
subcultures smaller groups of a larger culture that share 
some cultural values with society overall and yet dem-
onstrate unique cultural values and patterns of behavior 
within the individual subgroup (261)
subliminal advertising messages that are processed below 
the threshold of consciousness
subliminal perception unconscious awareness of a stimulus 
(70)
sunk cost effect the effect resulting from insensitivity to 
opportunity costs because as the amount of time or money 
invested in a product or a service increases, people are 
more reluctant to give up the product or service (243)
survey a set of structured questions to which a person is 
asked to respond (24)
systematic processing the process in which consumers think 
carefully about decisions, using all relevant information 
and considering all implications (223)
target market simply the segment(s) toward which a firm’s 
marketing efforts are directed (32)
that’s-not-all technique the technique starts high and builds 
in a downward fashion, i.e., the initial deal is changed into 
an even better deal before the consumer has an opportu-
nity to reject the first offer (296)
theory of cognitive itch properties of music may be analo-
gous to biochemical agents, such as histamines, which 
cause an itch on the skin (273)
theory of lay epistemology the formation and use of 
everyday knowledge, suggests that individuals differ in 
the degree to which they make the important trade-off 
between speed and accuracy (171)

398 
Glossary
theory of reasoned action one specific type of expectancy-
value model that explains how beliefs are combined to 
influence attitudes and how social norms or rules and 
attitudes influence behavior (90)
thin-slice inferences the particularly useful skill that people 
have learned automatically (139)
traits tendencies to behave a certain way across similar situ-
ations (151)
transience forgetting over time (127)
transitive if a consumer prefers A over B, and B over C, then 
she should prefer A over C (239)
trial pricing a large price discount on a single unit of a par-
ticular brand (366)
true brand universe the set of all brands that exist along 
with measures of each of their attributes (201)
true utility function the actual satisfaction s/he will obtain from 
consuming a brand, i.e., another objective reality (201)
truth effect as familiarity increases, a brand name seems 
more famous, liking for the brand increases, judgments 
about the brand are held with greater confidence, and 
product claims seem more likely to be true (144)
uncertainty-reduction process the consumer decision pro-
cess, given incomplete information (200)
unconditioned response a consumer’s automatic or 
unlearned response to a stimulus (121)
unconditioned stimulus the meaningful object that helps 
to learn the results in Pavlovian conditioning (121)
valuation effect an effect produced by consumers when they 
are extremely hungry as they rate food products more 
desirable (104)
value-expressive function the image appeals which are use-
ful for changing attitudes (107)
variety seeking the desire to choose new alternatives over 
more familiar ones (185)
verbal compliance a situation where someone says “yes” to 
a specific request (288)
viral marketing usually involves the Internet to facilitate the 
spread of word-of-mouth and spark buzz (318)
visual product placement placing the brand on screen 
within the setting or background of a program (329)
vivid stimuli like salient stimuli, draw attention automati-
cally and involuntarily (77)
want-got gap a discrepancy exists between what the con-
sumer wants the situation to be and what the situation 
really is (189)
wants need satisfiers that are shaped by a consumer’s per-
sonality, experiences, and culture—-including marketing 
(192)
Weber’s law the greater or stronger the initial stimulus was, 
the greater was the amount of change required for it to be 
noticed (67)
word-of-mouth marketing the execution of marketing tac-
tics specially designed to generate positive word-of-mouth 
marketing messages and create a virus-like exponential 
spread of those messages throughout the population of 
interest (318)
word-of-mouth the act of one consumer talking to another 
about a brand, and it can happen face-to-face and indi-
rectly via phone, mail, or the Internet (317)
Young & Rubicam Brand Asset Valuator set of scales to 
measure differentiation, relevance, esteem, and knowl-
edge (359)
Zanna and Rempel’s a theory suggesting that attitudes can 
be based on cognition (beliefs), affect (feelings, moods, 
and emotions), or behavior (86)

399
A
Aaker, David A., 355
Aaker, Jennifer, 165
Abdul, Paula, 323
Adams, Phil, 31
Agassi, Andre, 325
Anderson, Elijah, 275
Armstrong, Lance, 325
Assael, H., 182, 183
Attal, Laurent, 14
B
Baase, Charlie, 308
Beckham, David, 323, 325
Behrens, Les, 363
Belk, Russell, 155
Berry, Halle, 323
Beyoncè, 323
Big Daddy Kane, 265, 265
Blackwell, R. D., 189
Blank, A., 289
Boesky, Ivan, 344
Bon Jovi, 324
Briley, Donnel, 60
Brown, Deanna, 346
Bruckheimer, Jerry, 324
Bruner, G. C., 190
Bryant, Kobe, 323, 325
Burger, Jerry M., 296, 297
Burnett, Mark, 329
Burton, Jeff, 274
C
Cann, A., 296
Cannery, Sean, 322
Carey, Mariah, 19
Carter, Jimmy, 259
Chambers, Robert, 307
Chan, Jackie, 322
Chanowitz, B., 289
Chen, Huang, 275
Cialdini, Robert, 258, 288, 292, 303, 
304, 305
Clawson, James G., 189
Cline, Thomas W., 153, 162, 200, 203, 
207, 208
Cody, Iron Eyes, 303, 305
Combs, Sean, 265
Cook, Scott, 257
Cowell, Simon, 324
Cruise, Tom, 328
Curtis, Benjamin, 323
D
Daimler, Adolf, 274
Daimler, Gottlieb, 274
Daimler, Paul, 274
D’Amico, Richard A., 308
Davenport, Lindsay, 325
Davies, A., 162, 200, 203, 207, 208
Dean, James, 306
DeGeneres, Ellen, 322
De La Hoya, Oscar, 324, 325
Della Famina, James, 155
Depp, Johnny, 324
Diaz, Cameron, 323
Dichter, Ernest, 15
Dion, Celine, 323, 324
Dole, Bob, 323
Duff, Hillary, 20, 323
E
Edward VII (Britain), 322
Elkes, R., 296
Engel, J., 189
Ernst, Robert, 237
F
Faber, Ron, 255–256
Falk, Tom, 252
Fazio, R. H., 223
Ford, Henry, 35
Fraser, S., 291
Freedman, J., 291
Freud, Sigmund, 137
G
Gates, Bill, 259
Gaye, Marvin, 149, 168
Genovese, Catherine “Kitty,” 301
Gilbert, Dan, 144
Girard, Joe, 306
Gladwell, Malcolm, 306, 318
Goldberg, L. R., 164
Gordon, Jeff, 325
Gottfried, Gilbert, 168
Grazer, Brian, 324
Greenberg, Stephen T., 308
Gretzky, Wayne, 299
Guiltinan, J. P., 188
H
Hanks, Tom, 324
Hao Shen, 60
Harrop, Simon, 69
Hasselbeck, Matt, 325
Hepburn, Katherine, 326
Herr, P. M., 141
Hitchcock, Bob, 363
Hofstede, Geert, 261
Hot Boys, The, 265
I
Iron Eyes Cody, 303, 305
J
Jackson, J., 277
James, LeBron, 325
James, William, 155
Jardin, Xeni, 335
Jay-Z, 265, 324
Jeter, Derek, 325
Jing Xu, 60
Jobs, Steve, 259
John, Elton, 324
Johnson, Ervin “Magic,” 323
Jolie, Angelina, 264
Jones, Walter, 325
Jordan, Michael, 275, 325
K
Kahneman, Daniel, 74, 225, 
227, 241
Kam, Marcus, 327
Kardes, F., 108, 197, 216, 219
Karpachev, Boris, 343
Kasten, Thomas M., 383
Kellaris, James, 122, 273
Keller, K. L., 353, 356
Key, Wilson Bryan, 70
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 300
Kid Halloween, 335
Kushner, Robin, 308
Kwamé, 265
L
Lafley, A. G., 252
Langer, Ellen, 288, 289
Langtrey, Lily, 322
Left Eye, 265
Letterman, David, 324
Levin, Jennifer, 307
Levine, Dennis, 344
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 264
LL Cool J, 265
Loewenstein, George, 178–179
Lu, Xiaobo, 192
Name Index

400 
Name Index
M
Madden, T. J., 188
Madonna, 323, 324
Mandela, Nelson, 264
Manning, Peyton, 324
Marbury, Stephon, 275
Maslow, Abraham, 104–105, 191
MC Hammer, 265
McCarthy, Jennifer, 323
McCracken, Grant, 262, 268
McGraw, Tim, 324
McNeil, Bob, 155
McQueen, Steve, 306
Mertens, D. P., 162
Mickelson, Phil, 324, 325
Milgram, Stanley, 310
Milken, Michael, 344
Miller, George, 72
Ming, Yao, 327
Miniard, P. W., 189
Montezemolo, Luca Cordero de, 
259, 260
Mordin, C., 42
Morris, Michael, 60
Mosley, Winston, 301
N
Naughty by Nature, 265
O
Obama, Barack, 178
O’Doherty, John, 177
O’Guinn, Thomas, 255–257
Olson, J. C., 281
O’Neal, Shaquille, 325
P
Pamazal, R. J., 190
Parker, Robert, 363
Parker, Sarah Jessica, 306
Pasteur, Louis, 372
Paul, G. W., 188
Pavlov, Ivan, 121
Peter, J. P., 281
Pety Pablo, 328
Pinkerton, Lydia, 21
Pitt, Brad, 323, 324
Plassmann, Hilke, 177
Pollay, R. W., 280
Prager, Stephanie, 346
Puff Daddy (P. Diddy), 265
R
Raikkonen, Kimi, 324
Rain, 264
Ramirez, Manny, 325
Rangel, Antonio, 177
Reagan, Ronald, 322
Ripa, Kelly, 20
Rodriguez, Alex, 325
Rolling Stones, 324
Ronaldo, 325
Rossi, Valentino, 325
Rushdie, Salman, 300
S
Salt-N-Pepa, 265
Sarwer, David, 308
Schnatter, John, 221
Schoen, H., 166, 167
Schumacher, Michael, 324, 325
Schuman, S., 166, 167
Seabrook, John, 257
Seinfeld, Jerry, 323, 324
Sharapova, Maria, 325
Shen, Hao, 60
Sherman, S. J., 296
Shiv, Baba, 177–178
Shrum, L. J., 60
Siegal, Martin, 344
Simonson, Itamar, 60
Snoop Doggy Dogg, 265
Sorenstam, Annika, 325
Spielberg, Steven, 324
Stallworth, Cheryl, 3–4
Star, S. H., 349, 350
Stern, Howard, 324
Stewart, Martha, 344
Stiller, Ben, 324
Struthers, Sally, 244
T
Telander, R., 275
Thomas, Michael, 275
Timberlake, Justin, 323
Treach, 265
Turner, Kathleen, 320
Tversky, A., 225, 227, 241
Twain, Mark, 322
Tylor, Edward B., 261
U
Urban, Glen L., 341, 349, 350
Usunier, J., 272
V
Verbinski, Gore, 324
Vicary, James, 70, 135, 145
Vick, Michael, 324, 325
von Hippel, Eric, 257
Vowels, N. S., 162
W
Wagner, Honus, 299
Weber, Ernst, 67
Wei, Liu, 327
Williams, Kip, 6
Williams, Serena, 325
Williams, Venus, 325
Winfrey, Oprah, 324
Woods, Tiger, 19, 71, 110–111, 264, 322, 
323, 324, 325
Wyer, Robert S., Jr., 59
X
Xiang, Liu, 327
Xu, Jing, 60
Y
Yeung, Catherine, 60
Z
Zanna, M. P., 223
Zuckerman, Diana, 308

401
A
Absent-mindedness
127
Absolute threshold
66–67
Absolute utility error
201–202
Academic discipline, consumer behavior as
13–18
Accessibility
126, 221, 222
Accounts
161
Acculturation
268
Accuracy
162
Achievement
43–45, 106–107
Achievers
43, 44
Acquisition strategies
358–361
Activation
128
Active memory
72
Actual public-concept
153
Actual self-concept
152–153
Adaptation
69–70
Adaptive unconscious
137–138
Additive-difference heuristic
232, 233
Adjustment function
107, 108
Advergaming
328
Advertising
consumer generated, 320–322
corrective, 125
ethical problems with, 192
false and misleading, 125, 126
O’Guinn, Thomas, 255
price, 341
puffery, 221
subliminal, 135, 145–146
subliminal perception and, 70–72
Advertising Age (trade publication)
22, 155, 327, 330
Affect, in consumer decision making
177
Affect confirmation model
113–114
Affective responses
11. See also Emotion
Affect transfer
309
Affiliation
106–107
Affirmation of the consequent
299
African Americans, as segmentation base
40
Aggregated data
22
Agreeableness
163, 164, 165
AIO Inventories
41
Aligning activities
161
Alternative evaluation. See 
Uncertainty-reduction 
model
American Heart Association
96, 299
American Lung Association
306
Analogies, irrelevant
378
Anchor-and-adjustment heuristic
225, 230–231
Anthropology
257
Appearance management
159–160
Applied research
19–20
Approach
104
Archetypes
52
Arousal
73, 103
Asian Development Bank
192
Aspirational groups
45
Aspirer lifestyle segment
42
Assimilation, biased
368–369
Assimilation effect
141, 367
Associations
128
Associative interference
128, 130
Associative network
128, 129
Athlete endorsers
322–325, 327
Attachment
365
Attention
64
physical influences on, 72–73
selective, 64, 74–79
Attitude-based choice
221–223
Attitude function theory
107–110
Attitude models
90
Attitudes
changing, 97–98
implicit and explicit, 144
properties of, 86–88
Attraction effect
218, 219
Attractiveness, physical
307–308
Attribute-based choice
221–223
Attributes
279
Authority principle
309–310
Automatic information processing
135, 136–137
adaptive unconscious, 137–138
implicit memory, 139–145
managerial application, 148
subliminal advertising, 135, 
145–146
summary, 146
thin slice theory, 138–139
Automaticity principle
288–289
Subject Index

402 
Subject Index
Availability heuristic
225, 228–230, 374
Avoidance
104
B
Backward conditioning
121
Bait-and-switch
293
Balance theory
110–111
Base rate
227
Basic research
19–20
Because heuristic
289
Behavioral-based segmentation
38, 46–48
Behavioral compliance
286
authority principle, 309–310
automaticity principle, 288–289
commitment and consistency principle, 
290–293
defining, 288
liking principle, 306–309
managerial application, 313
reciprocity principle, 293–299
scarcity principle, 299–300
Sears influence agent, 286–287
social validation principle, 300–306
summary, 311
Behavioral decision theory
237
expected utility theory, 
238–247
Jordan’s Furniture, 252–253
managerial application, 252
overconfidence and culture, 250
selective thinking, 247–249
summary, 250
Vioxx, 237–238
Behavioral dimension, of return 
potential model
276–277
Behavioral economics
178–179
Behavioral responses
11
Behavioral science
14–17
Beliefs
82–85, 144–145
Believers
43, 44
Belonging needs
104, 105
Benefits
279
Bias
132. See also Managerial decision 
making biases
BIRGing
309
Blocking
122, 127–130
Blogs
335
Body language
270–271
Books, as secondary data sources
23
Brand chaos
196
Brand equity management
351–354
acquisition versus retention strategies, 
358–361
market leaders and market underdogs, 
357–358
product line management, 354–357
Brand
extensions 353
identity 352
integration 329
interaction 329
laziness 182, 183, 184
loyalty 182, 183, 184–185
meaning 352
personality 165–167
positivity effect 249
relationship 352
resonance 353
responses 352
stature 354, 355, 356
strength 354, 355, 356
universe, true and perceived 201
variance 203, 206
Branded entertainment
329
Branding strategy
347
brand equity management, 351–361
Disney, 347–348
entry strategy, 348–349
managerial application, 363
product life cycle management, 349–351
summary, 362
Brands
counterfeit, 338, 343
pioneering, 49–50
stimulus versus memory, 220
Bulgari Collection, The (Weldon)
328
Bureau of Labor Statistics
23
Business performance, consumer 
behavior studies and
11, 12
BusinessWeek (magazine)
229
Buzz marketing
318–320
C
Calibration
393
Cancellation
239
Cannibalization
37, 354
Causal relationships
20–22
Celebrity endorsers
320, 322–325, 328
Center for Human Appearance
308
Channel length
360
Characterization
168–169
Cheating
259–260
China, ethical crisis in
192
Choice
routine, 181
uncertainty-reduction model, 199–206
websites, 336–337
See also Product choice
Choice deferral
243–244
Choice heuristics
224, 231–233
City Roots
41
Classical conditioning
120–124
Closure
76
Cluster frontier
203, 205–206, 207–208
Clusters
202–203
Cluster size
203, 204–205
Cluster variance
203, 205
Cognition. See Need for cognition
Cognitive capacity
65
Cognitive closure, need for
171–172, 385
Cognitive commitment. See Premature 
cognitive commitment
Cognitive dissonance theory
111–112
Cognitive factors, in personality and 
self-concept
169–172

Subject Index 
403
Cognitive misers
184
Cognitive personality variables
169
Cognitive resources
96
Cognitive responses
11
Collectivism
302–303
Color (Apple Computer Company)
62–63
Commercial Alert
329
Commitment and consistency principle
290–293
Commitment theory
293
Commodities
344
Common knowledge effect
370
Comparative evaluation
246–247
Comparison matrix
339
Comparison omission
126
Compatibility principle
246
Compensatory decision 
making strategy
232, 337
Compensatory process
203–204
Competence
165, 166
Completion tests
26
Complexity
76–77
Compliance, verbal
288. See also Behavioral compliance
Compliments
162
Comprehension
65, 124–125, 144–145
Compromise effect
218–219
Compulsive buying
163, 165
Compulsiveness, of consumers
255–256
Concreteness
77–79
Conditioned response
121
Conditioned stimulus
121
Conditioning
classical, 120–124
forward and backward, 121
operant, 124
Conjunctive heuristic
232, 233
Connectors
318
Conscientiousness
163, 164, 165
Conscious awareness
72
Consensus-implies-correctness heuristic
223
Consequences
279
Consideration
203–206, 216. See also Product 
consideration, evaluation, 
and choice
Consideration set (choice alternatives)
216–219
Consistency. See Commitment and 
consistency principle
Consonance
111
Constants
26
Construction tests
27
Consumer activities
8, 9–10
Consumer advocacy paradigm
341–344
Consumer behavior
5, 8
academic field of, 13–18
culture and, 261, 262–268
managerial application, 29
neuroeconomics and, 179
neuroscience and, 178
overview, 8–11
paradigms in, 255
reality television, 5–8
social influence and, 258
studying, reasons for, 11–13
summary, 27–28
See also Branding strategy; Online 
consumer behavior
Consumer behavior research
5, 18–19
academic field for, 13–18
basic versus applied, 19–20
correlations and causal relationships, 
20–22
evolution of, 14–18
managerial application, 29
reality television, 5–8
reasons for, 11–13
secondary versus primary data, 22–27
summary, 27–28
Consumer choice
219, 220–221
Consumer compulsiveness
255–256
Consumer decision making
177–179, 180
culture and, 224
information search, 195–199
Kellogg’s Company, 180–181
managerial application, 213
post-purchase evaluation, 206–210
problem recognition, 189–195
summary, 211
traditional model of, 188–189
uncertainty-reduction model, 199–206
See also Behavioral decision theory; 
Product consideration, evaluation, 
and choice
Consumer decisions, types of
181–188
Consumer education and decision making, 
consumer behavior studies for
13
Consumer focused strategy. See Positioning; 
Segmentation
Consumer generated marketing 
(advertising), 320–322
Consumer information processing
58–61. See also Automatic information 
processing; Consumer perception; 
Emotion; Judgments; Learning; 
Memory; Motivation; Personality; 
Self-concept
Consumer involvement. See Involvement
Consumer management
361
Consumer perception
62
attention, physical influences on, 72–73
attention, selective, 74–79
color (Apple Computer Company), 
62–63
perceptual process, 63–65
sensory thresholds, 66–72
Consumer preference heterogeneity
35–36
Consumer products, cultural meaning and
262, 263–265
Consumer Reports (magazine)
195, 196
Consumer research strategies
314, 315–316
celebrity and athlete endorsers, 322–325
consumer generated marketing 
(advertising), 320–322
E.B. Horn Great Diamond Hunt, 
314–315
managerial application, 332
product placement, 325–330
summary, 330–331
word-of-mouth, 316–320
Consumer responses
8, 10–11
Consumers
cultural meaning and, 262, 265–268
individual versus organizational, 8–9
segmentation and, 34

404 
Subject Index
Consumer satisfaction
209–210
Consumer uncertainty
201–202, 205
Consumer values
278–282
Continuity pricing
360
Continuous reinforcement
124
Contrast effect
141, 367
Control group
26
Convenience segment
46, 47
Core benefit proposition
51
Core values
278
CORFing
309
Corrective advertising
125
Correlations
20–22
Correspondent inference
323
Corruption
344
Cost reduction
329
Counterfeit brands
338, 343
Credence goods
337
Crescive norms
275
Crime, advertising and
275
Cross Cultural Consumer Characterization
42
Cross cultural segmentation
42
Cultural categories
262–263
Cultural change, via hip-hop fashion
265
Culturally constituted world
262–263
Cultural meaning
263–268
Cultural norms
275–277
Cultural principles
263
Cultural rituals
265–268
Cultural segmentation
40
Cultural translation
270, 271
Cultural values
261, 275
Culture
259
brand personality and, 166
cheating, 259–260
consumer behavior and, 262–268
consumer decision making and, 224
consumer values, 278–282
defining, 261
high- and low-context, 271–273
language, 268–275
managerial application, 285
overconfidence and, 250
social validation principle and, 301–303
summary, 282–283
Customer-based brand equity pyramid
353
Customer delight
13–14, 210
Customer loyalty programs
48
Customer perceived value
13
Customers, generation of
350
Customization, of websites
336–337
Customs
275
Cybersquatting
343
D
D.A.R.E. Program
300
Data
empirical, 15
secondary versus primary, 22–27
Databases, online
23
Data collection methods
23
Decision frame management
383–385
Decision making. See Behavioral decision 
theory; Consumer education and decision 
making
Decision making biases. See Managerial 
decision making; Managerial decision 
making biases
Decline stage
diffusion curve, 349
product life cycle, 350–351
Demographic characteristics
37
Demographics-based segmentation
37, 38
Dependent variables
26
Descriptive norms
303–306
Determinant attributes
187
Devaluation effect
104
Diagnostic
222
Differential threshold
67–68
Differentiation
354, 355
Diffusion curve
349
Diffusion of innovation
348
Diffusion of responsibility
301
Diminishing sensitivity
241
Directional motivation
96, 97
Direct questioning
24–25
Disclaimers
161
Discrepancy-interruption theory
114–115
Disjunctive heuristic
232, 233
Disparagement
162
Disposal activities
10
Dissonance
111
Dissonance-reduction
209–210
Distraction effects
144–145
Divestment rituals
266, 267
Divide and conquer strategy
32–33. See also Positioning; Segmentation
Domain names
343
Domestic Duos
41
Dominance
239
Door-in-the-face technique
294–296
Double-barreled questions
25
Drive
104
Drive theory
104–105
Dual process model
223

Subject Index 
405
E
Early Adopters
318
Economics
behavioral, 178–179
information search, 198–199
Economist, The
69
Education. See Consumer education and 
decision making
Effort continuum
181
Ego-defensive function
107, 108
Elaboration likelihood model
94–95
Elimination-by-aspects heuristic
231–232, 233
Emotion
101, 113–114
discrepancy-interruption theory, 114–115
excitation transfer theory, 115–116
managerial application, 118
nostalgia and, 101–102
overview of, 102–103
summary, 117
Emotional
interest 77
responses 11
stability 163, 164
Empirical confrontation
17
Empirical data
15
Enacted norms
275
Encoding
127
Encoding-specificity principle
129
Enculturation
268
Endowment effect
243–244
Enduring involvement
195
Entertainment, branded
329
Entry strategy
348–349
Epistemic seizing
172
Epistemology. See Theory of lay 
epistemology
Esteem
354, 355
Esteem needs
104, 105
E-tailers
335, 338–339
Ethical issues
advertising, 126
advertising and violence, 275
charities and marketing, 96
China, 192
Chinese production practices, 352
consumer behavior research, 18–19
counterfeit brands, 343
marketing, 192–193
marketing placebo effects, 137
obesity, 112
plastic surgery, 308
puffery, 221
segmentation, 34
self-concept, 152
subliminal advertising, 71
subliminal perception, 329
tampering, 18
Ethnographic research
24
Evaluation
post-purchase, 206–210
product choice, 219–223
uncertainty-reduction model, 199–206
See also Product consideration, 
evaluation, and choice
Evaluation dimension, of return 
potential model
276, 277
Evaluative judgments
changing, 97–98
properties of, 86–88
Even-a-penny technique
298–299
Evoked set
216
Exchange rituals
266
Excitation transfer theory
115–116
Excitement
165, 166
Excuses
161
Expansion anchors
231
Expectancy disconfirmation model
210
Expectancy-value models
90
Expected utility theory
238–239
framing effects, 239–245
preference reversals, 245–247
Experience goods
337
Experiencers
43, 44
Experimental approach
15
Experiments
26
Explicit attitudes
144
Explicit memory
139
Explorer lifestyle segment
42
Expression texts
27
Extended self
155–157
Extensive problem solving
182
External data sources
23
External search
195
External uncertainty
201, 204, 205
Extinction
124
Extrinsic motivation
105–106
Extrinsic variety seeking
185–186
Extroversion
165. See also Surgency
Exurbs
39
F
Fake shoppers
320
False advertising
125, 126
False memories
131
Familiarity
131, 306–307
Familiarity effects
144
Fashion system
263–265
Fear appeals, by insurance companies
239
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
125, 329
Figure-ground principle
74
Financial risk
183
First Amendment
71
Five-Factor Model
163–165
Flattery
161, 162
Flow
335

406 
Subject Index
Focus groups
25
Follower positioning
50
Foot-in-the-door technique
290–291, 295, 296
Forward conditioning
121
Frames
239–245
Freezing
172
Frequency of good and bad features 
heuristic
232–233
Functional benefits
279, 281
Functional risk
183
G
Gambler’s fallacy
227
Gaps
53
Generation effect
127
Geo-demographic segmentation
39
Geographic based segmentation
37, 38, 39–41
GeoVALS
46
Goals
104
Goal-state (goal-object)
103–104
Government data sources
23
Grooming rituals
266, 267
Groupthink
25
Growth stage
diffusion curve, 349
product life cycle, 350
H
Halo effect
307
Hedonic products
113
Heuristic processing
223–225
choice heuristics, 224, 231–233
persuasion heuristics, 223
prediction heuristics, 224, 226–231
Heuristic/systematic model
95–96
Heuristics
price-quality, 51, 172
High-context cultures
271–273
High self-monitors
158, 258, 301
Hip-hop fashion
265
Homeopathic medicine, erroneous 
beliefs about
82–83
Humor. See Need for humor
Hyper critique
162
Hypothesis formation
17
Hypothesis testing
17
I
Ideal public-concept
153
Ideals
43–45
Ideal self-concept
152–153
Ideal vectors
54
Ignorance
34
Illusory correlation
21
Imitation evangelists
319–320
Implementation intentions
106
Implicit Association Test (IAT)
143–144
Implicit attitudes
144
Implicit memory
139–145
Impression management theory
159–162
Impulse buying
198
Inaccuracy
162
Incomplete information
201
Independent variables
26
In-depth interview (IDI)
15, 25
Indexes, online
23
Indirect associations
309
Indirect endorsements
328
Individual consumers
8–9
Individual differences, social validation 
principle and
301–303
Individualism
278, 302–303
Influence. See Social influence
Influence heuristics. See Choice heuristics
Information
accessibility of, 126
incomplete, 201
obsolete, 201
perceived relevance of, 96
Informational motives
191, 192
Information integration theory
92–94
Information organization, on websites
337–339
Information processing
58–61. See also Automatic information 
processing; Consumer perception; 
Emotion; Judgments; Learning; Memory; 
Motivation; Personality; Self-concept
Information search
195–199, 337
Information search costs
339–341
Ingratiation
160–161, 309
Injunctive norms
303–306
Innate needs
103
Innovation, diffusion of
348
Innovators
43, 44, 318
Insincerity
162
Instrumental products
113
Instrumental values
280, 281
Insurance companies, fear appeals by
239
Intangible attributes
279, 281
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
23
Intellect
163, 164
Intensity
69, 75–76
Interactivity, age of
334–336
Intermediate problem solving
181–182
Internal data sources
23
Internal search
195

Subject Index 
407
Internal uncertainty
201, 205
Internet. See Online consumer behavior; 
Online marketing
Interpretivism
17–18
Interviewer bias
25
Interviews, in-depth
15, 25
Intrinsic motivation
105–106
Intrinsic variety seeking
186
Introduction stage
diffusion curve, 349
product life cycle, 349–350
Intuition
139
Invalid information
387
Invariance principle
239
Involuntary selective attention
74–79
Involvement
88–89, 182
attitude models based on, 90
elaboration likelihood model,
94–95
enduring and situational, 195
expectancy-value models, 90
heuristic/systematic model, 95–96
information integration theory, 
92–94
reasoned action theory, 91–92, 93
J
JapanVALS
46
Journal of Consumer Research (trade 
publication)
22
Judgments
82
evaluative (attitudes), 86–88,
97–98
involvement, 88–96
managerial application, 100
nonevaluative (beliefs), 82–85
parameters of, 96–97
summary, 98
See also Attitude and judgment; 
Representativeness heuristic
Justifications
161
Just noticeable difference (j.n.d.)
67–68
K
Knowledge
120, 354, 355
Knowledge function
107, 108
L
Language
268–269
body language, 270–271
cultural translation, 270
high- and low-context cultures, 
271–273
symbols, 273–275
Large numbers, law of
227
Law of large numbers
227
Lay epistemology, theory of
171
Leader positioning
49–50
Leaners
320
Learning
119
comprehension and miscomprehension, 
124–125
importance of, 120
managerial application, 134
Martini & Rossi, 119–120
summary, 133
types of, 120–124
Length-implies-strength heuristic
223
Lexicographic heuristic
231, 233
Lifestyle, consumer behavior and
256
Likelihood ratio
394
Liking-agreement heuristic
223
Liking principle
306–309
Linguistics. See Language
List of Values (LOV)
282
List technique
301
Locus of control
169
Longevity, of product placement
328
Long-term orientation (LTO)
278
Loss aversion
241–243
Love/belonging needs
104, 105
Loved objects
157–158
Low-ball technique
292–293
Low-context cultures
271–273
Low self-monitors
158, 258, 301
Loyalty programs
360
Loyal segment
46, 47
Lure procedure
293
M
Mainstreamer lifestyle segment
42
Majority fallacy
36
Makers
43, 44
Malleable self
158
Mall-intercept
25
Managerial application
automatic information processing, 148
behavioral decision theory, 253
branding strategy, 363
consumer behavior and consumer 
behavior research, 29
consumer decision making, 213
consumer research strategies, 332
culture and values, 285
judgments, 100
learning and memory, 134
motivation and emotion, 118
online consumer behavior, 346
personality and self-concept, 175
product choice, 236
segmentation and positioning, 56
social influence and behavioral 
compliance, 313
Market aggregation
35
Market gaps
53
Marketing
consumer generated, 320–322
ethical problems with, 192–193
social influence and, 258
translation faux pas, 271
Marketing activities, cultural meaning and
263
Marketing concept
13
Marketing decisions, framing influence on
240
Marketing mix
19–20
Marketing placebo effects
137, 138, 177
Marketing research
18
Marketing science approach
15
Market leaders, management of
357–358

408 
Subject Index
Market mavens
196
Marketplace rumors
130
Market segmentation. See Segmentation
Market segregation
34
Market underdogs, management of
357–358
Masculinity
278
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
104–105
Mass customization
35
Mass marketing
35
Maturity stage
diffusion curve, 349
product life cycle, 350
Mavens
318
Means-ends chains
278–281
Measurement error
201
Memory
119, 126
absent-mindedness, 127
bias, 132
blocking, 127–130
explicit, 139
implicit, 139–145
importance of, 120
managerial application, 134
Martini & Rossi, 119–120
misattribution, 130–131
persistence, 132
short-term, 72
sins of, 126–132
suggestibility, 131–132
summary, 133
transience, 126
Memory-based choice
220
Memory brands
220
Mental responses
11
Mere exposure effect
131, 306–307
Micromarketing
35
Miller’s Rule
72
Mindless thinking. See Automaticity 
principle
Mindset priming effect
143
Misattribution
130–131
Misattribution of arousal
116
Miscomprehension
124–125
Misleading advertising
125, 126
MODE model
222–223
Monopolies
344
Mood-as-information model
113
Moody’s Manuals (trade publication)
22
Morés
276–276
Morphology
268, 269
Motivation
101
directional and nondirectional,
96–97
information search, 198
intrinsic and extrinsic, 105–106
managerial application, 118
needs and, 104–112
nostalgia and, 101–102
overview of, 102–103
process of, 103–104
summary, 117
Motivation dimension of  VALS
43–45
Motivation research
14
Movers and Shakers
41
Multiple-deescalating-requests technique
298
Multiple trait theory
163–165
Multi-product strategy. See Segmentation
MUM effect
309
Music, purchasing behavior and
140
N
National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA)
305
Navigation, of websites
337
Need for cognition (NFC)
169–170
Need for cognitive closure (NFCC)
171–172
Need for humor (NFH)
170–171
Needs
103, 104
attitude function theory, 107–110
balance theory, 110–111
cognitive dissonance theory, 111–112
drive theory, 104–105
innate, 103
power, affiliation, and achievement, 
106–107
primary and secondary, 103
problem recognition and, 190–192
self-determination theory, 105–106
Needs hierarchy
104–105
Negative correlation
20
Negative feedback
162
Negative ingratiation
162
Negative-oriented motives
191
Negative reinforcement
124
Neuroeconomics
179
Neuroimaging
177
Neuroscience
178
Node
128
Non-compensatory decision 
making strategy
231, 337
Non-compensatory process
203–204
Nondirectional motivation
96–97
Nonevaluative judgments
82–85
Nonprofit organizations, 
consumer research and
305
Nonverbal communications
268–269
Norm Potential Model
285
Norms
cultural, 275–277
injunctive versus descriptive, 303–306
Nostalgia
101–102
Novelty
75
Nutricosmetics
14
O
Obesity
112
Objects, loved
157–158
Observation
16, 24

Subject Index 
409
Observational techniques
24
Obsolete information
201
Obtrusive observation
24
Off-price discounters
47
Ongoing search
195, 196
Online consumer behavior
333
consumer advocacy paradigm, 341–344
information search costs, 339–341
interactivity, age of, 334–336
managerial application, 346
summary, 344
website design features, 336–339
Yahoo!, 333–334
Online indexes and databases
23
Operant conditioning
124
Opinion conformity
161
Opinion leaders
264
Opportunities, problem recognition and
193–195
Opportunity costs
243
Organic word-of-mouth
318
Organizational consumers
8–9
Overconfidence
250, 393
Oversegmentation
37
P
Package-pricing
68
Parity products
187
Partial reinforcement
124
Participant observation
24
Part-list cuing
217
Patronage programs
360
Peer groups
45
Penturbia
39
Perceived brand universe
201
Perceived pain
46
Perceived product market
202–203
Perceived risk
182–183
Perceived utility function
201
Perceived value
46
Perception
63, 329. See also Consumer perception
Perceptual mapping
53–54
Perceptual process
63–65
Perceptual selection. See Selective attention
Periodicals
23
Persistence
132
Personality
149, 162–163
brand personality, 165–167
characterization, 168–169
cognitive factors, 169–172
Gap, 149–150
managerial application, 175
multiple trait theory, 163–165
summary, 172–173
Personality traits
162
Personal qualities
151
Persuasion
258
Persuasion heuristics
96, 223
Phenomenal absolutism
64
Phonology
268, 269
Physical attractiveness
307–308
Physical influences, on attention
72–73
Physical risk
183
Physiological needs
104
Pioneering brands
49–50
Placebo effects, marketing
137, 138
Plastic surgery
307–308
Population
16
Position
75
Positioning
30, 33, 48–49, 361
divide and conquer strategy, 32–33
follower, 50
Jungle Jim’s International Market, 
30–32
leader, 49–50
managerial application, 56
perceptual mapping, 53–54
repositioning, 52–53
segmentation bases and, 51–52
summary, 54–55
Positive correlation
20
Positive ingratiation
162
Positive reinforcement
124
Positivism
15. See also Behavioral science
Possession rituals
266–267
Possessions
155–156
Posterior probability
394
Postmodernism
17–18
Post-purchase evaluation
206–210
Power
106–107
abuses of, 344
Power distance
278
Prediction heuristics
224, 225, 226–231
Predictions
17
Pre-exposure effect
122
Preference reversals
241, 245–247
Prejudice
34
Premium pricing
51
Preppy Murder Trial
307
Prepurchase search
195, 196
Prevention focus
107–110
Price
46
positioning by, 51
Price advertising
341
Price bundling
244
Price-matching refunds
196
Price-quality heuristic
51, 172, 249

410 
Subject Index
Price segment
46, 47
Price sensitivity
341
Pricing, continuity and trial
360
Primary data
22–27
Primary motivation
43, 45
Primary needs
103
Priming effect
128, 130, 140–143
Principles, cultural
263
PRIZM
40
PRIZMNE
40–41
Proactive interference
129
Problem recognition
189–195
Problem solving
181–182, 183, 187–188
Procedural priming effects
142
Processing effort
182
Product associations
167
Product attributes or benefits
46–47
Product choice
214, 216
consideration set (choice alternatives), 
216–219
evaluation construction for, 
219–223
heuristic processing, 223–233
managerial application, 236
Sony, 214–215
summary, 234
Product knowledge, search effort and
197
Product life cycle curve
350
Product life cycle management
349–351
Product line management
354–357
Product placement
325–330
Product pushers
319
Products
all-in-one, 229
cultural meaning and, 262,
263–265
hedonic and instrumental, 113
parity, 187
Product usage
47–48
Product usage situation, positioning by
52
Product user, positioning by
52
Prohibition Era
300
Projective techniques
26–27
Promotion focus
107–110
Proximity
79
Psychographic profiles
41
Psychographics
38, 41–46
Psychological accounting
243
Psychological risk
183
Psychosocial benefits
279, 281
Public-concept, ideal versus actual
153
Public policy, consumer behavior 
studies and
11–12
Puffery
221
Punishment
124
Purchase activities
9
Purchasing behavior, music and
140
Q
Qualitative research methods
17–18
Quantitative research methods
15
Questioning
16, 24–25
R
Race-based segmentation
40
Random assignment
26
Reach, of product placement
328
Realism, of product placement
328
Reality television
5–8
Reasoned action theory
91–92, 93
Reciprocity principle
293–299
Recommendation agent
339
Reference dependence
241–243
Reformer lifestyle segment
42
Regression to the mean
228
Regulatory focus theory
107–110
Reinforcement
124
Relationship marketing
343–344
Relative utility error
202
Relevance
354, 355
Repetition
69
Repositioning
52–53
Representativeness heuristic
225, 226–227, 371–372
Research. See Consumer behavior research
Resigned lifestyle segment
42
Resource dimension of VALS
43, 44, 45
Responses, conditioned and 
unconditioned
121
Responsibility, diffusion of
301
Retention rate
361
Retention strategies
358–361
Retrieval
127
Retroactive interference
129
Return potential model
276–277
Risk, perceived
182–183
Risk aversion
240
Risk seeking
241
Risky decision making
237. See also Behavioral decision theory
Rituals, cultural
265–268
Rokeach Value Survey (VALS)
281–282
Role identities
151
Routine choice
181
Ruggedness
165, 166
Rumors, in marketplace
130

Subject Index 
411
S
Safety needs
104, 105
Sales-cost trade-off
36
Salesmen
318
Salient stimuli
74–77
Sarcasm
162
Satanic Verses, The (Rushdie)
300
Satisfaction, consumer
209–210
Satisfaction paradox
210
Scarcity principle
299–300
Scientific method
16–17
Scrambled sentence puzzles
142
Search. See Information search
Search costs
337, 339–341
Search effort, product knowledge and
197
Search goods
337
Secondary data
22–27
Secondary needs
103
Segmentation
30, 32, 361
benefits of, 34
divide and conquer strategy, 32–33
factors influencing, 35–37
Jungle Jim’s International Market, 
30–32
Lake, Snell, Perry, and Mermin and 
Associates, 57
managerial application, 56
summary, 54–55
Segmentation bases
behavioral, 38, 46–48
demographic, 37, 38
geographic, 37, 38, 39–41
positioning and, 51–52
psychographic, 38, 41–46
Segregation
34
Selective attention
64, 74–79
Selective thinking
247–249
Self-actualization needs
105
Self-concept
149, 278
cognitive factors, 169–172
defining, 151–153
extended self, 155–157
Gap, 149–150
impression management theory, 
159–162
loved objects, 157–158
managerial application, 175
role of, 153–162
self-monitoring, 158–159
summary, 172–173
Self-conceptions
158
Self-deprecation
160
Self-determination theory
105–106
Self-enhancement
160
Self-evaluations
152
Self-expression
43–45
Self-focus
152–153
Self-location
152, 153
Self-monitoring
158–159, 258, 301
Self-perception theory
291
Self-presentation
160
Self-prophecy
290
Self-schemas
154
Selling orientation
13
Semantics
268, 269
Semiotics
269
Sensation
64
Sensory exposure
64
Sensory proximity
79
Sensory thresholds
66–72
Seven enduring human values
42
Shaping
124
Short-term memory
72
Similarity tactic
308
Simplicity
69
Simulation heuristic
225, 230, 374–375
Sincerity
162, 165, 166
Single-attribute heuristic
231
Singular evaluation
246–247
Situational involvement
195
Social desirability bias
25
Social influence
258, 286
authority principle, 309–310
automaticity principle, 288–289
commitment and consistency principle, 
290–293
liking principle, 306–309
managerial application, 313
reciprocity principle, 293–299
scarcity principle, 299–300
Sears influence agent, 286–287
social validation principle, 300–306
summary, 311
Social risk
183
Social science
15. See also Behavioral science
Social validation principle
300–306
Society, segmentation and
34
Sociology
257
Sophistication
165, 166
Source confusion
131
Source of volume
358
Sour grapes strategy
209–210
Spatial proximity
79
Sponsorship
329
Spreading activation
128
Stealth celebrity endorsers
320
Stealth marketing
318, 320, 332
Stereotypes
34
Stimuli
conditioned and unconditioned, 121
salient, 74–77
vivid, 77–79
Stimulus-based choice
220

412 
Subject Index
Stimulus brands
220
Stimulus generalization
121
STP strategy
361
Strivers
43, 44
Struggler lifestyle segment
42
Subcultures
261
Subliminal advertising
135, 145–146
Subliminal embeds
70
Subliminal perception
70–72, 329
Suburbs
39
Succeeder lifestyle segment
42
Suggestibility
131–132
Suggestive selling
231
Sunk cost effect
243–244
Supraliminal threshold
70
Surgency
163, 164
Survey Research Lab
256
Surveys
24–25
Survivors
43, 44
Sweet lemons strategy
209
Symbols
273–275
Syntax
268, 269
Systematic processing
223
Systematic testing
22
T
Tampering
18
Tangible attributes
279, 281
Targeting
361
Target market
32
Task demands
96
Temporal proximity
79
Terminal values
280, 281
That’s-not-all technique
296–298
Theory generation
17
Theory of lay epistemology
171
Thinkers
43, 44
Thin-slice inferences
139
Thin slice theory
138–139
Time constraints
196
Tip-of-the-tongue effect
128
Tipping Point, The (Gladwell)
306, 318
Toothpaste
184
Toronto-Dominion Bank v. Boris 
Karpachev (2002)
343
Traditional model of consumer 
decision making
188–189
Traits
151. See also Multiple trait theory
Transformational motives
192
Transience
126
Transitivity
239
Translation, cultural
270, 271
Translation problems
269
Trial pricing
360
True brand universe
201
True utility function
201
Truth effect
131, 144
Typical user
166
Typical use situations
167
Typosquatting
343
U
Unbelieving
144–145
Uncertainty
consumer, 201–202
external, 201, 204, 205
internal, 201, 205
Uncertainty avoidance
278
Uncertainty-reduction model
199–206
Unconditioned response
121
Unconditioned stimulus
121
Underprocessing, biases resulting from
371–377
U.S. Census Bureau
22, 37, 40, 23, 261
U.S. Census Population Report
22
U.S. Department of Agriculture
181
U.S. Department of Justice
18
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
12, 13, 192, 308
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
338
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC)
18
University of Michigan Survey 
Research Center
282
Unobtrusive observation
24
Upward Bound
41
Urban environments
39
Usage occasions
47–48
Use activities
9–10
Utility
201
Utility function
201
V
Validation. See Social validation principle
VALS System
41–46, 281–282
Valuation effect
104
Value-expressive function
107, 108

Subject Index 
413
Value proposition
48
Values
259
cheating, 259–260
consumer, 278–282
cultural, 261, 275
instrumental and terminal, 280, 281
managerial application, 285
summary, 282–283
Value segment
46, 47
Variables
20–21, 26
Variety seeking
182, 183, 185–187
Verbal compliance
288
Violence, advertising and
275
Viral marketing
318
Viral videos
318
Visual product placement
329
Vital Statistics Report
22
Vivid stimuli
77–79
Volume, source of
358
Voluntary selective attention
74–79
W
Want-got gap
189–190
Wants, problem recognition and
192–193
Weber’s Law
67
Weblogs
335
Website design, features of
336–339
Word-association tests
26
Word-of-mouth marketing
316–320
Working memory
72
World Health Organization (WHO)
192
Y
Young & Rubicam Brand Asset Valuator
354, 355, 356
Young Digerati
41
Z
Zero correlation
20
Zip-code marketing
39

414
3M Car Care
157
7-Up
50, 54
10percentoffamazon.com
343
24 (television series)
330
1900’s House (reality television show)
5
A
A&E Channel
70
ABC
320
Absolut vodka
165
AC Nielsen
316
ACR
255
Adidas
265, 275, 327
ADT Systems
156, 191
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)
343
Aflac
168
African Queen, The (movie)
326
A. G. Edwards
340
Air Jordan
265, 275
Alka-Seltzer
270
Always
351
Amazon.com
337
AMDEdge
343
American Academy for Cosmetic Surgery
308
American Cancer Society
298
American Express
319, 322, 323, 363
American Greetings
101
American Idol (reality 
television show)
5, 7, 330
American Motors
271
American Red Cross
66
Amway Corp.
294, 327
Anheuser-Busch
186
Answers
333
AOL
334
Apple Computer
62, 63, 75, 167, 201, 302, 330
Apple Jacks
181
Apple Macintosh
204
Apprentice, The (television series)
322
Aquafresh Floss ‘N’ Cap
229
Arm & Hammer
351
Armani
49
Aroma Company, The
69
Ask.com
344
Asti Spumanti
122
AT&T
274
Aunt Jemima
68
Australian Idol (reality 
television show)
6
Avis
351
Avon
273
Axe
351
B
Bachelorette, The (reality television show)
5
Bankrate.com
342
Barbie
274, 352
Bargain Hunt (reality television show)
6
Bayer
52, 355
Behrens and Hitchcock
363
Ben & Jerry’s
51, 202, 203, 207–208
Bentley
190
BestBuy
236
Betamax formats
204, 236
Better Business Bureau
130
Betty Crocker
52, 68
Big Boy
167
Big Brother Italy (reality television show)
6
Big Macs
128
Binney & Smith
275
BizRate.com
214, 336
Blackberry
301
Black Flag
125
Bloomingdale’s
69
Bluetooth
166, 192
Blu-Ray
236
BMW
35, 50, 101, 126, 193, 229, 266, 
326–327, 352
BMW 3-Series
35
Product/Company Index

Product/Company Index 
415
BMW Z3 Roadster
326–327
Boflex Extreme
294
Boing Boing
335
Bombay Sapphire
119
Boodles
119
Bowflex
193
BP
191
Bran Buds
271
Brand sense agency
69
Brawny Paper Towels
51
Breyers
202, 203, 207
Brooks Brothers
193
Bud Light
355, 357
Budweiser
167, 185–186, 357
Budweiser Clydesdales
168
BUG
294
Bulgari Jewelry Company
328
Burger King
18, 36, 112
Business Week (magazine)
229
Buy.com
343
BzzAgent
319
C
Cadillac
70, 167, 278, 328
Caffeine Free Pepsi
35
California Raisin Advisory Board
149, 168
California Raisins
168
Callaway
188
Calvin Klein
47, 323
Campaign for Real Beauty, The
48
Campbell’s Soup
38, 52, 125, 273
Candies
323
Captain Morgan’s
274
Care Bears
101
Carl’s Jr.
78
Carnival (ice cream)
202, 203
Carnival Cruises
38
Cars (movie)
352
Cartier
328
Casio
337
Cava
122
Cavemen (television series)
169
CBS
5, 329, 330
Cengage Learning
261
Charles Schwab
343
Charlie the Tuna
168
Charmin Toilet Tissue
75
Cheerio’s
102, 359
Cherry Coke
54, 353
Chery QQ Minicar
338
Chesterfield
322
Chevette
140
Chevrolet
167, 273, 292, 306, 322
Chevrolet Spark
338
Chevy Tahoe
322
Chic-fil-A cows
168
China Basketball Association
327
Christmas Story, A (movie)
328
Chrysler
323
Cingular
274
Civilization (computer game)
266
Clairol
271
Claritas
40
Clark shoes
91–92, 93
Clive Christian #1 Perfume
51
Club Med
244
Coach
47
Coca-Cola
7, 18, 36, 50, 145, 149, 265, 269, 303, 
324, 327, 329–330, 349, 353, 354, 355, 
359, 360
Coke
50, 135
Coke Classic
36, 353
Coke Zero
353, 354, 355
Colgate
271
Colonel Sanders
68
Colonial House (reality 
television show)
5
Comedy Central
171
Compaq Computer
62
Confindustria
259
Consumer Financial Decisions survey
46
Core Secrets
294
Corn Pops
181
Corvette
278
Cox Communications
41
Craftsmen 80th Anniversary 
Edition lawn tractor
287
Crayola Crayon
66
Crest Whitestrips
11, 12
Crocodile
338
Crocs
301
CSI: NY (television series)
330
Cue
271

416 
Product/Company Index
D
Dairy Association
269
Dairy Queen
86–87
Dannon
68
Datril
351
DeBeers Company
299
Delicio.us
333
Dell Computer
62, 63, 161, 192, 194, 201, 323
Design Concepts, Inc.
257
Deutz
274
Diet Coke
355
Diet Pepsi
35, 355
Diet Pepsi Lime
35
Dionysus
341
Disney
96, 149, 236, 347–348, 349, 352–353, 
355
Disneyland
347
Disney World
347
Doggie Day Camps
156
Domaine Carneros
122
Donald Duck
347
Doritos
320, 355
Dove
48, 49, 152
Dove Chocolates
355
Dove Intensive Firming Lotion
152
Dove’s Body Nourishers
152
Dreyer’s
68
DuPont
351
Dyson
38
E
eBay
300, 342
E.B. Horn Company
314–315
Edy’s Grand Ice Cream
68, 202, 203
E-Harmony
105
eHarmony.com
191
Elizabeth Arden’s Flawless Finish Radiant 
Moisture Makeup SPF
8, 198
Energizer Bunny
168
Ephedra
244
Erna Schein
363
Esso Oil
271
E-trade
340
E.T. The Extra-Terrestrial 
(movie)
326
Euro Disney
347–348
Evitol
271
Excedrin
109
Expedia.com
343
EZ-Com
141
F
Federal Express
51, 323
Ferrari
140, 259
Firestone
317
Fisher-Price
352
Flickr
333
Folger’s
357
FoodNetwork.com
346
Foods of All Nations
193
Foote Cone and Belding
168
Forbes Magazine
324
Ford Fiesta
140
Ford Motor Company
35, 190, 319, 329–330
Ford Pinto
140
Fox
5, 7, 236, 330
Freixenet
122
Frito-Lay
320
Froot Loops
180
Frozen Coke
18
G
Gap
149–150
Gatorade
52, 105, 186–187, 279
Geico Insurance
168, 169
General Electric
149, 229
General Electric Profile and Monogram 
oven
229
GeoVALS
46
Gillette
323
GoldenEye (movie)
326–327
Good Morning America 
(television program)
320
Google
333–334, 344
Gordon’s Gin
326
Got Milk? (slogan)
323
Gottschalks
38
Great Diamond Hunt
314–315
Greenfield Consulting Group
3–4
Gucci
165, 328
H
Haagen-Dazs
202, 203, 207
Hallmark
38, 40, 355
Hanes
267, 351
Harley-Davidson
149, 153, 154, 175, 299
Harris Interactive
24

Product/Company Index 
417
Harris Poll
24
Harrods
69
HBO
244, 330
HD DVD
236
Healthy Choice
66
Heineken
37
Hennessy
165
Hershey Foods Corporation
326
Hewlett-Packard Company
62–63, 167, 194, 338
H. H. Gregg
357
Highlights
294
Hilfiger
265
Hip-Hop Abs
294
H. J. Heinz Company
321
Honda
153, 191
Hong Kong Tourist Board
270
Hooters of America, Inc.
307–308
Hoover
271
Hoover, U.K.
89
Hot Wheels
125, 274
Houston Rockets
327
Huggies Diapers
68
Hulu.com
317
Hunchback of Notre Dame, The (movie)
347
Hunt’s Prima Sauce
36
Hypalon
123
Hype
204
I
IAT
144
IBM
149
IBM clones
204
iBook
62
Idaho
351
ID Patrol
217, 218
iMac
62
Information Architects Ltd.
302
InfoScan
22
Innéov
14
Inspiron
63
Intel
273
Intel T6400
338
Intuit
257
iPhone
167
iPod
301, 330
Irish Mist
271
Ish
351
iTunes
266
Ivory
359
Izod
154
J
JapanVALS
46
JCPenney
186, 336, 337
J. Crew
154, 337
Jeep
50, 165
Jif
47
Jim Beam
322
Johnson & Johnson
351
Jolly Green Giant
168
Jordan’s Furniture
252–253
JP Morgan Chase
56
Juan Valdez
130
Jubilee
341
Judas Priest
71
Jungle Jim’s International Market
30–32
Junior Mint
325–326
K
Karl Kani
154
Kashi Good Friends
359
Kay Jewelers
267
Keebler elves
130
Keep America Beautiful, Inc.
303–304, 305
Kellogg’s
165, 168, 180–181, 271, 319
Kellogg’s Corn Flakes
359
Kellogg’s Rice Krispies Snap, Crackle, 
and Pop
169
Kenmore
357
Kentucky Fried Chicken
68, 71, 74
Kimberly-Clark
68, 252
Kmart
51, 153, 266, 296
Kodak Company
46, 105, 337, 355
Kool-Aid
145–146
Kool-Aid man
169
Kraft
20, 319
Kroger
51, 226, 252
L
Lacoste (La Chemise Lacoste)
154, 338
L.A. Gear
323
Lake, Snell, Perry, and Mermin and 
Associates
57
Land’s End
105, 343
Landsend.com
337

418 
Product/Company Index
Lean Cuisine
193
L’eggs
351
Lenovo Group Ltd.
194
Lenox
52
Lever 2000
156, 359
Lexus
105, 125, 126, 165, 328
LGE cell phone
229
Life cereal
130
Like a Prayer (music video)
323
Limewire
266
Lincoln Mercury
323
Lion King, The (movie)
347
Lions Gate
236
Lipton
351
Listerine
52, 125
Little Mikey
130
L.L. Bean
165, 299, 343
L’Oreal
14, 105, 267
Louis Vuitton
165
Lucky Strike
319
Luvs
68
M
M&M’s
48, 168, 269, 326
Mac
167, 302
Macintosh
204
Macy’s
69
Mad Men (television series)
70
Magic Bullet Blender
294
Mahogany Cards With Sound
40
Mahogany greeting cards
38, 40
Marlboro
52, 165, 166
Marlboro Man
52
Mars, Inc.
269
Martin Agency
168
Martini & Rossi
119–120
Mary Kay
24, 358
MasterCard
124
Matador
271
Mattel
125, 352
Maybelline
105
Mazda
335
Mazda3
335
McCann Worldgroup
155
McDonald’s
83, 112, 128, 129, 130, 149, 165, 265, 
273, 300, 323
McGruff the Crime Dog
168–169
MCI
340
MCI-Worldcom
344
Mediamark Research 
Intelligence, LLC
45–46
MediaVest
346
Mercedes-Benz
50, 126, 140, 149, 229, 274, 355
Merck
238–239
Merrill Lynch
364
MGM/Columbia Tristar
236
Mickey Mouse
347
Microsoft
334, 335
Microsoft Corp.
199
Microsoft Vista
302
Milky Way
125
Miller
355
Miller Brewing Company
207–208
Miller Genuine Draft (MGD)
207–208, 357
Miller Lite
355
Millward Brown
3
Mini Cooper
101
Minute Maid Maj Jong (game)
328
Minute Maid
328
Miramax
236
Mr. Clean
168
Mrs. Butterworth
169
Mist Stick
271
Model-T
35
Molson
355
Monsoon
267
Mountain Bell Company
270
Mountain Dew
165, 322
MSN
344
MSN Spaces
335
MTV
5, 38
N
Nabisco
273, 353
Nancy Drew (computer game)
266
Napster
266
NASCAR
274
National Basketball Association (NBA)
327
National Crime Prevention Council
169
National Lampoon (magazine)
171
Nationwide Insurance
239
Nautical
265
NBA
274

Product/Company Index 
419
NBC
322, 330
Nestlé
14
Net Flix
236
New Coke
36
NFL
309
Nielsen Market Research Company
22
Nielsen Media Research
7
Nielsen TV Ratings Reports
22
Nike
19, 87, 105, 110–111, 165, 167, 193, 269, 
274, 275, 322, 323, 324, 327
Nokia
149, 165
Nordictrack
193
Nordstrom
153
Notebook Privacy Computer Filter
156
Nouilly Prat
119
NTL
351
Nutricosmetics
14
O
Ocean Spray
355
Office, The (television series)
330
Oil of Olay
125
Oldsmobile
355
Old Spice
351
Old Spice High Endurance 
Antiperspirant-Deodorant
27
Olympus
85
One-Touch Can Opener
294
Orbitz.com
343
Orvis
343
Oscar Meyer
319
Ovaltine
101
P
P8600
338
PalmOne Treo 600
229
Pampers
193, 351
Panama
333
Papa John’s
221
Parmalat
344
PayPal
342
Pears Soap
322
Peeps
52
Pepsi
35, 37, 323, 355
PepsiCo
68, 271
Pepsi Cola
19, 35, 50
Pepsi Max
35
Pepsi One
35, 37
Pepsodent
274–275
pets.com
337
PetsHotels
156
Philadelphia Eagles
324
Piaget
51
Piaggio
319
Picnic (movie)
135
Pillsbury Doughboy
130, 168
Pizza Hut
221
Planter’s Mr. Peanut
169
Politically Incorrect 
(television program)
323
Polly Pocket
352
Polo Ralph Lauren
154
Pop-Tarts
181
Porsche
140, 299, 328
Post Cereal Co.
168
PQ Media
329
Prevacid
191
Pringles
74
PRIZM
40
PRIZMNE
40–41
Proactive Solutions
294
Procter & Gamble (P&G)
11, 12, 13, 24, 37, 68, 75, 130, 193, 252, 
300, 319, 340, 351, 359
Public Broadcasting System (PBS)
5
Pur Flavor Filtration System
75
Pur Flavor Options
75
Purdue
351
Q
Quaker Oats man
169
Quaker State
37
Quest Cigarettes
170
R
Ragu
36
Rahmens
302
Raid
330
Ramada
355
Ray-Ban
328
Reader’s Digest
282
“Real Beauty” campaign (Dove)
152
Real World, The (reality 
television show)
5
Red Bull
191, 204, 278, 319
Red Dog
207–208
Red Ryder BB Gun
328
Reebok
267

420 
Product/Company Index
Reese’s Pieces
326
Reichenstein, Oliver
302
Revlon
167, 323
Reye’s Syndrome Foundation
299
Rice Krispies
180
Richard Childress Racing
274
Riken
123
Rolex
165, 266
Rolling Stone Magazine
282
Rolls Royce
74, 140, 271
Ronald McDonald
128, 167
Royal Doulton
52
S
St. Louis Cardinals
186
Saks Fifth Avenue
69
Samarin
270
Samuel Adams
185
Schick Intuition
229
Schweppes Tonic Water
271
SC Johnson Company
330
Scope
52
Scripps Metworks Interactive
346
Seagram’s
327–328
Sealtest
353
Sears
153, 257, 286, 288, 293, 308, 313, 323, 
338, 357
Sears.com
338
Secret Deodorant
52
Seinfeld (television program)
325–326
Sesame Street
355
Shanghai Sharks
327
Silver Mist
271
Sky vodka
165
Skyworks
328
Smucker’s
351
Snackwell’s
38
Snapple
355
Snickers
137, 190
SoBe Adrenaline Rush
138
Sony
96, 214–215, 236, 319, 
349, 355
Sony Ericsson Mobile Communication 
Company
320
Sony Pictures
236
Sony PlayStation
3, 236
Sopranos, The (television series)
330
Soup-On-The-Go
38
Special K.
180
Sprite
38, 54, 324, 340
SRI Consulting Business Intelligence 
(SRIC-BI)
41, 43, 44, 45, 46
ST DuPont
51
Starbucks Coffee
9, 38, 83, 167, 278, 355
Starbury
275
Star-Kist
168
Starter
265
Stoli’s vodka
165
Stove Top Stuffing
358
Subway
38, 51, 132
Sudoku
170
Sunkist
351
Sun-Maid
168
Super Bowl
73, 116, 152, 320
Survivor (reality television show)
5, 329
Suzuki
153
Swatch
355
Swiffer
7
T
T6400
338
T6600
338
Taco Bell Chihuahua
168
Tag Heuer
323
Tanqueray
119
Target
257, 266, 274, 361
TD Ameritrade
340, 343
TD Waterhouse
343
Teddy Grahams
355
Tide
66
Timberline
154, 165
Tire Discounters
244
Titleist
188
Tivo
194–195
T-Mobile
318
Tokyo Disneyland
347
Tony the Tiger
68, 130
Toshiba
236
Total Gym 1500
294
Touchstone
236
Toyota
192, 300
Toyota Camry
190
Toyota Prius
3, 4
Trading Rooms (reality 
television show)
6
Trading Spaces (reality television show)
6, 7

Product/Company Index 
421
Travelers Insurance
239
Travelocity.com
343, 363
TremorTeen
319
Tupperware
358
Turtle Wax
157
TV Guide
282
Twitter
171
Tyco
344
Tylenol
52, 109, 351
U
UltraBrite
125
Umbro
271
Unilever
152, 156
United Pan-Europe Communications
351
U.S. Air Force
105, 154
U.S. Army
105, 154, 155
U.S. Marines
154
U.S. Navy
154
United Way
124
USA Today
168
Usunier, Jean-Claude
270
V
VALS System
41–46
Vanilla Coke
353
Verizon Communications
86, 192, 300
Versace
328
Versa-Com
141
Vespa
319
VHS formats
204, 236
Viagra
323
Vioxx
237–238
Virginia Slims
154
Vocalpoint
319
Volkswagen
149
Volvo
51
VW Beetle
140
Vya
119
W
Walmart
49, 51, 236, 299, 337, 346, 361
Warner Brothers Studios
236
Wedgwood
47
Weight Watchers
193, 202, 203
Weldon, Fay
328
Wendy’s
112, 191
Werther’s
101–102
Wesson
355
Whirlpool
269, 357
White House Black Market (WHBM)
299
Whorf, Benjamin Lee
268
Wild Cherry Pepsi
35
Williams-Sonoma
218
Windows operating system
199
World of Warcraft (computer game)
266
X
X-box 360
300
Xerox
50
Y
Yahoo!
165, 168, 333–334, 344
YouTube
318, 320, 333
Z
Ziba Design, Inc.
62–63
Zyklon
271
Zykon
271

