Cover-image not available

CONSUMER CULTURE
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Families in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Freshwater Issues, Zachary A. Smith and Grenetta Thomassey
Gay and Lesbian Issues, Chuck Stewart
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Religion and Politics, Glenn H. Utter and John W. Storey
U.S. National Security, Cynthia Watson
War Crimes and Justice, Howard Ball
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as terrorism, sexual harassment,
homelessness, AIDS, gambling, animal rights, and air pollution.
Written by professional writers, scholars, and nonacademic
experts, these books are authoritative, clearly written, up-to-
date, and objective. They provide a good starting point for
research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject; a detailed chronology; biographical
sketches; facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material; a directory of organizations and agencies;
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources; a glossary; and
an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to better understand the
social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing the
world today.


CONSUMER CULTURE
A Reference Handbook
Douglas J. Goodman and Mirelle Cohen
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2004 by Douglas J. Goodman and Mirelle Cohen
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Goodman, Douglas J.
Consumer culture : a reference handbook / Douglas J. Goodman,
Mirelle Cohen.
p.  cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes index.
ISBN  1-57607-975-9 (hardcover : alk. paper)   1-57607-976-7 (e-book)
1.  Consumption (Economics)—Social aspects.  2.  Consumers.  I.
Cohen, Mirelle.  II.  Title.  III.  Series.
HC79. C6G665 2003
306.3—dc22
2003020916 
08
07
06
05
04
10   9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Note: Parts of chapters 2 and 3 are to be published as “Consumption as a Social
Problem” in G. Ritzer, ed., The Handbook of Social Problems, Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 2003.
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an e-book. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
.
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

Contents
List of Tables, xi
Preface, xiii
1
From Consumption to Consumer Culture, 1
Consumption as a Culture, 3
Traditional Consumption, 5
Fashion, 6
Fashioning Demand, 11
Department Stores, 13
Middle-Class Culture Is Consumer Culture, 18
After the Department Store, 21
References, 24
2
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture, 27
Economics of Consumption, 28
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions, 31
Contradictions between Consumer Culture and Capitalist
Production, 32
Contradictions between Consumer Culture and Bourgeois
Culture, 34
The Consumer as Sovereign and as Dupe, 35
Consumer Contradictions in Politics, 41
Conclusion, 44
References, 45
3
The Consumption of Anticonsumption, 49
Hip Consumerism, 51
New Age Consumerism, 55
vii

Cheesy Consumerism, 58
Consumption as an International Social Problem, 59
Glocalization, 60
McDonaldization as Heterogeneity and Homogeneity, 62
The Contradictions of Global Consumer Culture, 64
The Consumption of Anti-Americanization, 66
McDonaldization in France, 67
Conclusion, 69
References, 70
4
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture, 75
Race and Ethnicity, 78
Gender: The Feminine, 83
Sexual Orientation and Camp, 86
Class, 70
Style as an Individual Expression, 93
Inequality Based on Age, 96
The Poor, 99
Conclusion, 105
References, 106
5
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture, 109
Starbucks and Anonymous Inequality, 111
Coffee and Capitalism, 116
Economic Cosmopolitanism, 120
The Latte Revolution and Fair Trade, 122
Distance between Producers and Consumers, 125
Boycott Movements, 129
Conclusion, 136
References, 138
6
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations, 141
People, 141
Charlotte Beers (1935– ), 141
William Bernbach (1911–1982), 142
Aristide Boucicaut (1810–1877), 143
Florence Kelley (1859–1932), 144
John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), 145
Ray Kroc (1902–1984), 146
Ralph Nader (1934– ), 147
viii
Contents

Vance Packard (1914–1996), 148
Queen Elizabeth I (1533–1603), 149
Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929), 149
Aaron Montgomery Ward (1843–1913), 150
Josiah Wedgwood (1730–1795), 152
Helen Rosen Woodward (1882–1960), 153
Events, Trends, and Organizations, 154
Bourgeois Culture, 154
Civil Rights Boycotts (1950s and 1960s), 155
Diners Club Card (1950), 156
Great Depression (1929–1939), 157
The Peacock Revolution (1968), 158
Starbucks, 159
Volkswagen Beetle, 160 
World Trade Organization (WTO), 161
7
Organizations, Associations, and Government and
International Agencies, 163
Selected Organizations Based in the United States, 163
Selected Organizations Based Abroad, 175
8
Print and Nonprint Resources, 187
Books, 187
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals, 212
Videos, 228
Selected Websites, 231
Index, 237
About the Authors, 251
Contents
ix


List of Tables
1.1
A History of Sugar Consumption in Great Britain, 8
1.2
Tea Imports for Home Consumption: 1700–1799
(Annual Average), 9
1.3
Early Department Stores, 15
1.4
Comparison of Sears and Montgomery Ward
Department Stores, 1945 and 1954, 20
1.5
Facts about Malls, 22
2.1
Political Advertising on Television: Breakdown of Total
Dollars Spent, 43
3.1
Consumption and Happiness, 50
4.1
Ethnic Differences in Product Usage and Store
Patronage, 81
4.2
Women’s Expenditure as a Percentage of Total
Expenditure, 84
4.3
Mean Spending by Men and Women over a Two-Week
Period to the Nearest Dollar, 85
4.4
Marketing to Gays and Lesbians, 87
4.5
Typical Spending in Family Life Cycle Stages, 100
4.6
Standard of Living of All American Families (1900) and
Poor American Families (1970), 101
4.7
Average Annual Food Expenditures, 2000: Household
by Pretax Income, 102
4.8
Household Indebtedness as a Percentage of Disposable
Income, 104
5.1
Stigmatizing versus Anonymous Inequality, 113
5.2
World Coffee Production, 1950–1990, 116
5.3
Historical Time Line of Consumer Boycotts, 130
xi


Preface
T
he analyst is always involved in the culture that he or she is
studying. This is accepted as necessary in the social sciences. It
is why anthropologists generally engage in participant obser-
vation by living with the culture that they study, and it is why so-
ciologists generally study their own culture. Despite its necessity,
it is also seen as a danger, because we cannot help but bring prej-
udices, stereotypes, habits of thought, and assumptions to the
culture that we are studying.
That there are dangers associated with our necessary en-
gagement with a culture is true of the study of any culture, but it
is especially true of consumer culture for three reasons. First, the
study of consumer culture does not have the rich history of schol-
arship that we see in the study of cultures shaped by production.
To study the effects of the division of labor, industrialization, vo-
cations, or changes in the mode of production, the sociologists
can turn to a formidable body of theory and research: Émile
Durkheim, Max Weber, and Karl Marx, to name just a few. These
great analysts of society wrote at the time when our modern cul-
ture was forming, and they provide us with a standpoint from
which to understand our present concerns.
There are a number of reasons for this lack of study, but there
are two main ones. In the early modern period, the changes in
consumption (discussed in chapter 1) were not as obvious as the
changes in production (the building of factories, separation of
home and workplace, growth of cities, etc.). The other main rea-
son is that men were primarily concerned with work and pro-
duction whereas women where mainly concerned with con-
sumption (discussed in chapter 4). People then, and some even
xiii

today, do not feel that what women do is as important as what
men do.
The second reason that the study of consumer culture is es-
pecially difficult is that we tend to think of consumption as a nat-
ural thing that is independent of historical and social context.
Since people always and everywhere must consume, we assume
that a consumer culture must have always existed and every-
where been the same. Although few people are totally ignorant of
the history of production (for example, the steam engine, the pro-
duction line, computers), most will find the history of consump-
tion related in chapter 1 as well as the discussion of the changing
relation between consumer culture and inequality in chapters 4
and 5 almost completely new.
The third reason for the difficulty of studying consumer cul-
ture relates more directly to this book. Scholars today, especially
those who wish to write books that will be read, must think in
terms of the consumption of their work. This means that the very
thing that we are studying has shaped every aspect of this book:
the main ideas that we have chosen to present, the examples that
we have used to illustrate these ideas, the structure of the sen-
tences, the word choices, and so forth. This book is inextricably
intertwined with consumer culture, and the reader could pay the
authors no higher compliment than to use some of the insights
and tools presented in these chapters to critique this very book.
This book is both a scholarly analysis and a consumer prod-
uct. In line with our attempt to present a scholarly analysis, this
book is meant to be informative, challenging, and critical. As a
consumer product, we have tried to make this book accessible,
useful, and entertaining. This book supposes that the reader is in-
timately knowledgeable about consumer culture—indeed an ex-
pert on how to use consumer culture for the reader’s economic
advantage and amusement. Nevertheless, we do not assume that
the reader will be familiar with the history of consumer culture or
what makes consumer culture unique. It is our intent to use his-
torical and sociological analysis to reveal what is extraordinary in
our everyday, taken-for-granted practices of consumption.
Chapter 1 is a necessarily short and simplified history of con-
sumer culture. This chapter uses history not to throw names and
dates at the reader, but to reveal that what we often believe to be
natural, such as a concern with fashion, is in fact, historically
unique. Consumption has changed, not only in how we do it, but
in how we think about it.
xiv
Preface

Chapter 2 looks at the contradictions of consumer culture.
For example, our culture contains messages that, on one hand,
consumers are sovereign and, on the other hand, consumers are
manipulated dupes. The chapter examines both the economic
background of these contradictions and their political effects.
Chapter 3 examines one particularly important contradiction
in detail: We use consumption to express our disgust with con-
sumption. Our very criticisms of consumption are often part of
making consumer culture stronger. The chapter examines a num-
ber of forms of this contradiction, including its international ex-
pression.
Both chapters 4 and 5 examine the way that inequality works
in consumer culture. Chapter 4 argues that inequality that works
by stigmatizing groups or individuals is being subverted by con-
sumer culture. Chapter 5 argues that inequality that works
through anonymous global connections is made stronger by con-
sumer culture. Together the two chapters contend that the way
that inequality works in consumer culture is different than it has
worked in other cultures and different than most of us think that
it works. Chapter 5 concludes by discussing the political ramifi-
cations of this change.
The rest of the chapters are intended to provide the reader
with resources for further research, whether for their own curios-
ity or for papers and assignments. Chapter 6 presents a short de-
scription of those people, events, trends, and organizations that
are important to the story that we wanted to tell in this book.
Chapter 7 provides a description of organizations, associations,
and agencies concerned with consumer culture, as well as infor-
mation for contacting them. Chapter 8 consists of an annotated
list of books, chapters, articles, and videos that further discuss
consumer culture.
Preface
xv


1
From Consumption to
Consumer Culture
W
e live in a consumer culture. Consumption pervades our
everyday lives and structures our everyday practices. The
values, meanings, and costs of what we consume have
become an increasingly important part of our social and personal
experiences. Occasionally, we may wonder at the amount of time
we spend consuming, thinking about consuming, and preparing
to consume. It may even occur to us that not all cultures have been
so focused on consumption. Nevertheless, we know relatively lit-
tle about how our culture came to be this way, nor are we aware
of the full extent to which consumption has shaped our social life.
The news media is filled with information about consump-
tion—not only in the form of advertising, but also as news about
businesses, lifestyles, and economic indicators. But the news does
not provide the basis for understanding a consumer culture be-
cause these news items were written as reports on current prob-
lems and interests—on the financial problems of a company or the
latest fashion trends. Such stories do not tell us how we came to be
a culture that identifies freedom with consumer choice or that sees
consumption as a means of self-fulfillment and shopping as a
form of entertainment. They do not tell us how consumption be-
came one of the central organizing motifs of our society.
For the most part, we only become aware of consumption
when it is a problem: when a slowing economy keeps people
from buying houses, when cars are built with a concern for sala-
bility rather than safety, when there are shortages of the latest ver-
sion of what we have come to view as necessary, when we realize
1

the environmental degradation caused by producing what is in
fashion and discarding what is out of fashion, or when we read
about the adverse effects that a globalized consumer culture has
on other parts of the world. Understanding a social phenomena
often begins with recognizing a problem, but it cannot end there.
We need to understand the social and historical context of a con-
sumer society.
In order to understand our consumer society, we should look
at more than the obvious economic processes and practices of ex-
change. We should look at the way in which these economic
processes and practices of exchange give people meaningful ob-
jects to incorporate into their social interactions and their per-
sonal biographies.
All cultures have found meanings in material goods. An-
thropologists and sociologists have long told us that every object
possesses a meaning. Objects may represent our social status or
they may be concrete symbols of our most intimate experiences.
They may represent a memory of our past, a sign of our current
identity, or a symbol of what we hope to be. Except perhaps as a
philosophical exercise, it is useless to try to separate out the real
object from its meaning.
Consumption, then, is about meaning. Consumption can be
defined as the set of practices through which commodities become
a part of a particular individual. The archetypal model here
would be eating, in which a commodity becomes a physical part
of the individual, but more important are those practices where
commodities become part of the individual symbolically. Goods
are consumed not only for their material characteristics, but even
more for what they symbolize—their meanings, associations, and
their involvement in our self-image.
These symbolic meanings are certainly social, but that does
not mean that society determines the meaning of the object in any
absolute way. Different people can find different meanings in the
same object. We certainly find this when we move from culture to
culture. Objects made for the most mundane functions, such as
grinding food or clasping a robe, may show up in another culture
as an objet d’art. But even within the same culture, the meaning
of the object can vary. Many yard sales have been the stage for the
magical transformation of an object from useless trash to valuable
collectible.
Consumption is not simply the acquiring of a product’s prede-
termined meanings. Instead, it should be seen as a form of social
2
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

interaction—perhaps as participation in a social language. Con-
sumption is not a one-way process going from social definition to
individual use but a process of negotiation and contestation. Mar-
tial metaphors are often used, seeing the consumer as a guerrilla
attempting to outflank the big guns of the advertiser. But it is
perhaps better to see consumption as a playground where war
is sometimes played, along with hide-and-seek, dress-up, and
many other barely organized games.
The social production of meaning and the individual’s ap-
propriation of meaning are inevitably linked aspects of a single
cultural process. This is why the consumption of a socially mean-
ingful object always involves the production of individual mean-
ing. No matter how strong the social meanings that are promoted
through advertising, as soon as a consumer acquires an object, he
or she immediately produces an interpretation of that object, a
story that gives it special significance. No matter how many other
people may own that same pair of pants or how many billboard
models may advertise them, they become my pants that I bought
in San Francisco and wore hiking the Cascades with my best
friend and stained with a coffee spill when I heard the surprising
news and which I still keep despite the fact that my waist has now
expanded beyond all hope of ever fitting into them again. As the
French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu puts it, “the consumer helps to
produce the product he consumes, by a labor of identification and
decoding” (1984, 100).
Consumption as a Culture
It is tempting to regard consumption as a practice that can be
discussed independent of its social and historical context, since
it is assumed to be a ubiquitous aspect of all social life. Such a
view of consumption misses the different roles that consump-
tion can play in various cultures, and it misses the historical
development of these diverse relations between culture and
consumption. In this book, consumption will be examined as so-
cially and historically variable. These practices and their mean-
ings differ from culture to culture and—the focus of this chap-
ter—they differ historically.
Consumption is an important topic for those who wish to
understand our society precisely because it is unquestioned. It is
this unquestioned quotidian aspect that suggests that we are in a
Consumption as a Culture
3

consumer culture. While consumption is an act, consumer cul-
ture is a way of life.
In general, we can speak of a culture whenever we can talk
about a community as an agent or as having an intention. For ex-
ample, at a number of points we will write that consumer culture
“does” something or “presents” itself as something. When such
statements are not patently absurd, we are speaking of something
like a culture. We must remember that when we use the term cul-
ture, we are not saying that everyone in that community shares
those values or practices, nevertheless, a culture is more than a
convenient generalization. The term culture indicates values and
practices that individuals can reject but usually at a price—at
least of feeling different and more likely the price of becoming the
focus of some form of social control.
It is quite likely that never before in history has consumption
become one of the central values of a culture. Consumption has
always occurred, but in previous societies, consumption was pri-
marily a reflection of other values such as kinship systems or
forms of hierarchy. In these other societies, one would have been
socialized into patterns of consumption that were tasteful or ap-
propriate to one’s social position; but in modern society, one
learns simply to consume, and tasteful or appropriate consump-
tion is only one of the myriad choices. It is this focus on con-
sumption as a central value that makes ours a consumer culture.
It appears that consumer culture had its beginnings in West-
ern capitalism. The norms, objects, practices, and power struc-
tures of our society have cohered increasingly around consump-
tion. Those cultural practices that represent alternatives to
consumer culture, such as bourgeois high culture, are becoming
increasingly commodified, and—as we will discuss in chapter 3—
even those practices that are explicitly anticonsumption, such as
environmental concerns, have become a way to sell more com-
modities.
Consumption no longer seems to simply reflect our cultural
values; it has itself become a cultural value. It has entered into the
warp and woof of the fabric of modern life. All forms of social
life—from education to sexual relations to political campaigns—
are now seen as consumer relations. Every public space, every oc-
casion for public gathering, every creative expression is seen as
an opportunity to encourage more consumption. Our lives ap-
parently amount to little more than a diversity of opportunities to
consume.
4
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

Consumer culture has been incredibly successful. Not only
has it been successful in satisfying our needs and desires, but it
has also been successful in redefining what our needs are and in
expanding our desires. If we accept these desires as natural or in-
evitable, then consumer society seems natural and inevitable as
well. If, however, we have some misgivings about this culture,
want to change it, or aim to reject it altogether, then we must
begin to understand it as a sociohistorical phenomenon that
could have been different.
Traditional Consumption
Before the Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth century, what
people consumed was, for the most part, either made by the fam-
ily or made locally by people with whom the consumer had a per-
sonal relation. Towns had shops where people could buy things,
but these shops tended to be an extension of the craftsman’s
workshop. In fact, the word shop meant porch of a residence in
Old Saxon. You could not go “shopping” in the modern sense of
browsing, because there were no shops with a mixture of goods,
and there was rarely anything on display, since most items were
made to order. Furthermore, entering a shop entailed an obliga-
tion to buy. The main practice that occurred in these shops was
not browsing, but bargaining. There were no fixed prices and no
marked prices even to act as a guide.
The closest thing in early Europe to what we would call
shopping occurred in the weekly markets and seasonal fairs.
Markets were only open one day a week, but there you could
browse through the products of the nearby countryside and the
goods made by local craftsmen. “Since people went there on set
days, it was a natural focus for social life,” states historian Fer-
nand Braudel (1982, 29). “It was at the market that townspeople
met, made deals, quarreled, perhaps came to blows.” One can
still attend such weekly markets in small towns and daily mar-
kets in large cities throughout Europe, Africa, and South Amer-
ica and find them operating very much as they did in the prein-
dustrial era.
Fairs usually had more of a selection and drew sellers from
outside the community and even from other countries. The
biggest fairs were virtually international markets. However, fairs
were generally held only once a year. A few of the larger dealers
Traditional Consumption
5

had booths, but most just used a temporary table, and many
craftsmen and peddlers simply spread their goods on the ground
or walked among the crowds.
The historical pattern in America was somewhat different.
Unlike in Europe, where markets and fairs preceded the develop-
ment of shops, in America shops emerged as the prevailing way
of buying and selling in its early colonial period. This was be-
cause the colonial period was dominated by such corporations as
the British East India Company, which controlled the provisions.
Some of the posts set up by the large trading companies even re-
sembled chain stores. It was not until the eighteenth century that
markets and fairs became popular in the United States.
However, nowhere in Europe or America was there anything
that could be called a consumer culture before the nineteenth cen-
tury. Certainly, there was consumption earlier than the nineteenth
century, and it was related to the culture, but it would have to be
said that consumption was in the service of other culturally de-
fined status systems rather than the central value of that system.
Consumption might have represented royal power or family re-
lations, but consumption was not itself a value system.
Fashion
Before there could be a consumer culture, there first had to be an
interest in fashion. Fashion includes clothing, but also any object
where there is a concern for what is different, new, and improved,
and which allows us to express our individuality. One sociologist
declared that, “one cannot understand the modern consumer so-
ciety and the meaning of consumption in a modern society if the
social mechanism of fashion, a self-dynamic social process, is not
properly understood and analysed” (Gronow 1997, xi).
Fashion is so central to modern-day consumption and so
much a part of expressing our individuality that it is difficult to
imagine a culture in which it is not a major force. It is equally diffi-
cult to grasp how great a change it introduced into people’s every-
day lives and expectations. To understand the uniqueness of con-
sumer culture, we must realize that fashion has not always been of
concern to people. Not all cultures have been interested in the nov-
elty produced by fashionable change, and even where there has
been interest, there has rarely been the means to pursue fashion.
People seem to have always been interested in the beautiful or in
6
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

signs of status, but the pursuit of the new for its own sake, of nov-
elty as an individual expression, is itself something new and novel.
Historians (McCracken 1988; Braudel 1973) have convinc-
ingly traced the beginning of Western culture’s concern with fash-
ion to the sixteenth-century court of Elizabeth I (1533–1603; see
profile of Queen Elizabeth I in chapter 6). It was there that we saw
the beginnings of a conception of fashion that would spread to
the middle class, making possible a consumer culture. It was at
that time, in the last quarter of the sixteenth century in England,
that consumption first took off amongst the European nobility.
This has been attributed to two important developments. First,
Queen Elizabeth I used the dramatic spectacle of fashion as a dis-
play of governmental power. Second, she forced social competi-
tion among the nobility by removing them from their locality
where they were clearly superior and forcing them to attend the
London court where they had to compete with equals.
Before this time, consumption had always been a family mat-
ter that involved an organization that spanned the generations.
Commodities were chosen because of their ability to grow more
valuable as they grew older, with the idea that they would be
passed down to succeeding generations. Newness and novelty
were seen as the marks of commonness. However, the Eliza-
bethan nobleman now began to spend less for his family and
more to secure his place in this new social competition. Goods se-
lected as markers in a social competition required very different
characteristics than those purchased to be handed down. There
was no longer a concern for increasing value over time; instead,
the consumer focused on the ability of the commodity to express
the individuality of the consumer, his or her difference from oth-
ers of the same social rank.
Of course, this was not the first time that consumption was
used for social competition, but what occurred next in European
history is almost unprecedented. During the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, this competitive consumption spread be-
yond the court to create new institutions and lay the foundation
for a consumer culture—that is, a culture that does not simply
use consumption as one tool in its status system, but for which
consumption becomes a central value. Historians tell us of a
gradual increase in consumption during the time of the Eliza-
bethan court, but they describe a dramatic takeoff in the early
eighteenth century as the fashion system took hold outside the
court (Breen 1993, 251–252).
Fashion
7

One of the opening events of this consumer revolution was
the wild enthusiasm with which the English greeted the cheap
calico and muslin imported from India around the turn of the
century. The sudden demand for this cloth was one of the first in-
dications that fashion was assuming an unprecedented impor-
tance that extended beyond the elite. At about the same time,
there was a huge increase in the import of certain food items,
specifically sugar, tea, and coffee (Mintz 1985; see tables 1.1 and
8
From Consumption to Consumer Culture
Table 1.1
A History of Sugar Consumption in Great Britain
8000 B.C.
Sugarcane is first domesticated in New Guinea.
6000 B.C.
Sugar is diffused from New Guinea to the Philippines and India,
and possibly Indonesia.
1000 A.D.
Sugar is introduced into Western Europe.
1096 A.D.
Sugar reaches Venice, and Venice subsequently becomes a major
reexporting center for Europe.
1100 A.D.
Sugar is introduced to England.
1319 A.D.
The first documented shipload of sugar is sent directly to England.
1627 A.D.
Settlement of Barbados is established. It becomes England’s major
sugar-producing colony.
1650 A.D.
Sugar moves from being a luxury and a rarity to a commonplace
necessity. 
1655–
Jamaica is colonized by the British. During the next 100 years,
1660 A.D.
it will receive 662,400 slaves, primarily employed on British sugar
plantations. By 1660, England consumes 1,000 hogsheads of sugar,
and British colonies export 2,000 hogsheads (96,666 gallons) of
sugar.
1700 A.D.
England consumes 50,000 hogsheads (3.25 million gallons) of sugar
(4 pounds per capita), and British colonies export 18,000 hogsheads
(1.2 million gallons).
1753 A.D.
110,000 hogsheads (7.1 million gallons) of sugar are imported to
England (12 pounds per capita), and another 6,000 (290,000
gallons) hogsheads are exported elsewhere by British colonies.
1830 A.D.
Total British colonial production rises to 572,000 tons, an increase
of more than 233 percent in 30 years.
1890 A.D.
World production exceeds 6 million tons, a 500 percent increase in
30 years.
1900 A.D.
Sugar has firmly entered the diet of every working family and
supplies nearly one-fifth of the calories in the English diet.
Source: Adapted from Sidney W. Minz. 1985. Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History. New
York: Viking Press.

1.2). This was significant because of the speed with which these
items changed from the luxuries of elites into everyday necessi-
ties for the masses. Also significant was that the cloths, sugar, tea,
and coffee (we will have more to say about coffee in chapter 5)
were produced in areas remote from Europe, then introduced into
mass trade. It was the first evidence of the globalizing effect of
consumer culture.
The historian Sydney Mintz describes the importance of this
change:
The consumption of these items by proletarian con-
sumers marked a turning-point in western history.
Masses of European working people, none of whom
had ever before had access to products coming from
more than a few miles away, now became the every-
day consumers of what had quite recently been remote
and precious luxuries. As they did so, their relation-
ship to their own labour changed. Without recogniz-
ing it, they became dependent upon markets that far
exceeded their own visions of the world. . . . The
meaning of work, the definition of self, the very nature
of material things must have seemed to change, as
commodities, in the new capitalist sense, became com-
monplace. What it meant to be a person would now
become a different thing, too.
Fashion
9
Table 1.2 Tea Imports for Home Consumption: 1700–1799
(Annual Average)
England and Wales
Thirteen Colonies
Year
Legal Pounds
Estimated Legal
Legal Pounds
Estimated Legal
per Capita
and Illegal Pounds
per Capita
and Illegal Pounds
per Capita
per Capita
1700–1709
0.01
—
—
—
1710–1719
0.05
—
—
—
1720–1729
0.10
—
—
—
1730–1739
0.17
0.50
—
—
1740–1749
0.29
1.00
—
—
1750–1759
0.49
1.10
0.11
0.43
1760–1769
0.81
1.60
0.19
0.80
1770–1779
0.70
1.40
0.13
—
1780–1789
1.26
2.00
—
—
1790–1799
2.00
2.10 
—
—
Source: Adapted from Carole Shammas. 1993. “Changes in English and Anglo-American Consumption from
1550–1800.” In Consumption and the World of Goods, John Brewer and Roy Porter, eds., 184. London: Routledge.

Mintz further describes,
A newly emerging world in which working people
produced less and less of what they themselves con-
sumed; in which they filled most of their needs by sell-
ing their labour for wages and buying what they con-
sumed in an impersonal market; and in which their
purchases became a measure of some kind of their own
identities. . . . To say that these substances became a
measure of people’s identities is to claim that the
people who consumed them somehow changed in
their own eyes or the eyes others, by buying and con-
suming them. Part of this assertion is the idea that the
newly emerging capitalist world carried within it dif-
fering conceptions both of what an individual was, and
of what an individual might become. (1993, 266–267)
Throughout this period, prosperous merchants and aristo-
crats began to fill their homes with such imported goods as for-
eign paintings, oriental rugs, china tea services, and furniture
made from tropical woods. Even among the less than prosperous,
there was an increased interest in decorating the dining room and
the bedroom. Much of this decorating involved the newly indus-
trialized manufactured goods such as textile products, pottery,
glass, and paper. These increasingly affordable items spread
quickly, becoming so common that they appeared in the homes of
peasants and laborers. This rapid spread of consumer goods was
aided by both demographic changes and, perhaps most impor-
tantly, the Industrial Revolution. It would be a mistake, however,
to think that the Industrial Revolution happened independently
of what could be called a consumer revolution—or even worse, as
has been often assumed, that the Industrial Revolution caused the
change in consumption. One clue is that the industries that blos-
somed in the Industrial Revolution were primarily those in the
consumer sector rather than those in the heavy industrial section
(Wyrwa 1998, 444).
The change in consumption guaranteed that those who in-
dustrialized would have a market. Consumers who are inter-
ested in fashion will buy what is new and novel. This makes
them more interested in the latest industrial product than in the
traditional craft of their neighbors. Furthermore, they will buy
the next style when it comes out instead of waiting for the old to
need replacing after years of patching. Neil McKendrick, a his-
10
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

torian of this period, tells us that “the consumer revolution was
the necessary analogue to the Industrial Revolution, the neces-
sary convulsion on the demand side of the equation to match
the convulsion on the supply side” (1983, 9). The increasing
mechanization and rationality on the production side went
hand in hand with fashionable triviality, impulse buying, prod-
uct obsolescence, and a fascination with all that was ephemeral.
In Braudel’s words, “the future belonged to societies which
were trifling enough, but also rich and inventive enough, to
bother about changing colours, materials and styles of costume”
(1982, 235–236).
The new attitude toward consumption meant that those with
the means would try new things simply for the change. Even
those who currently could not afford them had a reason to work
harder to get the surplus. What made this period different from
the past was that those who had much seemed eager to add to the
excess with every passing fashion, and those who had little
struggled to the best of their ability to buy what they could.
As commodities became more diverse and included more im-
ported and manufactured goods, the medieval pattern of shop-
ping at markets and fairs was replaced by a new urban pattern of
shopping in permanent shops that tended to be clustered together
in certain areas. The shops were usually a family affair. Clients
were mostly from the neighborhood, and they would have known
both the shopkeeper and each other. Clients shopped daily and
mainly bought necessities. They were indifferent to packaging and
took no notice of anything like a brand name. The shopkeeper
took a client’s order, fetched the articles from behind the counter,
measured them out, haggled over the prices, wrapped them, and
either took cash or debited the sum to the account book. The idea
that the seller could encourage increased consumption never oc-
curred to these merchants. This was the next major development
in the history of consumer culture.
Fashioning Demand
We have long known that the Industrial Revolution was driven in
large part by the scientific understanding and mastery of the
forces of nature. We are just now beginning to see that the parallel
consumer revolution was also driven by a new kind of under-
standing and mastery, in this case, of fashion and the marketplace.
Fashioning Demand
11

A few people began to see that fashion was a phenomena that
could be understood and controlled.
Although fashions may change rapidly and continually, there
is always some social uniformity in the changes. Fashion is char-
acterized by trends, and it cannot exist without people—those
who set these trends and identifiable groups that follow. An un-
derstanding of the malleability of fashion trends could be used by
those producing and selling consumer goods. Consumer demand
could be controlled to suit the needs of the producers. Larger and
more predictable markets could be created without impeding, in-
deed even encouraging, fashionable change.
According to Grant McCracken (1988), Josiah Wedgwood was
one of the pioneers in this new understanding of fashion and the
marketplace (see profile of Josiah Wedgwood in chapter 6). Wedg-
wood was a manufacturer and retailer of pottery in eighteenth-
century England. He was able to channel the elite’s pursuit of the
latest and most novel styles of ceramic into a profitable fashion
for the many. Wedgwood’s genius was to recognize that if the rich
and elite could be induced to adopt fashions, then the other
classes would soon follow.
There are only certain societies where it is possible for a fash-
ion to spread from a higher class to a lower class. First, the spread
of fashion has to be allowed by the norms and laws of the society.
Second, the fashion has to be affordable for those in the lower
class. Finally, the classes must be close enough with some fluidity
between them that those in the lower class could imagine them-
selves owning what those in the upper class have. Only in such
societies will a lower class be able to, or even wish to, emulate the
consumption of the higher class.
Eighteenth-century England—with its fluid social structure,
rising wages, growing bourgeoisie, and relative egalitarianism—
presented the right mix of ingredients for social emulation to be-
come a strong cultural force. In England during this period, there
was a widespread ambition to climb from one rank up to the next.
In this pursuit, possessions were both tools and symbols of social
promotion. Therefore, those in the lower class were eager to pos-
sess whatever the upper class deemed fashionable. Wedgwood
realized the immense financial potential of such social emula-
tion—if it could be properly controlled. The fashionable com-
modity he focused on was pottery.
The emergence of one fashion often leads to the introduction
of other fashions. The spread of imported hot beverages such as
12
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

tea, coffee, and chocolate created a demand for pots and cups for
drinking them (and, as we will see in chapter 5, a demand for
coffeehouses). At first, this was not a demand for British pottery,
since only Asian porcelains, that is, “china,” could stand up to
the hot liquid without cracking. As a result, the new fashion did
not immediately affect the production side. It was not long be-
fore English manufacturers developed firing processes that ri-
valed those used on imported pottery. However, more important
than the changes in production were the changes in marketing
these products.
To examine these changes in marketing, we focus here on
Wedgwood, but there were others at this same time whose mar-
keting campaigns encouraged an unprecedented surge of spend-
ing that spread across Europe. Few, however, understood what
they were doing as well as Wedgwood.
The leaders in fashion at that time were the upper classes.
Wedgwood learned to closely observe what they were buying in
order to predict what the lower classes would buy next. He used
innovative techniques to keep his products in step with subtle
changes in fashion among the upper class. More importantly,
until Wedgwood, the upper class’s choice of a new fashion was
made according to their own whims or, at most, the monarchy’s
direction. Wedgwood learned to use marketing in order to direct
upper-class taste. He went to endless trouble and expense in
order to curry their favor. He gave them free samples of his latest
products, pandered to their whims, asked their advice, and ac-
cepted their custom orders. In this way, he was able to identify his
own products with the elite, thereby making his commodities at-
tractive objects to those who wanted to emulate the elite.
It was this commercialization of fashion that was the chief
way in which consumer demand was changed by eighteenth-
century innovations. These innovations included the manipula-
tion of fashion leaders, a more rapid obsolescence of style, the
speedier diffusion of fashion knowledge, the use of marketing
techniques, and the targeting of previously excluded social
groups, especially the newly emerging middle class.
Department Stores
Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, novelty
and diversity were appearing everywhere. Nevertheless, most of
Department Stores
13

the change affected the wealthy city dwellers. The poor and those
living in the country and small towns still shopped much as their
grandparents had done. A large gap developed between the spe-
cialized luxury shops of London and Paris that catered to the
fashionable and the town and village merchants that provided
traditional staples to familiar customers.
However, by the end of the eighteenth century, retail shops
selling a wide variety of ready-made goods were well established
throughout even the smaller towns of England and France and
had become a familiar part of most European capitals. This trend
continued in the nineteenth century, as a true middle class became
increasingly important. For the most part, the newfound wealth of
the growing middle class was spent on consumption, and pre-
cisely what was consumed was increasingly dictated by fashion.
The verb “to shop” began to be used in the eighteenth cen-
tury as more and more shops were filled with more and more
goods. Nevertheless, the idea of “shopping” had yet to change
significantly. Purchasing anything was still a complex, personal
transaction. The time spent in a shop was taken up with evaluat-
ing the knowledge, skill, and honesty of the shopkeeper and with
arguing over the price. Shopping had not yet become a form of
leisure and entertainment.
However, along with the expansion of retail, there was also a
transformation by the end of this period that amounted to a “rev-
olution” in retailing. The shop was transformed by new tech-
niques of selling. Clearly marked prices replaced prices based on
haggling. Reputation based on hearsay gave way to the creation
of reputation by means of advertisement. Shops began to use dis-
plays to entice customers in. Shops were transformed from estab-
lishments that existed solely to fulfill customers’ known wants
into places designed to attract customers and to create new
wants. Retail stores in the larger urban areas had reached such a
size, handled such a wide variety of goods, and began to use such
new retailing techniques that it was probably incorrect to think of
them simply as “large general stores.” They were becoming
something very different—department stores.
The simultaneous occurrence of a retail revolution in France,
the United States, and England in the late nineteenth century has
led to a rivalry over which country should be acclaimed the
birthplace of the department store. Most accounts name France’s
Bon Marché, opened in 1869, as the first department store (Miller
1981; see table 1.3). Other accounts name the later but more di-
14
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

verse Macy’s, John Wanamaker’s “New Kind of Store,” or per-
haps Stewart’s “Marble Palace.” But the debate over which was
truly the first may be left aside. What is important is the fact that
there was a widespread urban phenomena of the period, and
thus our attention might be better focused on what these stores
had in common.
In both North America and Europe, the transition from small
shop to department store took shape at roughly the same time as
more fundamental transformations were occurring in the coun-
tries’ economic structures—most notably, a strong and sustained
economic expansion. Wherever the transition started, it was not
long before every major city had its centerpiece downtown de-
partment store that came to represent that city’s indigenous
essence.
Perhaps more important than the emergence of the depart-
ment store itself was that the department store’s style of presen-
tation inevitably forced all retailers to change. The department
store pioneered and perfected many of the new techniques in re-
tailing, such as window displays, the display of goods in interi-
ors, fixed prices, and cash sales. All of these marked a distinct
break with the past and constituted the “birth of modern retail.”
Indeed, it is difficult to overestimate the role of these new de-
partment stores in the cultivation of a consumer culture.
Department Stores
15
Table 1.3
Early Department Stores
1670
Hudson’s Bay Company is established and given control over the fur
trade in much of the Canadian territory. It is now a department store.
1838
“David Jones” opens in Sydney, Australia; “Bainbridge and
Company” opens in Newcastle, England, featuring fixed prices.
1846
A. T. Stewart’s “Marble Palace” opens in New York.
1857
“Macy’s” opens in New York.
1863
“Whitely’s of London” opens. By 1872, it had incorporated ten
neighboring stores and taken on the name of “Universal Provider.”
1869
“Bon Marché of France” opens. 
1877
John Wanamaker’s “New Kind of Store” opens in Philadelphia.
1881
“Marshall Fields” opens in Chicago.
1885
Henry Charles Harrod opens “Harrods of London.”
1904
Billed as the oldest department store in Japan, “Mitsukoshi” opened in
1673 as a kimono shop and becomes a department store in 1904.
1907
“Globus” is the first department store in Switzerland.
1909
Gordon Selfridge opens “Selfridge’s of London.”

Three of the changes in retailing are particularly important.
First, it was primarily through the department store that shopping
became a leisure activity, in contrast to the purposeful acquisition
of goods. Where leisure once meant freedom from work and eco-
nomic responsibility, now the economic sphere and leisure became
increasingly intertwined. As many of us have discovered to our
chagrin, the leisure of shopping usually ends up costing us some-
thing. Second, the main aim of the retail establishment was
changed by the department store. Instead of the preplanned ac-
quisition of particular items, the department store is devoted to
the arousal of previously unimagined desires. We often enter the
department store knowing only that we want—the department
store itself provides the substance of our desire. The third change
was the deliberate targeting of the middle class. The number of
people who had the right to these desires was expanded beyond
the elite and, as we will describe more fully later, the department
store became the royal court of the middle class.
Most significant for this examination, though, is the depart-
ment stores’ social functions as “cathedrals of consumption” (Zola
1980) and their effect on the imagination by providing “visions of
excess” (Bataille 1985) or “dream worlds” (Williams 1982). The
abundant use of marble, carpets, ornaments, balconies, and dis-
plays induced in shoppers the same sort of awe that they felt in
cathedrals, while it captured and stimulated their imagination
with visions of what they could own or, at least, what they could
want to own.
A legend of retailing is that the future founder of Bon Marché,
Aristide Boucicaut, lost his way in the Paris Exposition of 1855 (see
profile of Aristide Boucicaut in chapter 6). He was dazzled by the
spectacle of the goods on display and delighted in the surprises
that met his every turn. The exposition presented a dream world
of sumptuous display where the browser could imagine possess-
ing all of the commodities offered. Boucicaut realized that specta-
cle and browsing were integral to the success of the exposition and
that these elements had tremendous potential for retailing.
Experts have distinguished department stores from tradi-
tional retail stores by their level of capitalization, diversity of
merchandise, methods of selling, and structure and styles of man-
agement. But the most conspicuous characteristic distinguishing
the department store is its use of displays. As goods were in-
creasingly standardized and the act of consumption became more
impersonal, the display of items became correspondingly more
16
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

important. With the standardization of goods and prices, the ac-
tivity of purchasing became one of comparing the relative worth
of different items. One of the most important aspects of this new
shopping experience was browsing the items that were on dis-
play. The importance of display is now taken for granted, but it
was a novel idea in the mid-nineteenth century. Goods that were
displayed for comparison became their own sort of art form, es-
pecially in window displays.
The spectacle of the department store involved more than
just the commodities, however. These displays of commodities
merged into other spectacles such as concerts, fashion shows,
pageants, and other extravaganzas. There were also a range of
leisure and rest facilities such as rest rooms, reading rooms, writ-
ing rooms, silence rooms, restaurants, exhibitions, and concert
halls, so that a visit to a department store was presented less as
acquiring and purchasing and more as luxury and leisure. For ex-
ample, Chicago’s Marshall Fields had thirty-nine marble-floored
lavatories with three maids in each. When it opened in 1902, six
orchestras played on the various floors, roses adorned every
counter, but nothing was permitted to be sold on that first day. It
was only for display and fantasy. As Kim Humphrey explains,
“Shopping, even for everyday items, had now almost entirely lost
its status as an activity and become simply an experience. It had
lost a materiality and become a cultural event” (1998, 114). Trans-
forming shopping into a leisure activity depended on many of
these innovations that were developed by the department store—
the displays, the spectacle, the leisure areas. But one of the most
important changes was the transformation of the personal rela-
tion between shopkeeper and customer into an impersonal rela-
tion between strangers. This allowed the focus to be on the object
rather than the person. You only knew the person you were trad-
ing with through the object. Before purchasing the object, you
may have never met; after the transaction, you may never see
each other again. This impersonal relationship proved beneficial
to the consumer. If you wanted to try something new, out of char-
acter, or above your station, who was to know?
The actual act of purchasing became insignificant compared
to the activity of shopping. The department store was a permanent
fair, a dream world, a spectacle of excessive proportions. Going to
the store became an event and an adventure. One came less to pur-
chase a particular article than simply to visit, to browse, to see
what was new, to try on new fashions and even new identities.
Department Stores
17

Buying became secondary. It was often just an added excitement,
a way to spice up the primary experience of shopping.
Some shops in France put a sign in their windows saying en-
trée libre, which meant that one could enter without needing to
make a purchase. Because buying was no longer obligatory, even
the poor could enter the stores—although there was little they
could actually buy. Since all classes could enter, each class in its
own way could achieve a form of consumerhood through what
has been called “the democratization of luxury.” Luxury was
available as an experience—even if only a viewing experience—
to anybody who wanted it.
But it was especially middle-class women who were at-
tracted to this new practice, a day’s shopping. The department
store offered them one of the few places for public activity. In fact,
the department store presented itself as a new kind of commu-
nity: not merely a huge sales hall, but a meeting place, a site for
female sociability and arguably also emancipation, since it made
part of “the public” safe for women. In this safe public arena, the
department store taught middle-class women their new civic
roles: to be consumers.
Middle-Class Culture Is Consumer Culture
The professionalization of public and private bureaucracies cre-
ated a steadily rising number of white-collar jobs. In addition,
there were an increasing number of small-business owners. The
emergence of department stores coincided with the rise of this
new middle class. Middle-class families had money to spare for a
few luxuries and were gradually switching the emphasis of their
housekeeping expenditure from food to fashion.
Department stores specifically targeted middle-class con-
sumers, who were spending on a much wider variety of goods
than ever before, as they struggled to rig themselves out with the
paraphernalia of gentility. They had more money to spend, but it
had to be spent on more things, and therefore they were cost con-
scious. The department stores sought to provide traditional
upper-class services at lower prices. Roland Marchand explains
how useful the department stores were to the upwardly mobile
consumer:
Suppose a newly promoted railway clerk and his wife
wanted to celebrate their fresh prosperity by moving
18
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

for the first time to a house with a drawing-room.
They could go to a cabinetmaker and expose their ig-
norance and their strictly limited means, and to an up-
holsterer and do the same, and perhaps to a print-
seller and a china-shop and an ironmonger and so
forth, and wrestle with the unfamiliar problems of fur-
nishing for themselves. Or they could walk around a
department store and inspect the displays of many
grades of chairs, carpets, curtains, find out what was
the stylish thing, all clearly labeled and priced. At the
same time the sight of all sorts of other items, orna-
ments, pictures, mirrors, knick-knacks, would suggest
ideas they had never imagined. (1995, 234)
In effect, the department store was the middle-class world—
a world where middle-class culture itself was on display, com-
plete with middle-class costumes, middle-class occasions, and
middle-class ambitions. The very range of middle-class lifestyles
were to be found on the store’s shelves and counters and floors.
Furthermore, the department store became the main vector
for social homogenization. It disseminated the values and life-
style of the urban upper-middle class to middle-class society as a
whole. It did this by lowering prices to a level that allowed mid-
dle-class commodities to become mass-consumer items. But it
also disseminated middle-class culture by becoming a kind of
cultural primer. The department store showed people how they
should dress, how they should furnish their home, and how they
should spend their leisure time. It defined ideals and goals for
middle-class society. It illustrated how people should live if they
were successful or on their way to becoming successful or even
merely wished to appear successful.
It was not simply that department stores educated con-
sumers about what was new, modern, and fashionable; they also
made this information seem necessary for the middle-class
woman who truly cared about her family. All of this involved ad-
vertising, which developed as an industry in its own right, no-
tably with the emergence of increasingly popular mail-order cat-
alogs that allowed the spectacular display of goods to be viewed
in the home.
Mail-order houses—such as Montgomery Ward and Sears
and Roebuck—slanted the appeal of their advertisements to a
rural consumer, and for many an isolated small-town inhabitant,
the large, lavishly illustrated catalog became an important cultural
Middle-Class Culture Is Consumer Culture
19

document (see profile of Aaron Montgomery Ward in chapter 6
and table 1.4). Thus, beginning with the department store, the
middle classes of the large cities and small towns became more
alike. Through advertising, through catalogs, and through pil-
grimages to downtown stores, the middle class shared in a com-
mon culture. For the first time, we see the emergence of a class that
was almost totally defined by consumption.
During this same period, there was a transformation of ad-
vertising. Posters, handbills, and even sandwich boards had long
been used, but these were usually associated with local products.
The change in the role of advertising was especially evident in the
United States where mass production began to make a national
market possible. Beginning with “patent” medicines after the Civil
War, advertising encouraged customers to ask local merchants for
particular national brands rather than simply accepting merchan-
dise from whatever source the merchant preferred. In less than
twenty years, national advertising transformed local tastes into a
mass market. Advertising used customer demand to force mer-
chants into a national market whether the merchants wanted to or
not. This set the stage for the entire country to become a homoge-
nous consumer culture dominated by middle-class tastes.
The middle class that appeared in advertisements, in the
pages of the catalogs, and in department store displays was no
longer defined by a certain shared lifestyle but rather by the sug-
gestion that its members bought certain goods. Being middle class
meant a certain pattern of consumption. This allowed the depart-
ment store—the principal medium of consumption—to become
both the supplier and the creator of middle-class identity. “Middle
class” could be identified with whatever the store had to sell.
20
From Consumption to Consumer Culture
Table 1.4
Comparison of Sears and Montgomery Ward Department
Stores, 1945 and 1954
Sears
Montgomery Ward
Sales
Profit
Number
Sales
Profit
Number
(in millions) (in millions)
of Stores
(in millions) (in millions)
of Stores
1945
$1,045.3
$35.8
—
$654.8
$22.9
—
Percent 
of total
61.5
61.0
38.5
39.0
1954
$2,965.4
$147.3
699
$887.3
$35.2
568
Percent
of total 
76.7
80.7
23.3
19.3
Source: Calculated from data in Boris Emmet and John E. Jeuck. 1950. Catalogues and Counters: A History of Sears,
Roebuck and Company. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 650 and 664.

The values and habits of the middle class were translated
into marketable goods. In department store displays, advertise-
ments, and mail-order catalogs, the concept of a proper middle-
class household was transformed into particular furnishings, a
set of outfits, and a collection of leisure items. At the same time,
new needs were created almost systematically, so that the defini-
tion of the middle class could fluctuate with changes in the con-
sumer goods available. Clothing fashions were the clearest exam-
ple of this. It was not simply that clothing styles varied from year
to year or that complete changes occurred. There were also en-
tirely new kinds of clothing to fit entirely new kinds of wants—
apparel for particular sports, for driving, and for cooking, and
different outfits for different leisure pursuits.
As local consumer tastes were transformed into a national
demand dominated by middle-class culture, advertising began to
feature a new kind of differentiation based on the brand name.
Because the market was swamped with uniform mass-produced
commodities, brands were introduced to allow customers to dis-
tinguish between standardized products. Because of this, the role
of advertising changed. Rather than focusing on the actual attrib-
utes of the product, advertisements began to build an image
around a product’s brand. In many cases, this image took the
form of an invented personality (Aunt Jemima), which often
evoked traditions (Old Granddad Whiskey). In other cases, the
image was attached to certain class aspirations (Cadillac) or to the
exotic (Gypsie Queen cigarettes) or the religious (Quaker Oats).
Through the department stores, the middle classes gradually
became fashion conscious. The stores helped to create the de-
mands to which they catered. Through their displays and adver-
tisements, middle-class culture became consumer culture and its
central theme was the visions of excess that constituted the
unique attraction of the department store. With the brand, the
product itself became less and less important, while the invented
image took center stage. The idea of consumption was gradually
changed from a function of need to a function of fantasy.
After the Department Store
The remarkable and prolonged prosperity after World War I
brought the middle-class culture being sold by the department
stores within reach of the working class. Even the depression in
After the Department Store
21

the 1930s seemed only to increase the hold of consumer culture
on the Western world, since it eliminated many of the local stores
that were still able to compete with the newer forms of retailing.
By the end of World War II, consumer culture presented itself as
the way in which a troubled society could be restored and recon-
22
From Consumption to Consumer Culture
Table 1.5
Facts about Malls 
1819
London’s Burlington Arcade opens—one of the world’s earliest retail
shopping arcades.
1851
The Crystal Palace Exhibition features a nineteen-acre building that is
walled and roofed in glass and that has many characteristics of the
modern mall.
1867
The world’s first shopping “mall,” the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele, is
built in Milan, Italy.
1923
The first shopping mall in the United States and the world’s first
automobile-oriented shopping center, the Country Club Plaza, opens
near Kansas City, Missouri. 
1946
There are eight shopping malls in the United States by the end of
World War II.
1956
Southdale, the first enclosed mall, opens near Minneapolis, Minnesota.
1970s
Studies show that the typical American spends more time at the mall
than at any other place except home or work.a
1980s
Giant megamalls are developed. The West Edmonton Mall in Alberta,
Canada, opens in 1981 with more than 800 stores and a hotel, an
amusement park, a miniature-golf course, a church, a “water park” for
surfing, a zoo, and a 438-foot-long lake. However, the number of
centers under construction nationwide begins to decline in 1988.a
1990s
By 1992, there are 38,966 operating shopping centers in the United
States, 1,835 of them large, regional malls.a
In 1992, the largest enclosed shopping and entertainment facility in
the United States—the Mall of America—opens in Bloomington,
Minnesota.
A 1994 Roper poll finds that only 10 percent of respondents say they
shop at malls “very often” (down from 16 percent in 1987), while 24
percent say they do not go to malls at all (up from 12 percent in
1987).b
Another survey finds the average shoppers’ monthly time spent in
malls declined from twelve hours in 1980 to only four hours in 1990.c
Source Notes: 
a Kenneth Jackson. 1996. “All the World’s a Mall: Reflections on the Social and Economic Consequences of the
American Shopping Center.” The American Historical Review 101, no. 4: 1111–1121.
b “Fifteen Ways to Fix the Suburbs.” 1995. Newsweek 125, no. 20 (15 May): 46–53.
c Tim Cavanaugh. 1996. “Mall Crawl Palls.” American Demographics 18, no.9: 14–16.

structed. Consumption and democratic citizenship became in-
creasingly intertwined in official and popular rhetoric.
However, by the late 1950s, the department store no longer
was seen as one of the great symbols of modern retailing and was
even beginning to look like it was itself no longer in fashion. Its
place of importance was taken by the shopping mall (a collection
of independent retail stores, services, and a parking area), which
is designed, constructed, and maintained as a unit by a separate
management firm (see table 1.5).
The increasing dependence on automobiles and the growth
of suburbs had an important effect on the location and form of
shopping districts. Middle-class customers began to avoid down-
town areas where parking was difficult and were instead at-
tracted to suburban malls with plenty of parking. These malls
often included department stores as anchors, but the department
store was demoted to only one attraction among others.
Soon, shopping malls were not just being incorporated into
already-existing suburbs to provide shopping for a nearby popu-
lation. Instead, they began to shape the development of the new
suburbs. New highways, services, and housing were built around
the mall. The suburbs followed the shopping mall, as consump-
tion increasingly became one of the main driving forces for social
change.
These changes also promoted cultural changes. The cultural
forms associated with groups of like-minded people attending
unique performances—such as symphonies, plays, and operas—
began to fade. In their place grew the easily reproducible, mass-
market cultural forms such as movies, chain restaurants, and
theme parks. The change in culture tracked the change from
downtown department store to suburban mall.
In the time between the emergence of the department store
and the dominance of the mall, there have been other important
changes in consumption: Chain stores spread in the late nine-
teenth century; supermarkets became our main way of buying
food in the 1930s; brands became even more important; experi-
ences began to be viewed as consumable goods; credit cards made
money irrelevant; self-service made consuming not only anony-
mous, but solitary. Most of the changes in consumption have oc-
curred in two directions that seem at first sight to be contradictory;
the act of consuming has grown simpler, while at the same time
the organization of consumption has become increasingly compli-
cated. Consumption is simpler in that buying something, making
After the Department Store
23

a thing our own, is an easy, efficient, impersonal, usually painless
activity. But the choice of what commodity to buy, the way to pur-
chase it, the meanings that it has, and the hidden network that has
produced it have all become much more complex.
Nevertheless, this in no way changes the basic argument of
this chapter. Fashion and its manipulation still dominate our cul-
ture. Consumption is still, and perhaps increasingly so, a form of
leisure. Retailing is as much about creating new wants and needs
as it is about fulfilling our present ones. Cultural forms are in-
creasingly commodified. Subcultures are defined by what they
buy. And our common culture is still a consumer culture.
References
Bataille, Georges. 1985. Visions of Excess: Selected Writings. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of
Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Braudel, Fernand. 1973. Capitalism and Material Life, 1400–1800. New
York: Harper & Row.
———. 1982. The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization and Capitalism,
15th–18th Century. New York: Harper & Row.
———. 1992. Civilization and Capitalism: Fifteenth–Eighteenth Century.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Breen, Tim. 1993. “The Meaning of Things: Interpreting the Consumer
Economy in the Eighteenth Century.” In J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds.,
Consumption and the World of Goods, 249–260. New York: Routledge.
Cavanaugh, Tim. 1996. “Mall Crawl Palls.” American Demographics 18, no.
9: 14–16.
Emmet, Boris, and John E. Jeuck. 1950. Catalogues and Counters: A History
of Sears, Roebuck and Company. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
“Fifteen Ways to Fix the Suburbs.” 1995. Newsweek 125, no. 20 (15 May):
46–53.
Gronow, Jukka. 1997. The Sociology of Taste. New York: Routledge.
Humphrey, Kim. 1998. Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the Changing Cultures of
Consumption. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jackson, Kenneth. 1996. “All the World’s a Mall: Reflections on the Social
and Economic Consequences of the American Shopping Center.” The
American Historical Review 101, no. 4: 1111–1121.
24
From Consumption to Consumer Culture

Marchand, Roland. 1995. Advertising the American Dream: Making Way for
Modernity, 1920–1940. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
McCracken, Grant. 1988. Culture and Consumption: New Approaches to the
Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Activities. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
McKendrick, Neil. 1983. “The Consumer Revolution of Eighteenth-
Century England.” In N. McKendrick, J. Brewer, and J. Plumb, eds., The
Birth of a Consumer Society, 7–33. London: Hutchinson.
Miller, Michael. 1981. The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Depart-
ment Store, 1869–1920. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mintz, Sydney W. 1985. Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern
History. New York: Viking Press.
———. 1993. “The Changing Roles of Food in the Study of Consump-
tion.” In J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds., Consumption and the World of Goods,
261–273. New York: Routledge.
Shammas, Carole. 1993. “Changes in English and Anglo-American Con-
sumption from 1550–1800.” In J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds., Consumption
and the World of Goods, 177–205. London: Routledge.
Williams, Rosalind. 1982. Dream Worlds: Mass Consumption in Late-
Nineteenth-Century France. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wyrwa, Ulrich. 1998. “Consumption and Consumer Society: A Contribu-
tion of the History of Ideas.” In S. Strasser, C. McGovern, and M. Judt,
eds., Getting and Spending: European and American Consumer Societies in the
Twentieth Century, 431–447. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Zola, Émile. 1980. Au bonheur des dames. Paris: Gallimard.
References
25


2
The Contradictions of
Consumer Culture
T
he following are a collection of bumper stickers about con-
sumption: “When the Going Gets Tough, the Tough Go
Shopping,” “He Who Dies with the Most Toys Wins,” “People
Who Say Money Can’t Buy Happiness Don’t Know Where to
Shop,” “So Many Malls, and So Little Trunk Space,” “I’m
Spending My Grandkids’ Inheritance,” and “A Woman’s Place Is
in the Mall.”
Only the most naive reader would think that these are cele-
brations of consumption. All of them have an ironic edge. All of
them represent a truth about our society: We love consuming, but
we are not quite comfortable with that feeling. This chapter ar-
gues that the contradictions in our feelings about consumption
have their origin in the contradictions in our consumer culture.
Consumption is central to our society. It is an essential part
of the values and concepts through which individuals under-
stand their place in society. However, before we can understand
the culture, we first must understand the economic system that is
the basis of our consumer culture. Following an examination of
that economic system, we will look at some of the contradictions
of consumer culture—its contradictions with the demands of pro-
duction with bourgeois culture and the contradictions in the view
of the consumer. Finally, we will look at the effects that consumer
culture has had on our political system.
27

Economics of Consumption
The capitalist economic system based on the ideal of a free mar-
ket has become one of the main institutions of our society. Indeed,
we seem to be currently engaged in a grand social experiment to
see just how much of our society can be given over to the eco-
nomic system. The market economy has assumed many of the
functions—such as running schools and incarcerating law-
breakers—once thought to be the government’s responsibility. We
tend to see the economy as more responsive to the needs of the
average person than is any government agency. Increasingly, the
public sees the government as bureaucratic interference in the
economy and not as protection from the excesses of the economic
system.
An important part of this change has been the increasing em-
phasis on the role of the consumer in the economy. Consumption
is now recognized by both experts and laypersons as the econ-
omy’s driving force, and the ordinary consumer, rather than the
producer, is seen as the central figure in the economic system.
This, however, has not always been the case. It is useful to look
briefly at the history of the change in economic thought from a
focus on the producer to a focus on the consumer.
Economists, of course, have always had to recognize the ex-
istence of consumption, even if it had little place in their analysis.
Adam Smith, the founder of modern economic theory, wrote that
“consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production and
the interest of the producer ought to be attended to, only so far as
it may be necessary for promoting that of the consumer. The
maxim is so perfectly self-evident, that it would be absurd to at-
tempt to prove it” (Smith 1937, 625).
Despite economists’ recognition of its importance, consump-
tion never entered into early economic analysis because it was
seen as either a response to a natural need or as the result of un-
natural and morally reprehensible greed. Consumers either in-
creased their consumption because increased income allowed
them to provide for previously unmet natural needs or they were
led into increased consumption because of what economist Alfred
Marshall (1890) called an  “unwholesome desire.” Consequently,
any policy to stimulate the economy by increasing consumption
was either impossible or immoral. With this approach, there
could be no recognition of an active consumer nor of a consumer
culture.
28
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

However, the current economic view of consumption has
moved from seeing it as an unwholesome desire to recognizing it
as the central source of our economic strength. It is viewed as so
important that after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001,
President Bush promoted increased consumption as a patriotic
duty. As the New York Times reported, “Indeed, in the twitchy post-
September 11 economy, consumer confidence has become the It
Statistic. With business investment shrinking and the markets on
the fritz, free-spending shoppers are considered the last line of de-
fense against a disastrous economic slide” (Walker 2003, C1).
We will trace this change in the economic view of consump-
tion through four stages: (1) consumption as detrimental to the ac-
cumulation of wealth; (2) consumption as a propellant that keeps
the economy rolling; (3) the consumer as a rational agent that de-
termines the allocation of resources; and (4) the consumer as a so-
cial agent involved in complex ways with fashion trends, social
competition, and emulation. We will briefly comment on each.
The idea of a capitalist economy began with the concept of
accumulating wealth and rationally investing it, rather than
spending it on pleasurable consumption. It has therefore always
been part of the “spirit of capitalism” (Weber 2002) to discourage
consumption because it was seen as inimical to the accumulation
of wealth on which capitalism depends.
The economist who did the most to recognize the positive
role of consumption was John Maynard Keynes (see profile of
John Maynard Keynes in chapter 6). Writing during the Great
Depression, Keynes argued that low consumption impeded re-
covery, and he therefore promoted increased consumption as the
solution to the economic malaise (see description of the Great
Depression in chapter 6). Keynes suggested state intervention to
stimulate consumption, and this idea guided the economic poli-
cies of President Roosevelt’s New Deal, President Kennedy’s
New Frontier, and President Johnson’s Great Society, and contin-
ues to guide President George W. Bush’s calls for patriotic con-
sumption.
For Keynes, though, it made little difference what the con-
sumer bought. Consumer buying did not enter the market as in-
formation so much as a propellant that stimulated the economy.
The next step in understanding the economics of consumption
saw the consumer not just as propellant, but also as the provider
of information on which a rational economy could be based. This
has come to be called the neoclassical approach.
Economics of Consumption
29

The neoclassical approach sees the consumer as a rational,
utilitarian purchaser. The economy might often go in the wrong
direction—investing too much in one sector rather than another,
producing too much or too little—but decisions by the rational
consumer will sooner or later set the economy on the correct
course. The best thing that a business can do is to pay attention to
the choices of the consumer, and the best thing that the govern-
ment can do is to leave consumers alone to make their choices.
Governments could never adequately direct the economy be-
cause a rational economic order depends on the dispersed bits of
information held by individual consumers.
This neoclassical view, which still dominates current eco-
nomic thinking, depends heavily upon the rationality of the con-
sumer (Stigler 1982, 52), despite the fact that study after study has
shown that consumers are far from rational. The neoclassical
view starts with the assumption that the economy is rational and
reasons backwards that the consumer that steers it must therefore
be rational as well. However, there is just as little evidence to sup-
port the rationality of the economy as there is to support the ra-
tionality of the individual consumer. Both seem to have at their
core social processes—such as fashion trends, whims, and ma-
nipulated emotions—that the neoclassical model must see as ex-
traneous and irrational.
Recently, there has been more acceptance of an approach to
the economics of consumption that, like the neoclassical ap-
proach, recognizes the irreplaceable role of the consumer in
steering the economy, but that also recognizes the social
processes at the heart of the economy. In this more sociological
approach, it is the very irrationality of the economy—its de-
pendence on fashion trends, emulation, and competitive con-
sumption—that makes the role of the consumer so necessary for
steering the economy. It is not that the government does not have
all of the information dispersed among rational individuals—if
that were the case, then we could reinstate centralized planning
once we had found a way to gather and organize all of the dis-
persed knowledge. Instead, it is precisely because the economy
is not rational that consumers are irreplaceable. Only consumers
are in touch with the never-entirely rational social processes that
are at the center of our economic system.
In fact, Michael Porter (1990) has argued that consumers in
touch with fashion trends are one of the most important resources
determining the competitive advantage of a nation. The intensity
30
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

of the Japanese interest in audio and photographic equipment,
the Italian love of fashion, the German love of cars, the British
love of gardening, the American love of fast food—all of these
have resulted in industries that dominate the world market.
This is even truer in a globalizing world where the industry’s
domestic market of sophisticated, knowledgeable consumers pro-
vides a place to test new products. These consumers demand
rapid improvements, are in touch with the latest fads, and are
highly aware of the status effects of having the newest model. So-
phisticated, knowledgeable consumers provide a continuing
competitive advantage so long as the demands of the home mar-
ket are not idiosyncratic and are predictive of trends in other
countries. For example, the American consumer’s interest in fast,
inexpensive, and convenient food provides a competitive advan-
tage so long as other countries are moving along the same path of
putting more value on speed and predictability than on the qual-
ity of the food.
Today, nearly everyone recognizes the importance of con-
sumption to our economy. We will next argue that this impor-
tance extends far beyond the economy. Consumption is more
than just an economic transaction. Consumption has become cen-
tral to our culture.
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions
The shared concepts and values of a culture help people to relate
their individual lives to larger themes. Historically, most cultures
have been centered around a set of religious values and concepts.
Alternatively, a few cultures have found their values and con-
cepts in secular, intellectual, and aesthetic movements, usually
called “high” culture. This is the type of culture that one refers to
when speaking of the arts, manners, or education. We will be
looking at something different from either of these: a consumer
culture.
To say that we are a consumer culture means that our central
shared values have to do with consumption. This is not to say
that religion and high culture have disappeared from our society,
but that they have become instances of consumer culture. People
still have religion, but increasingly, they “shop around” for the
right religion and choose one that fits their lifestyles. Religion is
not a tradition that we are inextricably embedded in; instead, it is
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions
31

chosen, consumed, and sometimes discarded, returned, or ex-
changed like any other commodity.
Similarly, high culture has simply become a niche market in
a consumer culture. From the perspective of marketers, people
who go to classical concerts and art museums are a cluster group
who also tend to buy Italian espresso machines, Volvo cars, and
Pierre Cardin clothes. In other words, a preference for a certain
type of “high” art has been reduced to a simple indication of the
“type” of consumer items a person is most likely to buy. Even if
we don’t “prefer” high culture, it nonetheless occasionally finds
its way into our experience of consumption. High culture is what
we listen to while we are on hold waiting for customer service. It
is what we pass on our way to the museum gift shop. It is what
we buy to decorate our living rooms. Even where high culture is
not simply a commodity, it functions more and more like a com-
modity, with an emphasis on the new, the latest, the attention-
getting, the controversial, the shocking.
Despite its differences from previous cultures, consumer cul-
ture is still a set of meanings through which individuals can relate
their individual lives to larger themes. In most societies, culture
has been the way to transmit the established social meanings of
objects, their appropriate use, or tasteful display. However, our
culture has and continues to create a multitude of items that have
no established social meanings. For example, what is the tradi-
tional meaning of a modem or a DVD player? Consequently, one
of the main tasks of consumer culture has been the creation of
new meanings, especially through advertising. In addition, con-
sumer culture, like all cultures, must motivate us and give our in-
dividual lives meaning. The main point of this section is to argue
that the meanings that make up consumer culture are contradic-
tory with both the traditions out of which they have emerged and
with the culture’s own understanding of itself.
Contradictions between Consumer Culture
and Capitalist Production
A capitalist economic system requires, by definition, the accumu-
lation of capital, which is then consistently and rationally in-
vested in production. Capitalism was able to emerge because it
was originally linked to a culture that emphasized self-control,
delayed gratification, and rational planning in the pursuit of
32
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

clearly defined goals. However, a culture structured around pro-
duction has, to a large extent, been transformed into a culture
structured around consumption, and this is hardly a culture of
self-control and delayed gratification. A culture that once saw
work as a moral end in itself now sees work only as a means to-
ward more consumption (Schor 2000).
Capitalism requires completely different attitudes from those
who produce as compared to those who consume—even though
they are usually the same person. The rational, calculating pro-
ducer requires the irrational, impulsive consumer. If we were as
rational in our consuming as we are in our producing, the econ-
omy would grind to a halt. Capitalist production still requires
self-restraint, discipline, and frugality in our work, but our con-
sumer culture promotes just the opposite. Whereas once we were
encouraged to save and invest, we are now also encouraged to
spend and go into debt. Daniel Bell in The Cultural Contradictions
of Capitalism argued that the only solution to this contradiction is
for us to become fragmented, to have one set of values at work
and another when we consume. As Bell puts it, “One is to be
straight by day, and a swinger at night” (1976, 72). But Bell did
not believe that this fragmentation would be sustainable. He pre-
dicted that the industrialized world would soon enter a crisis be-
cause the capitalist economy is contradicted by a consumer cul-
ture that is focused on hedonism and novelty. According to Bell,
consumer culture’s pursuit of the new and improved and its re-
jection of all that is old-fashioned and passé have infected a cul-
ture that now rejects all traditions and that accepts new values
with an ironic stance that degenerates into bitter attack once those
values are no longer fashionable. We have lost all other overrid-
ing values motivating us to work—only the desire for more con-
sumption remains. But, Bell believed that this value could not get
us through an economic downturn in the way that a work ethic
could.
More than twenty-five years later, Bell’s analysis of the con-
tradiction between a consumer culture and capitalist production
appears to be absolutely correct. Capitalism seems even more
driven by this contradiction than ever. However, his prediction
appears to be absolutely wrong: The disjunction continues and
even worsens, but it does not appear to be bringing us any closer
to a cultural crisis. Indeed, it will be argued below that our very
fragmentation now fuels our consumption as we purchase com-
modities that promise a lost wholeness.
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions
33

Contradictions between Consumer Culture
and Bourgeois Culture
Marxists, members of the aristocracy, and others who see them-
selves as outside of consumer culture have always had an ani-
mosity toward it. Marxists have argued that consumer culture
rests on the exploitation of workers (Sklair 1995). Even where it
seems to benefit the workers, that benefit is only a device to “buy
off” their revolt and delay the triumph of the popular will (Mar-
cuse 1992). Those who see themselves as part of an aristocratic
tradition advance a more elitist condemnation (Gronow 1997).
Consumer culture is, for them, a contradiction in terms. Nothing
that can be popularly consumed could form the basis of a true
culture. The aristocratic critique is based on the assumption that
the triumph of consumerism is the triumph of the popular will,
and this is precisely what they do not like.
The bourgeoisie were those shop owners and small busi-
nessmen who came to dominance as the feudal order faded. The
bourgeoisie created a culture that was distinct from the landed
aristocracy, and it was this culture that the middle class adopted
as economic conditions changed. Because consumer culture be-
came identified with bourgeois culture, the disdain of consumer
culture by both Marxists and aristocrats is usually combined with
a rejection of the bourgeoisie. Nevertheless, even though bour-
geois culture is deeply intertwined with consumption, bourgeois
culture has roots that preceded consumer culture (Schudson
1998), and despite the best efforts of modern advertising, bour-
geois culture is still not entirely comfortable with the centrality of
consumption. Consequently, we see a contradiction between con-
sumer culture and the bourgeois culture out of which the former
emerged. Bourgeois culture was related to the Christian, espe-
cially Protestant, religion (Weber 2002). Its early emphasis was on
sacrifice and self-restraint. Identity and personal satisfaction were
to be found in a career or vocation. In addition, it included a sense
of family and community that encompassed but extended be-
yond the self-reliant individual (Ashcraft 1972).
All of these traits are inimical to consumer culture. Rather
than sacrifice and self-restraint, hedonism and luxurious indul-
gence are emphasized. Consumer culture presents identity as
being infinitely transformable with the purchase of new products
(Halter 2000), and even on the production side, people are en-
couraged to be flexible, mobile, and transitory rather than devot-
34
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

ing themselves to a lifelong vocation (Hage and Powers 1992). Fi-
nally, consumer culture emphasizes the individual over the com-
munity. It may take coordinated groups to produce objects, but
these objects are usually consumed by individuals.
Consumer culture grew out of bourgeois culture, but parent
and progeny are often at odds, and there is little hope that there
will ever be a complete reconciliation between bourgeois culture
and its “prodigal son.” A bourgeois critique of consumer culture
has persisted and helps to explain the long sociological neglect of
consumption as a serious subject of study (Ritzer, Goodman, and
Wiedenhoft 2001). And even ordinary shoppers are often subject
to self-contempt because their consumption is so indulgent and
unrestrained.
Michael Schudson (1998) lists three bourgeois objections to
consumer culture. The first, which he calls the Puritan objection,
criticizes the pursuit of material goods because it takes away from
the spiritual. The second, which he calls Quaker, objects to the fri-
volity and indulgence that are not compatible with a life of sim-
plicity and self-restraint. Finally, the third objection, which he
calls republican, believes consumer culture has undermined the
community, leading to political complacency and the lack of civic
engagement.
There is a long history of bourgeois anticonsumption senti-
ments (Breen 1993; Horowitz 1985). Indeed, consumer culture has
always developed in tandem with its own critique. We consume,
but we often feel guilty about it. The belief that consumer culture
is not compatible with spirituality, simplicity, and community is a
strong part of our bourgeois heritage. The feeling that virtue lies
in thrift and self-restraint, and sin in consumption, is still present,
even when it has lost its religious roots. But just as our fragmen-
tation fuels more consumption, so does our guilt and loss of spir-
itual meaning. Advertisers have found ways to use this guilt to
get us to consume more. As we will describe below, people buy
objects that promise spirituality, simplicity, and community.
The Consumer as Sovereign and as Dupe
The demands of capitalist production and its relation with bour-
geois culture do not exhaust the contradictions of consumer cul-
ture. There is also a strong contradiction in regard to the rational-
ity, autonomy, and power of the consumer. On the one hand, the
consumer is sovereign. The consumer’s rational choices determine
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions
35

the direction of the economy. Everything is designed with the in-
tent (albeit often failing) to please the consumer. The rich and
powerful of our society must listen to the consumers’ voices and
try to discern their fleeting whims. On the other hand, the con-
sumer is often portrayed as nothing but a dupe, subject to uncon-
trolled impulses and manipulated by the most transparent tricks.
Probably the first thing that we think of in terms of manipu-
lating the consumer is advertising. Billions of dollars are spent on
advertising every year, and very little of that advertising is of the
informational variety that the assumption of a rational consumer
would lead one to expect. Advertising is increasingly pervasive.
In 1880, only $30 million was spent on advertising in the United
States; thirty years later, it had increased to $600 million (Durning
1992), and today, it is in excess of $200 billion in the United States
and over $300 billion worldwide (Cardona 2002). Every day,
North Americans are exposed to an estimated 12 billion display
advertisements, 3 million radio commercials, and more than
200,000 television commercials. Not only are advertisements plas-
tered on billboards, shown between breaks on television shows,
popped up on our computer screens, and placed beside text in
our newspapers, but they are also beamed into classrooms,
played in elevators, featured as props in movies, displayed above
the urinal in men’s bathrooms, used as part of athletes’ uniforms,
and displayed in every place and in every manner that human in-
genuity can devise. We seem to be currently engaged in a grand
experiment to see just how much of our society can be given over
to the economic system, and perhaps the riskiest part stems from
the constant exposure of people—from cradle to grave, from wak-
ing to sleeping—to advertising.
Examining advertising makes it clear that the concept of a con-
sumer culture includes much more than a direct relation between
individuals and the objects they consume. To a large extent, that re-
lation is mediated by the meanings attached to the objects. Of
course, all cultures have attached traditional meanings to objects,
but our culture is so flooded with a constant stream of new (and
improved) products that they long ago exceeded all traditional
meanings. Many objects depend, at least initially, on the meanings
produced by advertising. Whatever its initial aim, advertising does
more than sell products. It is an integral part of consumer culture.
It not only attaches meanings to commodities, but also to the
people who purchase and use them, as Daniel Bell explains:
36
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

The advertising in the women’s magazines, the house-
and-home periodicals, and sophisticated journals like
the New Yorker was to teach people how to dress, fur-
nish a home, buy the right wines—in short, the styles
of life appropriate to the new statuses. Though at first
the changes were primarily in manners, dress, taste,
and food habits, sooner or later they began to affect
more basic patterns: the structure of authority in the
family, the role of children and young adults as inde-
pendent consumers in the society, the patterns of
morals, and the different meanings of achievement in
the society. (1976, 69)
Indeed, the meanings produced by a consumer culture ex-
tend even to the personality of the consumer. It is not just a
motorcycle or a white ball gown that one purchases, but the iden-
tity that goes with it. One becomes a biker or a debutante. Identi-
ties become commodities to buy, and like other commodities,
there are competing identities on the market. As a 1991 cover of
Cosmopolitan declared: “By changing the way you look . . . you
can create a new you!”
One of the early leaders in advertising, Helen Woodward,
identified the attraction of the purchasable identity in the follow-
ing way: “To those who cannot change their whole lives or occu-
pations, even a new line in a dress is often a relief. The woman
who is tired of her husband or her home or a job feels some lift-
ing of the weight of life from seeing a straight line change into a
bouffant, or a gray pass into beige. Most people do not have the
courage or the understanding to make deeper changes” (1926,
345; see profile of Helen Rosen Woodward in chapter 6).
It is in the ability to proffer new meanings and identities that
consumer culture and advertising contain a strong dose of ideal-
ism. We are more attached to the ideal meaning of the object and
to the ideal identity represented by the object than to the object it-
self. This is the phenomenon that Raymond Williams refers to
when he writes that advertising is proof that people in modern
capitalist societies are not materialist. Williams claims “if we were
sensibly materialist, in that part of our living in which we use
things, we should find most advertising to be of an insane irrele-
vance” (1980, 185). It is not that we are tricked by the meanings
that advertisements deliver. To a large degree, it is the meaning—
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions
37

the advertising, the brand, the logo, the Nike swoosh, the Polo
pony—that is wanted, especially by the young. The actual com-
modity is just the convenient carrier of that meaning.
The idea that we wear the logo not the clothes, drink the ad-
vertising not the soda, and drive the image not the car has seemed
to many to prove that we are being manipulated. Advertisers, it
has been argued, create desires that consumers obediently ex-
press as if the desires were the consumers’ own. This has been
called the “hypodermic theory” of advertising—advertisements
inject us with false needs (Key 1972). According to this theory, the
desire to consume is largely the product of the manipulations of
advertisers on an unsuspecting public. A passive public is duped
into spending money on things it does not need.
Vance Packard’s The Hidden Persuaders (1957) was an early
and influential example of this viewpoint, arguing that our minds
are controlled by the hidden, subliminal messages contained in
advertising (see profile of Vance Packard in chapter 6). Packard’s
interviews with advertisers revealed their rather disturbing atti-
tude toward the general public. He writes, “Typically they see us
as bundles of daydreams, misty hidden yearnings, guilt com-
plexes, irrational emotional blockages. We are image lovers given
to impulsive and compulsive acts. We annoy them with our seem-
ingly senseless quirks, but we please them with our growing
docility in responding to their manipulation of symbols that stir
us to action” (1957, 12).
Another influential book attacking consumer culture was
Stuart Ewen’s Captains of Consciousness (1976). Ewen argued that
consumer society is a gigantic fraud, a conspiracy to manipulate
the public and sell people items they do not need. Whereas those
who controlled society were once captains of industry, society is
now controlled through the manipulations of advertising by cap-
tains of consciousness.
These books have been followed by a steady succession of
anticonsumption books, including most recently: The Overspent
American: Upscaling, Downshifting, and the New Consumer (1998) by
Juliet Schor, No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Name Bullies (2000)
by Naomi Klein, Culture Jam: How to Reverse America’s Suicidal
Consumer Binge—And Why We Must (2000) by Kalle Lasn, and
Shoveling Fuel for a Runaway Train: Errant Economists, Shameful
Spenders, and a Plan to Stop Them All (2002) by Brian Czech, not to
mention the magazines such as Ad Cult and AdBusters.
38
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

Of course, it is easy enough to dismiss this hypodermic the-
ory by pointing to advertising’s spectacular failures. New prod-
ucts with substantial advertising are introduced every day, and
the vast majority of them fail. One of the most cited examples is
the huge amount spent introducing and marketing the Edsel car,
which became a laughable flop (Larrabee 1957).
Furthermore, it has been argued that the creation and control
of meaning is not a one-way process. Advertisers may create
saleable meanings for the new commodities, but consumers often
create meanings of their own (Abercrombie 1994; de Certeau
1984; Fiske 1989). For example, hippies took the American flag
and unpatriotically used it as clothing, punks took the safety pin
and used it as bodily adornment, and rap DJs took the turntable
and turned it into a creative instrument. None of these uses were
intended or even imagined by those who created and marketed
the products. Advertisers may often have the first word on mean-
ings, and there is no disputing the power of that position, but
consumers sometimes have the last word. Rather than simply a
conduit for the producers’ meanings, consumer objects are often
a site of struggle over meaning.
Despite this struggle over meaning, few can doubt that ad-
vertising is aimed at controlling our behavior, and we must sus-
pect that it is fairly successful. Otherwise, why would corpora-
tions continue to spend billions of dollars on it? Nevertheless,
most people, although they often feel disdain for advertising, are
not ready to revolt against the “captains of consciousness” and
their “hidden persuaders.” Perhaps this is because the sort of con-
trol that advertising exerts is not one that is experienced as dis-
agreeable. It is not a rigid, constraining control, but exactly the
opposite. Advertising manipulates us toward unrestraint in
spending. It encourages us to enjoy forbidden pleasures, to break
the old rules of thrift and self-discipline. One might say that it is
controlling us to go out of control, at least where consuming is
concerned. Controlling us to be, in a sense, out of control is a con-
tradiction, but it is one that is easy to avoid examining too closely.
Despite the contradiction, it is easy to think of this control as free-
dom and this manipulation as power.
What the vast amount of advertising really sells is consumer
culture itself. Even if advertising fails to sell a particular product,
the advertisements still sell the meanings and values of a con-
sumer culture. As Christopher Lasch writes, “The importance of
Consumer Culture and Its Contradictions
39

advertising is not that it invariably succeeds in its immediate pur-
pose, much less that it lobotomizes the consumer into a state of
passive acquiescence, but simply that it surrounds people with
images of the good life in which happiness depends on con-
sumption. The ubiquity of such images leaves little space for
competing conceptions of the good life” (1994, 1387).
What advertising constantly sells is the idea that there is a
product to solve each of life’s problems—that the good life, the at-
tractive personality, the appropriate taste can be purchased along
with the object that we are told represents it. However, this prom-
ise is constantly broken. One of our first great disappointments is
the discovery that buying that special toy does not bring us the
infinite fun portrayed on television (Gunter and Furnham 1998).
Nor, we soon discover, does buying those clothes gain us social
acceptance. Our first car does not translate into freedom, and
buying a beer does not surround us with beautiful members of
the opposite sex. We buy the commodities, but the good life does
not follow.
Donella Meadows explains why, despite our continued dis-
satisfaction, we continue to consume.
People don’t need enormous cars, they need respect.
They don’t need closets full of clothes; they need to
feel attractive and they need excitement and variety
and beauty. People don’t need electronic equipment;
they need something worthwhile to do with their
lives. People need identity, community, challenge, ac-
knowledgment, love, and joy. To try to fill these needs
with material things is to set up an unquenchable ap-
petite for false solutions to real and never-satisfied
problems. The resulting psychological emptiness is
one of the major forces behind the desire for material
growth. (1992, 216)
The greatest contradiction that consumer culture has had to
face is not with an economic system that values both the accu-
mulation of capital and consumer extravagance, nor its contra-
diction with the bourgeois ethics out of which it emerged, nor the
contradiction between the rational and irrational consumer. The
greatest contradiction that consumer culture has had to deal with
is that it does not deliver on its own promises, and this very men-
dacity fuels further consumption.
40
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

Consumer Contradictions in Politics
A consumer culture has effects far beyond actual consumption
and its associated advertising. Such a culture tends to change all
other institutions into something compatible with its consumerist
values. We have already discussed how religions have changed
from unquestioned traditions into belief systems that we “shop
around” for in order to fit our lifestyles. The same sort of thing
happens in higher education, where students are more and more
frequently treated like consumers, and the mission of the school is
increasingly shaped by its attempts to market itself to its target au-
dience. Similarly, news becomes entertainment, artistic value is
measured by price, and history is turned into theme parks. In-
deed, it seems that every human expression, from art to sex to out-
rage, is either sold as a commodity or used to sell a commodity.
Of most concern to many is the effect that consumer culture
has had on politics. The democratic model depends on citizens
making rational decisions, but the same marketing techniques
and advertising campaigns that have targeted the irrational con-
sumer are now aimed at the irrational citizen. It is not just that
people think they should be able to buy good government rather
than creating and participating in it or that people place more
trust in the efficiencies of a consumer-driven economy than a
citizen-led government. It is rather that our very models of polit-
ical freedom and civic participation come from consumption.
Freedom now means the opportunity to indulge our impulses
rather than the capacity to determine our destiny, and civic par-
ticipation means choosing among prepackaged political candi-
dates. In this way, the contradictions that are at the heart of con-
sumer culture have infected our political system.
To some extent, consumer issues such as the cost of living,
scarcity of goods, health and safety effects, and the conditions
under which commodities are made or sold have always been of
political concern. But it was in trying to end the Great Depression
that the concerns of consumption and consumers became estab-
lished as a central part of public discourse. The New Deal began
a process that equated the consumer’s freedom of choice with
democracy and defined the American way of life through con-
sumer goods. By the time of the Cold War, it was the difference
between Soviet and American consumers that defined the conflict
more than the difference between political citizens.
Consumer Contradictions in Politics
41

However, consumer culture has affected politics in more
ways than just making the satisfaction of consumer demands a
political priority. The consumer in the market has become the
model for the political citizen. Indeed, some early enthusiasts
proclaimed the consumer market to be more democratic than any
government could be.
Edward Filene, founder of the Boston department store and
early consumer expert, suggested that by buying commodities,
consumers were voting with their dollars. In this way, “the
masses of America have elected Henry Ford. They have elected
General Motors. They have elected the General Electric Company,
and Woolworth’s and all the other great industrial and business
leaders of the day” (1931, 98).
Charles McGovern describes the way that the fledgling ad-
vertising industry welcomed the analogy between consumer and
citizen.
In metaphors equating consumers with citizens and
purchasing with voting, admen portrayed consump-
tion as the true exercise of the individual’s civic role
and public identity; consumption was the ritual
means of affirming one’s nationality as an American.
They identified their own work of persuasion as poli-
tics—the promulgation of ideas and programs for the
common good to be affirmed or rejected through a
public, communal, and voluntary process. The central
political comparison in advertising was the electoral
metaphor. (1998, 43)
There is, however, one glaring problem with this analogy. If
consumers vote with their dollars, then some people have many
more votes than others. Equality may be the goal in politics, but
inequality is the rule in consumer markets. What the poor need
but cannot afford simply does not appear in the market, while the
wealthy’s every whim is catered to by many.
As consumer markets became the model of democratic
choice, political campaigns became more like advertising cam-
paigns. This process has been described in detail in both
Theodore H. White’s The Making of the President, 1960 (1961) and
Joe McGinniss’s The Selling of the President, 1968 (1969). But it
takes little analysis to convince us of the similarity of politics and
advertising, because the parallel has become an accepted part of
the political discussion. Pundits constantly refer to the success of
42
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

political advertisements and the ability of the candidate to sell his
or her image. Beyond the rhetoric, political campaigns regularly
hire people who work in advertising, and techniques developed
in the field of market research are widely used to analyze the
preferences of voters. This has led individuals to view themselves
as passive consumers rather than active citizens. People now ex-
pect politics to consist of selecting between prefabricated choices
in which the political affiliation of the candidate works something
like a brand name. In such an environment, issues are less impor-
tant than style.
The wholesale adoption of advertising techniques for politi-
cal campaigns began in earnest with Eisenhower’s presidential
campaign in 1952. In that year, only 5 percent of campaign ex-
penditures went to broadcast media. By 1972, that figure had
reached 15 percent for direct expenditures and undoubtedly
much more when media consultants and production costs are in-
cluded. Since then, political advertising has focused more on tel-
evision (see table 2.1).
Some see a conspiracy behind this relation between politics
and consumer culture. Consumer culture is believed to be part of
Consumer Contradictions in Politics
43
Table 2.1
Political Advertising on Television: Breakdown of Total
Dollars Spent
Election Year
National Networks
Local Stations
Total
1970*
$260,900
$11,789,000
$12,049,900
1972
6,519,100
18,061,000
24,580,100
1974
1,486,200
21,781,600
23,267,800
1976
7,906,500
42,935,700
50,842,200
1978
1,065,800
56,545,000
57,610,800
1980
20,699,700
69,870,300
90,570,000
1982
861,900
122,760,300
123,622,200
1984
43,652,500
110,171,500
153,824,000
1986
459,300
161,184,000
161,643,300
1988
38,520,700
189,379,500
227,900,200
1990
—
203,313,300
203,313,300
1992
73,816,000
225,807,400
299,623,400
1994
—
354,961,400
354,961,400
1996
33,824,000
366,661,900
400,485,900
1998
—
498,890,600
498,890,600
2000
772,600
605,233,100
606,005,700
Sources: Adapted from Anthony Corrado. 2000. Beyond the Basics: Campaign Finance Reform. New York: Century
Foundation Press, 31.
Television Bureau of Advertising, http://www.tvb.org/rcentral/mediatrendstrack/tvbasics/31_Political.asp.
* Political advertising was first measured as a category in 1970.

a larger scheme to tranquilize the public and to channel all dis-
content into a wish for more goods. Stuart Ewen argued that the
captains of consciousness intend for us to consume ourselves
“into social and political passivity” (1976, 204). Herbert Marcuse
coined the term “repressive tolerance” to describe the way in
which our leaders substitute consumer satisfaction for real free-
dom and weaken the capacity for protest through the propa-
ganda of commodities (1965).
However, such a conspiracy theory is difficult to support, es-
pecially since those in charge seem to be as limited by the con-
sumer model as those who are supposedly being controlled. Po-
litical leaders today need to watch the polls constantly, and their
leadership is severely limited by the need to “sell” their programs
to an electorate that is always looking for a better deal. This is not
to say that the problems described by such critics as Ewen and
Marcuse are not real, but that it seems more likely that they can
be attributed to a pervasive culture than a conspiracy.
Political leaders at both ends of the spectrum have had diffi-
culty adapting to this consumer culture. Liberals have been re-
luctant to adopt the marketing strategies of the big businesses
that they have traditionally opposed, while conservatives have
found it difficult to reconcile these strategies with their emphasis
on family, community, and traditional values.
Edward Luttwak, a former Reagan administration official,
describes the contradiction of conservative politics in terms that
are analogous to the contradictions of consumer culture. “The
contradiction between wanting rapid economic growth and dy-
namic economic change and at the same time wanting family
values, community values, and stability is a contradiction so huge
that it can only last because of an aggressive refusal to think about
it” (de Graaf 1997, 50). Or perhaps we are so used to living this
contradiction in consumer culture that we can no longer see it in
other spheres.
Conclusion
It seems that our consumer culture is infected with contradic-
tions. We are to be self-disciplined and self-indulgent, spiritual
and materialist, calculating and impulsive. We are authentically
cynical, traditionally radical. Consumption is experienced as a
mix of pleasure and guilt, anticipation and fear, desire and trepi-
44
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

dation. We both love and hate our consumer culture and our
guilt, fear, trepidation, and hate involve us in this culture just as
deeply as does our love.
Ambivalence about consumption is part of our consumer
culture. Some believe that the consumers’ desires need to be sup-
pressed, while others are working to incite them. At different
times, we see the consumer as sovereign and as victim; we see
shopping as a process through which we create and express our
identity and as the acting out of the advertisers’ hypnotic sugges-
tions; we see the shopping center as our community and as the
destroyer of our community. We are unsure whether we are on
the verge of unprecedented abundance and empowerment or so-
cial and environmental devastation.
References
Abercrombie, Nicholas. 1994. “Authority and Consumer Society.” In R.
Keat, N. Whiteley, and N. Abercrombie, eds., The Authority of the Con-
sumer, 4357. New York: Routledge.
Ashcraft, Richard. 1972. “Marx and Weber on Liberalism as Bourgeois
Ideology.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 14, no. 2: 130–168.
Bell, Daniel. 1976. The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism. New York:
Basic Books.
Breen, Tim. 1993. “The Meaning of Things: Interpreting the Consumer
Economy in the Eighteenth Century.” In J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds.,
Consumption and the World of Goods, 249–260. New York: Routledge.
Cardona, Mercedes. 2002. “U.S. Will See Modest Boost in Ad Spending.”
Advertising Age 73: 22–23.
Corrado, Anthony. 2000. Beyond the Basics: Campaign Finance Reform. New
York: Century Foundation Press.
Czech, Brian. 2002. Shoveling Fuel for a Runaway Train: Errant Economists,
Shameful Spenders, and a Plan to Stop Them All. Berkeley: University of Cal-
ifornia Press.
de Certeau, Michel. 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
de Graaf, John. 1997. Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic. San Fran-
cisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Durning, Alan. 1992. How Much Is Enough?: The Consumer Society and the
Future of the Earth. New York: Norton.
References
45

Ewen, Stuart. 1976. Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social
Roots of the Consumer Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Filene, Edward. 1931. Speaking of Change: Selection of Speeches and Articles
by Edward A. Filene. New York: Private Press.
Fiske, John. 1989. Reading the Popular. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Gronow, Jukka. 1997. The Sociology of Taste. New York: Routledge.
Gunter, Barrie, and Adrian Furnham. 1998. Children as Consumers: A Psy-
chological Analysis of the Young People’s Market. New York: Routledge.
Hage, Gerald, and Charles Powers. 1992. Post-Industrial Lives: Roles and
Relationships in the Twenty-First Century. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Halter, Marilyn. 2000. Shopping for Identity: The Marketing of Ethnicity.
New York: Schocken.
Horowitz, Daniel. 1985. The Morality of Spending: Attitudes toward the Con-
sumer Society in America, 1875–1940. Chicago: Elephant Press.
Key, Wilson B. 1972. Subliminal Seduction. New York: Signet.
Klein, Naomi. 2000. No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Name Bullies.
Toronto: Knopf Canada.
Larrabee, Eric. 1957. “The Edsel and How It Got That Way.” Harper’s
1231, no. 1: 123–146.
Lasch, Christopher. 1994. “The Culture of Consumption.” In P. Stearns,
ed., Encyclopedia of Social History, 1387–1388. New York: Garland.
Lasn, Kalle. 2000. Culture Jam: How to Reverse America’s Suicidal Consumer
Binge—And Why We Must. New York: Quill.
Marcuse, Herbert. 1965. “Repressive Tolerance.” In R. Wolff, B. Moore,
and H. Marcuse, eds., A Critique of Pure Tolerance, 81–123. Boston: Beacon
Press.
———. 1992. One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced In-
dustrial Society. 2d ed. Boston: Beacon Press.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. New York: Macmillan.
McGinniss, Joe. 1969. The Selling of the President, 1968. New York: Trident.
McGovern, Charles. 1998. “Consumption and Citizenship in the United
States, 1900–1940.” In S. Strasser, C. McGovern, and M. Judt, eds., Getting
and Spending: European and American Consumer Societies in the Twentieth
Century, 37–58. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Meadows, Donella H. 1992. Beyond the Limits. Post Mills, VT: Chelsea
Green.
Packard, Vance. 1957. The Hidden Persuaders. New York: D. McKay.
Porter, Michael. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York:
Free Press.
46
The Contradictions of Consumer Culture

Ritzer, George, Douglas Goodman, and Wendy Wiedenhoft. 2001. “The-
ories of Consumption.” In G. Ritzer and B. Smart, eds., Handbook of Social
Theory, 410–427. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Schor, Juliet. 1998. The Overspent American: Upscaling, Downshifting, and
the New Consumer. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2000. “The New Politics of Consumption.” In J. Schor, ed., Do
Americans Shop Too Much?, 3–36. Boston: Beacon Press.
Schudson, Michael. 1998. “Delectable Materialism: Second Thoughts on
Consumer Culture.” In D. Crocker and T. Linden, eds., Ethics of Con-
sumption: The Good Life, Justice, and Global Stewardship, 249–268. Lanham,
MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Sklair, Leslie. 1995. Sociology of the Global System. 2d ed. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Smith, Adam. 1937. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. New York: Modern Library.
Stigler, George. 1982. Economists and Public Policy. Washington, DC:
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.
Walker, Rob. 2003. “Anti-War Protests Give McDonald’s a Taste of Brand-
Power Backlash.” New York Times, 30 March, C1.
Weber, Max. 2002. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. 3d ed.
Los Angeles: Roxbury.
White, Theodore H. 1961. The Making of the President, 1960. New York:
Atheneum.
Woodward, Helen. 1926. Through Many Windows. New York: Harper.
References
47


3
The Consumption of
Anticonsumption
C
onsumption is a problem. One of the most interesting aspects
of our consumer culture is that this statement really requires
no argument. Consumer culture itself proclaims consumption
to be a problem. For example, we are inundated with advertising
that attacks the absurdity of advertising, people buy books that
condemn consumption, and, indeed, as we will argue later in this
chapter, products are often consumed to express disdain for con-
sumption.
Whatever the problem, advertising has tried to position a
product as its solution—not simply for the personal problems of
halitosis, shyness, or unattractiveness, but also for social prob-
lems such as oppression or inequality. For example, advertising
has always portrayed itself as on the side of liberation, especially
from everything old and traditional. This usually takes the form
of liberation from old commodities in favor of new and improved
commodities, but there has sometimes been an actual political
component. For example, advertisements for cigarettes were
early public proclamations for women’s equality. A leading ad-
vertiser of the 1920s described an advertising-inspired parade
where, with the support of a prominent feminist, some young
women lit “torches of freedom” (i.e., cigarettes) “as a protest
against woman’s inequality” (Ewen 1976, 161). Gender inequality
could be solved by buying the right brand of cigarettes, the right
toys for little girls, the right suit for the businesswoman.
By the middle of the 1950s, consumer culture and advertis-
ing were increasingly seen as parts of the problem rather than as
49

solutions. People were beginning to realize that if there is any
connection between increased consumption and happiness, it is
a negative one (see table 3.1). A common theme of popular mag-
azine articles, movies, and sermons, as well as of academic writ-
ing was the problem of conformity, of consumerism, and the
loss of the work ethic. The appearance of this theme shows the
50
The Consumption of Anticonsumption
Rise in per capita consumption in the
United States between 1973 and 1993.
In 1992, people were, on average, 4.5
times richer than their great-
grandparents at the turn of the century.
Median size of a new house built in the
United States: 
1949: 1,100 square feet
1970: 1,385 square feet 
1993: 2,060 square feet
Americans can choose from:
Over 25,000 supermarket items
200 kinds of cereal
11,092 magazines
In 1987, the number of shopping centers
in the United States (32,563) surpassed
the number of high schools.
By the time they graduate from high
school, American teenagers are typically
exposed to 360,000 advertisements.
Since 1960, the daily average number of
hours spent viewing television has risen
by 39 percent.
Doctors comprise the highest income
group in theUnited States. 
American parents spent 40 percent less
time with their children in 1991 than
they did in 1965.
Despite the astounding economic growth
between 1958 and 1980, Americans reported
feeling significantly less well-off in 1980
than they had twenty-two years earlier.
Percent of Americans reporting that they
were “very happy” were no more
numerous in 1991 than in 1957.
51 percent decrease in quality of life in the
United States since 1970, as measured by
the index of Social Health.
75 percent of American workers ages
twenty-five to forty-nine  report that they
would like to see a return to a simpler
society with less emphasis on material
wealth.
93 percent of American teenage girls
report store-hopping as favorite activity.
Employed Americans spent 163 hours
more per year on the job in 1991 than they
did in 1969. 
Doctors and lawyers comprise the
professions with the highest proportion of
unhappy people.
69 percent of Americans would like to
“slow down and live a more relaxed life.”
Table 3.1
Consumption and Happiness
Changes in Consumption
Changes in Quality of Life
Sources: EcoFuture. 2003. All-Consuming Passion: Waking Up from the American Dream. http://www.ecofuture.org/
pk/pkar9506.html; Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin. 1993. Your Money or Your Life: Transforming Your Relationship
with Money and Achieving Financial Independence. 2d ed. New York: Penguin; New Road Map Foundation.
http://www.cn.org/zpg/acpmain.htm.

protean ingenuity of consumer culture in that advertising was
able to present even this problem as solvable by more con-
sumption. Because this innovation was so important to the
spread of consumer culture, we will examine it in detail.
Hip Consumerism
Thomas Frank, in The Conquest of Cool (1997), has described
changes in advertising as one of the most important processes be-
hind the counterculture of the 1960s. Frank’s main thesis is that
the counterculture received its impetus from the momentous
transformation that advertising underwent in the early 1960s.
Advertising made the hatred of consumer culture one of its own
themes and presented the consumer as a rebel against the “estab-
lishment” and conformity.
The counterculture of the 1960s was deeply critical of con-
sumer culture. One of the founding documents of the counter-
culture, the Port Huron Statement, condemned marketing tech-
niques intended to “create pseudo-needs in consumers” and to
make “wasteful ‘planned obsolescence’ . . . a permanent feature
of business strategy” (Miller 1987, 339). However, both critics
and admirers have commented on the deep connections between
consumer culture and the counterculture of the 1960s. Both
promulgated a doctrine of hedonism, liberation, and continual
transgression. Frank makes sense of this contradiction by
demonstrating that consumer culture was itself critical of con-
sumer culture, and the counterculture was, to a large extent, a re-
flection of that.
The central theme that gives coherence to American
advertising of both the early and late sixties is this:
Consumer culture is a gigantic fraud. It demands that
you act like everyone else, that you restrain yourself,
that you fit in with the crowd, when you are in fact an
individual. Consumer culture lies and seeks to sell
you shoddy products that will fall apart or be out of
style in a few years; but you crave authenticity and
are too smart to fall for that Madison Avenue stuff
(your neighbors may not be). Above all, consumer
culture fosters conventions that are repressive and un-
fulfilling; but with the help of hip trends you can
smash through those, create a new world in which
Hip Consumerism
51

people can be themselves, pretense has vanished, and
healthy appetites are liberated from the stultifying
mores of the past. (1997, 136)
In other words, consumer culture presented consumption as a so-
lution to its own problems.
The generally accepted story of the relation between the
1960s counterculture and consumer culture is that the latter co-
opted the former. In the beginning, the story goes, there was an
authentic counterculture that was in opposition to capitalism and
corporate culture. However, this authentic movement either sold
out or was effectively mimicked by a mass-produced counterfeit
culture of groovy, psychedelic products that captured the youth
market and subverted the real counterculture’s threat. Frank con-
tends that the mass-produced counterfeit culture was “not so
much evidence of co-optation, but rather evidence of the coun-
terculture’s roots in consumer culture” (1997, 27).
Of course, few would deny the connection between the coun-
terculture and the popular music and “rebel” celebrities of con-
sumer culture. Furthermore, the role of television and popular
magazines in advertising the “summer of love” and the entire hip-
pie phenomena is unquestioned. Frank’s argument goes further
than this to claim that it was in the heart of the beast, in advertis-
ing itself, that the first changes occurred that triggered the coun-
terculture and the hippie movement: “The changes here were, if
anything, even more remarkable, more significant, and took place
slightly earlier than those in music and youth culture” (1997, 27).
Frank’s study of advertisers in the late 1950s and early 1960s
shows that they were developing their own counterculture. A
new generation of advertisers was growing tired of the repetitive,
“scientific” advertisements of the 1950s and was finding success
with advertisements that were ironic, rebellious, and that at-
tacked or made fun of consumer culture itself.
In 1960, the advertising company Doyle Dane Bernbach
launched a campaign that was to define hip consumerism (see
profile of William Bernbach in chapter 6). It was for the Volkswa-
gen beetle (see description of Volkswagen Beetle in chapter 6). It
is no accident that the commodity most identified with the 1960s
counterculture is the Volkswagen.
Most car advertising before the 1960s consisted of beautiful
fantasies of some sort: a verdant green countryside, elegantly
dressed models, and gleaming metal; or a racetrack, skimpily
dressed models, and more gleaming metal. Its photography
52
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

grabbed you, and its text labored powerfully to extol the virtues of
the car. The Volkswagen advertisement, in contrast, was simple,
not flashy; self-deprecating, not self-congratulatory; and funny,
not serious. It was the opposite of the advertising that everyone
was used to. One of the first advertisements was a full page of
mostly white space with a small picture of the car in the upper
corner, a small headline toward the bottom saying “Think Small,”
and a couple of paragraphs that described how strange the car
was.
Most significantly, the Volkswagen advertisements made fun
of the product, of advertising, and of consumer culture. It was the
advertisements that first called the car a “beetle” and said that the
station wagon “looked like a shoebox.” But it was at consumer
culture itself that the advertisements aimed their sharpest barbs.
They ridiculed the use of cars as status symbols. They poked fun
at dealers’ sales tactics. They pilloried the faddishness and
planned obsolescence of the fashionable commodity.
These new advertisements were extremely successful and
initiated a revolt in advertising against the hard sell that still
dominated the industry. In this “revolution,” the new generation
of advertisers saw the emerging counterculture “not as an enemy
to be undermined or a threat to consumer culture but as a hope-
ful sign, a symbolic ally in their own struggles against the moun-
tains of dead-weight procedure and hierarchy that had accumu-
lated over the years” (Frank 1997, 9). This partnership changed
consumer culture.
Almost no American car manufacturers were still
using the idealized, white-family-at-play motif by that
year [1965]. And with the exception of luxury lines
(Cadillac, Lincoln, Chrysler), virtually every car being
marketed in America introduced its 1966 model year
as an implement of nonconformity, of instant youthful-
ness, of mockery toward traditional Detroit-suckers, or
of distinction from the mass society herd. . . . The
critique of mass society, leveled by the American au-
tomakers was noticeably different from that of Volk-
swagen and Volvo. The ads of the Big Three auto-
makers were not concerned with evading planned
obsolescence, but with discovering for annual style
changes a more compelling meaning. Where Volks-
wagen and Volvo emphasized authenticity and dura-
bility, Detroit stressed escape, excitement, carnival,
Hip Consumerism
53

nonconformity, and individualism. It is a cleavage that
goes to the heart of the commercial revolution of the
sixties: every brand claimed to be bored, disgusted,
and alienated, but for some these meant the never-
changing Volkswagen and blue jeans; they steered oth-
ers toward the Pontiac Breakaway and the Peacock
Revolution [see description of Peacock Revolution in
chapter 6]. (Frank 1997, 156–157)
What we see then is not the emergence of a movement that
opposed consumer culture and was then co-opted and defeated
by it, but rather a change within consumer culture itself. In the
1960s, consumer culture entered a new phase that Frank calls “hip
consumerism.” It is now more resistant to criticisms, because it is
able to transform those very criticisms into reasons to consume.
Hip consumerism uses the ambivalence, the contradictions, and
the disappointments due to advertising’s constantly broken prom-
ises as further inducements to buy more. The protests against ma-
nipulation, conformity, and loss of meaning are transformed into
reasons to consume. Disgust with consumerism is turned into the
fuel that feeds consumerism because we express our disgust with
consumer culture through consumption.
Advertising no longer sells a commodity so much as a rebel-
lious stance. For example, Benetton advertisements have not used
pictures of its products since 1989. Instead, their advertisements
feature shocking images of AIDS victims, racism, war, and death-
row inmates. Oliviero Toscani, Benetton’s head of advertising,
sees these advertisements as a criticism of consumer culture: “The
advertising industry has corrupted society. It persuades people
that they are respected for what they consume, that they are only
worth what they possess” (Ticnic 1997, 9). This is not the head of
the politburo speaking, but the head of advertising at a major in-
ternational company.
Hip consumers are anticonsumption, but they have been
taught to express their attitudes through what they buy. They are
rebels, but they have been taught to rebel against last year’s fash-
ions and especially to rebel against the old-fashioned Puritanism
and frugality of their parents. They crave traditions and are will-
ing to buy the latest tradition. They want authenticity and will
pay for its simulation.
What changed during the sixties, it now seems, were
the strategies of consumerism, the ideology by which
54
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

business explained its domination of the national life.
Now products existed to facilitate our rebellion
against the soul-deadening world of products, to put
us in touch with our authentic selves, to distinguish us
from the mass-produced herd, to express our outrage
at the stifling world of economic necessity. (Frank
1997, 229)
Hip consumerism has become the latest and strongest ver-
sion of consumer culture. Both the critique of consumption and
the solution to the problems of consumption are now contained
within consumer culture. In other words, consumer culture pre-
sents itself as a problem that only more consumption can solve.
Advertisements that incorporate ironic attacks on consumer cul-
ture are themselves protected from those attacks because they
have positioned themselves on the side of the skeptical viewer.
Advertisements that promote rebellion, mock authority, and
promise a mass-produced nonconformity are now ubiquitous.
For example, one of the main targets of the counterculture’s and
of feminists’ critique of consumer culture was the cosmetics in-
dustry, which was taken to be the epitome of artificiality and con-
formity to mass-produced standards of beauty. However, hip
consumerism has revamped these commodities as signs of ironic
artificiality, defiance, and nonconformity. A case in point, one
company, significantly named Urban Decay, offers cosmetics with
names like Plague, Demise, Rat, Roach, and Asphyxia.
New Age Consumerism
In addition to buying to express nonconformity and rebellion,
consumers also buy to express an interest in living a simple life,
a concern about the environment, and as a declaration of spiritu-
ality. For instance, those who seek the simple life can choose
among more than 100 models of sleeping bags. They can peruse
the advertisements in Real Simple, “the magazine devoted to sim-
plifying your life.” They can buy an SUV to get off-road and
closer to nature. They can furnish their home with the latest
craze in traditional crafts. They can, if they possess the money,
have custom-made, one-of-a-kind clothes fashioned for them out
of hand-spun fabric.
We can call this variant of the hip consumer the New Age con-
sumer. A forthcoming article by Sam Binkley discusses the Whole
New Age Consumerism
55

Earth Catalog, one of the most important documents of the change
from hip consumption to New Age consumption. This strange mix
of a Sears Roebuck catalog and opinionated Consumer Reports put
together by dropouts from the counterculture used its lists of com-
modities to carry the 1960s rebellious spirit into the spiritual envi-
ronmentalism that characterizes the New Age consumer.
The hip consumer responds to the contradictions of con-
sumer culture through consumption that emphasizes artifice,
irony, and nonconformity. The New Age consumer responds to
these same contradictions also with consumption, but they prefer
commodities that represent a noncommercial and more spiritual
life. The New Age consumer prefers boutiques to national chains,
gentrified neighborhood centers to shopping malls. However,
even the mall-based chain store can be sold to the New Age con-
sumer if it is properly marketed, as Anita Roddick proved when
she introduced the environmentally friendly, politically correct
chain, The Body Shop.
New Age consumers demonstrate through their consump-
tion that they are earth-friendly, socially responsible, enlightened
global citizens in tune with nature. They prefer natural wood,
natural fibers, natural ingredients, organic food, and herbal body-
care products. All of these are sold as remedies for the problems
of consumer culture.
Kimberly Lau provides an interesting case of New Age con-
sumerism in her study of New Age Capitalism (2000). She covers a
number of examples including the spread of yoga and macrobi-
otic diets, but most germane is her examination of the marketing
of aromatherapy. In the marketing of aromatherapy, we see many
of the attributes of hip consumption that Frank described, but
with a New Age twist.
Horst Rechelbacher, the founder of Aveda, introduced aro-
matherapy to the American public in 1978. Since Aveda’s success,
others have followed suit, including specialty stores such as The
Body Shop, Garden Botanika, and H2O. In addition, noncosmetic
but hip retailers such as The Gap, The Limited, Eddie Bauer,
Urban Outfitters, Banana Republic, Pier 1 Imports, and The Na-
ture Company have all introduced aromatherapy products. Lau
estimates the annual sale of aromatherapy products to be $300 to
$500 million, with an annual growth rate of approximately 30 per-
cent (2000, 34).
Lau describes three characteristics of the aromatherapy ad-
vertising campaign that appeals to the New Age consumer: (1) it
56
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

is presented as ecofriendly; (2) it is a remedy for the psychic ills of
modern civilization; and (3) it is able to function as a hip con-
sumer’s status symbol.
As Lau informs us, “everyone from aromatherapists to es-
sential oil suppliers and aroma researchers praises the earth-
friendly nature of aromatherapy, but no one articulates the pre-
cise nature of its environmentalism” (2000, 39–40). Finding no
evidence for its ecological beneficence, Lau can only surmise the
following formula: “The association seems as simple as
plants=green=earth-friendly” (2000, 40).
In addition, aromatherapy is associated with ancient and
contemporary cultures that are portrayed as unsullied by the
problems of modern consumer culture. It is variously associated
with the ancient practices of Egypt, Greece, Rome, India, and
China. In addition, Aveda advertises that some of its ingredients
are obtained from the Yawanawa, who live in the rain forests of
western Brazil. Lau sees this identification of aromatherapy with
ancient and nonindustrialized cultures as “part of an attempt to
counter modernity and the techno-industrial capitalist system it
signifies” (2000, 30). In other words, advertising positions this
product outside of consumer culture, as an alternative and even
an antidote.1
Of course, this alternative to consumer culture can only be
consumed by those able to afford it. This allows Aveda products,
like most hip commodities, to function both as a status symbol
and as an antistatus symbol. It represents both the material re-
sources to buy expensive body-care products and a criticism of
Western materialism.
Aveda makes available for purchase the idea of partic-
ipating in cultural critique, of living according to an-
cient philosophies, of living an alternative lifestyle. . . .
Consumption becomes a mode of addressing social,
political, and cultural disenchantment, although the
very processes enabling consumption are what charac-
terize modernity, itself the cause of the disenchant-
ment being critiqued. (Lau 2000, 133)
Furthermore, all of the New Age commodities discussed by
Lau claim to remedy the fragmentation that Daniel Bell, in The
Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism, predicted would destroy con-
sumer culture. Reconnecting mind, body, and spirit is a primary
theme of these products. They are all, at least in name, holistic.
New Age Consumerism
57

Here, too, the contradictions of our consumer culture function as
another reason to consume.
Not only do these products turn anticonsumption into a rea-
son for more consumption, but it is arguable that they co-opt any
real opposition to consumer culture.
Each product comes with a tag, an address, a lifestyle.
The act of purchase locates the individual within a
tribe, and in this way, fashion functions to regulate
lifestyles and produce the belief that every consumer
choice is a free choice, a way in which individuals
invent themselves. Such practices can co-opt self-
identifying groups into the consumer cycle, even those
who may be politically and ethically opposed to it—
for example, those targeted by the new niche markets
in anti-fashions, eco-sensitive clothing, and products
from recycled materials. (Finkelstein 1995, 232)
Cheesy Consumerism
For those unable to believe any longer in consumer culture’s
promises of nostalgic simplicity or ancient spirituality, there is yet
another variant of the hip consumer, the “antihip” or the cheesy
consumer. The hip consumer responds to the contradictions of
consumer culture by stressing artifice and nonconformity. The
New Age consumer responds by “buying” into a fantasy of nos-
talgic simplicity. This new variation, the cheesy consumer, stresses
the artifice of the fantasy of nostalgic simplicity.
We see the cheesy sensibility in the popularity of reruns of
Gilligan’s Island and The Brady Bunch. One cable company is run-
ning these with faux retro commercials, but we can see such cheesy
advertisements throughout our consumer culture. Old Navy seems
to specialize in them, and cheese is the motif in Britney Spears’s
retro Pepsi commercials. David Letterman and especially his fake-
hipster bandleader, Paul Schafer, is the epitome of cheese.
Cheese is a kind of manufactured camp (see chapter 4 for a
discussion of camp). However, while camp aficionados must
rummage through the near past for marginal figures, cheese is
ready-made. Also, while camp has a subversive bite to it, the
cheese attitude is simply sarcastic.
Michiko Kakutani (1992) explains the appeal of cheese to the
58
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

jaded consumer. According to Kakutani, the current generation is
one that “grew up suspicious of sincerity; wary of making emo-
tional, political, or artistic commitments; and whose cynical, de-
fensive mantra is, ‘Hey, I’m cool, you’re cool, and we won’t en-
danger our coolness by ever admitting to a genuine emotion or
serious ambition’” (C1).
The cheesy consumer wants to believe in families like the
Brady Bunch and, of course, all of the consumer products that
made them the happy family that they were, but he cannot.
Cheese is a way to indulge in the fantasy, but now in a skeptical,
ironic mode. Cheesy commercials allow the viewer to both enjoy
the fantasy and feel smugly superior to it. In addition, they posi-
tion the advertiser on the side of the skeptical consumer so that
both can smirk at consumer culture even as they indulge in it.
Consumption as an International
Social Problem
The hip comsumer, the New Age consumer, and the chees con-
sumer have all been described previously as primarily American
and European phenomena. However, consumer culture has become
a global phenomenon and, consequently, a global problem. Here,
too, more consumption is offered as a solution to consumer culture.
A global consumer culture is connected to the international
flow of products, money, people, information, and services,
which has been called globalization. There can be little doubt that
the world is becoming increasingly interconnected and that this
has enormous cultural implications. It is not only that countries
are economically interdependent, but that they are also culturally
interdependent. The political, social, and cultural borders that
once separated cutlures have become permeable. Clearly, there
are multiple forces at work in globalization—economic, political,
institutional, technological—but undoubtedly the most obvious
form that globalization assumes is as a global consumer culture.
Few expressions of globalization are so visible, wide-
spread and pervasive as the worldwide proliferation
of internationally traded consumer brands, the global
ascendancy of popular cultural icons and artifacts, and
the simultaneous communication of events by satellite
broadcasts to hundreds of millions of people at a time
Consumerism as an International Social Problem
59

on all continents. The most public symbols of global-
ization consist of Coca-Cola, Madonna and the news
on CNN. (Held et al. 1999, 327)
Steger cites as examples of globalization the appearance of
Nike sneakers on Amazonian Indians, Texaco baseball caps on
sub-Saharan youths, and Chicago Bulls sweatshirts on Palestini-
ans (2002, 36). In such examples, it is easy to see a homogenized—
even Americanized—consumer culture spreading throughout the
world by creating standardized tastes and desires. And, in fact,
this homogenized world is often precisely what the advertising for
consumption promises, as in the McDonald’s advertisement, “It’s
what everyone around the world keeps saying—It’s MacTime,” or
when Coke wants to teach the world to sing in perfect harmony.
Although some see globalization as an Americanized homo-
geneity, others see it as leading to the creating of heterogeneous, di-
verse, and plural local cultures. In other words, people in a small
American town might be exposed to Japanese movies, African
music, and French fashions, and each person in the town can create
their own individual and unique lifestyle from these world sources.
The question whether globalization increases cultural homo-
geneity and sameness by establishing common codes and prac-
tices or whether it increases a heterogeneity of newly emerging
differences seems now, to many analysts, to have been answered.
Globalization does both. Globalization appears to make people
more different but in a similar way. It creates a mixed system,
where people are homogenized into similar individuals, ethnici-
ties, and nations who want different things. It creates what
Roland Robertson has called “glocalization” (1995).
Glocalization
According to Robertson, “globalization is not an all-encompassing
process of homogenization but a complex mixture of homoge-
nization and heterogenization” (2001, 462). There is an interpene-
tration of the global and the local that creates a difference-within-
sameness. The local is not opposed to the global, rather it is an
aspect of the global. Consequently, the homogeneity of global cul-
tural flows will be matched by the heterogeneity of their reception,
appropriation, and response. Everybody is exposed to McDon-
ald’s, Coke, and Levis, but people do different things with them.
It is this that characterizes glocalization.
60
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

Glocalization is related to “delocalization.” The defining char-
acteristic of our global culture is that relations between people are
no longer dependent on a particular location. The distance be-
tween people and the borders separating them mean less and
less. We now inhabit a new global space along with the local
space. The idea of glocalization is that our relation to the local is
changed by the global context. Global forces undermine our bond
to a fixed local culture, its unquestioned traditions, and stable
identities. Through television, the Internet, advertising, trade, and
travel, people are more exposed to the world and therefore freer
from the constraints of the local.
Not only is delocalization caused by global forces, but people
themselves are more mobile and prone to cross borders. Many of
a locale’s residents did not grow up in that locality, and these
newcomers bring other traditions to this new place. In addition,
indigenous locals travel, interact, and return, thereby transform-
ing their cultures. These processes are so prevalent that a number
of cities are dominated by cosmopolitan elites and immigrant
neighborhoods. Sassen describes these as global cities (1991).
These processes lead to a cultural form that is referred to as
“hybridization” (Pieterse 1995). Zwingle describes “sitting in a
coffee shop in London drinking Italian espresso served by an Al-
gerian waiter to the strains of the Beach Boys singing ‘I wish they
all could be California girls’” (2000, 153). Pieterse describes “Thai
boxing by Moroccan girls in Amsterdam, Asian rap in London,
Irish bagels, Chinese tacos and Mardi Gras Indians in the United
States” (1995, 53). We regularly see these hybrids in music, nov-
els, restaurants, paintings, crafts, and so on. The hybrid form per-
vades both high and popular culture and even “traditional” cul-
ture. In fact, much of what we take to be local and traditional is a
hybrid. All around the world, we see the re-creation of local ritu-
als for the tourist trade. Glocalization is connected to delocaliza-
tion through the creation or re-creation of the local traditions in a
way that conforms to global forces.
There is a similarity between glocalization and the niche
markets created by consumer culture. This should not be a sur-
prise since the very term glocalization began as “one of the main
marketing buzzwords of the beginning of the nineties” (Tulloch
1991, 134). Global culture seems to be precisely tracking the trend
among consumer goods that marketers have already recognized.
Although there are some global brands, one business analyst ob-
served that this “does not mean that there is a global consumer
Consumption as an International Social Problem
61

for companies to target. International cultural differences are by
no means disappearing and, in the late twentieth century, indi-
vidualism is as strong a world force as internationalism. Con-
sumer goods are becoming more, rather than less, focused on the
individual” (Fitzgerald 1997, 742). However, the individuals fo-
cused on by global marketing are, as one business leader put it,
“heteroconsumers”: “People who’ve become increasingly alike
and indistinct from one another, and yet have simultaneously
varied and multiple preferences” (Levitt 1988, 8).
Thus, there is indeed greater heterogeneity, but it is in the
context of and, to a large extent, in response to the homogeneity
of a consumer culture. What appears to be disorder is really sys-
tematic. Global consumer culture creates what Wilk calls “global
systems of common difference” (1995). Again, this seems to be
recognized by consumer advertising. An AT&T advertisement
says, “What makes us all the same is that we’re all different.”
McDonaldization as Heterogeneity and
Homogeneity
George Ritzer (2000) coined the term “McDonaldization” to de-
scribe the way in which more and more of our life is being run
like a fast food restaurant. Because McDonaldization has become
a widely used term for the globalization of consumer culture, it is
useful to employ it to examine the interplay of heterogeneity and
homogeneity. First, however, it is necessary to clearly define what
is meant by McDonaldization. It is not simply the spread of a par-
ticular restaurant chain. Instead it is the spread of the processes of
efficiency, calculability, predictability, and control, which McDon-
ald’s successfully introduced into consumption (see profile of Ray
Kroc, founder of McDonald’s, in chapter 6). Fast food restaurants
provide food efficiently rather than providing good food. The fast
food restaurant is able to calculate how many hamburgers have
been served, how many seconds it takes to fill a cup, the exact
profit margin of each sale, and so forth. Each hamburger, no mat-
ter when or where it is bought, is predictably the same. In order
to achieve this efficiency, calculability, and predictability, people
must be controlled. The idea of McDonaldization is that these
processes are coming to dominate more economic and cultural
sectors as well as spreading globally.
Although McDonaldization refers to much more than the
62
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

restaurant chain, it is instructive to begin with a focus on the het-
erogenizing aspects of McDonald’s itself. We see within the ho-
mogeneity of McDonald’s (the vanguard of McDonaldization)
four types of heterogeneity.
First, McDonald’s in a non-American setting provides a cheap
and easily accessible tourist experience. Stephenson describes the
experience of Dutch patrons where a local McDonald’s provides
“a kind of instant emigration that occurs the moment one walks
through the doors, where Dutch rules rather obviously don’t
apply and where there are few adults around to enforce any that
might” (1989, 227).
Second, when McDonald’s is accepted as a local institution,
it creates a new heterogeneous hybrid locality. The literature is
rife with descriptions of tourists to the United States from other
countries who are surprised to see a McDonald’s here. Watson’s
(1997) collection is full of descriptions of the acceptance of Mc-
Donald’s as a local phenomena in East Asian countries. This is in-
dicative not of the power of the local, but of the power of Mc-
Donald’s to re-create the local. As Ritzer points out, “Its impact is
far greater if it infiltrates a local culture and becomes a part of it
than if it remains perceived as an American phenomenon super-
imposed on a local setting” (2001, 171).
Third, the chain varies its menu to adapt to particular locali-
ties. In India, McDonald’s outlets serve Vegetable McNuggets
and Maharaja Macs made with mutton. In Turkey, they offer a
chilled yogurt drink. In Italy, espresso and cold pasta. Teriyaki
burgers are on the menu in Japan, Taiwan, and Hong Kong (along
with red bean sundaes). The main sandwich in the Netherlands is
a vegetarian burger; in Norway, it is McLaks (a grilled salmon
sandwich); in Germany, frankfurters; in Uruguay, a poached egg
hamburger called the McHuevo.
Finally, the process of McDonaldization is adopted by in-
digenous competitors of McDonald’s to create a local variety of
fast food. Ritzer mentions Russkoye Bistro in Russia, Ronghua
Chicken and Xiangfei Roast Chicken in China, Mos Burger in
Japan, and Uncle Joe’s Hamburger in Korea (2001). Ritzer writes
that “it is not the existence of American chains (and other new
means of consumption) in other countries that is the most impor-
tant indicator of the spread of McDonaldization, but rather the
existence of indigenous clones of those McDonaldized enter-
prises” (2001, 170).
We see then that, on the one hand, McDonald’s itself becomes
Consumption as an International Social Problem
63

more heterogeneous by adapting to the local, and, on the other
hand, McDonaldization promotes heterogeneity in the locality by
creating a tourist experience, a hybrid local, and by promoting
McDonaldized local competitors. Nevertheless, as glocalization
would predict, along with this increased heterogeneity of prod-
uct and locality comes an increased homogeneity of process—of
calculability, efficiency, predictability, and control.
The Contradictions of Global
Consumer Culture
We see in global consumer culture the same contradictions that
we outlined previously. Of course, as capitalism has spread, we
see also the spread of its contradiction between a calculating, ra-
tional, frugal producer and an impulsive, irrational, prodigal con-
sumer. In addition, even though many of these countries don’t
have a Protestant tradition or a bourgeois culture, we neverthe-
less see a contradiction between their traditional ethos and the
impulses of a consumer culture. This often takes the form of a
generational difference in developing countries.
In each nation, there remains a significant population
segment who have lived through underdevelopment,
whose collective memories of material deprivation
and thrifty ways are still fresh. Their moral/ideologi-
cal position on savings has made them resistant to the
rapid expansion of consumerism. In addition, this
group often sees the arrival of consumerist culture as
the consequence of the penetration and contamination
of traditional cultural practices by “Western,” particu-
larly American, cultures. Thus, the moral debate on
consumption has often been characterized as a “gener-
ational conflict,” supposedly between the deprived
generation who embody thrift as a traditional value
and the affluent and fast-spending, “Westernised”
generation. (Beng-Huat 2000, 8) 
We also see the same contradictory view of the consumer. On
the one hand, the spread of consumer culture is driven primarily
by the choices made by those who live in the invaded territory.
The consumer is the sovereign director of globalizing consumer
64
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

culture. On the other hand, as Wilk writes, “it is clear that people
are not making completely free choices about goods. They are not
merely absorbing foreign goods into their existing modes of con-
sumption, and making free strategic choices in the global market-
place. Third world consumers are subject to various forms of co-
ercion, both economic and ideological” (1994, 81).
These contradictions of global consumer culture are also re-
solved through the consumption of anticonsumption. Just as in
Western culture, others are encouraged to consume in order to
represent their belief in anticonsumption traditions, their disdain
of advertisers’ attempts to control them or their rebellion.
We certainly see some of the same aspects of hip consum-
erism in response to the globalization of consumer culture. For
example, marketers in Eastern Europe have introduced a new
product labeled “Ordinary Laundry Detergent” as a hip response
to the heavy promotion of Tide as cleaning “ better than ordinary
laundry detergent” (Money and Colton 2000, 190). However, most
characteristic of the response to the contradictions of global con-
sumption has been what Robertson calls a “willful nostalgia”
(1992). Woodruff and Drake report, for example, that “Czech-
made” soft drinks promise to relieve the stress of the urban, cos-
mopolitan life that is associated with such global products as
Coke and Pepsi (1998). The cosmetics company Shiseido empha-
sizes its Japanese origins even outside of Japan and advertises an
image of Japanese mystique and exoticism (Schutte and Ciarlante
1998). The makers of French chocolates emphasize a nostalgic
“Other” of tropical jungles, but also the craft tradition of hand-
made chocolates (Terrio 1996).
We even see this willful nostalgia being used by McDonald’s
itself. The McDonald’s in Singapore offers a “kampong” burger.
Beng-Huat tells us that “kampong refers to the villages in which
most Singaporeans lived prior to being resettled into high-rise
public housing estates, a time which is remembered nostalgically
as the ‘good old days’ when life was much more relaxed and com-
munity more organic than today’s high-stress living in a glob-
alised economy” (2000, 195–196).
Along with these familiar contradictions, we see also the
highlighting of a new one, the contradiction outlined previously
between heterogeneity and homogeneity. In reaction to the new
contradiction, people are encouraged to consume in order to re-
sist a homogenizing globalization, which is usually and most ef-
fectively presented as Americanization.
The Contraditions of Global Consumer Culture
65

The Consumption of Anti-Americanization
Before we describe the way in which anti-Americanization is
used to spur consumption, we should point out that the United
States first spurred consumption as a symbol for rebellion rather
than as a symbol of homogenous conformity. Schutte and Ciar-
lante describe Coca-Cola, Levis, and Marlboro as symbols of in-
dividualism and freedom (1998, 195). Yoshimi describes Ameri-
can consumer goods as “symbols of ‘emancipation’ and
‘resistance’” (2000, 202). According to Beng-Huat, “American
products have been used to express resistance to local repres-
sions” (2000, 16). Humphrey says that Western consumer goods
represented “resistance to the regime” in the Soviet Union (1995,
57), and this continued in post-Communist Russia with Chevro-
let successfully selling cars to Russians with a “Born in the
U.S.A.” campaign (Money and Colton 2000, 189).
Despite the use of images portraying American products as
symbols of emancipation and resistance, quite the opposite sym-
bolization has often occurred. This has emerged naturally enough
from the contradictions of global consumer culture listed previ-
ously. There has been a condemnation of the unbridled consumer
both as not rational enough and as not traditional enough (Sacks
1998). Furthermore, the image of the sovereign consumer, which
consumer culture introduced, has often been used as the basis for
criticizing the manipulated consumer. It was not long before both
nations and local entrepreneurs saw the advantage to be gained
in portraying globalization, or more usually Americanization, as
the enemy. Appadurai notes the benefits of “posing global com-
moditization (or capitalism, or some other such external enemy)
as more real than the threat of its own hegemonic strategies”
(1996, 32). Beng-Huat describes the “moral panic” created by the
South Korean government and media against an Americanized
consumer culture (2000).
Of course, these moral crusades have not diminished con-
sumption in South Korea or in any other culture. Instead, as we
will describe later, these antiglobalization attitudes function like
the anticonsumption attitudes described in the first part of this
chapter. They fuel more consumption. This might be suspected
since, as many analysts have noted, the United States is “the
home of opposition and resistance to globalization, in spite of the
widely held view that globalization is an American project. In
66
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

fact, it has by now become appropriate to talk of the globalization
of anti-globalism” (Robertson 2001, 459).
McDonaldization in France
Let us return again to McDonald’s and look at its reception in
France as an exemplary case of the consumption of anti-
Americanization. McDonald’s was, for the French, identified with
the United States, and the French relation with American culture
has been, to say the least, ambiguous. France is well known for
having rejected American culture in the 1960s and 1970s, only to
embrace it by the mid-1980s (Kuisel 1993). Even though McDon-
ald’s was introduced into France in 1972 in the period of supposed
American rejection, it nevertheless benefited from this American
association because many saw McDonald’s as a kind of “reverse
snobbery” (Fantasia 1995, 227). This view existed even among the
upper class, as evidenced by the fact that a haute couture fashion
show served a buffet of McDonald’s food during this period.
Along with McDonald’s, there was an accompanying spread
of McDonaldization among the French food industry. In the be-
ginning, these French fast food restaurants tried to benefit from
the association of fast food with the United States, by using such
names as Magic Burger, B’Burger, Manhattan Burger, Katy’s
Burger, Love Burger, and Kiss Burger. In addition, their look and
food products were copied from the American model. Indeed,
Fantasia reports that French-owned hamburger places far out-
numbered American-owned ones (1995, 206). More important
than the food and the look, the restaurants copied the processes
of McDonaldization: its efficiency, calculability, predictability,
and control.
Of course, McDonald’s identification with the United States
has not been solely to its benefit. The very thing that has made
McDonald’s so popular has also made it the target of antiglobal-
ization activists. French McDonald’s have been sites of protest as
well as of vandalism and bombing. The case of Jose Bove who de-
stroyed a half-built McDonald’s in protest of a World Trade Or-
ganization (WTO) ruling has become a cause célèbre with sup-
port from tens of thousands of protestors as well as political
leaders (see description of World Trade Organization (WTO) in
chapter 6). More recently, those protesting the invasion/libera-
tion of Iraq have burned a Ronald McDonald statue in Ecuador,
The Contradictions of Global Consumer Culture
67

smashed McDonald’s windows in Paris, and scaled a McDonald’s
sign in South Korea.
Nevertheless, despite the opposition to McDonald’s, Mc-
Donaldization has continued apace and increasingly acquired a
French twist. French fast food restuarants quickly moved from
American food and look to traditional French foods such as crois-
sants and sandwiches on brioche or baguettes. Despite their now
identifiably French names, products, and looks, these food outlets
follow the same standardized, mechanized, and efficient practices
that McDonald’s introduced. However, they market themselves
as a French (i.e., non-American) fast food. In a minor reverse in-
cursion, a few of these French fast food places (e.g., Pret à Manger)
have invaded the United States, drawing upon the French identi-
fication with fine food to help sell their McDonaldized products.
More important than this reverse incursion is the fact that the
French fast food places have used the rejection of McDonald’s
and of Americanization to sell their own products. In other
words, the rejection of McDonald’s has been used to promote the
spread of McDonaldization. France provides us with a clear ex-
ample of the increase in heterogeneity—of products, look, and na-
tional identification—along with the increased homogenization
of process.
This is not merely an economic phenomena. As Chua Beng-
Huat describes in the case of Singapore, the state is deeply in-
volved.
Consumption expansion thus tends to lead to some
level of global homogenization of culture among con-
sumers, an effect that gives rise to negative responses
to globalisation. As consumer goods are always also
cultural goods, expansion of consumption of imported
products and services often gives rise to an exagger-
ated sense of “panic,” of cultural “invasion” which,
supposedly, if left unchecked will result in the demise
of the local culture. Critics, including the state, thus in-
veigh against specific “foreign” targets, such as
“Americanisation” or “Japanisation,” and take upon
themselves to promote “local” culture as ballast
against the “foreign” cultural invasions. The desire of
the state to involve itself in such ideological critique is
obvious. Homogenisation of culture globally is anti-
thetical to the idea of the “uniqueness” of nationalist
sentiments and, therefore, is potentially threatening to
68
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

the hold of the nation-state on its citizens. Emphasis-
ing the “national” as “local” differences is in the inter-
ests of the nation-state as an act of self-preservation.
Hence, existing alongside embracing the arrival of
capital is a cultural/moral critique of both the com-
modification of social life and the “cultural imperial-
ism” of the countries from which the goods originate.
(2000, 183–184)
We see a similar effect in the marketing of such soft drinks as
Mecca Cola and Qibla Cola, which target the European Muslim
community and position themselves as an expression of anti-
Americanization (Hundley 2003). The idea is that individuals are
to express their contempt for the United States and its associated
consumer society through the consumption of products that are
produced, packaged, and marketed in a way that is deeply de-
pendent on American consumer culture. In addition, although not
so strongly anti-American, the Japanese create a national identity
that is presented as distinct from others, especially Americans, and
which is tied to what Yoshino (1999) calls a cultural marketplace.
Likewise, Foster describes the people of Papau New Guinea as
using consumption to create a local identity in opposition to the
identity attached to global brands (2002). One final example, John-
ston describes an advertisement for a flavored milk drink in New
Zealand that is strongly critical of American culture, but which
uses a musical rap form to express it (2001). In these and many
other cases, the spread of consumer culture is supported by the re-
jection of consumer culture represented as Americanization.
Conclusion
As discussed in the first part of this chapter, we have been en-
couraged to buy in order to establish our individuality in a mass-
produced culture, to express our disgust with consumption by
more consumption, to purchase the latest improved traditions. In
the context of globalization, the consumption of anticonsumption
is given a new twist. Now people are encouraged to buy to ex-
press their rejection of homogenized Americanization. Our dis-
gust with the homogenized Americanization of McDonald’s is
used to expand the underlying process of McDonaldization. Our
disgust with global consumer culture is used to strengthen and
spread it.
Conclusion
69

Far from creating a crisis, the problems of consumer culture
have made it more resilient. This is because our dissatisfaction
with the culture is expressed through more consumption. Con-
sumption has become our model for dissent, our model for free-
dom, our model for political activity. All alternatives to consumer
culture—the simple life, the spiritual, the traditional, the local—
become variant consumer fantasies. Consumption is a social prob-
lem and it is offered as its own solution.
Note
1. It is not necessary to invoke ancient and nonindustrialized cultures to
position a product outside of consumer culture. Passamai describes how
New Age consumers invoke science fiction and fantasy stories to posi-
tion commodities outside of consumer culture (2002).
References
Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Global-
ization. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Bell, Daniel. 1976. The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism. New York:
Basic Books.
Beng-Huat, Chua. 2000. “Consuming Asians: Ideas and Issues.” In C.
Beng-Huat, ed., Consumption in Asian Lifestyles and Identities, 1–34. New
York: Routledge.
———. 2000. “Singaporeans Ingesting McDonalds.” In C. Beng-Huat,
ed., Consumption in Asian Lifestyles and Identities, 183–201. New York:
Routledge.
Binkley, Sam. Forthcoming. “The Seers of Menlo Park: The Discourse of
Heroic Consumption in the Whole Earth Catalog.” Journal of Consumer
Culture.
Dominguez, Joe, and Vicki Robin. 1993. Your Money or Your Life: Trans-
forming Your Relationship with Money and Achieving Financial Independence.
2d ed. New York: Penguin.
EcoFuture. 2003. All-Consuming Passion: Waking Up from the American
Dream. http://www.ecofuture.org/pk/pkar9506.html.
Ewen, Stuart. 1976. Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social
Roots of the Consumer Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Fantasia, Rick. 1995. “Fast Food in France.” Theory and Society 24: 201–243.
70
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

Finkelstein, Joanne. 1995. “The Anemic World of the High Consumer:
Fashion and Cultural Formation.” In D. Miller, ed., Worlds Apart: Moder-
nity Through the Prism of the Local, 227–245. New York: Routledge.
Fitzgerald, Niall. 1997. “Harnessing the Potential of Globalization for the
Consumer and Citizen.” International Affairs 73: 739–746.
Foster, Robert. 2002. Materializing the Nation: Commodities, Consumption,
and Media in Papua New Guinea. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Frank, Thomas. 1997. The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Countercul-
ture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Held, David, Anthony McGrew, David Goldblatt, and Jonathan Perraton.
1999. Global Transformations: Politics, Economics, and Culture. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Humphrey, Caroline. 1995. “Creating a Culture of Disillusionment: Con-
sumption in Moscow, a Chronicle of Changing Times.” In D. Miller, ed.,
Worlds Apart: Modernity through the Prism of the Local, 43–68. New York:
Routledge.
Hundley, Tom. 2003. “Foreign Cola Knockoffs Offer Anti-American Po-
litical Flavor.” Chicago Tribune, 5 February, B1.
Johnston, Jessica. 2001. “The Battle for Local Identity: An Ethnographic
Description of Local/Global Tensions in a New Zealand Advertisement.”
Journal of Popular Culture 35: 193–205.
Kakutani, Michiko. 1992. “First There Was Camp; Now There’s Cheese.”
New York Times, 7 August, C1.
Kuisel, Richard. 1993. Seducing the French: The Dilemma of Americanization.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lau, Kimberly. 2000. New Age Capitalism: Making Money East of Eden.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Levitt, Theodore. 1988. “The Pluralization of Consumption.” Harvard
Business Review 2: 7–8.
Miller, Jim. 1987. “Port Huron Statement.” In J. Miller, ed., Democracy Is
in the Streets: From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago, 329–374. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
Money, R. Bruce, and Deborah Colton. 2000. “Global Advertising.” Jour-
nal of World Business 35: 189–205.
New Road Map Foundation. http://www.cn.org/zpg/acpmain.htm.
Passamai, Adam. 2002. “Cultural Consumption of History and Popular
Culture in Alternative Spiritualities.” Journal of Consumer Culture 2:
197–218.
References
71

Pieterse, Jan N. 1995. “Globalization as Hybridization.” In M. Feather-
stone, S. Lash, and R. Robertson, eds., Global Modernities, 45–68. London:
Sage.
Ritzer, George. 2000. The McDonaldization of Society. New Century ed.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge.
———. 2001. “Globalization Theory: Lessons from the Exportation of
McDonaldization and the New Means of Consumption.” In G. Ritzer,
ed., Explorations in the Sociology of Consumption: Fast Food, Credit Cards and
Casinos, 160–180. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Robertson, Roland. 1992. Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture.
London: Sage.
———. 1995. “Glocalization: Time-Space and Homogeneity-Hetero-
geneity.” In M. Featherstone, S. Lash, and R. Robertson, eds., Global
Modernities, 25–44. London: Sage.
———. 2001. “Globalization Theory 2000+: Major Problematics.” In G.
Ritzer and B. Smart, eds., Handbook of Social Theory, 458–471. London:
Sage.
Sacks, Jeffrey. 1998. “Unlocking the Mysteries of Globalization.” Foreign
Policy 110: 58–64.
Sassen, Saskia. 1991. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Schutte, Hellmut, and Deanna Ciarlante. 1998. Consumer Behavior in Asia.
New York: New York University Press.
Steger, Manfred. 2002. Globalism: The New Market Ideology. Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield.
Stephenson, Peter H. 1989. “Going to McDonald’s in Leiden: Reflections
on the Concept of Self and Society in the Netherlands.” ETHOS: Journal
of the Society for Psychological Anthropology 17: 226–247.
Terrio, Susan J. 1996. “Crafting Grand Cru Chocolates in Contemporary
France.” American Anthropologist 98: 67–79.
Ticnic, Serra. 1997. “United Colors and United Meetings: Benetton and
the Commodification of Social Issues.” Journal of Communication 47: 3–25.
Tulloch, Sara, comp. 1991. The Oxford Dictionary of New Words. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Watson, James. 1997. Golden Arches East: McDonald’s in East Asia. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Wilk, Richard. 1994. “Consumer Goods as Dialogue about Develop-
ment.” Culture and History 7: 79–100.
72
The Consumption of Anticonsumption

———. 1995. “Learning to Be Local in Belize: Global Systems of Com-
mon Difference.” In D. Miller, ed., Worlds Apart: Modernity through the
Prism of the Local, 110–133. New York: Routledge.
Woodruff, David, and James Drake. 1998. “Ready to Shop Until They
Drop.” Business Week (22 June): 104.
Yoshimi, Shunya. 2000. “Consuming ‘America’: From Symbol to Sys-
tem.” In C. Beng-Huat, ed., Consumption in Asian Lifestyles and Identities,
111–134. New York: Routledge.
Yoshino, Kosaku. 1999. “Rethinking Theories of Nationalism: Japan’s
Nationalism in a Marketplace Perspective.” In K. Yoshino, ed., Consum-
ing Ethnicity and Nationalism: Asian Experiences, 8–28. Honolulu: Univer-
sity of Hawaii Press.
Zwingle, Erla. 2000. “A World Together.” In K. Sjursen, ed., Globalization,
153–164. New York: H. W. Wilson.
References
73


4
Stigmatizing Inequality
in Consumer Culture
L
eon Wynter starts his book, American Skin, by talking about the
relation between race and shoes. In New York in 1965, white
boys wore U.S. Keds sneakers. If a child had on Converse All-
Stars, he was a “Negro or one of the tiny handful of Puerto Ricans”
(Wynter 2002, 1). There was one white boy who regularly wore
Converse and nobody knew what to make of him. Today, Wynter
reports, you can tell little about someone’s race by looking at what
a person wears. “Whites and nonwhites are still mostly segregated
within their neighborhoods in the Bronx. But everyone—young
and old, working and upper middle class, college and high school
graduates—wears the same sneakers, baseball caps, jeans, boots,
and designer names” (Wynter 2002, 4). In a generation, the role of
consumer objects in the American system of inequality has com-
pletely changed. Whereas consumer objects were one of the most
important markers of segregation and inequality, they have now
become signs of integration and homogeneity. In this chapter, we
will try to understand how this has happened.
Inequality is present in practically all societies. Orwell showed
us that even in Animal Farm’s utopia of equality, “some animals
are more equal than others.” Skin color, caste, gender, age, reli-
gion, sexual orientation, citizenship—these are only the most ob-
vious forms of inequality. Despite being practically universal, in-
equality takes a unique form in different cultures. As you would
expect, inequality takes a different form in a consumer culture.
We actually should say that inequality takes two forms:One is ob-
vious and the other is much more difficult to perceive.
75

In the next two chapters, we will look at the two ways that
inequality functions in a consumer culture. In this chapter, we
will look at the first type of inequality—one that we actually ex-
perience in a direct, less ambiguous, and more transparent man-
ner. This type of inequality can be called stigmatizing inequality
because it treats people as though there is something wrong with
them—at the very least, as though they are not our equal.
The second type of inequality—which we will not discuss
until the next chapter—is anonymous, indirect, and not resulting
from our intention. We will call this anonymous inequality. In
general, this kind of inequality is not stigmatizing because it
doesn’t involve people we personally know. I may, in fact, very
much admire (from afar, or a tourist’s admiration) the people
being oppressed in this second type of inequality, but the in-
equality is created even without my intention, although certainly
not without my action.
Consumer objects are involved in both types of inequality,
and in this chapter we will look at how consumer objects are used
in stigmatizing inequality. Consumer objects are one of the main
ways in which we communicate who we are to others. It is not
just that our T-shirts have messages, but that they—like all of our
clothes, like all of our possessions—are messages. The things we
consume are expressions of ourselves, and whether or not we
consciously intend a message, others will read it as such.
Such messages can be about many things—including mes-
sages about our own individuality and idiosyncrasies—however,
the messages are often about our class, race, gender, sexual orien-
tation, and so forth. In other words, they are messages about
where we rank in a system of inequality. And even messages
about our individuality are often set against the background of
systems of inequality. We are individuals in comparison to the
stereotypes that make up the system of inequality. Sometimes we
consume to indicate membership in a group, sometimes to indi-
cate nonmembership, and sometimes as ironic comments on any
system of membership.
The attempt to work out the contradictions of consumer cul-
ture discussed in the previous chapter typically takes place
within the system of stigmatizing inequality that the individual
inherits. So, for example, hip, “anticonsumer” consumption is
often pursued in relation to real or perceived inequality—some-
times a rejection of the inequality, occasionally a retro reproduc-
76
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

tion of it, and, more usually, an ironic comment on it. We will see
later that antiracism and antisexism have become important parts
of the rebellious attitude of the hip consumer. Similarly, nostalgic,
authentic, or spiritual consumption is usually expressed in terms
of the particular—usually stigmatized—group that one grew up
in. The nostalgic authenticity of an African American is different
from that of an Italian American. The same is true of cheesy con-
sumption, since what is marginal or mainstream differs from sub-
culture to subculture.
We see then that even as consumer culture appears to be in-
creasingly homogeneous and as various processes and trends
converge, many consumer practices remain embedded in histori-
cally specific social contexts. Perhaps the most important social
context is the existing system of stigmatizing inequality. In our
consumer culture, we can identify six important types of stigma-
tizing inequality: race, gender, sexual orientation, class, age, and
poverty. Each will be discussed in this chapter, but first we will
make some general remarks on how stigmatizing inequality is
taken up and transformed by a consumer culture.
It is as wrong to suppose that consumer culture simply erad-
icates social inequality as it would be to suppose that these in-
equalities persist without being transformed by consumer cul-
ture. Consumer culture does not simply replace inherited systems
of inequality, rather it uses, transforms, and, to some degree, sub-
verts their power to stigmatize by changing the signs of stigma
into fashion statements.
Inequality is both perpetuated by a consumer culture and si-
multaneously subverted. Consumption perpetuates inequality by
enhancing its visibility. For example, markers of gender inequality
are taken up by a consumer culture, enhanced, and reinterpreted as
signs of sexuality. Even though the marker of inequality is even
more on display, it now may serve a different purpose. Rather than
marking the person for discriminatory treatment, it may serve as a
self-assertion on the part of the formerly stigmatized individual.
The transformation of stigmatizing signs into fashion state-
ments is a general trend in consumer culture, but the extent of
that transformation and the form that it takes depend heavily
upon the particular history of that system of inequality in that
particular culture. Consequently, we shall see that despite impor-
tant similarities in each of the types of inequality discussed in this
chapter, there are also significant differences.
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture
77

Race and Ethnicity
In looking at inequality based on race and ethnicity, we can start
with the history of people of African descent in American con-
sumer culture. In the early years of the United States, most African
Americans were slaves and therefore had limited opportunities to
participate in a consumer culture. But even those who were never
slaves were and still are harmed by the stigmatizing inequality of
racial discrimination. Their opportunities for consumption have
been affected by this discrimination, since there have been sepa-
rate and, of course, far from equal access to commodities.
In the struggle for civil rights, consumption became the black
community’s most effective tool (see description of Civil Rights
Boycotts in chapter 6). Robert Weems describes consumer ac-
tivism as “the most potent nonviolent strategy employed by
African Americans during this period of civil rights activity”
(1998, 56). Even before the famous consumer boycotts of busses
and the lunch counter sit-ins, African Americans had organized
boycotts to protest racist violence, humiliating treatment, de-
meaning images, and discriminatory hiring practices. For exam-
ple, the 1930s saw various “Don’t Buy Where You Can’t Work”
campaigns.
Furthermore, Weems documents another way in which con-
sumption promoted civil rights: through the activity of those busi-
nesses who targeted the black consumer (1998, 70–79). Weems
convincingly argues that, more than any ethical commitment, it
was the profit potential of an expanded consumer market that was
a primary motivation for the recognition of racial equality.
Because African Americans before the twentieth century were
predominantly poor and rural, not many marketing campaigns
were directed at them. They did figure in some advertising, but
mostly as servile or humorous representations that appealed to
whites. As early as the 1930s, a few companies began to target
African American consumers. Except for musical recordings and
personal grooming products, these marketing campaigns simply
tried to sell standard “white” products to a new group of con-
sumers who just happened to be of African descent.
However, as the Civil Rights Movement progressed in the
1960s and 1970s and businesses became more attuned to the de-
mands of the African American consumer, marketers moved
away from assuming a desegregated market and began to pro-
mote consumption as an expression of racial pride.
78
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

The 1960s graphically demonstrated the elasticity
of American capitalism. Corporate marketers began
the decade by developing advertisements that catered
to African Americans’ perceived interest in racial de-
segregation. By decade’s end, as African Americans
moved politically from a more passive to a more con-
frontational stance, U.S. corporations promoted the
“soul” market, which extolled black culture and cus-
toms, to retain the allegiance of black consumers.
(Weems 1998, 70)
For example, in the late 1960s, one widely used advertisement
for cigarettes featured a dashiki-wearing black man with copy that
read, “Bold Cold Newport . . . a whole new bag of menthol smok-
ing.” By the 1970s, so-called blaxploitation films such as Superfly
and Shaft became hugely successful by portraying the continuing
inequality, the depravity of the white-controlled system, and the
capacity of a black man (and in a few cases, such as Foxy Brown, a
black woman) to attain a version of personal integrity despite the
corrupt system. Far from being suppressed or censored, rich,
white producers lined up to produce more of them. The most im-
portant color to the producers was clearly green.
Consumption was used as a vehicle for claiming the respect
that was still denied African Americans in the realm of employ-
ment and production. Paul Gilroy, writing about British popular
culture of the 1970s and 1980s, argued that for minority commu-
nities, “consumption is turned outwards; no longer a private, pas-
sive or individual process it becomes a procedure of collective af-
firmation and protest in which a new authentic public sphere is
brought into being” (1987, 210).
To a large degree, race- and ethnic-based consumption dove-
tails with the hip consumerism discussed in the previous chap-
ter. Consumer objects, such as the African dashiki featured in the
Newport advertisement, are seen to represent a nostalgic or ex-
otic alternative to consumer culture. Consumption, in this case,
is used in an attempt to retrieve some of the socially cohesive
elements destroyed in the real or imagined traditional culture.
African Americans are different than other ethnic groups be-
cause of the large-scale disruption of living traditions during
slavery, but it is a difference of degrees rather than kind, since all
traditions become mediated by images in consumer culture.
The theme of black pride and standing up to racism has also
been used to attract consumers of European descent. Hip-hop
Race and Ethnicity
79

and rap became the preferred music of millions of white teen-
agers. Benetton ran a series of advertisements that featured the
theme of racism. One of the first such advertisements pictured
black and white hands handcuffed together. The Timberland
Company ran an advertising campaign urging consumers to
“Give Racism the Boot.”
Companies wanted so much to be able to identify with the
popular criticism of racism that at least one advertising campaign
featured fabricated instances of racism. Nike had Tiger Woods
saying, “There are still courses in the United States that I am not
allowed to play because of the color of my skin.” After the adver-
tisement ran, both Nike and Tiger Woods admitted that he could
play on any course that he wanted to.
We are in the strange position that many consumer objects—
clothes, music, food—are more race identified than ever, and yet
this in no way restricts their consumption. African Americans eat
Mexican food; whites listen to black music; Hispanics watch
Oprah. Racial identity, according to the author of American Skin,
is “now just a label, a fashion” (Wynter 2002, 5).
We see that barriers to consumption based on race are eradi-
cated much more quickly than barriers in other areas, such as em-
ployment. This is not to say that racial issues simply disappear
from consumer culture (see table 4.1). Rather, signs of race that sup-
port systems of inequality are often used in a consumer culture for
a different function. Segregation continues, but now as a segmen-
tation of the consumer market. For example, marketing research
tells us that affluent African Americans are more likely than whites
to buy convertibles, expensive stereos, and sailboats (O’Hare 1989).
Businesses will continue to discriminate, but now in order to better
sell to that market segment, whether sailboats to rich African
Americans or malt liquor to destitute African Americans.1
We see a similar evolution in the ethnic market. Consumer
markets that once discriminated against some ethnicities tried at
first to market to a “melting pot.” However, just as discussed in
connection with African Americans, segmentation reemerged as
marketers became more attuned to the demands of the ethnic
groups.
One significant part of the ethnic market has been unaccul-
turated (usually first-generation) immigrants. Marketing aimed at
these immigrants both validates and perpetuates the foreign cul-
ture right in the middle of the United States. Even though immi-
grants may be ignored in mainstream media and political discus-
80
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

sions, they have been recognized as consumers and are sought
after by marketers. Marketers offer specially tailored merchandise
and services that support the continuation of foreign cultural
forms while at the same time providing the vehicle through which
the newcomers are introduced to the mainstream consumer
world. As one marketing executive for Pepsi said, “It’s funny be-
cause I was an international business major in my undergraduate
studies, and I often feel like I am doing international marketing in
the domestic environment” (Rossman 1994, 155).
Of even more interest is the ethnic market that is aimed at the
fully acculturated. This is a phenomena sometimes called sym-
bolic ethnicity (Gans 1979), in which ethnicity is manifest through
Race and Ethnicity
81
Table 4.1
Ethnic Differences in Product Usage and Store Patronage
Product Usage or
Anglos/
African
U.S.
Asian
Store Patronage
Whites
Americans
Latinos
Americans
Number of different types of electronics owned (1996)
13.6
19.9
41.9
24.6
Percentage of group owning individual electronic products
Television
97.0
99.0
99.0
93.0
VCR
78
78
62
75
Microwave
86
73
57
70
Camera
75
60
49
66
Compact disc player
34
43
48
52
Answering machine
48.4
43
22
43
Video game player
35.7
36
33
30
Dishwasher
46.5
21
9
21
Personal computer
26.8
23
9
41
Camcorder
21.7
16
17
25
Beeper
12.7
31
19
21
Cellular phone
15.3
19
8
19
Store shopped at most often (1994) as percentage of ethnic group
J.C. Penney
15.1
18.5
18.5
16.2
Sears
12.8
21.7
22.2
17.3
Kmart
17.2
17.6
21.1
21.8
Wal-Mart
28.1
7.8
9.1
4.7
Other 
26.7
34.2
29.0
39.9
Total
99.9
99.8
99.9
99.9
Hamburger place visited in the last four weeks (1996) as percentage of ethnic group
McDonald’s
46.4
44.6
46.7
56.4
Burger King
25.9
22.8
35.2
31.4
Wendy’s
9.8
12.9
8.1
6.4
Other
17.8
8.6
9.9
5.8
Total
99.9
99.9
99.9
100.0
Source: Marye C. Tharpe. 2001. Marketing and Consumer Identity in Multicultural America. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage, 44–45.

forms of leisure activity—such as festivals, ethnic music, and
other cultural spectacles—as well as through consumption. As
segregated ethnic communities recede, people tend to use their
consumption of ethnic goods and services to signal their ethnic
identity. Halter observes that “shopping for an ethnic identity has
become big business for contemporary consumer society” (2000,
8). Halter’s explanation of the popularity of this type of con-
sumption is analogous to the explanation for hip consumption
discussed in chapter 3.
My research suggests that although the impetus to re-
claim roots often stems from disdain for commercial
interests, paradoxically, consumers look to the market-
place to revive and re-identify with ethnic values.
Though a crucial component of the rationale for the
creation of ethnic pride groups and related culture-
specific practices may be to protest against the ills of
consumer society, the new ethnics demonstrate that
they are nonetheless deeply tied to consumerist prac-
tices. (2000, 13–14)
As Halter reports, whites are seeing themselves more fre-
quently as an ethnic group and are looking to consume products
indicating, for instance, Irish or Scandinavian pride (2000, 11). In
addition, the hip consumer may use consumer objects to make
ironic comments on their own traditions. For instance, the white
wedding dress, a symbol of sexual purity in European traditions,
may be redesigned today as a sexual fetish costume. This ironic
costume may still be used in a hip wedding or as a fashion in a
Manhattan nightclub. Of course, the amount of symbolic impor-
tance attached to an object by a community will differ, and this
variance will affect the extent to which individual style and irony
are allowed without being punished.
Just as in racial marketing, the audience includes many more
than just members of the particular ethnic group. For example,
one of the fastest-growing segments of the recording industry is
world music, which sells the latest in authentically traditional
music to jaded American consumers. And alongside Hallmark’s
cards aimed at African Americans (Mahogany line), Hispanics
(Primor), and Jews (Tree of Life), there is also a line of cards
(Common Threads) filled with traditional sayings and images
from a multitude of traditional cultures that is sold primarily to
those of European descent.
82
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

Here we see the same contradiction—that is, consumer cul-
ture presents itself as a problem that only more consumption can
solve—but the form is somewhat different. Rather than rebellion
and nonconformity, consumption represents a search for the au-
thenticity of a folk culture presumably unsullied by the corrup-
tion of consumer culture. People are ready to buy the latest fad in
representations of an unchanging tradition.
Gender: The Feminine
Whereas inequality based on race and ethnicity has tended to be-
come market segmentation, gender inequality has taken a some-
what different course in consumer culture. One reason for this
difference is that, from the very start, consumer culture was inti-
mately related to gender issues. We have already seen that con-
sumer culture carries a contradiction in its view of the consumer
as both rational and impulsive. As signs of gender are taken up
by the system of consumption, this contradiction is accentuated
so that women are represented both as the ultimate in consumer
impulsiveness and as the rational consumer of mundane, non-
symbolic goods such as groceries.
In the historical development of consumer culture, the binary
division male/female has lined up with other divisions such as
work/leisure, production/consumption, public/private, rational/
impulsive. Men were seen as workers, producers, in the public
sphere, and rational. Women were seen as having more leisure,
consuming, in the private sphere, and impulsive. These differing
characterizations are related to the social changes that accompa-
nied the emergence of a consumer culture. First, the change from
a basically agrarian to an industrial society meant that the house-
hold was divided from the workplace, and this change, as we
know, was gendered, so that men went to the factories for the paid
labor of production, while women stayed in the private home and
took over the unpaid labor of provisioning the family.
This change was accompanied by a related change in the po-
litical sphere. As local traditions and inherited authorities lost
their legitimacy, they were replaced by decisions made through
discussions in certain formal and informal institutions, ranging
from legislative bodies to coffeehouses. These discussions were
governed by rules of order that required that contributions be ra-
tionally articulated. Just as with the public sphere of production,
Gender: The Feminine
83

this political public was identified with and exclusive to men.
Consequently, men became identified with rational demands that
could be accommodated by a political system, while women were
identified with impulsive, frivolous demands that disrupted po-
litical systems.
In both cases, women became identified with consumption—
on the one hand, the mundane, necessarily economical consump-
tion related to provisioning the household and, on the other, the
frivolous consumption derived from irrational, impulsive de-
mands (see tables 4.2 and 4.3). This is why critics of consumer cul-
ture regularly complained that the culture was being feminized
(e.g., Hoggart 1957).
Furthermore, the passive attractiveness of the consumer ob-
ject was easily related to the traditional role of the woman in sex-
ual courting. Indeed, a common theme of advertising from the
earliest placards to the latest Internet pop-up is the association of
a commodity with an eroticized woman. And it makes very little
difference whether the target consumer is male or female. The
barely dressed female model has been used to sell everything
from women’s hats to power tools.
Reacting to the relation between women and consumer cul-
ture, analysts have tended to one extreme or another. One side as-
serts that consumer culture victimizes women. For example, in
the groundbreaking feminist work The Feminine Mystique (1963),
84
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture
Table 4.2 Women’s Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Expenditure
Items
Percentage of Total Expenditure
Women’s Clothes
90
Children’s Clothes
85
Food
80
Educational Courses
79
Child Care/School Expenses
78
Medical/Dental
59
Household Goods
51
Tobacco
43
Recreation
42
Men’s Clothes
40
Holidays
36
Gambling
35
Meals Out
34
Repairs to House
33
Motor Vehicles
31
Alcohol
27
Source: Adapted from Jan Pahl. 2000. “The Gendering of Spending within Households.” Radical Statistics, no. 75
(autumn): 38–48.

Betty Friedan lambastes advertising for implanting false needs
and using overly sexualized images of women. Consumption is
portrayed there as the realm of female enslavement. The other
side argues that consumer culture liberates women by opening
up a public sphere in which they could be active participants. We
saw in chapter 1 that the department store is the concrete histor-
ical example of this access to the public sphere. Not only did
women dominate this public space as shoppers, but the consumer
industries provided some of the first opportunities for female em-
ployees. If one effect of consumer culture has been to portray
women as sexualized commodities, another has been to open eco-
nomic opportunities and a new public sphere that allowed women
to become aware of their commonalities.
In addition, although consumer culture exploited the image
of women as sexualized commodities, it did not invent it. And
there is a sense in which the prominent display and commercial
use of this image has subverted its power. The bikinied model
draped over the car is more obviously artificial and patently ex-
ploitive than the romantic archetype of women of the previous
age. Even as the sexualized image of the feminine was used to sell
products, its sense of naturalness was undermined.
We see the undermining of this sense of naturalness in the cos-
metics industry where the image of the sexualized woman reigned
supreme. For example, in the 1930s, the cosmetics firm, Volupte,
marketed two new lipsticks. One was aimed at the elegant gentle-
woman and the other was aimed at those who liked to be shocking.
The name of the first was Lady and the second, Hussy. Mademoiselle
Gender: The Feminine
85
Table 4.3
Mean Spending by Men and Women over a Two-Week
Period to the Nearest Dollar
Male in Full-Time Employment;
Both in Full-Time Employment
Female in Unpaid Work
Men’s Mean
Women’s Mean
Men’s Mean
Women’s Mean
Spending in
Spending in
Spending in
Spending in
Dollars
Dollars
Dollars
Dollars
Food
38
117
26
132
Household goods
39
57
36
38
Holidays
111
108
200
53
Men’s Clothes
35
26
33
20
Repairs to House
183
138
59
72
Meals Out
32
20
27
9
Motor Vehicles
92
57
75
47
Gambling
9
6
9
3
Source: Adapted from Jan Pahl. 2000. “The Gendering of Spending within Households.” Radical Statistics, no. 75
(autumn): 38–48.

magazine described the choice between the two as follows: “Each
of these two categories being as much a matter of mood as a mat-
ter of fact, we leave you to decide which you prefer to be” (quoted
in Peiss 1996, 311). That cosmetic firm, of course, did not make up
the categories of Lady and Hussy; it simply used them to market a
commodity. However, in the process, it transformed these cate-
gories into a matter of mood rather than a fixed identity. They were
an individual decision rather than a degrading social judgment.
In addition, women gained some power through their role of
the mundane provisioner for the household. Most of the early con-
sumer movements were organized by women (Furlough 1991). In
her study of World War I consumer movements in Germany, Be-
linda Davis notes the privileged status of women as consumers: “It
was when women appeared to act in the role of wronged con-
sumers that their disruption of order in the street was accepted and
even condoned. And it seems that only women were accorded the
privilege of responding in that fashion” (1996, 299).
Stigmatizing inequality around gender has not simply be-
come a form of marketing segmentation. It has persisted and even
become more ubiquitous, because it is intertwined with the growth
of consumer culture. Nevertheless, to some degree this form of in-
equality has become more obviously artificial and has opened up
a public space for women. Consequently, stigmatizing inequality
has been subverted by consumer culture.
Sexual Orientation and Camp
Many of the systems of inequality in consumer culture are simi-
lar in the sense that we see a working out of the central contra-
dictions of consumer culture discussed in chapter 2. Neverthe-
less, they are all different because they have different histories
and different social contexts. We see this mix of similarity and dif-
ference when we turn to sexual orientation in consumer culture.
On the one hand, like racial discrimination, consumer cul-
ture at first ignored the gay and lesbian consumer, until it was
seen that there was money to be made (see table 4.4). Then,
consumer-oriented and popular-culture businesses led the way in
accepting different orientations. We have danced to the Village
People, Roseanne has been kissed by a lesbian on national televi-
sion, Greg Louganis’s book has become a number one best-seller,
Martina Navratilova has sold us computers, Ellen has come out,
86
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

and gay marriage has been featured on the cover of the most con-
servative newspapers.
On the other hand, like women, the gay and lesbian con-
sumer tends to be represented in an overly sexual way. Further-
more, like both racial communities and women, consumer boy-
cotts have been a primary way for gays and lesbians to exert
influence, most notably through the boycott of Florida’s citrus
products sparked by singer/spokesperson Anita Bryant’s cam-
paign against homosexuals in the late 1970s.
However, sexual orientation has a special relation to con-
sumption because, unlike gender or many aspects of race and eth-
nicity, sexual orientation is not easily recognized without the
props of dress or mannerisms. Consequently, there has always
been a greater concern with fashion and conspicuous consump-
tion in the gay and lesbian community. It should be noted that this
concern is strongly gendered. Lesbians have tended to exhibit a
kind of antifashion because of fashion’s connection to traditional
Sexual Orientation and Camp
87
Table 4.4  Marketing to Gays and Lesbians
1979
Anheuser-Busch (Bud Light) and Absolut vodka ensure their
advertisements are inclusive of the gay community.
1980s
Few companies pursue gay marketing. This has been attributed to the
AIDS crisis, which peaked in the mid-1980s. 
1994
American Airlines establishes a unit focused on the gay and lesbian
market. 
IKEA makes the first prime-time television spot featuring a gay couple
shopping for furniture.
1995
Automaker Subaru runs a series of advertisements with the caption
“It’s Not a Choice. It’s the Way We’re Built” to appeal to the gay and
lesbian community.
2000
Office Max advertises on http://gay.com. 
2001
JP Morgan Chase sets up marketing programs focusing exclusively on
the gay market. 
2002
Jaguar North America launches marketing and advertising campaign
to specifically reach gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (GLBT)
consumers.
Procter and Gamble markets its “Whitestrips” (a tooth-whitening
product) using “The Smile Team,” a group of handsome, athletic men
with great smiles, who appeared at gay pride and gay film festivals. 
American Express builds an entire program around the gay consumer,
including the development of gay-specific copy for its advertising
campaigns.

femininity, while gay men have seen fashion as both a personal
and political statement.
At first, advertisers had to use coded messages to sell to the
gay and lesbian community. Advertisements with same-sex im-
agery were used, but they were usually ambiguous. The couples
shown might be close, and perhaps overly playful, friends or they
might be lovers. The precise relationship was left to the imagina-
tion of the viewer. Even when homoerotic images became more
accepted, advertisers realized that they could use this ambiguity
to aim the same advertisement at married, single, gay, or straight
viewers. Each group could decode the advertisement to fit their
particular inclination. In addition, this coding had another effect
that became even more significant for consumer culture, because
it was out of this milieu that “camp” emerged.
When something that is fundamental to the formation of a
person’s identity is at variance with what most people in a soci-
ety believe is normal, it has an effect on the way that one ap-
proaches the normal. Consequently, homosexuals tend to have a
very skeptical and ironic view of what passes for normal, not just
in sexuality, but in all things. This ironic sense is heightened by a
social pressure to obscure any self-expression behind a code be-
cause of a fear of being “outed.” It is this ironic view of normality
and sensitivity to codes that is the basis for camp.
Camp comes from the French camper, to pose in an exagger-
ated fashion. It refers to a sensibility that favors exaggeration and
artifice. The act that is by definition camp is the drag perfor-
mance. In drag, gay men (and in a few cases, women) dress up as
the opposite sex in an exaggerated manner. The drag perfor-
mance simultaneously applauds and mocks normal gender roles.
In general, the woman who is portrayed by the drag artist is al-
ready an exaggeration of the gender role (e.g., Mae West), and the
performance tends to heighten that exaggeration almost to the
point of parody. The drag performance denaturalizes the normal
heterosexual roles and suggests that all masculinity and feminin-
ity is a performance.
Camp has come to mean not so much the drag performance
itself as those types of celebrities that make for good drag. Camp
refers to those cultural products that have exaggerated elements
that tend to denaturalize and almost parody the very categories
that they represent. Just as Mae West exaggerated and almost
parodied femininity, camp aficionados prefer such cultural prod-
88
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

ucts as 1950s Japanese monster movies that exaggerate and al-
most parody the attempt to manipulate the emotional reactions
of the audience.
Camp is not found in the products themselves so much as in
the attitude with which they are consumed. Almost anything can
be camp, but in general, camp items are out-of-fashion com-
modities that were originally aimed at a popular audience, but
which were, for various reasons, never completely successful.
Camp items are usually marginal, exaggerated, passé. For in-
stance, flamingo lawn ornaments, an exaggerated piece of exotic
nature on the suburban lawn, became more popular as a camp
item—see John Water’s movie Pink Flamingos—than they ever
were in the 1950s.
A seminal essay on camp by Susan Sontag describes it as
apolitical (1966). Sontag writes that “the whole point of Camp is
to dethrone the serious. Camp is playful, anti-serious. More pre-
cisely, Camp involves a new, more complex relation to ‘the seri-
ous.’ One can be serious about the frivolous, frivolous about the
serious” (288). This is true, but there is, nevertheless, a political
dimension to camp. Through its exaggerations, camp subverts
the categories that divide people up into normal and not normal
and that divide things and feelings into natural and artificial.
Scott Long stresses the political dimension of camp by reminding
us of how the Stonewall riots that led to the modern gay rights
movement started: “It is no coincidence that the first acts of ho-
mosexual liberation were undertaken by drag queens” (1993, 80).
The camp sensibility has escaped from the homosexual ghetto
and now pervades our consumer culture. Camp has become ubiq-
uitous in advertising and popular culture because it fits so well
with the ironic tone favored by the hip consumer discussed in
chapter 3. In one of the first printed discussions of the subject,
Christopher Isherwood has a character in his novel, The World in
the Evening, predict the importance of camp to the modern atti-
tude: “You’ll find yourself wanting to use the word whenever you
discuss aesthetics or philosophy or almost anything. I never can
understand how critics managed to do without it” (1956, 106).
Camp has indeed become indispensable in consumer cul-
ture. First, it manages to reinstate a kind of hierarchy of taste even
within the trash of popular culture. There are those who get it and
those who do not, those who are in and those who are out. Sec-
ond, it allows even those who are skeptical of consumer culture
Sexual Orientation and Camp
89

to indulge in its pleasure, albeit ironically. The child who secretly
watched the ersatz hippy Partridge Family, can now proudly carry
his or her lunch box to work as an ironic comment. Most impor-
tantly, camp led to “cheese,” a manufactured, prepackaged campi-
ness discussed in chapter 3. Both camp and cheese emphasize ex-
aggeration and artifice. Both require an ironic sense. However,
whereas Sontag noted that one can say something is “not marginal
enough” to be camp (1966, 287), cheese usually involves the best-
known phenomena of consumer culture.
Camp is in tension with consumer culture. The people who
recognize camp are those who society sees as abnormal. What is
most campy are those products that tried so hard to be normal, to
be mainstream, but failed. Camp celebrates the failures and there-
fore criticizes the criteria by which mainstream success is judged.
Cheese, however, celebrates the successes of consumer culture
and brings them back for an ironic rerun. The cheese attitude
smugly laughs at these products, but it does not subvert them.
Class
Perhaps the most studied aspect of the intersection of consump-
tion and inequality has had to do with class. We must note that
for sociologists, class means much more than just the amount of
money that one makes. Class, in its broadest sense, means a
group with a common relation to what they need in order to
make a living. Let us look at the difference between the owner of
a family business, the owner of a factory (a capitalist), and some-
one who works at the factory. In the small business, the person
who owns the tools and other means of making a living also does
the work. However, with the factory, the person who owns the
means of making a living is not the person who does the work. In
addition, the small-business owner probably owns the products
that he makes until he sells them, but the factory worker never
owns what she makes, because the products made by the factory
worker are owned by the capitalist who owns the factory.
It is assumed that the people in each group share similar op-
portunities in life—for example, that the children of the capitalist
are more likely to go to a good preschool than the children of the
workers. At each step of their lives, the members of different
classes would have somewhat different opportunities and choices.
Of course, the amount of money that one makes would be an im-
90
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

portant part of those opportunities, but class means more than
that. The bankrupt capitalist, for example, may have made bad
choices and ignored crucial opportunities, but that is different
than the worker who never had those choices and opportunities in
the first place.
As we saw in chapter 1, consumer culture was, from its very
inception, a class-based phenomena. It was intertwined with the
rise of the middle class. The middle class was, for the most part,
bourgeois, but it also included the growing number of office
workers and bureaucrats. As class position was defined increas-
ingly by consumption practices, these groups had common op-
portunities and choices, even though they had very different re-
lations to what they needed to make a living.
In the beginning of consumer culture, fashions were defined
by those above the middle class. In the eighteenth century, fash-
ion flowed from the court to the rest of the aristocracy and then
to the bourgeois. By the nineteenth century, the bourgeois upper
class took on more of the role of leaders, and fashion flowed from
them to the rest of the middle class. At least in this early stage of
consumer culture, the lower class simply followed the upper
class. This is often called a trickle down effect.
One sociologist who studied this early stage of consumer cul-
ture was Thorstein Veblen. In The Theory of the Leisure Class, Veblen
focuses on the need of people to make distinctions between them-
selves through the display of consumer objects (see profile of
Thorstein Veblen in chapter 6). Specifically, Veblen examines the ef-
forts of the lower class to use consumer objects to pass themselves
off as members of the upper class and the efforts of the upper class
to maintain their distinction from the lower classes (1899).
Veblen assumes that there are two motives for consumption:
(1) the creation of distinctions and (2) emulation. According to
Veblen, all classes seek to distinguish themselves from those situ-
ated below them in the social hierarchy. But, classes also attempt
to emulate those that rank above them. So, each time an upper
class finds a way to distinguish itself, the lower class will attempt
to emulate it (ibid.).
Veblen used the term “conspicuous consumption” to describe
how status objects are ostentatiously displayed to symbolize class
membership. The upper class determines the consumer object that
is to be conspicuously consumed, and the lower class attempts to
imitate. However, once the lower class successfully imitates the sta-
tus objects of the upper class, the upper class abandons the objects
Class
91

and declares new objects that distinguish them from those below.
This, according to Veblen, is what drives fashion’s constant pursuit
of the latest novelty. Every time the lower class copies the latest
fashion, the upper class must create a newer one (ibid.).
There are reasons to question both the trickle down theory
and the premise that emulation is the force driving modern con-
sumption. For one thing, many elite consumer objects, fashions,
or styles have actually originated from lower classes. Jeans, Doc
Marten shoes, cargo pants, peasant blouses, Harley Davidson
motorcycles, punk styles, and jazz music are all objects of con-
sumption that have “trickled up” from lower social groups to the
elite. Indeed, the previous discussion on camp and sexual orien-
tation suggests that it was precisely the low status of homosexu-
als that made them creatively use fashion to produce a recogniz-
able community.
Take, for example, the T-shirt. Two generations ago, it was part
of working-class garb. Today, it is assuredly a part of the upper
class, and, indeed, one upper-class designer describes the T-shirt as
something that is now beyond class. In the introduction to a fash-
ion book, Giorgio Armani said, “I love the T-shirt as an anti-status
symbol, putting rich and poor on the same level in a sheath of
white cotton that cancels the distinctions of caste” (1966, 13). Of
course, we can hardly take Armani seriously on his sense of equal-
ity between rich and poor. Nevertheless, it is clear that consumer
culture operates in a more complex fashion than just a trickle from
rich down to poor. Certainly, most products travel the established
path from the high to the lower, but those cases where products do
not are significant to our understanding of consumer culture.
The sociologist Herbert Blumer (1969a) found that ap-
proaches that focused on class are too narrow to encompass the
truly dynamic diffusion of consumer objects. Rather than a verti-
cal movement of consumer goods that trickle down a class hier-
archy, Blumer argued that fashion often moves horizontally
across a variety of social groups simultaneously.
Styles which start life on the streetcorner have a way of
ending up on the backs of top models on the world’s
most prestigious fashion catwalks. This shouldn’t sur-
prise us because, as we have seen, the authenticity
which streetstyle is deemed to represent is a precious
commodity. Everyone wants a piece of it. But it is more
than the price tag which distinguishes the genuine ar-
ticle from its chic reinterpretation. It’s a question of
92
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

context. And when fashion sticks its metaphorical gilt
frame around a leather motorbike jacket, a Hippy kaf-
tan, a pair of trainers, or a Ragga girl’s batty-riders, it
transforms an emblem of subcultural identity into
something which anyone with enough money can ac-
quire and wear with pride. (Polhemus 1994, 8)
Class is by definition tied to production. Class still functions
in a consumer culture, because, of course, all consumer cultures
also produce. However, like other inequalities, class functions dif-
ferently in consumer culture. Class in consumer culture is increas-
ingly a style, a fashion statement. Wearing jeans and a bowling
shirt no more indicates your class position than does wearing an
evening gown or a suit. The former may be worn by practically
anyone and the latter by those with the money to buy them. Class
is not the issue, only money. To the extent that class is distinct from
money, it is only a style, a matter of dressing up or dressing down.
Style as an Individual Expression
What we see in our analysis of inequality is that consumer soci-
ety does not eliminate preexisting racial, gender, sexual orienta-
tion, or class divisions; rather, the objects and signs associated
with inequality tend to be used as part of a style. Style is the way
that people express their individuality in consumer culture. So-
ciologists have long believed that our individuality is not solely
a matter of the individual, but that it is also shaped by the cul-
ture. Not only must others be able to recognize our expressions
of individuality, but others also evaluate these expressions, and
this recognition and evaluation by others influences our self-
evaluation and our self-esteem.
In consumer culture, it is not what you produce that defines
your individuality, but what you buy. Our individuality is ex-
pressed through what we consume and display. This means that
we create a sense of individuality by selecting from what other
people have made. Our clothes, food, drink, home, car, and so
forth are regarded as indicators of our taste and sense of style,
even though, in most cases, they are made by someone else.
Another one of the contradictions of consumer culture has to
do with our freedom to express our individuality through a con-
sumption style. On the one hand, if someone is making the prod-
uct, there is little to keep us from using it as part of our style. One
Style as an Individual Expression
93

need not be virginal (or even a bride) to wear a white wedding
dress, Italian to eat Italian food, Christian to wear a crucifix, male
to wear a tie, or a princess to wear a tiara. Neither do we need any
of the skills necessary to produce these items. In this sense, we
have much more freedom to express our individuality than ever
before. On the other hand, we can only consume what is offered
in the market. We must create our personal style out of those
items that are available. Not only does this restrict our freedom,
but it does so in a way that makes the expression of individuality
especially difficult, because the availability of an item in a con-
sumer market invariably means that many others are purchasing
this same item, and it is likely that it is purchased as an expres-
sion of their individuality.
This limited availability of truly one-of-a-kind items is why a
style means more than simply purchasing and wearing an item.
What makes a style is the creative organization of different items
into a coherent and distinctive ensemble. One cannot really buy a
style. One can only buy the items that are then creatively com-
bined to form the individual style. One sociologist points out the
Scylla and Charybdis of navigating a style, explaining: “If the
room of a contemporary house consisted only of items represent-
ing a single style, it would create a very sterile impression and the
individual would not find any natural place in it. It would be an
equally big mistake for a person to try to produce all the furniture
totally according to his own private taste in order to create a pri-
vate style of his own. Only a genius . . . could succeed in such an
effort (Gronow 1997, 99).
Our individuality finds its expression somewhere in between
the manufactured style of the producers and the uniqueness of
the creative genius. This makes our attempts to express our indi-
viduality in consumer culture difficult and precarious. We must
find a way to use other people’s products—in most cases, meant
for a mass market—to express our individuality. Furthermore,
our identity in modern culture is increasingly tied to what is in-
dividual about us instead of the social position that we are born
into. People living in a modern society are relatively free to
choose and, at the same time, almost forced to construct their own
identity. Such a situation is bound to create a great deal of anxiety
and to produce ways to deal with it. Of course, the way to deal
with it is, as always, through more consumption. This is best seen
by looking at Martha Stewart.
Martha Stewart is the founder and CEO of Martha Stewart
94
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

Living Omnimedia. At the time this book is being written,
Martha Stewart has resigned from her position as CEO because
of an investment scandal. In 1996, she was named one of “Amer-
ica’s Twenty-Five Most Influential People” by Time magazine.
She produces a popular magazine, a television show, and a web-
site, as well as authoring numerous books. She sells—on her
website, through her catalog, and through K-Mart—hundreds of
items for home and garden. But, undoubtedly, her most impor-
tant product is her style. This girl from an impoverished family
of Polish immigrants is currently the most influential authority
on style in America.
In one sense, Martha Stewart is only the latest in a long line
of domestic advisers that date from the eighteenth century, when
women’s identity was firmly tied to their management of the
bourgeois household. Some of the more notable domestic advis-
ers were Isabella Beeton in England and, in the United States,
Catharine Beecher, a sister of Harriet Beecher Stowe. There are,
however, a number of characteristics that are unique to Martha
Stewart and that place her squarely within consumer culture.
First, Martha Stewart is much more about consumption than
any previous domestic adviser. Of course, all of the domestic ad-
visers that we remember wrote and sold their books, but no other
created a consumer empire around their advice. The Home Fur-
nishing Network remarks that Stewart has “successfully translated
that personal style from her books, magazine, and television show
into affordable products that allow average Americans to live a lit-
tle more stylishly and elegantly” (quoted in Smith 2000, 337).
Second, Martha Stewart’s advice is much more about indi-
vidual choice rather than following social norms and rules. Pre-
vious books of domestic advice were, as one early book described
itself, aimed at “those whose ‘gentle’ minds lead them to wish to
do what is expected of them, and that which may be considered
the right thing” (Troubridge 1931). Martha Stewart also describes
what is expected and right—not as a prescription but as a tem-
plate to improvise on. For example, on her website, she presents
for weddings “some traditional guidelines for seating arrange-
ments, procession, ceremony formation, and recession.” How-
ever, she quickly adds, “You can choose to conduct your cere-
mony in a different way.”
Finally, Martha Stewart emphasizes her educational rather
than prescriptive role. She does not tell people what they should
do, she only teaches them skills. Columns in her magazine Martha
Style as an Individual Expression
95

Stewart Living such as “Wedding 101,” and “Field Trip” empha-
size that this is an educational endeavor. She describes her role as
follows: “I’m less mother than teacher . . . hardly anybody I know
thinks of me as a mother” (Lippert 1995, 26).
Despite Martha Stewart’s reputation as the “queen of WASPs,”
she uses ethnicity and race as part of her style. Her magazine, tel-
evision show, and website include quite a bit of information
about Jewish traditions and ceremonies. She offers numerous
recipes from a “Mess O’ Greens” to fish tacos that are derived
from, or identified with, minority groups. In one of her Thanks-
giving issues, she featured an African American family and their
traditional recipes. In the December issue of her magazine, she of-
fers tips on how to have a very Martha Christmas, Hanukkah,
and Kwanzaa. In addition, she will sometimes emphasize her
own ethnicity, for example, by having her very Polish mother
make pierogi on her show.
We see in Martha Stewart all of the styles discussed above.
She has become a favorite of female impersonators. She presents
high-, middle-, and working-class ideas and recipes as the occa-
sion demands. But it is in terms of gender role as a style that
Martha Stewart has made her greatest contribution. Her success
can be traced to her ability to present traditional, back-to-the-
kitchen femininity as a lifestyle choice. Staging femininity as a
style, she has transformed domesticity into big business.
However, as with so much of consumer culture, this style is
a fantasy. “You lie in bed, nestled among your uncoordinated
sheets, eating a Lean Cuisine. . . . You flip through the pages of a
Martha book or magazine and you dream. You don’t cook”
(Lavin 1996, 51). And it is a fantasy that leads directly to more
consumption. As one journalist admitted, “I did not create an out-
door canopy, I purchased a patio umbrella. I did not make my
own gift wrap with gold enamel paint, I bought it in bulk”
(Mallick 1995, D1).
Inequality Based on Age
Style is the way that people express their individuality in con-
sumer culture. For the most part, stigmatizing inequality just be-
comes part of our style, part of our expression of individuality.
Race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation allow marketers to
divide us into groups, but these groups are not necessarily un-
96
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

equal in terms of consumption. These inequalities still function in
the realm of production to give people different access to money,
but once people have the money, these inequalities have little ef-
fect on people’s ability to consume. There are, however, two kinds
of inequality that still persist in consumer culture and arguably
grow even stronger. They are inequality based on age and on
money. We will deal with age first.
The young have a disproportionate influence on consumer
culture in comparison to other age groups and especially in com-
parison to the elderly. Youths are important to consumer culture
in three ways: (1) as a profitable current market, (2) as a potential
future market, and (3) as a group that influences other markets.
We will briefly discuss each of these.
In the 1960s, American children spent about $2 billion a year.
By the end of the 1980s, this figure had risen to $6 billion. By the
mid-1990s, it was around $9 billion. Tootelian and Gaedeke (1992)
found that despite a 15 percent decline in the number of American
teenagers in the 1980s, this group’s aggregate spending power in-
creased by nearly 25 percent. In addition to the amount they
spend directly, it is estimated that children directly influence $130
billion of parental purchases (Gunter and Furnham 1998).
Recognizing the growing importance of the young consumer,
American companies spent $500 million in 1990 marketing to it,
five times more than was spent in 1980 (Durning 1992, 122). But
this investment was intended to affect more than their current con-
sumption. Marketers were also trying to influence what children
would purchase throughout the rest of their lives. The very young
are especially susceptible to advertising since many of them do not
fully recognize the commercial nature of advertisements (Gunter
and Furnham 1998). Studies have shown that a number of con-
sumer preferences are established in youth and then remain fairly
stable into adulthood. Some preferences, such as cigarettes and
beer, are established years before any actual consumption occurs.
Marketing to children is, in this sense, marketing to the fu-
ture. In addition, if we believe that consumer culture will in-
evitably spread to the rest of the world, then there is another
sense in which marketing to children is marketing to the future.
The spread of consumer culture occurs most rapidly among the
young of other cultures.
Before there is a geographic culture there is a children’s
culture; that children are very much alike around the
Inequality Based on Age
97

industrialized world. The result is that they very much
want the same things; that they generally translate
their needs into similar wants that tend to transcend
culture. Therefore, it appears that fairly standardized
multinational marketing strategies to children around
the globe are viable. (McNeal 1992, 250)
Finally, children are important in consumer culture because
of the influence that they have over other groups. For one thing,
children tend to be leaders in using new products. Because of the
rapid pace of change, younger consumers are usually more knowl-
edgeable about new commodities than older consumers. Thus,
parents are often forced to consult their children not only about
what is in fashion, but even about the basic function of newer
high-tech gadgets.
However, the youth market is even more influential as a
symbolic market, because this market includes not only those
who actually are young, but the vastly greater number of those
who want to feel young. For example, the Pepsi generation has no
age limit; instead, it symbolically attaches a youthful attitude to
the product. One important trend in marketing has been the use
of campaigns developed for children to sell a childlike experience
to adults. Disney has been particularly effective with this strategy.
The direct focus on youth is fairly recent. Advertising cam-
paigns specifically targeting young consumers did not really
begin until the mid-1950s (Kline 1998). Before this, the youth
market was usually reached through parents. Department stores
that sold to the middle-class family also included children’s
items. By the late 1920s, Macy’s began to advertise that it had the
largest toy department in the world. Dolls, stuffed animals, balls,
and sport equipment became hot commodities. Slowly, items
began to be promoted not only for parents to buy for children,
but also for children to buy themselves. Department stores pro-
duced their own radio programs for children and put on elabo-
rate shows. Some items, such as cheap, sensationalist “dime nov-
els” and comic books, became popular despite, or possibly
because of, parents’ disapproval.
In our consumer culture, children’s first experiences with
consumption generally occur in the first few years of their lives.
It will often involve a shopping trip with some sort of commen-
tary provided by the parent on choosing and buying items. The
child may be allowed to select items off of a shelf and to hand
money to the cashier. By the age of four or five, most children in
98
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

the United States have already made an independent purchase,
usually a gift for a parent with some minimal help from the other
parent or a relative. By the age of ten, they have been found in the
United States to make over 250 purchase visits a year to a variety
of different kinds of stores (McNeal 1992).
Recently, marketers have targeted increasingly younger con-
sumers. A Wall Street Journal article quoted an expert in market-
ing who declared that “two-year-olds are concerned about their
brand of clothes, and by the age of six are full-out consumers”
(quoted in Schiller 1989). Children’s cartoons have become basi-
cally one long advertisement. Dolls come equipped with brand-
name clothes. Many companies that specialize in children’s prod-
ucts have formed company-sponsored marketing groups, which
they call “clubs.” Children who join these clubs enroll in a pro-
gram of serial advertising.
As children have become the direct target of marketers, par-
ents have tended to be seen as “gatekeepers,” whose efforts to
protect their children from commercial pressures must be circum-
vented so that those children, in the rather chilling terms used by
the marketers, can be “captured, owned, and branded” (de Graaf
et al. 2001, 53). John de Graaf, who produced the PBS documen-
tary “Affluenza,” reported that “speaker after speaker revealed
the strategy: Portray parents as fools and fuddyduddies who
aren’t smart enough to realize their children’s need for the prod-
ucts being sold. It’s a proven technique for neutralizing parental
influence in the marketer/child relationship” (2001, 53–54).
With the focus on youth, the consumption of the middle-
aged and elderly has progressively less influence on the market
(see table 4.5). For example, few movies, electronics, and fashions
are designed for the older consumer. This undoubtedly widens
the divide between the young who enjoy consumption and feel
well served and the elderly who feel there is something morally
wrong with consumer culture and who are ill-served by it.
The Poor
Another type of inequality built into consumer culture is based
on poverty. Being poor in a consumer culture is, to paraphrase
Dickens, the best and worst of times. On the one hand, poverty is
the one thing that can keep you from participating in consumer
culture. As we have seen, racial and ethnic minorities, women,
The Poor
99

gay men and lesbians, and the working classes are not necessar-
ily excluded from consumer society, while white Westerners,
men, heterosexuals, and the bourgeois are not necessarily in-
cluded. There is, then, a very real sense in which consumer cul-
ture cares only about one thing—whether you have money.
On the other hand, our poor are certainly the least materially
impoverished of any culture in history (see table 4.6). The progress
in just our lifetime is generally unrecognized, but nevertheless, as-
tounding. It is common to measure a country’s success against
poverty by looking at its poorest one-fifth. Currently, the poorest
one-fifth of the U.S. population buys more than the average one-
fifth did in 1955 (Twitchell 2001, 18).
It may be true, as Jesus said, that the poor are always with us,
but the poor are not always the same. In particular, our stereo-
type, our image of the poor, is different in different cultures. In a
culture based around production, the poor are imagined to be
those who do not produce, that is, the unemployed. Poverty, in
the cultural imagination of consumer culture, is tied less to being
a failed worker than to being a failed consumer. Those who are
visibly poor, who beg on our streets and fill our homeless shel-
100
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture
Table 4.5  Typical Spending in Family Life Cycle Stages
Stage
Typical Items of Expenditure
Young, single adult
Clothing, entertainment, car
Unmarried couples
Low-cost furniture, budget travel
Newly married, 
Furniture, appliances, entertainment
no children
Married, no children Designer furniture, entertainment, smaller homes, sports
cars, career clothing
Family, with young 
Insurance, medical expenses, children’s clothing,
children at home
toys, larger homes
Family, with older 
Personal electronic items, holidays, family-size packages
children at home
of food and household goods, larger homes
Single parents
Low-cost housing, discount food, inexpensive clothing
Divorced without 
Apartments, small packages of food and household 
children
goods, dating service, clubs
Family, children left Travel, hobbies, home improvement
home (empty nest)
Family, main 
Medical expenses, retirement homes, 
breadwinner retired
cosmetics, jewelry
Solitary survivor
Medical expenses, restaurants, apartments
Source: Adapted from Gerrit Antonides and W. Fred Van Raaij. 1998. Consumer Behaviour: A European Perspective.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 312.

ters, are assumed to consume the wrong thing, usually the wrong
drug, or to consume some substance to excess.
The poor are also more or less visible depending on the cul-
ture. In a consumer culture, they are not very visible. Except for
those few beggars that are encountered in the urban centers, the
poor are difficult to recognize. You rarely see people wearing
rags. You rarely see people starving. Although many suffer from
less manifest mental illnesses, few have obvious physical prob-
lems that are in need of immediate attention.
Furthermore, the poor do not form groups in a consumer so-
ciety. Previously, geographical location, or sometimes dislocation,
brought the poor into contact with each other, so that a community
could form. For example, in this country, there were huge tracts of
Appalachia that were essentially a community of poor. Similarly,
there were large parts of urban cities made up of immigrants or
minority races who were almost all poor, but who formed a tight
community. Today’s poor tend to be mobile individuals. At most,
they will seek therapy rather than community. They dream of win-
ning the lottery rather than a new form of society.
The poor in consumer culture, despite being materially better
off, are not able to fully participate in this culture because they
have less disposable income after basic necessities are acquired
(see table 4.7). Poverty is not just the inability to buy things; it is
also the inability to engage in the central practice of our culture. A
culture that is directed by the decisions of consumers in the mar-
ket pays no attention to the truly poor. The quirks and caprices of
The Poor
101
Table 4.6 Standard of Living of All American Families (1900) and Poor
American Families (1970)
Percent of Families
All Families
Poor Families
Having Amenities
in 1900
in 1970*
Flush toilet
15
99
Running water
24†
92
Central heating
1
58
One (or fewer) persons per room
48
96
Electricity
3
99
Refrigeration
18 (ice)
99 (mechanical)
Automobiles
1‡
41
Source: Stanley Lebergott. 1976. The American Economy: Income, Wealth, and Want. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 8.
Notes:
* Family incomes under $4,000
† Data are for 1890
‡ Data are for 1910

the rich cause extensive changes in what our society produces,
while the urgent needs of the poor have little effect. The poor are
left to select from choices that have been determined by those with
more money and other interests.
In addition, since individuality is expressed through con-
sumption, the poor are greatly disadvantaged in expressing their
own individuality. An individual style cannot be reduced to
money, but there is no question that it is easier to be stylish with
than without money. Usually the poor must express their indi-
viduality with products made for millions of others, while the
rich can express theirs with products that are one-of-a-kind. It is
clear that individuality is easier to express in the second case than
in the first.
Of course, there is a sense in which it is possible to consume
without actually buying. Stores and malls are open to those who
simply wish to look, desire, and fantasize. Indeed, this is often
what we mean when we use the term shopping. Nevertheless, it
is one thing to decide not to buy and another to not be able to.
The poor experience shopping as a locked door with a window
through which they are invited to admire.
In a culture where consuming means so much, not having
money is a profound social disability. For parents faced with the
desires of their children, the failure can feel overwhelming. This
is why economists have defined poverty in terms of a social norm
rather than in any absolute sense. Indeed, the very term “stan-
dard of living” suggests the point: The standard is a social norm.
102
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture
Table 4.7
Average Annual Food Expenditures, 2000: Household by
Pretax Income
Item
Annual Pretax Income
Less than $5,000–
$10,000– $15,000– $20,000– $30,000– $40,000– $50,000–
$70,000
$5,000
$9,999
$14,999
$19,999
$29,999
$39,999
$49,999
$69,000
and Over
Average Total
Spent on Food $2,627
$2,462
$2,984
$3,743
$4,507
$5,118
$6,228
$6,557
$8,665
Meat/Poultry
/Fish/Eggs
$437
$451
$581
$695
$800
$803
$938
$898
$1,095
Dairy Products
$151
$189
$234
$273
$305
$338
$376
$401
$472
Fruits and 
Vegetables
$268
$324
$372
$455
$519
$508
$595
$580
$785
Average Percent 
of Pretax Income 
Spent on Food
133%
32%
24%
22%
18%
15%
14%
11%
8%
Source: Adapted from U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2000. 2000 Consumer Expenditure
Survey. http://www.bls.gov/CEX (accessed 2 July 2003).

As one New Yorker cartoon expressed it, “I was sad because I had
no onboard fax until I saw a man who had no mobile phone.”
James Duesenberry popularized the phrase “keeping up with
the Joneses” (1952). He argued that the preservation of human
dignity and self-esteem required that we match our neighbors in
the purchase of dishwashers, televisions, second cars, and the like.
What we buy, and, more importantly, what we want to buy is de-
termined by what is possessed by those we see around us. How-
ever, recent research indicates that what the poor see around them
has drastically changed.
Traditionally, people have measured their own consumption
by comparing themselves to what sociologists call a reference
group—a comparison group located nearby in the social hierar-
chy. For instance, people living in working-class neighborhoods
generally saw and wanted what other working-class neighbors
had. Of course, there has always been a tendency to copy those in
the next-higher income level, but there was also a strong social
pressure not to “put on pretensions,” to be “true to your roots,”
and true to some core nonconsumer values such as community
and family.
This dedication to nonconsumer values now appears to be
less true. People still measure themselves against a reference
group, but it is no longer composed of their neighbors. It is now
composed of those they see in television programs and advertis-
ing. People do not measure their well-being against their friends,
but against the television show Friends. According to Juliet Schor
(1998), the reference for a large number of Americans are the
upper-middle-class individuals and families that dominate the
shows and advertisements on television. These shows depict in-
comes that are typically three to five times the income of average
viewers. This is why Schor’s research shows that increased con-
sumption is related to watching more television. Each additional
hour of television watched in a week was correlated with an ad-
ditional $208 of annual spending (1998, 81–82).
It is easier to see the lifestyle of a television family than it is
to see that of one’s own neighbors. This inflates the viewer’s per-
ceptions of what others have, and consequently what one feels de-
prived without. Even the poor compare themselves to the upper-
middle-class people who populate television programs and
commercials. If a poor person watches the Super Bowl on televi-
sion, he or she will see advertisements for Macintosh computers,
$60,000 SUVs, and investment companies. Schor believes that this
The Poor
103

explains why “the level of income needed to fulfill one’s dreams
doubled between 1986 and 1994, and is currently more than twice
the median household income” (2000, 10).
Despite this inequality, the poor have found a way to partic-
ipate in consumer culture through accumulating debt. Early in
their history, revolving-credit plans were provided by many de-
partment stores. Instead of needing to save before making a large
purchase, the consumer could spend without any rational plan-
ning. Instead, a rational plan to pay off the purchase in monthly
installments would be calculated and enforced by the department
store.
By the 1920s, such companies as gas and hotel chains pro-
vided credit cards to customers for purchases made at company
outlets. The use of credit cards quickly expanded after World War
II. In 1950, Diners Club issued the first “universal” credit card to
200 customers who could use it at twenty-seven restaurants in
New York (see description of Diners Club Card in chapter 6). In a
few years, credit card use by traveling salesmen helped to expand
the system to other parts of the country and to a variety of estab-
lishments. This was quickly followed by bank credit cards. The
first national plan was BankAmericard (now VISA), begun in Cal-
ifornia in 1959 and licensed in other states in 1966. Since then,
credit cards have spread to all parts of the world (Ritzer 1995).
In 1968, when the federal government first began to track
credit card debt, it was reported to be $1,316,770,000, about 1 per-
cent of total consumer debt. By 2002, the figure for credit card
debt was $712,190,720,000 or 42 percent of total consumer debt.
This was occurring at a time when consumer debt itself was ex-
panding. In the 1990s alone, consumer credit increased by 70 per-
cent after adjusting for inflation. Table 4.8 shows a similar in-
104
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture
Table 4.8 Household Indebtedness as a Percentage of Disposable
Income
Country[ies]
Liabilities
1983
1993
USA
74
97
Canada
75
101
UK
74
110
Japan
85
112
France
58
79
Italy
8
32
Source: Adapted from Gerrit Antonides and W. Fred Van Raaij. 1998. Consumer Behavior: A European Perspective.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 450.

crease in most developed countries. For the rich, credit cards are
financial tools that allow them to keep track of spending and
avoid carrying large amounts of cash. However, for the poor try-
ing to live like those they see on television, credit cards mean
record levels of debt and bankruptcy.
Conclusion
Each of the systems of inequality in consumer culture is different,
because each has different histories and different social contexts.
Nevertheless, there are strong similarities among many of them.
We see in most cases that the system of inequality is transformed
into a fashion statement regarding the individuality of the con-
sumer. Furthermore, we see that consumer culture makes the
signs of inequality more visible and makes them appear more ar-
bitrary. In this sense, consumer culture subverts stigmatizing sys-
tems of inequality.
Nevertheless, we should be clear about four things. The first
point—to repeat what has been said previously—is that there are
at least two systems of inequality—based on age and poverty—
which have grown stronger in consumer culture. Consumer cul-
ture may promote diversity, but only if it is a marketable diversity.
If diversity can be sold, then it is less likely to become the basis of
inequality. If it cannot be sold, then it disappears from our radar
screen, creating a stronger inequality because it is now invisible.
The second point is that even though a system of inequality
has been transformed into a fashion statement, the effects of the in-
equality can be the same. It really makes little difference whether
stigmatized individuals live in a deteriorating community and en-
gage in self-destructive behavior because they are forced to or be-
cause they choose to as part of their self-affirmation. In either case,
segregation and inequality continue.
Third, even if systems of inequality are subverted by trends
in consumer culture, there are many other trends in our society,
not the least of which are systems of production that have long
supported forms of inequality that are able to provide cheap labor
by paying certain races and ethnic groups less, by requiring one
gender to provide free domestic labor, and by privileging the het-
erosexual family that is able to supply cheap labor for the future.
The final point, which will be the main focus of the next
chapter, is that even as stigmatizing inequality is subverted by its
Conclusion
105

transformation into a fashion system, it strengthens a different
kind of inequality, which is anonymous, indirect, and not result-
ing from our intention. This inequality occurs not because we
stigmatize people, but as a result of our participation in con-
sumer culture.
Note
1. One notable exception is in housing, where the removal of the barriers
to consumption required legal intervention. Some have argued that bar-
riers in the consumption-related area of borrowing also remain; however,
differences in credit histories and savings complicate this issue.
References
Antonides, Gerrit, and W. Fred Van Raaij. 1998. Consumer Behaviour: A
European Perspective. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Armani, Giorgio. 1966. “Introduction.” In A. Harris, The White T, 1–15.
New York: Harper Style.
Blumer, Herbert. 1969a. “Fashion: From Class Differentiation to Collec-
tive Selection.” Sociological Quarterly 10: 275–291.
———. 1969b. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Davis, Belinda. 1996. “Food Scarcity and the Female Consumer.” In V. de
Grazia and E. Furlough, eds., The Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption
in Historical Perspective, 287–310. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
de Graaf, John, David Wann, and Thomas Naylor. 2001. Affluenza: The
All-Consuming Epidemic. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Duesenberry, James S. 1952. Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumer Be-
havior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Durning, Alan. 1992. How Much Is Enough?: The Consumer Society and the
Future of the Earth. New York: Norton.
Friedan, Betty. 1963. The Feminine Mystique. New York: Norton.
Furlough, Ellen. 1991. Consumer Cooperation in France: The Politics of Con-
sumption, 1834–1930. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Gans, Herbert. 1979. “Symbolic Ethnicity: The Future of Ethnic Groups
and Cultures in America.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 2: 1–20.
Gilroy, Paul. 1987. “There Ain’t No Black in the Union Jack”: The Cultural
Politics of Race and Nation. London: Hutchinson.
106
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

Gronow, Jukka. 1997. The Sociology of Taste. New York: Routledge.
Gunter, Barrie, and Adrian Furnham. 1998. Children as Consumers: A Psy-
chological Analysis of the Young People’s Market. New York: Routledge.
Halter, Marilyn. 2000. Shopping for Identity: The Marketing of Ethnicity.
New York: Schocken.
Hoggart, Richard. 1957. The Uses of Literacy: Aspects of Working Class Life
with Special Reference to Publications and Entertainments. London: Chatto
and Windus.
Isherwood, Christopher. 1956. The World in the Evening. New York: Avon.
Kline, Stephen. 1998. “Toys, Socialization, and the Commodification of
Play.” In S. Strasser, C. McGovern, and M. Judt, eds, Getting and Spending,
339–358. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lavin, Cheryl. 1996. “The House of Stewart.” Chicago Tribune (15 Febru-
ary): 51.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1976. The American Economy: Income, Wealth, and Want.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lippert, Barbara. 1995. “Our Martha, Ourselves.” New York Times, 15
May, 26–35.
Long, Scott. 1993. “The Loneliness of Camp in Camp Grounds: Style and
Homosexuality.” In D. Begman, ed., Camp Grounds: Style and Homosexu-
ality, 78–91. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
Mallick, Heather. 1995. “We Worship Martha Stewart, Our Lady of
Lifestyle. But Why?” Toronto Sun, 18 June, D1.
McNeal, James. 1992. Kids as Customers: A Handbook of Marketing to Chil-
dren. New York: Lexington Books.
O’Hare, William. 1989. “In the Black: Affluent Blacks Are a Rapidly
Growing Market.” American Demographics 11: 24–26.
Pahl, Jan. 2000. “The Gendering of Spending within Households.” Radi-
cal Statistics, no. 75 (autumn): 38–48.
Peiss, Kathy. 1996. “Making Up, Making Over: Cosmetics, Consumer
Culture, and Women’s Identity.” In V. de Grazia and E. Furlough, eds.,
Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption in Historical Perspective, 311–336.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Polhemus, Ted. 1994. Streetstyle: From Sidewalk to Catwalk. New York:
Thames and Hudson.
Ritzer, George. 1995. Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit
Card Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge.
Rossman, Marlene. 1994. Multicultural Marketing: Selling to a Diverse
America. New York: AMACOM.
Schiller, Herbert I. 1989. Culture, Inc. New York: Oxford University Press.
References
107

Schor, Juliet. 1998. The Overspent American: Upscaling, Downshifting, and
the New Consumer. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2000. “The New Politics of Consumption.” In J. Schor, ed., Do
Americans Shop Too Much?, 3–36. Boston: Beacon Press.
Smith, Cynthia Duquette. 2000. “Discipline—It’s a ‘Good Thing’: Rhetor-
ical Constitution and Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.” Women’s
Studies in Communication 23: 337–366.
Sontag, Susan. 1966. Against Interpretation, and Other Essays. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Stewart, Martha. N.d. Bride 101. http://www.marthastewart.com/
page.jhtml?type=content&id=channel1582&catid=cat457 [2 March 2003].
Tharpe, Marye C. 2001. Marketing and Consumer Identity in Multicultural
America. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tootelian, D., and R. Gaedeke. 1992. “The Teen Market: An Expolratory
Analysis of Income, Spending, and Shopping Patterns.” Journal of Con-
sumer Marketing 9: 35–45.
Troubridge, Laura. 1931. The Book of Etiquette. Kingswood, UK: The
World’s Work.
Twitchell, James. 2001. Living It Up: Our Love Affair with Luxury. New
York: Columbia University Press.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2000. 2000 Con-
sumer Expenditure Survey. http://www.bls.gov/cex [2 July 2003].
Veblen, Thorstein. 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. London: Rout-
ledge.
Weems, Robert. 1998. Desegregating the Dollar: African American Con-
sumerism in the Twentieth Century. New York: New York University Press.
Wynter, Leon. 2002. American Skin: Pop Culture, Big Business, and the End
of White America. New York: Crown.
108
Stigmatizing Inequality in Consumer Culture

5
Anonymous Inequality in
Global Consumer Culture
F
or four days in late 1999, the city of Seattle was paralyzed.
Police patrolled the streets in riot gear. Almost 600 people were
arrested. The scent of tear gas filled the air. Mixed with the
chants of peaceful protesters were the sounds of smashing win-
dows. It was the first mass demonstration in decades to capture
the attention of the nation, and it was the last of the millennium.
The primary target of this protest was the World Trade Or-
ganization (WTO). If there had been questions about the WTO be-
fore the Seattle protest, the main one would have been, what is it?
And the answer, that it is an international organization estab-
lished in 1995 to reduce trade barriers, would have brought a
yawn to most listeners. But it was opposition to this organization
of trade experts proposed by Canada, based in Geneva, and rep-
resenting 135 countries that set into motion these extraordinary
events.
Rallying around the cry “Shut Down the WTO!” thousands
of protesters blocked Seattle’s streets and made it impossible for
delegates to enter the meeting. Anarchists, trade unions, environ-
mentalists, and various groups more difficult to categorize (with
such names as ACME Collective, Bananarchy Movement, Port-
land Spuds, and STARC Naked) combined to confront an organ-
ization whose primary mission is to allow consumer goods to
move more easily around the world.
Self-described anarchists recruited students from local Seat-
tle campuses. They joined steelworkers and dockworkers, farm-
ers and fishers. The protesters had different and often conflicting
109

concerns: some about cheap labor in developing countries, some
about the environment, some about genetically engineered food,
many about the spreading power of transnational corporations.
People came outfitted in giant condoms, carrying inflatable dol-
phins, dressed as sea turtles, sporting fluorescent orange hard
hats. There were cardboard puppets, waving ears of corn, rever-
berating five-gallon-bucket drums, and posters representing every
political stripe and color.
The protesters’ explicit complaints about the WTO were fre-
quently muddled by the multitude of voices, and, even when
clear, they often did not stand up to closer inspection. For exam-
ple, probably the clearest criticism made by the protesters was
against the WTO ruling that overturned a U.S. ban on the sale of
Asian shrimp whose catch endangers sea turtles. However, none
of the protesters’ literature, websites, or speakers took into ac-
count the WTO claim that the ruling was about discrimination,
not environmental protection. The suit was brought before the
WTO by Asian countries (India, Malaysia, Pakistan, and Thai-
land) who successfully argued that the United States discrimi-
nated because it provided favored Caribbean countries with tech-
nical and financial assistance and longer transition periods for
their fishers to start using turtle-excluder devices. The WTO rul-
ing clearly stated that the United States can pursue the protection
of endangered turtles, but that this difference in treatment could
not be justified. According to the WTO, the goal of this and other
rulings is to encourage countries to respect the nondiscrimination
provisions of the multilateral trading treaties that the countries
themselves have negotiated (Ruggiero 2000). These rules allow
the protection of species, the environment, and scarce resources
so long as the protection is applied without arbitrary or unjustifi-
able bias and is not just a cover for discriminatory treatment.
Nevertheless, the specific facts of the complaints are not really
relevant either to the protesters or to our theme of consumption.
The protesters did not need to engage the WTO’s explanation be-
cause the WTO was primarily a symbol of the larger forces that
constitute a spreading consumer culture. It could be argued that
like market forces, the WTO is remote and mysterious, powerful
and unaccountable—that like consumer culture, it is concerned
with commodities and markets rather than jobs, health, the envi-
ronment, development, and national sovereignty. It was not a par-
ticular ruling or even a particular organization that was being tar-
geted, but the spread of consumer culture around the world. As
110
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

one of the attendees, former British Columbia premier Glen Clark,
said, “There is a real backlash against globalization. People are
starting to question the genuflecting at the altar of the free market”
(Howard 2000, 94). More than the WTO, the protesters seemed to
be expressing rage about being dominated by corporations like
Starbucks, McDonald’s, and Nike. And, indeed, more than the
WTO meeting, these stores bore the brunt of the damage.
Early on the first day of the protest, small groups began
breaking windows of retail stores, such as Nike and Starbucks,
that depend heavily on global trade to furnish consumer prod-
ucts. The downtown Starbucks café was looted, and soon twenty-
five other Starbucks were closed (see description of Starbucks in
chapter 6). By the end of the four days, downtown businesses
claim to have lost $20 million in sales and property damage
(Brunner 2000, A1). Ironically, many of the businesses targeted by
the protesters were seen by local community leaders as glowing
examples of downtown’s rebirth.
According to some, these multinational businesses and free
trade in general will, in the long run, be beneficial for the very is-
sues that the protesters point to. By boosting the economy as a
whole, global trade may create resources that could be used to
train workers for more valuable jobs. As living standards rise,
people may demand a cleaner environment, and they could insist
that their country’s new riches be invested in people’s health. In
addition, there is reason to believe that free trade will help close
the gap between rich and poor countries. In the last twelve years,
as the free trade mantra has dominated global relations, develop-
ing countries’ share in world trade has risen from one-fifth to
more than one-quarter, and their share of trade in manufactured
products has doubled. It could be argued that the problems asso-
ciated with free trade have less to do with trade than with a lack
of political will to justly use the riches that trade produces, but, as
we will argue near the end of this chapter, even this lack of polit-
ical will may be traceable to a spreading consumer culture.
Starbucks and Anonymous Inequality
Both the advantages and disadvantages of global trade can be
examined by looking closely at Starbucks. Starbucks seems to
be everywhere. By 2005, Starbucks predicts that they will have
a total of 10,000 locations in sixty countries (Dukcevich 2002).
Starbucks and Anonymous Inequality
111

Starbucks began as a roaster of high-quality coffee, but what
spurred their growth and created the mass-market, specialty cof-
fee industry was the decision by Howard Schultz to open Euro-
pean-style coffee bars instead of just selling coffee beans to
restaurants. With that, Starbucks became much more than a cup
of coffee. It became a brand. Along with over two dozen varieties
of beans, an assortment of mugs, teapots, and coffee-making
equipment, they sell their own cookbook and even a Starbucks
compact disc. You can also buy a bottled Starbucks Frappuccino
either in Starbucks cafés or in many grocery stores, where you
will also find their six different Starbucks coffee ice creams.
With this success has come a notoriety that is at first puz-
zling. In a recent popular movie, Austin Powers 2: The Spy Who
Shagged Me, Starbucks was portrayed as a front for the evil empire
of the megalomaniac villain. On the one-year anniversary of the
WTO protest, vandals attacked nine Starbucks stores. In addition,
Starbucks became the target of a sustained protest over the in-
equities of the international coffee-trading system.
Nobody denies that Starbucks is exemplary in their treat-
ment of their own workers. Even part-timers at Starbucks are en-
titled to medical benefits and participation in the stock-option
plan. Furthermore, Starbucks had been strongly involved in local
charities and even set up its own philanthropic foundation. It is
the company’s effect on workers in other parts of the world, who
do not have any formal relation with Starbucks, and its unin-
tended effects on entire geographic regions that are at issue.
We will call what is at issue here anonymous inequality. Un-
like the stigmatizing inequality discussed in the previous chapter,
anonymous inequality is created without anyone intending it.
This idea of a result without intention may seem paradoxical. For
many sociologists, it is useful to think of such relations as if they
involved some gigantic mechanical device. This is the image that
most have in mind when they refer to these relations as a system.
The capitalist market is just such a system. It can be thought of as
a “virtual” mechanical device that takes consumer actions as
input and distributes scarce resources as its output. Even though
the consumer only means to buy a cup of coffee, the system takes
this action as an input and uses it to distribute resources. In many
cases, this distribution is unequal.
In table 5.1, we have listed the difference between stigmatiz-
ing inequality, which was discussed in chapter 4, and anonymous
inequality. The key difference is the different way that people in-
112
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

volved in the inequality are related to each other. In stigmatizing
inequality, the people often know each other, or they at least are
able to recognize each other. For example, in a racially based sys-
tem of inequality, stigmatizing inequality would be in effect only
if certain races were considered for higher-paying positions. In
many cases, those eligible for the position and those excluded
from it know each other personally. At the very least, they are able
to recognize each other as members of different races.
In anonymous inequality, the different people need not know
each other and usually do not. For instance, we will look at the ef-
fect of the coffee trade on a system of global inequality. The buyer
of a cup of coffee does not know the plantation worker who grew
the particular beans used to brew the coffee, nevertheless the two
may be involved in a system of inequality. Indeed, if the buyer of
the coffee becomes concerned about his or her involvement in the
system of inequality, it is very difficult for the buyer to discover
who exactly is being disadvantaged by the system.
The second difference is that in stigmatizing inequality, the
inequality is either intended or part of ingrained habits. One of
the important trends of modern culture is that inequality based
Starbucks and Anonymous Inequality
113
Table 5.1  Stigmatizing versus Anonymous Inequality
Stigmatizing Inequality
Anonymous Inequality
Relations between 
Often know each other, 
Unknown to each other
people
at least recognize
each other
Very difficult to establish
personal relation or
recognition
Involvement of 
Must be intentional
Usually is not intentional
individual’s intentions
or habitual
Political effects
Intimately involved 
Difficult to see direct
with politics either to
political effects
enforce the inequality
or to rectify past
Possible to have a political
inequality
effect through boycotts
Use of consumer
To mark people 
To connect people
objects
as different
through a market system
Consumer culture’s 
Tends to make more
Gives greater scope for a
effect on inequality
obvious, turn into a
globalized system of 
fashion statement, 
anonymous inequality
and, ultimately, subvert

on ingrained habits is disappearing, so that most stigmatizing
inequality is now entirely intentional. Previously, people might
have gone to segregated churches and restaurants simply because
that is what they were used to and comfortable with. Today, most
segregation and discrimination is a conscious decision. In stig-
matizing inequality today, people are not hired for jobs, are not
served in certain establishments, are not allowed in specified
areas because other people actively intend to discriminate against
them.
In anonymous inequality, the intention is not necessary. The
coffee consumer does not intend to hurt the plantation worker. In
fact, the buyer of the coffee may actually admire plantation work-
ers in an abstract, romanticized way. The consumer simply wants
consistently good coffee for a reasonable price. But, even without
any intention, it is still the actions of the consumer that cause the
inequality. The consumer may be surprised or even appalled at the
result of their action, but that makes the inequality no less real.
The third distinction is based on political effects. Because
stigmatizing inequality involves people we know and because it
is intentional, it has direct political effects. The creation and per-
petuation of such a system of inequality usually involves politi-
cal decisions. Furthermore, the dismantling of such a system
also involves political decisions. Laws barring discrimination
are passed, affirmative action programs are put into place, and
so forth.
Anonymous inequality also involves political decisions, but
in a less straightforward way, because anonymous inequality
often appears to be simply the workings of an economic system.
As we will discuss later, the economic system of international
trade requires political decisions regarding, for example, tariffs
and so on. It also has political effects such as supporting political
regimes that will protect large landholders. Nevertheless, these
political decisions appear to be just background to the workings
of the economic system.
This peculiar mix of economic and political systems makes
political action against anonymous inequality particularly dif-
ficult. For stigmatizing inequality, laws can be demanded and
government programs can be instituted, but since anonymous in-
equality is set into motion by the unintended actions of the con-
sumer, political remedies are more difficult. Because it appears to
be an economic problem, economic solutions, such as boycotts, are
commonly proposed. As we will discuss later, there is a long his-
114
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

tory of boycotts and consumer action in relation to both stigma-
tizing and anonymous inequality. However, such consumer ac-
tions against anonymous inequality are problematic mainly be-
cause consumer action is also one of the prime causes of the
inequality, even though it may not be perceived as such.
A fourth difference between stigmatizing inequality and
anonymous inequality is the way in which consumer objects are
used. Consumer objects are involved in both types of inequality,
because such objects are one of our primary means of relating to
each other. With stigmatizing inequality, what we buy is dis-
played to different groups of people in different ways. If, for ex-
ample, we purchase a white sheet and create a hooded robe out
of it to wear, the object functions as a sign in a system of stigma-
tizing inequality. We buy certain things or keep others from buy-
ing certain things in order to display our difference. For example,
one race may not be able to buy a meal at a nice restaurant. In-
stead, they are forced to consume meals in a manner that marks
them as different.
However, it is also true that the purchase of a consumer
product relates us in an anonymous way with all of those who
worked to produce and supply this product. Furthermore, all of
those who worked to supply us with these products are con-
nected in an economic system that takes our consumption as one
input and that produces inequality. Think, for example, of the cup
of coffee that you might have bought before sitting down to read
this text. In that simple transaction, you entered into a relation-
ship with hundreds of others: the waitperson, the owner of the
coffee shop, the people working at the roaster, the importer, the
truck driver, the dockworkers, all of the people on the ship that
brought the beans, the coffee plantation owner, the pickers, and
so on. In addition, you supported a particular trading relation be-
tween countries, a particular form of government in the grower’s
country that has been historically shaped by the coffee trade, a
particular relation between the plantation owner and the worker,
and many other social relations. You did all of this by exchanging
money for a cup of coffee. In the relation between these objects
lies hidden all of these social relations between people.
Finally, the growth of consumer culture has had different ef-
fects on these two types of inequality. We argued in chapter 4
that stigmatizing inequality tends to be subverted by consumer
culture because the stigmatizing signs of difference simply be-
come part of a fashion system. In addition, the stigmatized
Starbucks and Anonymous Inequality
115

people tend to become market segments. This happens to differ-
ent degrees with different kinds of stigmatizing inequality, and
also it happens less to the stigmatization of the elderly and the
poor. Even so, consumer cultures tend to have less stigmatizing
inequality than other types of cultures.
The effect is quite the opposite with anonymous inequality.
We will argue in this chapter that anonymous inequality is one of
the main effects of the growth of consumer culture.
Coffee and Capitalism
Starbucks aside, coffee is an important commodity to examine in
trying to understand the anonymous inequality of modern con-
sumer culture and its global dimensions. Michael Jimenez calls
coffee “the paramount beverage of that emergent consumer soci-
ety” (1995, 53). Chapter 1 already discussed the importance of
coffee, along with sugar, cocoa, and tea, in spurring the changes
toward a consumer culture in seventeenth-century Europe. Cof-
fee was one of the first commodities to go from a luxury of the
elite to an everyday necessity for the middle class (see table 5.2).
It was also one of the first common products to be tied to a global
market.
Furthermore, it is generally accepted that the idea of equal
democratic participation in political decisions without regard to
wealth and status found one of its first expressions in eighteenth-
century coffeehouses (Habermas 1989). It has been claimed that
one of the attractions of the Starbucks phenomena is that it
harkens back to these earlier coffeehouses. Starbucks has de-
signed their shops to suggest a place for conversation and com-
munity rather than simply a place to purchase coffee.
Aside from coffee’s historical role, its intrinsic properties
seem particularly well suited to capitalism. Early in its promo-
tion, coffee marketers sponsored research documenting the rela-
116
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture
Table 5.2  World Coffee Production, 1950–1990
Production
Percent
(metric tons)
Change 
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
1950–1990
2,222,000
4,268,000
4,262,000
5,039,000
6,282,000
183
Source: Robert A. Rice and Justin R. Ward. 1996. Coffee, Conservation, and Commerce in the Western Hemisphere.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center and Natural Resources Defense Council, table 2, p. 39. 

tion between coffee and productivity. People were particularly
encouraged to use coffee to overcome the body’s natural rhythms
of a mid-morning and late afternoon slowdown. As the middle
class grew and office routines replaced more invigorating activi-
ties, the coffee break became an accepted feature of the work-
place. Even beyond the enhancement of productivity, coffee also
became an important part of leisure time in the emerging con-
sumer culture. Housewives met for a cup of coffee. Coffee was
regularly served to guests. It also became the beverage of choice
for dining out. As Gregory Dicum and Nina Luttinger claim, “In
a society that combines buzzing overstimulation with soul-aching
meaninglessness, coffee and its associated rituals are, for many of
us, the lubricants that make it possible to go on” (1999, ix).
The acceptance of coffee as the beverage of the middle class
was motivated by several changes in the way it was produced,
marketed, and consumed. In production, economies of scale and
technological improvements reduced costs significantly, so that
even the lower end of the middle class could afford it. In mar-
keting, coffee was one of the first products to move from a bulk,
unbranded grocers’ item to a prepackaged, brand-name item. In
fact, the introduction of the vacuum-packed can made coffee
one of the few products that was actually improved by its being
prepackaged. In addition, there were some important changes
in the technology of consuming coffee. For example, the auto-
matic electric coffeemaker was invented in 1906, and there was
a batch of technological developments in household grinders,
improved coffeepots, and filters that stimulated greater house-
hold usage. However, most significant were the changes in ad-
vertising coffee.
A conglomerate of roasters and marketers called the Joint
Coffee Publicity Committee was formed in the early decades of
the twentieth century to promote the use of coffee. They took ad-
vantage of the new media such as radio and cinema, as well as
billboards, newspapers, and magazines to promote coffee drink-
ing. By the 1920s, this marketing included an educational pro-
gram aimed at housewives on the importance of coffee. These
campaigns attempted to tie women’s self-esteem to their ability to
make a good cup of coffee. One “subtle” advertisement said that
“Mrs. Bradley surprised her husband” with a good cup of coffee
and “they lived happily ever after” (cited in Jimenez 1995, 50).
Another focus of the campaign was on advertising the medical
benefits of coffee in medical journals.
Coffee and Capitalism
117

Thanks to these changes, coffee became a staple of the new
consumer culture. By the 1930s, coffee was accepted as the pre-
eminent adult beverage. Most adults drank it. Few households
were unprepared to offer it to guests. It was available in nearly all
public spaces.
This demand for coffee created a national market for a stan-
dardized product. What had been a patchwork of local roasters
with different-tasting products became a homogenous national
product. Regional roasters quickly went national and were soon
bought out by food conglomerates. These changes placed more
emphasis on standardization and price than on taste and quality.
Consequently, coffee quality decreased. As advertising increas-
ingly focused on the brand, Ponte tells us that “the product itself
became of secondary importance. . . . By competing almost exclu-
sively on advertising, the major roasters stripped coffee of most
of its charm and appeal” (2002, 1110).
Whatever has happened to its charm and appeal, coffee em-
bodies the significance of anonymous global connections in a
consumer culture. For most of the last century, coffee has been
the world’s most valuable (legally) traded commodity after oil.
By examining coffee, we see the far-flung and unintended social
effects of the vast network of market relations in a global con-
sumer culture. Although most coffee is consumed in developed
countries, it is primarily grown in developing countries. It is the
perfect example of a commodity that depends on international
trade, and it exemplifies the way that inequality works in our
global consumer culture.
The coffee trade has profoundly shaped the societies of the
countries that produce it. The history of the trade in coffee begins
in the colonial era for which it was an ideal crop since it grew only
in the colonies, was easily shipped, and had a ready market in
Europe. As the colonial era faded, coffee was the primary com-
modity that allowed (or forced) the newly liberated countries to
be outwardly focused.
Because the United States was not really a colonial power, its
relation to the coffee trade was somewhat different. People from
the United States never owned or even managed the coffee plan-
tations. They were simply the main buyers. Nevertheless, the ef-
fects on the coffee-growing countries were the same.
In most of these coffee-producing countries, the cultivation
of coffee transformed the geographic and demographic land-
scape. The replacement of tropical forests with coffee estates was
118
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

equated with development. New towns, roads, and railroads
were built to service the increased coffee production. The natural
environment, the people’s pattern of settlement, and even the re-
gion’s identity were all deeply affected by the coffee trade. In ad-
dition, coffee has shaped the politics of these regions. In most
coffee-growing countries, production was concentrated into huge
plantations with a few rich owners and many poor workers. In
most cases, this promoted repressive authoritarian governments
to protect the rich landowners from the impoverished workers.
A historian of Brazil observed that “the economic dominance
of coffee was unquestionable. Among the property-owning sec-
tors of society the right of the planters to control the political sys-
tem was unquestioned, and the mass of working people—slaves,
freedmen, native Brazilian peasants, and immigrants—had no
political voice. The government of Sao Paulo was itself the in-
strument of the coffee planters” (Holloway 1980, 39).
Most importantly, the production of coffee tied the local
economy to an international economic system. The effect of this is
especially evident with coffee because coffee prices have always
been subject to significant price fluctuations in the international
market. Coffee’s production is tied to tropical weather patterns
that are inherently unstable and unpredictable. If production
were limited to one region, this would not matter because bad
weather would cause a shortage and higher prices, thereby rec-
ompensing the region affected. However, since coffee production
is spread all over the tropical regions of the world, a drought in
Africa could happen at the same time as a bumper year in Latin
America. This would mean that African growers would have
both low harvest and low prices. The important point here is that
the detrimental effect on the producing country is made worse by
being part of an international system.
In addition, changes in consumption because of such events
as economic booms and busts in consuming countries can be re-
sponded to only very slowly in producing countries, because the
coffee shrub generally takes five years to produce a mature crop.
For example, new areas might be planted in response to an in-
crease in demand that may be gone or have found alternative
sources by the time the first bean is produced. Furthermore, once
that five-year investment has been made by a grower, he or she is
very loathe to pull up the plant in response to a market glut.
The governments of coffee-producing countries have histor-
ically tried to restrain these international fluctuations. In fact,
Coffee and Capitalism
119

coffee was one of the first international commodities that the
producing countries attempted to control. Most of these attempts
were spearheaded by Brazil, which has been the largest producer
of coffee. Despite Brazil’s dominance, the presence of Pacific and
African producers and the increasing demand for Colombian
and other Central American varieties created a global trading
structure that was very difficult to unify into a trading bloc.
Brazil was able to bring some stability to coffee prices in the
early decades of the twentieth century, but this was quickly met
with resistance in the consumer counties, especially in the United
States. Public outrage over the “foreign” control of coffee prices
led to political debates over what came to be called the “coffee
question.” It was suggested that coffee importers should be pros-
ecuted for conspiracy to gouge consumers. Boycotts and a trade
war were threatened.
Economic Cosmopolitanism
In response to these threats, coffee producers and other groups
began an advertising and lobbying campaign to bring greater
awareness of the effects of international trade. According to
Jimenez, this campaign laid “the foundations for a new vision of
the international order” (1995, 55). Coffee producers convinced
politicians and even the general public that price fluctuations
threatened the stability of governments that were important to
the United States. This was a surprisingly effective argument in
the 1940s and 1950s because of the fear of communist influence in
Latin America. It was argued that unstable economies would pro-
duce unstable governments vulnerable to communist takeover.
All of this brought increased awareness of the implications of
being part of a global economy. Rather than considering only the
local effects of price controls, Americans started to look at the
global implications. Jiminez calls this way of looking at the world
“economic cosmopolitanism,” and he argues that the coffee trade
was “a singularly appropriate vehicle” for introducing this view-
point into the United States (1995, 52).
Starting during World War II, economic cosmopolitanism
led to a series of international agreements involving both pro-
ducing and consuming countries in order to stabilize prices. The
setting of prices moved out of the marketplace and into the back
120
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

rooms of international trade meetings. This culminated in an in-
ternational coffee agreement (ICA) establishing a global cartel
that assigned quotas to both producing and consuming coun-
tries, thereby creating a relatively stable pricing system from
1962 to 1989.
After 1989, when communism no longer appeared to be a
threat, the U.S. promotion of an ideology of free trade caused the
collapse of the ICA and once again exposed coffee-producing
countries to the fluctuations of international trade. There was
an immediate plunge in coffee prices to historic lows as power
shifted to consuming countries. One analyst describes the
change as follows:
The end of the ICA regime has profoundly affected the
balance of power in the coffee chain. From a fairly bal-
anced contest between producers and consumers
within the politics of the commodity agreement, mar-
ket relations shifted to a dominance of consuming
country–based operators (including their agents based
in producing countries) over farmers, local traders and
producing country governments. This has been ac-
companied by lower and more volatile coffee prices, a
higher proportion of the income generated in the chain
retained in consuming countries, and a declining level
of producer-held stocks. (Ponte 2002, 1105)
It is quite correct to say that power has shifted to the con-
sumer countries, but it is equally true to say that it has shifted to
the consumer. In a sense, the free market ideology has meant that
the governments of both the consumer and producer countries
have been bypassed for a more market-driven relation between
producers and consumers. When a consumer buys a cup of cof-
fee, it has geographic, demographic, and political effects in the
producer country. A complex, global network connects those who
produce coffee in tropical, developing countries to coffee con-
sumers in wealthy, temperate countries. Intertwined with the eco-
nomic relation are particular political relations. In buying coffee,
you support the free trade relation that prevents states from try-
ing to control devastating price fluctuations. You support repres-
sive regimes in coffee-growing countries. You support an eco-
nomic system that entails disparity between the owners of the
land and those who tend the crops. In other words, you support
Economic Cosmopolitanism
121

an international inequality between producer and consumer
countries and the inequality involved in the production of coffee.
And, as we have argued, you do all of this anonymously, without
knowing the people affected and without intending it.
Starting in the 1960s and building throughout the 1980s and
1990s, a new environmental damage was added to the social, po-
litical, and economic effects of the international coffee trade.
Driven by increased demand and the desire to boost yields, cof-
fee plantations switched from growing coffee under the shade of
a tree canopy to sun coffee farming. This change produced a dra-
matic increase in both yields and environmental degradation
(Wille 1994). Growing coffee under direct sunlight required a sig-
nificant increase in the use of fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides,
and insecticides. The cutting down of the shade trees also elimi-
nated a vibrant habitat for wildlife. Furthermore, buyers get a less
expensive product and consumers get a product of more consis-
tent quality. Consequently, shade coffee requires a commitment to
priorities other than making money or providing consumers with
an inexpensive and consistent product.
In a very real sense, this social and ecological devastation is
also caused by the coffee consumer. However, because of an in-
ternational trading system, this damage is never seen by the con-
sumer. One way to redress this problem would be to convince
consumers to buy shade-grown coffee. However, shade-grown
coffee is more expensive, the quality is not as consistent, and
there are no health benefits to the consumer because the pesti-
cides used to grow sun coffee are purged during roasting. What
is required is for consumers to become aware of the anonymous
effects of their consumption and to make consumer decisions
based on the people involved rather than the product’s quality
and price. This is where we return to Starbucks.
The Latte Revolution and Fair Trade
Recent years have seen a surge in consumer demand for specialty
coffees. The change in consumer taste cannot be understood with-
out looking at Starbucks. Starbucks was founded in 1971 in Seat-
tle and spent most of the 1980s “educating” consumers on the
qualities of fine coffees. However, the company did not really take
off until it designed a reproducible café-type environment for the
122
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

coffee consumer. It was Starbucks the milieu, rather than Star-
bucks the coffee, that triggered the company’s growth and spread.
Howard Schultz, the CEO of Starbucks, described it this way: “We
would take something old and tired and common—coffee—and
weave a sense of romance and community around it. We would
rediscover the mystique and charm that had swirled around cof-
fee throughout the centuries” (quoted in Dicum and Luttinger
1999, 115). Ponte calls this the “latte revolution” and claims that
“coffee bar chains sell an ambience and a social positioning more
than just ‘good’ coffee” (2002, 1111). Furthermore, he connects this
change with a more general change in consumer culture.
This happened at the same time as other consumer
products moved from mass-production and marketing
to being recast as more authentic, flavorful and
healthy (micro-brewed beer, specialty breads, organic
vegetables). By combining “ambience” consumption
and the possibility for consumers to choose type,
origin, roast, and grind, Starbucks managed to de-
commoditize coffee. It sold coffee pre-packaged with
lifestyle signifiers. (ibid.)
This decommodification of coffee—the transformation of
coffee from just the product of anonymous producers to a sign of
a lifestyle—provided an opportunity for a new relation between
the consumer and the producer. Consumers became interested
not just in the quality and price of the coffee, but in what the pur-
chase of coffee said about the consumer’s values. This opened up
the possibility for a change in the anonymous inequality of global
consumer culture. Coffee has been one of the first commodities
where this new possibility has begun to express itself.
The growth of “lifestyle” coffee consumption has been ac-
companied by consumer interest in organic coffee, shade-grown
coffee, and “Fair Trade” coffee. Fair Trade refers to a movement
that aims to achieve a fair price for small coffee growers. Begin-
ning in 1988 from a small Dutch organization, the Fair Trade
movement became international in 1997 with the establishment of
the Fair Trade Labeling Organizations International. Its founders
hoped to offset the effects of global economic forces on poor coun-
tries by establishing a minimum price for coffee. It includes a dis-
tribution system based on small, democratically run cooperatives
with shared profits. Despite the fact that Fair Trade coffee is more
The Latte Revolution and Fair Trade
123

expensive, does not taste better, and provides no direct benefit to
the consumer, it is one of the fastest-growing specialty coffees, al-
though it still makes up only about 2 percent of the market.
Just as Starbucks has been at the center of re-creating coffee
as a lifestyle commodity, it has also been at the center of the Fair
Trade controversy. In both cases, Starbucks’s role is primarily
symbolic. Starbucks created itself as a brand and a milieu and has
now become a symbol of the anonymous inequality of a con-
sumer culture.
In the fall of 1999, groups in favor of Fair Trade began to or-
ganize protests, letter-writing campaigns, and boycotts against
Starbucks, not because Starbucks was particularly egregious, but
because it was such a potent symbol. At first, Starbucks resisted
the protestors’ demand to sell Fair Trade coffee because those
beans were not as consistently high quality as sun-grown coffee.
However, realizing its dependence on symbols of lifestyle and its
vulnerability to such protests, Starbucks soon capitulated and
began to offer Fair Trade coffee in its stores as well as developing
worker and consumer education programs. It was not long before
Starbucks positioned itself as a leader in this movement. Its liter-
ature now stresses its role in conservation, workers’ welfare, and
development in coffee-growing countries.
When we look at Starbucks, we do not see an evil empire,
just as any fair look at the WTO will not see a cabal of multina-
tionals out to wreak environmental havoc. What we see instead
are mainly contradictions: a progressive company, treating their
workers well, responding to organized social demands, trying to
provide their customers with inexpensive consistent quality, and
contributing to ecological damage in developing countries. With
the WTO, we see an international organization trying to address
trade disputes and ending up harming endangered species. Simi-
larly, we see contradictions in the response to global consumer
culture, for example, people who smash the windows of Star-
bucks and Nike while wearing clothing from The Gap.
These are the sort of contradictions that we get with anony-
mous inequality. Here, the people being treated unequally are not
stigmatized. In fact, they may be very much admired, as the Star-
bucks coffee drinker may admire the people who work on the cof-
fee plantations. But, the actions of the Starbucks drinker never-
theless harm those who work on the coffee plantation. Because
they are the result of a global system of anonymous inequality,
these harms are extremely difficult to see.
124
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

Distance between Producers
and Consumers
It may be possible through research to discover some of the dam-
age, as well as the good, done to a producer country through our
consumption. However, this information is not immediately avail-
able at the point of purchase. When we are deciding on our pur-
chase, we normally have only two sources of information. The first
is the product itself, which is often on display, but even when it is
not displayed, we can inspect the product after our purchase and
it can inform subsequent consumption.
The second source of information is the price. For most con-
sumers, this information is either related to what can be afforded
or used to contrast with comparable objects. The price, in fact,
contains much more information. In the price is contained infor-
mation about the growing season in the producer country, ship-
ping costs, marketing strategies, government policies, and so
forth. All of these are reflected in the price, but it is not an easy
task to untangle all of this information from the pure numbers of
the price.
Other kinds of information are next to impossible to factor
into the price or they may show up in an inverted way. For exam-
ple, while economic costs usually show up in the price, social and
ecological costs usually do not. Economic costs such as broken-
down factories, outmoded equipment, and inefficient workers are
reflected in the higher price of the product. In making their selec-
tion, the consumer usually will not buy higher-priced, lower-qual-
ity goods, and therefore the producers who have created these
economic costs are punished. However, many social and political
costs actually lower the price, and consequently producers who
add to those costs may be rewarded. In the case of coffee, we have
seen that sun-grown coffee causes more environmental damage,
and yet it lowers the price of the coffee. Going only on price and
product, consumers will tend to buy sun-grown coffee, even
though it causes environmental damage.
We can assume that at least some consumers would be will-
ing to buy more expensive coffee that causes less environmental
damage, however it is not easy for consumers to know which cof-
fee causes more or less environmental damage. This is particu-
larly true in cases where there is a “distance” between the pro-
ducer and the consumer. In other words, when the producer is
Distance between Producers and Consumers
125

next door, we are more able and willing to include the social and
environmental costs in our consumption decision, but when the
consumer is across the globe, it is more difficult to see the social
and environmental costs, and we are less motivated to take them
into consideration.
The idea of distance is discussed by Thomas Princen (2002).
He defines distance as the separation between decisions about
production and decisions about consumption. Princen analyzes
distance along four dimensions, three of which are important for
our discussion here: geography, culture, and agency. Distance
along any of these dimensions makes it difficult to get any infor-
mation that is not contained in the product or the price.
The first dimension of distance, geography, is the easiest to
understand. It is the actual physical distance between the pro-
ducer and the consumer. Social and political damage that many
would object to in their own locale can be tolerated when it oc-
curs thousands of miles away. Even if the consumer is concerned
about what happens in these faraway countries, the geographic
distance makes it difficult to get the information necessary to
make an informed choice.
The second dimension is cultural distance. We often know
very little about the culture in which our products are produced.
I may, for example, be able to find out how much a worker is
paid, but I still might not know what the amount means in that
culture. A dollar a day sounds meager to someone living in the
United States, but it may or may not be a fair wage in Brazil. Fur-
thermore, I have no idea whether production decisions are being
forced on the people through coercion and poverty or whether
these people have knowingly traded environmental damage for
economic benefit. To make matters worse, this cultural distance
allows those who benefit from these practices to misrepresent the
culture that is being damaged. Geographic distance can be over-
come simply by travel, but cultural distance requires someone
who will explain what things mean to those involved, and those
who do the explaining may have their own agenda.
The third dimension is the distance created by the chain of
agents—people and organizations—that connect the producer
and the consumer (see figure 5.1). International commodities,
such as coffee, must pass along a chain made up of workers,
landowners, government inspectors, wholesale buyers, shippers,
roasters, and so forth, all of the way to the consumer. It is impor-
tant to remember two things about this chain of agents. First, each
126
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

Source: Adapted from Gregory Dicum and Nina Luttinger. 1999. The Coffee Book: Anatomy of an Industry from the
Crop to the Last Drop. New York: The New Press, 107.
Coffee drinker
Supermarket
Starbucks
Roaster
International
trader/broker
ICA (International
Coffee Agreement)
1962–1989
Coffee exporter
Domestic
processing
Domestic
trader/co-
operative/agent
Sun-grown
plantation
Shade-grown
smallholder
Figure 5.1  Global Coffee Network: Web of Agents

person and organization along the line has its own particular in-
terests that may or may not coincide with the producers or the
consumers. Second, every exchange along that chain is liable to
be unequal in the power that the agents have in the transaction.
This imbalance is especially strong in international exchange be-
cause agents from rich countries might have many more choices
about who to buy from than the choices that poorer countries
have on who to sell to. In addition, the economics of processing
and shipping require huge capital investments in such things as
factories and cargo ships, so that those agents are likely to be
much more powerful than such agents as workers.
Because of this chain of agents, information about the ecolog-
ical and social damage of production may not be passed from pro-
ducer to consumer even in cases where both ends of the chain want
that information to be shared. Every link in the chain typically in-
volves two agents, and if either of those agents want to suppress
the information, it will most likely be stopped at that point.
The greater the distance along any of these dimensions, the
more difficult it is for the consumer to have any effect on the pro-
duction of the commodity. This will happen even where both pro-
ducers and consumers are honest and concerned about social and
environmental damage, but it is especially likely where it is in the
interest of some party to manipulate the flow of information in
order to continue with practices that cause social and environ-
mental damage. In particular, this will happen where those who
benefit have access to advertising campaigns or lobbying.
It is our belief that much of the harm done by consumer so-
ciety is due to this distance. Environments are destroyed, people
are displaced, inequality is allowed to increase because of the dis-
tance that exists in the anonymous relations of global capitalism.
There are basically two ways that this problem of distance
can be addressed. First, one can attempt to decrease the distance
by doing such things as buying local to decrease geographic dis-
tance, traveling to and learning about other cultures to decrease
cultural distance, and encouraging producer or consumer coop-
eratives to decrease agency distance. Where these measures are
not feasible, the only alternative is a more organized response
that attempts to bridge the difference with the express interest of
minimizing environmental and social damage. There are different
ways of organizing this response—political protest, governmen-
tal regulations, import laws, or international bodies—but perhaps
the most popular in our consumer society has been the boycott.
128
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

Boycott Movements
Because the environmental damage and anonymous inequality
seem to be caused by consumer culture, it makes sense to many
to attempt to fix it through consumption. We have seen previ-
ously that a consumer boycott was used against Starbucks. This
was only the latest in a long history of consumer boycotts (see
table 5.3). They all have in common an interest in turning con-
sumer choice into a political force. A boycott is an attempt to
achieve objectives by urging individual consumers to refrain
from making selected purchases. It mobilizes the defining prac-
tice of consumer culture usually in order to achieve goals that are
against the tendencies of consumer culture, that is, for noneco-
nomic goals.
The term boycott originated in a movement by Irish peasants
to ostracize an English land agent, Captain Boycott, in the 1880s,
but the practice started long before this. One of the more famous
is the American boycott of English products dramatized by the
Boston Tea Party, which led up to the American Revolutionary
War. During the 1760s, numerous political groups organized con-
sumer boycotts of British goods, especially those, such as tea,
that were heavily taxed. The list of boycotted goods also in-
cluded silks, velvets, clocks, watches, and coaches. Tim Breen de-
scribes how these consumer boycotts helped to create a national
identity: “Americans discovered political ideology through a
discussion of the meanings of goods, through observances of
non-consumption that forced ordinary men and women to de-
clare exactly where they stood on the great constitutional issues
of the day” (1993, 250).
At about the same time as the American boycott of British
goods, a campaign developed with many similarities to the case
of coffee discussed previously: the boycott of slave-grown sugar
(Sussman 2000). Religious groups and other abolitionists began a
boycott in England and America against sugar grown in the West
Indies. It was argued that the apparently harmless practice of eat-
ing sugar supported slavery through a world trade network.
Boycotts also were successfully used as a supplement to
labor strikes. Unions had a difficult time carrying out effective
strikes in the early twentieth century because it was relatively
easy for employers to replace striking workers. Early labor lead-
ers saw the boycott as a consumer counterpart to the strike. This
practice continues, but its last notable success was in the 1970s
Boycott Movements
129

130
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture
Table 5.3  Historical Time Line of Consumer Boycotts
1300s
The practice of boycotting is documented as far back as the
fourteenth century.a
1766
Religious groups and other abolitionists begin a boycott in England
and America against slave sugar grown in the West Indies.
Americans boycott British goods. The most prominent boycott is the
Boston Tea Party, an event that led to the American Revolutionary
War.
1880
The term boycott originates in 1880 with the ostracism of Captain
C. C. Boycott, an Irish land agent, over his treatment of his tenants.
1902
A meat boycott is initiated largely by women on New York’s Lower
East Side who protest sharp price increases, which they blame on
oligarchic control over the beef industry.
1930s
The “Don’t Buy Where You Can’t Work” campaign encourages
African Americans, particularly women, to support African
American businesses. 
1947
Ghandi promotes Satyagraha (nonviolent political protest) by
organizing boycotts of British salt and cloth as part of a strategy of
nonviolent protest that ultimately leads to Indian independence.
1955
Rosa Parks refuses to give up her seat on a city bus to a white man,
triggering the Montgomery bus boycott, a pivotal event in the Civil
Rights Movement.
Late 1960s Boycott of Dow Chemical’s Saran Wrap in response to the
company’s manufacture of napalm in the Vietnam War. 
The California grape, celery, and grapefruit boycott, spearheaded by
Cesar Chavez, unionizes farmworkers. This forces concessions from
the growers by the early 1970s.
1970s
Nestlé, the world’s largest baby food manufacturer, is boycotted
between 1974 and 1984. The boycott is reinstated in 1998 after the
World Health authority determines that information contained in its
advertisements for baby formula is either misleading or incorrect.b
Gay rights groups boycott Florida citrus products in response to
antigay rhetoric by singer Anita Bryant, which leads Florida citrus
commissioners to end an endorsement contract with the singer.
1980s
1984, the Urban Alliance on Race Relations launches a mail-back
campaign whereby every catalog or flyer that does not reflect the
multiracial composition of the local population is mailed back to the
respective corporations with a note to the president and advertising
director explaining why.c
1986, Barclays Bank withdraws from South Africa, despite being the
largest bank in the country, primarily as a result of a consumer
boycott against South African apartheid. The boycott of companies
doing business in South Africa becomes a global movement, critical
in the eventual downfall of apartheid.d

with the boycott of celery, grapes, and grapefruit spearheaded by
Cesar Chavez, which was able to unionize farmworkers when all
previous efforts and methods had failed.
Even outside the labor movement, most early boycotts had
economic motivations. For example, the 1902 meat boycotts were
sparked by sharp increases in retail meat prices orchestrated by a
Boycott Movements
131
Table 5.3  Historical Time Line of Consumer Boycotts (continued)
1990s
European boycott of Shell over its plan to dump the Brent Spar oil
platform at sea and reports of environmental harm as a result of its
operations in Ogoniland, Nigeria.
Boycotts of Texaco in the United States over alleged racial remarks
by senior management.
Boycotts of Mitsubishi over alleged sexual harassment in the
workplace and, according to the Rainforest Action Network, for
environmental degradation around its manufacturing plants.
A multicountry boycott of Nike over alleged sweatshop conditions at
Asian suppliers.
Avon’s recognizable sign, “Avon calling,” is replaced with “Avon
killing” in media spoofs protesting animal testing. Benetton and
Revlon are similarly targeted.
McDonald’s is consistently attacked for environmental practices
such as deforestation, as a result of its need for cattle pasture, and
because it is viewed as a stalwart of American imperialism (and thus
boycotted across Europe after the United States invades Iraq in
2003). In 1999, French antiglobalization farmer Jose Bove destroyed
the building site of a McDonald’s restaurant in the southern French
town of Millau. A McDonald’s restaurant was blown up in Athens in
1999 by an anarchist group, and others are blown up in Brittany,
France, in 2000 by revolutionary separatist groups and in China in
December 2001 by a Muslim group.
Heinz and Bumble Bee Seafoods are boycotted for using nets for
catching tuna that also capture and kill dolphins.
General Electric is boycotted for manufacturing military weapons.
2000–
In 2003, Starbucks is boycotted by antiwar protesters in Lebanon and
criticized by New Zealand advocates seeking higher coffee prices for
farmers.
Source Notes:
a Jill Gabrielle Klein, N. Craig Smith, and Andrew John. 2002. Why We Boycott: Consumer Motivations for Boycott
Participation and Marketer Responses. London Business School Centre for Marketing: Working Paper No. 02-701,
June.
b N. Craig Smith. 1990. Morality and the Market: Consumer Pressure for Corporate Accountability. New York:
Routledge.
c Carol Tator. 1984. “Mail-Back Campaign.” Currents (summer): 15–18.
d Kenneth Rodman. 1994. “Public and Private Sanctions against South Africa.” Political Science Quarterly 101, no.
2: 313–334.

cartel of meatpackers. These boycotts typically involved the poor,
often recent immigrants to America. Similarly motivated by eco-
nomic concerns were consumer leagues, which also threatened
boycotts in order to protest high prices. These leagues generally
involved women activists. The earliest such organization, the Na-
tional Consumer League, was founded in 1899. Another important
group was the National Association of Housewives’ Leagues, es-
tablished in 1912.
Some of these consumer leagues went beyond economic is-
sues to address social concerns. Florence Kelley, the founding ex-
ecutive director of the National Consumer League, proclaimed
that the aim of the organization was to “moralize” the power of
the consumer so that workers received fair living wages, goods
were produced under sanitary conditions, and the interests of the
community were promoted (Kelley 1986; see profile of Florence
Kelley in chapter 6).
In addition to boycotts aimed as specific products, there is
also a history of boycotts aimed at new types of consumption.
There were campaigns against department stores, against chain
stores, and against mail-order shopping. These boycotts were
usually led by independent shopkeepers who were threatened by
the changes in marketing, but they often found a resonance in
those who saw that the changes threatened not just a particular
merchant, but a way of life.
Furthermore, there has been a history of boycotts by African
Americans, such as the “Don’t Buy Where You Can’t Work” cam-
paign in the 1930s. The idea behind this campaign was summa-
rized by W. E. B. Du Bois, “If we once make a religion of our de-
termination to spend our meagre income so far as possible only
in such ways as will bring us employment consideration and op-
portunity, the possibilities before us are enormous” (1985, 147).
This and similar calls led to the formation of such consumer
groups as the Housewives’ League of Detroit, which had 10,000
members in 1934 and encouraged African American women to
support African American businesses.
Of course, the effectiveness of these boycotts depended on
there already being some economic integration. Cities where
African Americans bought mainly from African Americans were
largely unaffected by boycotts. This is why boycotts in Atlanta
were ineffective in the 1960s, while the boycotts in Nashville and
Birmingham, where white business depended heavily on African
American purchasing, were highly effective (Wirmark 1974, 124).
132
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

Here, we see that the boycott has been used to confront both
anonymous and stigmatizing inequality. Such boycotts still con-
tinue addressing inequality based on race, ethnicity, gender, and
sexual orientation, as well as other forms of inequality.
Most of the boycotts discussed thus far were aimed at hurt-
ing the sales of the targeted company. The loss of consumer sales
was believed to be the means for gaining concessions from the
targeted firms. However, as consumption has become more of a
symbolic activity, consumer boycotts have also become more sym-
bolic. Friedman (1995) makes a useful distinction between “mar-
ket” boycotts and “media” boycotts. It is media boycotts that have
become increasingly important in our consumer culture.
Friedman illustrates the difference between market and
media boycotts by pointing to the typical site that a boycott group
would pick for their protest. “A marketplace-oriented group
would be likely to demonstrate in front of a store selling a boy-
cotted product, urging consumers not to buy the item. A media-
oriented boycott, on the other hand, would be more likely to select
the target firm’s headquarters, making sure that demonstrators
were positioned in front of a company sign or logo, so that tele-
vision cameras would be able to link these identifying visuals
with the boycotters’ publicity materials” (1995, 198).
Media boycotts are more likely to use celebrities, disrupt
stockholder meetings, protest at the homes and offices of busi-
ness executives, have press conferences featuring photogenic
“victims” of the corporate practices, and organize protest activi-
ties in public places that are unrelated, or only symbolically re-
lated, to the firm. Rather than time-intensive picket lines, they
use media-friendly humor and irony, such as replacing Avon’s
recognizable sign, “Avon calling,” with “Avon killing” to protest
animal testing. Friedman describes one particularly effective tac-
tic: “Involving children as activists. Environmental groups have
been particularly successful doing this in support of the tuna
boycott and the tropical timber boycott. The human interest
value of these stories of activist schoolchildren was clear to
the news media, which gave the stories wide coverage” (1995,
197). Because the aim is symbolic rather than to directly hurt
sales, the boycott could actually be a “buycott.” For example,
protest groups promoted a campaign in 1985 to buy products
from New Zealand in support of that country’s ban on ships car-
rying nuclear weapons.
Beyond the tactics, the objectives of the boycotts have also
Boycott Movements
133

changed. The new media boycotts are less about economic self-
interest and more about representing larger values. Instead of
economic self-interest, media boycotts tend to aim at ethical or so-
cially responsible actions. They include such issues as gender and
racial inequality (e.g., tourism boycotts of Miami and Arizona),
the environment (e.g., targeting Mitsubishi for their destruction
of the rain forest), animal rights (e.g., Avon, Revlon, and Benetton
for testing products on animals), and peace (e.g., General Electric
for manufacturing military weapons).
Undoubtedly, the two most popular of these issues are animal
rights and the environment. These two issues were absent from
boycotts before the 1970s, but have become the major concerns of
present-day media boycotts. Organizations such as People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals, Earth First!, and the Rainforest Ac-
tion Network are now the major leaders in boycotts, even though
the organizations did not exist twenty years ago. What these is-
sues have in common is that they are intellectually simple and
emotionally appealing. A picture of a dolphin entangled in a net or
of a laboratory bunny quickly communicates a powerful symbolic
message, as do many of the slogans associated with the movement
such as “save the dolphins.”
The fact that these media boycotts have larger ethical objec-
tives also influences the targets of the boycotts. Marketplace boy-
cotts trying to directly affect sales tended to target the most egre-
gious of the companies. Media boycotts tend to target the most
well known companies, regardless of the extent of their involve-
ment in the objectionable activity. For example, in recent (2003)
protests over the U.S. invasion of Iraq, McDonald’s became a pri-
mary target of boycotts by European activists. A reporter for the
New York Times explains why:
The fact that protesters are drawn to the Golden
Arches in their quest to gain attention is an interesting
example of brand power working in reverse. Many
marketing experts contend that “branding” is not a
logical process, that the most successful brands make
an emotional connection with consumers. This also
seems to be true of brand backlashes. Under happier
circumstances, the McDonald’s name and imagery can
stand as shorthand for a quick, dependable U.S.-style
meal. Now, it can be seen as standing for something
else: the policies of the United States and its place in
the world. (Walker 2003, C1)
134
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

Media boycotts prefer companies and especially brands that
are well known and easy to identify, and where consumer viola-
tion of the boycotts will be visible. They especially prefer global
companies. In some ways, corporations like Disney, Wal-Mart,
and Nike have helped make themselves vulnerable to consumer
actions. Their success in diversifying interests, buying out local
competition, and transferring production to cheap labor markets
abroad has created an “interconnectedness” in the global econ-
omy, which gives activists a lot of avenues to pursue (Ferguson
1997, 44).
Many of these media boycotts have been very successful. For
example, Avon, Neutrogena, Benetton, and a slew of other cos-
metics companies stopped animal testing. The primary targets of
a tuna boycott, Heinz and Bumble Bee Seafoods, agreed to catch
fish in a way that would avoid harming dolphins. A number of
these companies publicly attributed their changed policies to the
boycott campaigns. Nevertheless, there are limits to what can be
accomplished through these boycotts. Media boycotts around
complex issues are difficult to organize. Many companies are not
well known enough to become the target of boycotts. Some goals
do not have celebrity support or are not associated with photo-
genic victims.
All of these boycott movements have three things in com-
mon. First, they represent a democratization of protest, since they
allow anyone who consumes to protest—even if not old enough
to vote, or not a citizen, or a former felon. This has been especially
important when large segments of the population have been dis-
enfranchised because they were women or colonized subjects. It
should be noted, however, that economic differences become sig-
nificant, since few care if the poor boycott a product.
Second, these movements attempt to bring to our attention
the connection between the production of commodities and their
consumption. The movements have argued that the buying of
sugar was directly connected to the system of slavery that pro-
duced it, that the buying of clothes is connected to the sweatshops
in developing countries, or that the buying of coffee is connected
to ecological damage. The movements maintain that socioeco-
nomic injustice and environmental damage, whether it happens
around the world or around the corner, is enabled or hindered by
the everyday purchases of the average consumer. At the same
time, such movements recognize that the relation between pro-
ducer and consumer is commodified and alienated. We are not
Boycott Movements
135

encouraged to go to Colombia to work alongside the coffee pro-
ducer; instead, we demonstrate our concern through what we do
or do not buy.
Third, these movements depend on an image of the power-
ful consumer. To begin with, we should realize that these boycotts
are less a protest against consumer culture and more an attempt
to introduce different values into it. The consumer is seen as the
most important agent for effecting this change in values. In the
case of coffee, the farmers, the local governments, and, to an ex-
tent, even the coffee chains are seen as puppets controlled by the
consumers’ choices. The farmers must grow coffee in the most
economical way, governments must allow or even encourage
what is good for their gross national product, and coffee stores
must sell what the consumer will buy. Only the consumer seems
free to make choices between different values, for example, justice
over profit or ecology over consistent taste. All other choices seem
to be a chain of responses determined by the values of the con-
sumer. This is another one of the contradictions of consumer cul-
ture. Those who engage in these boycotts believe more in the
power of the consumer than does any advertising director or
marketing executive.
Conclusion
The popularity of media boycotts signals a changed attitude to
politics in our consumer culture. In chapter 2, we saw that the con-
sumer has become the model for the citizen. Not only do people
participate less as citizens—for instance, fewer and fewer people
vote—but when people do participate they do so “in consumer
mode” (Firat and Dholakia 1998, 103). Across the political spec-
trum, the figure of the consumer has become dominant. For con-
servatives, the government needs to get out of the way of the all-
powerful and mostly beneficent capitalist economy that is run by
and for the consumer. Liberals distrust the production side of the
economy, but through the increasing popularity of boycotts, even
liberals have pinned their hopes on the consumer. Rather than
democracy representing the ability of people to form a common
goal through open discussions, it has come to mean the ability to
choose among prepackaged goals and candidates. In the wide-
spread turn to boycotts, we see the culmination of the consumer
136
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

model of the citizen. Zachary Lyons, editor of Boycott Quarterly,
said the following: “People are recognizing that voting with their
dollars has a lot more power than their political vote, because cor-
porations actually have more power in Congress than the law-
makers supposedly in charge” (quoted in Ferguson 1997, 44).
We cannot forget the benefits of a consumer culture. Ratio-
nal people want material goods and there is nothing ignoble
about that. Despite all of the advertising, public-relations cam-
paigns, and shady marketing, consumer culture truly is an ex-
pression of our freedom. A society driven by consumption has
fed more people, clothed more people, and housed more people
than any society in history. It has even, as we argued in chapter
4, subverted some important forms of inequality.
Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the disadvantages of a con-
sumer society. The freedom of the individual consumer has lim-
ited the freedom of the community. The society that has fed,
clothed, and housed people has also damaged the environment
and created more trash than any other society in history. In place
of stigmatizing inequality, a more incorrigible anonymous in-
equality has emerged.
Perhaps the most worrying aspect of consumer society is that
our options for addressing its problems seem to be narrowing.
Most people, for example, are deeply concerned about the eco-
logical damage caused by consumption, but the response to it has
been channeled into individual consumer choices. People do not
agonize over different government and community-based solu-
tions; instead, they agonize over whether they should use paper
or plastic bags at the grocery store. The truth is that neither choice
makes much difference given the current institutional structures,
but the consumer approach to solving problems cannot change
institutional structures or even talk about communal solutions.
Consumer-based solutions involve recycling or buying a tree to
plant or, as we discussed in chapter 3, buying commodities that
symbolize our disgust with consumption. But no matter what its
benefits, consumption cannot really solve its own problems. Per-
haps we will consume our way out of a consumer culture, but it
is more likely to be through a catastrophic destruction than by
buying the simple life. The solution to the problems of consumer
culture requires first an understanding of consumption’s benefits
and problems and second people that are able to act as citizens in-
stead of just as consumers.
Conclusion
137

References
Breen, Tim. 1993. “The Meaning of Things: Interpreting the Consumer
Economy in the Eighteenth Century.” In J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds.,
Consumption and the World of Goods, 249–260. New York: Routledge.
Brunner, Jim. 2000. “$9.3 Million Bill from WTO Bound to Swell with
Claims against City.” Seattle Times (25 June): A1.
Dicum, Gregory, and Nina Luttinger. 1999. The Coffee Book: Anatomy of an
Industry from the Crop to the Last Drop. New York: The New Press.
Du Bois, W. E. B. 1985. Against Racism: Unpublished Essays, Papers, Ad-
dresses, 1887–1961. Amherst: University of Massachesetts Press.
Dukcevich, Davide. 2002. “Starbucks’ Flight to Latin America.” Forbes
170, no. 4: 27–28.
Ferguson, Sarah. 1997. “Boycotts ‘R’ Us.” Village Voice (8 July): 44–46.
Firat, A. Fuat, and Nikhilesh Dholakia. 1998. Consuming People: From Po-
litical Economy to Theaters of Consumption. New York: Routledge.
Friedman, Monroe. 1995. “On Promoting a Sustainable Future through
Consumer Activism.” Journal of Social Issues 51: 197–215.
Habermas, Jürgen. 1989. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Holloway, Thomas. 1980. Immigrants on the Land: Coffee and Society in Sao
Paulo, 1886–1934. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Jimenez, Michael. 1995. “From Plantation to Cup: Coffee and Capitalism
in the United States, 1830–1930.” In W. Roseberry, L. Gundmundson, and
M. Samper Kutschbach, eds., Coffee, Society, and Power in Latin America,
38–64. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kelley, Florence. 1986. The Autobiography of Florence Kelley. Chicago:
Charles Kerr.
Klein, Jill Gabrielle, N. Craig Smith, and Andrew John. 2002. Why We
Boycott: Consumer Motivations for Boycott Participation and Marketer Re-
sponses. London Business School Centre for Marketing: Working Paper
No. 02–701, June.
Ponte, Stefano. 2002. “The ‘Latte Revolution’?: Regulation, Markets and
Consumption in the Global Coffee Chain.” World Development 30:
1099–1122.
Princen, Thomas. 2002. “Distancing: Consumption and the Severing of
Feedback.” In T. Princen, M. Maniates, and K. Conca, eds., Confronting
Consumption, 103–132. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
138
Anonymous Inequality in Global Consumer Culture

Rice, Robert A., and Justin R. Ward. 1996. Coffee, Conservation, and Com-
merce in the Western Hemisphere. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Migratory
Bird Center and Natural Resources Defense Council.
Rodman, Kenneth. 1994. “Public and Private Sanctions against South
Africa.” Political Science Quarterly 101, no. 2: 313–334.
Ruggiero, Renato. 2000. “Foreword: Reflection from Seattle.” In J. Schott,
ed., The WTO after Seattle, xiii–xvii. Washington, DC: Institute for Inter-
national Economics.
Smith, N. Craig. 1990. Morality and the Market: Consumer Pressure for Cor-
porate Accountability. New York: Routledge.
Sussman, Charlotte. 2000. Consuming Anxieties: Consumer Protest, Gender,
and British Slavery, 1713–1833. Stanford, CA: University of Stanford Press.
Tator, Carol. 1984. “Mail-Back Campaign.” Currents (summer): 15–18.
Walker, Rob. 2003. “Anti-War Protests Give McDonald’s a Taste of Brand-
Power Backlash.” New York Times, 30 March, C1.
Wille, Chris. 1994. “The Birds and the Beans.” Audubon (November–De-
cember): 1–17.
Wirmark, Bo. 1974. “Nonviolent Methods and the American Civil Rights
Movement, 1955–1965.” Journal of Peace Research 11: 115–132.
References
139


6
People, Events, Trends, and
Organizations
T
his is an idiosyncratic selection of people, events, trends, and
organizations. The people include advertising executives, con-
sumer activists, economists, sociologists, marketers, and busi-
ness people. The events, trends, and organizations vary from
large and important trends such as bourgeois culture to isolated
events such as the introduction of the Volkswagen Beetle. Our
primary criteria for selection was to provide an easy resource for
those who wish to know more about the story presented in the
previous five chapters.
People
Charlotte Beers (1935– )
Charlotte Beers is an important figure in the history of women in
the advertising industry. Beers was the first female product man-
ager for Uncle Ben’s and eventually became the first female vice
president ever at J. Walter Thompson. In her two years as CEO of
Tatham-Laird & Kudner, Beers achieved profit margins double
the average for the industry and tripled billings to $325 million.
In 1992, Beers left Tatham-Laird & Kudner and joined Ogilvy &
Mather, where she worked for four years and increased the
billings to $2 billion during her tenure. Beers’s reputation and
141

success were recognized by Fortune Magazine when its first issue
to highlight the most powerful women in the United States fea-
tured Beers on the cover.
In October 2001, President George W. Bush appointed Beers
as the undersecretary of state for public diplomacy and public af-
fairs. Beers’s advertising experience was harnessed in order to
promote a positive image of the United States abroad. In pursuit
of such efforts, Beers considered purchasing airtime on the Arabic-
language Al-Jazeera network in order to “pitch” the American
message to a potentially hostile audience. Criticisms of Beers’s ef-
forts to “market” America to the rest of the world likened the in-
formation campaign of the U.S. government to the selling of
products such as Uncle Ben’s rice, for whom Beers worked for
many years. As a result of such criticism, and for health reasons,
Beers resigned the post of undersecretary of state for public diplo-
macy and public affairs in March 2003.
References
Douglas, William. 2001. “Bush Relies on Advertising Experts to Win over
Muslims.” 25 October. http://old.smh.com.au/news/0110/25/world/
world10.html [30 April 2003].
U.S. Department of State. 2003. “Biography—Charlotte Beers.” 13 March.
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/biog/5319.htm [30 April 2003].
William Bernbach (1911–1982)
By the time of his death from leukemia in October 1982, Bill Bern-
bach had established himself as an icon in both the world of ad-
vertising and mainstream popular culture. Bernbach was chosen
by Advertising Age as number one on the magazine’s twentieth-
century honor roll of advertising’s 100 most influential people,
and he is widely recognized as the most influential creative force
in advertising’s history, serving as mentor to some of the most
renowned figures in the advertising world.
Bernbach grew up in the Bronx in New York during the Great
Depression. After receiving a bachelor’s degree in English from
New York University, Bernbach went to work for Schenley Indus-
tries, a distillery that relied heavily on advertising. At Schenley,
Bernbach was exposed to the importance of marketing and began
conceiving advertising ideas. After serving in World War II, Bern-
bach worked for Grey Advertising as a copywriter, but hoping for
more autonomy and opportunities to be innovative, in 1949 Bern-
142
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

bach founded the firm Doyle Dane Bernbach (DDB) with Ned
Doyle and Maxwell Dane. DDB was among the first advertising
firms to introduce the idea that television commercials should ap-
peal to the emotions, feelings, and desires of viewers. Bernbach
was said to respect the intelligence of the public, and therefore saw
advertising as a form of art that could reveal and unleash creative
energies as well as deliver an honest message. DDB would even-
tually work on the advertising campaigns of many famous com-
panies, including Volkswagen, Avis Rental Cars, Mobil, Heinz,
American Airlines, and Sony. Bernbach worked for DDB for
thirty-three years, and through his innovation and experimenta-
tion, he changed the nature and scope of advertising, and there-
fore consumer culture, in the United States.
References
Advertising Age. 1999. The Advertising Century. New York: Crain Commu-
nications.
Higgins, Denis, ed. 1986. The Art of Writing Advertising: Conversations with
William Bernbach, Leo Burnett, George Gribbin, David Ogilvy, Rosser Reeves.
New York: McGraw-Hill/Contemporary Books.
Young, James Webb, and William Bernbach. 1988. Technique for Producing
Ideas. Reissue ed. New York: McGraw-Hill/Contemporary Books. 
Aristide Boucicaut (1810–1877)
Aristide Boucicaut was born in the Orne region of France. After
leaving for Paris in search of work, Boucicaut became a draper’s
assistant but lost his job as a result of the economic crisis and rev-
olution that swept through France in 1848. In 1869, along with
two acquaintances, the Videau brothers, with whom he had en-
tered a partnership, Boucicaut expanded an existing market stall
into a department store, which was named Le Bon Marché and
completed in 1887. The store made an immediate impression and
was described as “a cathedral of commerce for a congregation of
customers” by French novelist and social critic, Émile Zola, in his
book The Ladies Paradise (1883, 72). Due to favorable economic
conditions in France during the 1870s and 1880s, Boucicaut suc-
ceeded in “seducing” consumers with a range of products that
seemed irresistible compared to the selections of other stores at
the time or of other markets in the past. Boucicaut is credited for
introducing and refining what are now standard retail practices,
including home delivery, a mail-order catalog, clearly marked
People
143

and fixed prices, regular sales, promises of free merchandise, bal-
loons for children, and discount coupons.
Long before the passage of welfare legislation aimed at im-
proving workers’ conditions, Boucicaut paid bonuses to his staff
and provided a pension fund, free medical coverage, a staff li-
brary, free musical lessons, and the day off on Sundays. Bouci-
caut’s philanthropy extended to those beyond his staff. For ex-
ample, Boucicaut offered to divert surplus food from Bon Marché
to injured soldiers fighting in the Franco-Prussian War, which
began in 1870. Upon Boucicaut’s death in 1877, Le Bon Marché
had become the largest department store in the world.
References
History of Le Bon Marché. 2001. 10 October. http://www.bonmarche.
fr/anglais/index.htm [30 April 2003].
Miller, Michael B. 1994. The Bon Marché: Bourgeois Culture and the Depart-
ment Store, 1869–1920. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Florence Kelley (1859–1932)
Kelley was a renowned and influential activist during the Pro-
gressive Era who spearheaded many efforts to enact labor legis-
lation on behalf of women and children. Kelley was born in
Philadelphia and graduated from Cornell University in 1882. Two
years later, she married a doctor and socialist labor leader, Lazare
Wishnieweski, but left him in 1891 and moved into Hull House,
an activist organization in Chicago that was led by Jane Addams.
In 1892, Kelley completed a law degree from Northwestern Uni-
versity Law School.
From 1899, Kelley served as director of the National Con-
sumer’s League (NCL), an organization committed to industrial
reform through consumer pressure. The NCLA attached a white
label to products made by employers with fair and safe labor
practices while consumers were encouraged to boycott compa-
nies and goods that failed to earn the white label designation. In
addition to writing several books on the topic of industrial re-
form—including Ethical Gains through Legislation (1905) and Mod-
ern Industry in Relation to the Family, Health, Education, Morality
(1914)—Kelley was instrumental in the movement to abolish
child labor, pass legislation for working women, establish the
minimum wage, and provide maternal and child health services.
144
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

In 1894, Kelley was influential in getting child labor legislation
passed in the Illinois state legislature, but in 1995 the law was re-
pealed. Kelley supported many progressive causes, including
women’s suffrage and civil rights for African Americans, and
helped to establish the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909 and the Women’s Interna-
tional League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF) in 1915.
References
Goldmark, Josephine Clara. 1981. Impatient Crusader. Chicago: Green-
wood.
Kelley, Florence. 1914. Modern Industry in Relation to the Family, Health,
Education, Morality. New York: Longman.
Saller, Carol, and Ken Green. 1997. Florence Kelley (On My Own Biogra-
phies). Minneapolis, MN: Carolrhoda Books.
Sklar, Katherine Kish. 1986. The Autobiography of Florence Kelley: Notes of
Sixty Years. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr.
———. 1997. Florence Kelley and the Nation’s Work. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946)
Keynes is among the most important figures in the history of eco-
nomics. Born in Sussex, England, John Maynard Keynes was ed-
ucated in Eton College and King’s College at the University of
Cambridge. After studying mathematics at Cambridge, Keynes
took the civil service examinations and was placed in the India of-
fice. In 1909, Keynes returned to Cambridge to teach economics,
but by 1915, Keynes was working for the British treasury. Keynes
resigned from the treasury, however, in 1919 over his dismay over
what he saw as the unfair and unfeasible reparations demands
placed on Germany. In the 1930s, a period of economic depression
in the West, Keynes wrote The General Theory of Employment, In-
terest and Money (1936), a book that would revolutionize the field
of economics and greatly shape postwar public policy in Western
capitalist countries.
The ideas expressed in The General Theory of Employment, Inter-
est and Money, which gave rise to what became known collec-
tively as “Keynesian economics,” centered on the central role
played by the state in combating unemployment and inflation
People
145

through economic stimulation and the management of aggregate
demand. Using the Great Depression as his prime example,
Keynes argued that the unregulated markets promoted in the
laissez-faire approach to economics failed to secure employment
in the absence of some government regulation. Neoclassical eco-
nomic policies that advocated nonintervention were therefore
discredited, leading to a paradigmatic change in the way govern-
ments dealt with domestic spending and macroeconomic finan-
cial policy. In his final years, Keynes remained less active due to
failing health, but nonetheless helped to set up the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and provide the rationale for such policies
as compulsory savings and rationing to prevent price inflation.
References
Blaung, Mark. 1990. John Maynard Keynes: Life, Ideas, Legacy. London: Pal-
grave Macmillan.
“Keynes, John Maynard, 1st Baron Keynes of Tilton.” 2003. Microsoft En-
carta Online Encyclopedia. http://encarta.msn.com/encnet/refpages/
RefArticle.aspx?refid=761569910 [30 April 2003].
Skidelsky, Robert. 1995. John Maynard Keynes: The Economist as Savior
1920–1937: A Biography. New York: Penguin.
Ray Kroc (1902–1984)
Ray Kroc was the founder of McDonald’s Corporation, the
world’s largest fast food restaurant chain. In the early 1950s, Kroc
sold milk shake machines to restaurants, one of which was a
burger stand owned in San Bernardino by two brothers, Dick and
Maurice “Mac” McDonald. Due to a growing demand among
customers of the McDonald’s for milk shakes, Kroc suggested
that the brothers open more restaurants. In 1955, Kroc created the
McDonald’s Corporation and opened the first McDonald’s fran-
chise in Des Plaines, Illinois. After six years of operation, Kroc
paid $2.7 million to buy out the McDonald brothers. In the years
that followed, McDonald’s grew rapidly, partly as a result of
Kroc’s active involvement in company management and insis-
tence on standardization in both food preparation and the train-
ing of employees, the latter of which is done at “Hamburger Uni-
versity” in Elk Grove, Illinois. By 1963, 500 McDonald’s
restaurants had opened, and in 1967 McDonald’s expanded out-
side the continental United States into Canada and Puerto Rico.
146
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

With more than 24,500 McDonald’s locations in 115 coun-
tries, McDonald’s remains a very visible symbol of Western fast
food and has become large enough to influence the prices of cer-
tain commodities, such as beef and potatoes. Due to its size and
its social influence—for example, see the discussion of McDon-
aldization in chapter 3—McDonald’s has come under increasing
criticism. Critics of McDonald’s claim that the fast food chain
has contributed to various global problems, including logging
in rain forests to make room for beef cattle, encouraging obesity,
and using child labor to make the toys that come with Happy
Meals.
References
Kincheloe, Joe L. 2002. The Sign of the Burger: McDonald’s and the Culture
of Power (Labor in Crisis). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Kroc, Ray, and Robert Anderson. 1990. Grinding It Out: The Making of Mc-
Donald’s. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Love, John F. 1995. McDonald’s: Behind the Arches. Chicago: Bantam.
Ralph Nader (1934– )
Born in Winsted, Connecticut, to Lebanese immigrants, Ralph
Nader studied government and economics at the Woodrow Wil-
son School of International Affairs at Princeton University. After
graduating from Princeton in 1955, Nader enrolled in Harvard
University’s law school and practiced law for several years fol-
lowing his graduation. Nader’s book Unsafe at Any Speed (1965;
revised in 1972) uncovered some of the more questionable manu-
facturing and design practices of the automobile industry and
was influential in encouraging lawmakers to pass the National
Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. Bringing together
lawyers, students, and experts on consumer rights into teams
known as Nader’s Raiders, Nader has sought to expose the uneth-
ical or illegal practices of large corporations. Nader is acknowl-
edged as a key figure in the establishment of a consumers’ rights
movement, and over the years uncovered information that would
lead to the creation of several important agencies, including the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA), and the Consumer Product
Safety Commission (CPSC). (See chapter 7 for more information
People
147

on these organizations.) Nader also founded a number of con-
sumers’ rights organizations such as Public Citizen, Essential In-
formation, and the Center for Auto Safety (see chapter 7 for more
information on the Center for Auto Safety and Public Citizen, and
chapter 8 for more information on Essential Information). In re-
cent years, Nader has served as the Green Party’s presidential
candidate in 1996 and 2000.
References
Bollier, David. 1991. Citizen Action and Other Big Ideas: A History of Ralph
Nader and the Modern Consumer Movement. Washington, DC: Center for
Study of Responsive Law.
———. 2002. “The Nader Page.” 7 February. http://www.nader.org/
history_bollier.html [30 April 2003].
Mayer, Robert M. 1989. The Consumer Movement: Guardians of the Market-
place. Boston: Twayne.
Nader, Ralph. 1991. Unsafe at Any Speed: The Designed-In Dangers of the
American Automobile. New York: Knightsbridge.
Vance Packard (1914–1996)
Sociologist Vance Packard earned a national reputation in 1957
with the publication of The Hidden Persuaders, an investigation
into the U.S. advertising industry. In his book, Packard exposed
the psychological tactics used by advertisers to manipulate con-
sumers into desiring unnecessary goods. Packard argued that
hidden symbols were being employed by advertisers to tap into
the consciousness of potential consumers, and he identified sev-
eral techniques used by advertisers then, and used extensively
today, including especially the use of subliminal messages in text
and voice and the appeal to the anxieties, fears, aspirations, and
fantasies of consumers. It was hoped that exposure of these tech-
niques, which Packard considered antihumanistic and regres-
sive, would lead to a public outcry and a greater discussion and
scrutiny of the manipulative practices of the advertising industry.
The Hidden Persuaders sold over a million copies, topping the non-
fiction best-seller list in the United States for six weeks. Packard
went on to publish several more books, including The Status Seek-
ers (1959), The Waste Makers (1960), The Naked Society (1964), A Na-
tion of Strangers (1972), and The People Shapers (1977).
148
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

References
Horowitz, Daniel. 1994. Vance Packard and American Social Criticism.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Rothenberg, Randall. 1997. “How Powerful Is Advertising?” The Atlantic.
http://www.theatlantic.com/issues/97jun/advert.htm [30 April 2003].
Queen Elizabeth I (1533–1603)
With her ostentatious style and love of embroidery and decora-
tion, Queen Elizabeth I made a lasting contribution to the world
of fashion. Some believe that her craving for flamboyant dresses
stemmed not only from a certain amount of vanity, but also from
a desire to use dress as a means of conveying political strength,
nobility, and prestige. During this time, fancy clothing took time
to make and was very expensive because items were often altered
according to changing fashions and tastes. For example, parts of
garments were often replaced or altered, older items had to be
torn apart to provide fabric for other wardrobe pieces, and acces-
sories were recycled from one item to the next. The queen also re-
lied on items from the royal wardrobe to pay members of her royal
entourage, including valets and ladies-in-waiting. However,
despite the ostentatious and glamorous nature of the queen’s
wardrobe, she spent only one-fifth of the amount spent by her suc-
cessor, King James, on clothing.
References
Erickson, Carolly. 1997. The First Elizabeth. London: St. Martin’s Press.
Lasky, Kathryn. 1999. Elizabeth I: Red Rose of the House of Tudor, England,
1544 (The Royal Diaries). London: Scholastic Trade.
Leed, Drea. 2002. “Queen Elizabeth’s Influence on Elizabethan Fashion.”
10 June. http://costume.dm.net/influence.html [30 April 2003].
Tierney, Tom. 2002. Queen Elizabeth I: Paper Doll. Dover, UK: Dover Pub-
lications.
Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929)
Thorstein Veblen was the sixth of twelve children born to Norwe-
gian parents in rural Wisconsin. He studied at Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity and then at Yale where he obtained his Ph.D. in 1884. In
People
149

1892, he became a fellow of Cornell University and was also hired
to teach at the University of Chicago. An economist and sociolo-
gist, Veblen became famous for popularizing the term “conspic-
uous consumption” to signal the squandering of resources by
the wealthy. In his most famous work, The Theory of the Leisure
Class (1899), Veblen divided society into a “predator” or “leisure”
class, which owns business enterprises, and an “industrious”
class, which produces goods. In the book, Veblen criticized busi-
ness owners for what he considered their “pecuniary” values, and
he labeled the leisure class parasitic and harmful to the economy.
Despite the fame that came with the publication of The The-
ory of the Leisure Class, Veblen’s tenure at Chicago from 1892 to
1906, and subsequently at Stanford University from 1906 to 1909,
was limited due to his womanizing, making it difficult for Veblen
to find another academic position. However, a colleague and
friend who was the head of the Department of Economics at the
University of Missouri helped Veblen to obtain a position there in
1911. In Missouri, Veblen published another of his best-known
books, The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the Industrial
Arts (1914). Veblen left academia in 1917 and moved to Washing-
ton, D.C., where he worked for the U.S. Food Administration for
a short time before working as the editor of a magazine. However,
he soon made connections at the New School for Social Research,
where he took an academic position in 1919. Though he was quite
generously remunerated there, his lack of financial acumen and a
series of economic mishaps meant a very modest life for Veblen
from the time he retired from the New School in 1926 until his
death in August 1929.
References
Riesman, David. 1995. Thorstein Veblen. Chicago: Transaction Press.
Ritzer, George, and Douglas Goodman. 2003. Classical Sociological Theory,
4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tilman, Rick. 2003. The Legacy of Thorstein Veblen. Chicago: Edward Elgar
Publishers.
Aaron Montgomery Ward (1843–1913)
Born on 17 February 1843 in Chatham, New Jersey, Aaron Mont-
gomery Ward was apprenticed to a trade when he was fourteen,
marking the beginning of a long career in retailing. Based on the
150
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

comments of country proprietors and rural residents who com-
plained that the comforts of the city were often overpriced, of
poor quality, and difficult to purchase, Ward began to buy goods
at low prices and then allowed individuals to send orders by
mail and receive their purchases at their nearest railroad station.
In 1872, Ward rented a small shipping room and began to pub-
lish a general merchandise mail-order catalog that listed just
over 160 products. Retailers in rural parts of the country did not
appreciate their business being cut, or their unfairness of their
practices being exposed, and Ward’s catalog was therefore burned
in public. Nevertheless, the Wish Book, as Ward’s catalog became
known, was popular with consumers around the country. Due to
this popularity, Ward’s catalog was mimicked by, among others,
Richard W. Sears and Alvah C. Roebuck, leading in turn to more
imitation and eventually to the current importance of the mass-
distribution mail-order industry in the U.S. retail economy. Along
with the catalog, in 1975 Ward introduced the now ubiquitous
phrase “satisfaction guaranteed.”
In addition to heralding the catalog innovation, which
greatly facilitated consumption within the home, Ward was also
an early environmental advocate. After moving to Chicago in
1890, Ward filed four lawsuits in order to protect, restore, and
clean up the lakefront of Chicago. As Ward commented, “Here is
a park frontage on the lake, comparing favorably with the Bay of
Naples, which the city officials would crowd with buildings,
transforming the breathing spot for the poor into a show ground
for the educated rich” (Baker 1956, 82). Ward fought city and park
officials for two decades, using his own wealth to improve the
waterfront area of Chicago. When Ward died in December 1913,
his wife bequeathed a significant portion of his estate to North-
western University.
References
Baker, Nina Brown. 1956. Big Catalogue: The Life of Aaron Montgomery
Ward. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Herndon, Booton. 1972. Satisfaction Guaranteed: An Unconventional Report
to Today’s Consumers. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kim, Ann. 2000. Montgomery Ward: The World’s First Mail-Order Business.
April. http://www.lib.niu.edu/ipo/ihy000441.html [30 April 2003].
Latham, Frank B. 1972. 1872–1972: A Century of Serving Consumers—The
Story of Montgomery Ward. New York: McGraw-Hill.
People
151

Josiah Wedgwood (1730–1795)
Josiah Wedgwood was born in Burslem, Staffordshire, England,
as the thirteenth and youngest son of the potter Thomas Wedg-
wood. In 1737, upon the death of his father, Josiah joined Church-
yard Pottery Work, the family business. After suffering from
smallpox two years later, Wedgwood’s right leg became infected
and had to be amputated. Due to his injuries, Wedgwood was
unable to make his own pottery for some time, so instead he con-
ducted research into the craft of pottery. In 1759, Wedgwood es-
tablished a pottery works in Burslem, and in 1762, Queen Char-
lotte appointed Wedgwood as the royal supplier of dinnerware.
“Queen’s Ware,” as it came to be known, was successful, enabling
Wedgwood to build a village, which he named Etruria, near
Stoke-on-Trent, as well as a second factory and housing for his
employees.
At his pottery factory at Etruria, Wedgwood introduced the
concept of “division of labor,” whereby greater output was
achieved by assigning the various tasks of the potter, such as mix-
ing, shaping, firing, and glazing, to individual workers who spe-
cialized in each particular skill. The economic importance of
transportation was also foreseen by Wedgwood, who assisted in
the building of the Trent and Mersey Canal in northwest England,
which when completed in 1877 allowed Wedgwood to transport
supplies such as Cornish clay to his factory in Etruria. Wedg-
wood marketed his decorated and glazed earthenware not only
to members of the European bourgeoisie, but also the working
classes, for whom he created creamware. Aside from his reputa-
tion as the father of English pottery, Wedgwood was active in po-
litical and social reform movements, helping to form the Society
for the Abolition of the Slave Trade in 1787.
References
McKendrick, N. 1959. “Josiah Wedgwood: An Eighteenth-Century Entre-
preneur in Salesmanship and Marketing Techniques.” Economic History
Review 12, no. 3: 408–433.
Tames, Richard. 2002. Wedgwood. Lancashire, UK: Shire.
Wedgwood, C. W. 1978. Last of the Radicals: The Life of Josiah Clement Wedg-
wood. New York: Jonathan Cape.
152
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

Helen Rosen Woodward (1882–1960)
Helen Rosen Woodward was born in New York City. Considered
the most intelligent of the three children in her family, Woodward
was enrolled as a thirteen-year-old in the prestigious Girls’ Latin
School in Boston. After graduation, Woodward’s family returned
to New York, where Woodward began working for Merrill and
Baker, a book company. At Merrill and Baker, Woodward wrote
circular letters advertising the books, and in 1903 Woodward
moved to the Ben Hampton advertising agency. While working at
Ben Hampton, Woodward decided on a career as a copywriter,
but was apprehensive about the way that copywriters were paid
by the volume rather than the quality of advertisements. Wood-
ward met her husband, W. E. Woodward, while working for the
mail-order publisher J. A. Hill Company. Concerned about un-
equal pay rates between men and women, Woodward joined the
Women’s Trade Union League and assisted the organization by
writing circulars and providing English lessons to immigrants.
After Woodward became a writer and account executive for
the Frank Presbrey Company, a large advertising firm, she uti-
lized the technique of “emotional advertising,” which relies on
evocative visual images and dramatic text to entice readers into
wanting a product. Frustrated about the salary structure of the
advertising industry and ambivalent about conveying advertis-
ing messages that she herself doubted, Woodward left advertis-
ing for good in 1942. Although having worked for much of her
life in the field of advertising, Woodward nonetheless remained
uncomfortable about the manipulative tactics employed by ad-
vertisers. For example, in her book It’s an Art (1938), Woodward
divulged information on the various tricks of the advertising
trade, and she eventually wrote a number of consumer-oriented
columns for The Nation magazine.
References
Brock, Sharon S. 1994. “Helen Rosen Woodward.” In E. Applegate, ed.,
The Ad Men and Women, 344–353. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Fox, Stephen. 1984. The Mirror Makers: A History of American Advertising
and Its Creators. New York: William Morrow.
Hotchkiss, George Burton. 1949. Advertising Copy. New York: Harper &
Brothers.
People
153

Rowsome, Frank, Jr. 1959. They Laughed When I Sat Down. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Woodward, Helen Rosen. 1938. It’s an Art. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
———. 1938. “Pocket Guide: About Coffee.” The Nation 147, no. 22 (25
December): 565–566.
———. 1938. “Pocket Guide: How to Swing an Election.” The Nation 147,
no. 18 (11 December): 450–451.
———. 1960. The Lady Persuaders. New York: Ivan Obolensky.
———. 1985. Through Many Windows. New York: Garland.
Events, Trends, and Organizations
Bourgeois Culture
In medieval France, inhabitants of walled towns were known as
bourgeois, and the technical definition of bourgeois, according to
the Oxford English Dictionary, is “of or pertaining to the French
middle classes.” During the transition from feudalism to capital-
ism, merchants and small shop owners formed an emergent bour-
geoisie class, and as capitalism grew to become the dominant sys-
tem of social, economic, and political organization in Western
Europe, bourgeois culture became associated with middle-class
values and lifestyles. The term bourgeoisie was popularized in the
lexicon of social theory when Karl Marx (1818–1883) used the term
to denote the class that grew out of the feudal system and eventu-
ally enjoyed power in capitalism through its ownership of the
means of production. Bourgeois culture includes not only social
class, but also a set of words, objects, gestures, and even world-
views. Bourgeois culture is associated with several characteristics,
some of which conflict with one another: the exercise of self-
control, materialism, the importance of appearance and status, the
ritualization of daily routines, and a desire for respectability.
The “fetishism” of commodities—which according to Marx
occurs when commodities are treated as fetishistic objects di-
vorced from the relationships and forces that went into creating
them—shapes bourgeois culture by making monetary value and
the accumulation of commodities the source of meaning and
value. Contemporary critics of bourgeois, middle-class culture in-
dicate that, unlike in past eras when spiritual systems of belief
154
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

were said to guide ethics and morality, ethical questions in bour-
geois culture are influenced more by monetary concerns. How-
ever, though consumer culture grew out of bourgeois culture, the
emphasis in early bourgeois culture on self-restraint, sacrifice,
and community complicate the relationship between the birth of
bourgeois culture centuries ago and the emergence of a consumer
society.
References
“Bourgeois.” 2002. In “Glossary of Terms,” MIA Encyclopedia of Marx-
ism. 8 June. http://www.marxists.org/glossary/terms/b/o.htm [30
April 2003].
Kocka, Jurgen. 1994. Bourgeois Society in Nineteenth-Century Europe. New
York: Berg.
Le Wita, Beatrix. 1994. French Bourgeois Culture. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Civil Rights Boycotts (1950s and 1960s)
Though calls for racial equality have been voiced by a minority of
individuals throughout the history of the United States, the mod-
ern U.S. Civil Rights Movement took off only after the 1954
Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education. Since the
Civil Rights Movement demanded sweeping legal and cultural
changes, mass boycotts organized by civil rights workers—such
as the 1955 Montgomery bus boycotts organized in response to
the arrest of Rosa Parks for refusing to give up her bus seat to a
white passenger—and nonviolent acts of civil disobedience were
met head on by a violent counteroffensive mounted by white su-
premacists in the South. Although the white supremacists’ cam-
paign targeted the homes, businesses, and churches of African
Americans, and several civil rights leaders were assassinated, the
Civil Rights Movement grew in strength and slowly broadened
its base of support.
The Reverend Martin Luther King Jr., who emerged as the
chief spokesperson of the Civil Rights Movement, led many visi-
ble protests, including the 1963 attack on civil rights protesters in
Birmingham, Alabama, in which police and their dogs, along with
the fire department and their fire hoses, dispersed the crowd of
mostly young black demonstrators. Protests such as these pro-
duced dramatic images that were beamed across the United States
Events, Trends, and Organizations
155

on television, building sympathy and support for the movement.
King’s historic “I Have a Dream” speech, delivered on 28 August
1963 in Washington, D.C., was especially effective in conveying
the purpose and tactics of the movement. Five years later, in April
1968, King was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee. Despite the
violence that accompanied efforts to promote equality and inte-
gration, the Civil Rights Movement achieved a great deal in a
short amount of time and resulted in several legislative victories,
including the Civil Rights Act in 1964, the Voting Rights Act in
1965, and the first implementation of affirmative action policies in
the mid-1960s.
References
Hampton, Henry. 1990. Voices of Freedom: An Oral History of the Civil
Rights Movement from the 1950s through the 1980s. New York: Bantam.
Leventhal, Willy S., ed. 1998. The Children Coming On: A Retrospective of
the Montgomery Bus Boycott. Montgomery, AL: Black Belt Press.
Diners Club Card (1950)
Though currently a ubiquitous symbol of consumerism and con-
venience, it was not until 1914 when the very concept of the credit
card began. In that year, the most reliable customers of Western
Union were given the option of deferring their payments. Even
so, the use of an actual plastic card did not begin until 1950, when
Frank McNamara of Diners Club issued the first multiuse charge
card that could be used in a number of different locations. The
idea for the card came after an embarrassing incident where Mc-
Namara forgot his wallet and was unable to pay his restaurant
bill because he did not have any cash. In 1951, Franklin National
Bank in New York was the first bank to give its customers a credit
card. By 1952, the Diners Club Card was accepted at thousands of
merchants, and the use of charge cards continued to grow rapidly
in the following decades, expanding to Canada, Cuba, and
France. In 1962, the film The Man from the Diners Club starring
Danny Kaye was released and soon after, the Ideal Toy Corpora-
tion created the Diners Club board game. Currently, 6.5 million
merchants in 201 countries accept the Diners Club Card. Since the
creation of the Diners Club Card, credit card use in the United
States and the rest of the world has skyrocketed, leading to both
convenience for retailers and consumers, but also to criticisms of
the predatory practices of credit card companies (see annotation
156
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

for Robert Manning’s book in chapter 8 and Credit Card Nation
in the “Selected Websites” section of chapter 8).
References
“Credit Card History.” 2002. 8 June. http://bankcard.net/hist.htm [30
April 2003].
Diners Club International. 2000. “History of Diners Club, the First Charge
Card.” http://www.dinersclubnewsroom.com/anniversary.cfm?frame_
src=anniversary.cfm [30 April 2003].
Ritzer, George. 1995. Expressing America. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge.
Great Depression (1929–1939)
The Great Depression was, and remains to this day, the worst eco-
nomic depression ever suffered by the industrialized countries of
the world. The depression began in 1929 and lasted until the out-
break of World War II in 1939. The U.S. economy began a down-
ward slide in the early months of 1929, but this slide was precip-
itated greatly by the stock market collapse that commenced on 24
October 1929. Five days later, on what became known as Black
Tuesday (29 October 1929), the New York Stock Exchange lost
more value in one day than it had lost ever before, or since, and
within hours of opening, the stock market’s entire gains from the
previous year vanished. This collapse was surprising because cer-
tain influential figures, including Yale University economist Irv-
ing Fisher and President Herbert Hoover, had assured the public
just months and weeks earlier that the national economy was
strong and that prosperity would continue unabated.
However, considering the disjuncture between stock values
and actual profits that characterized the U.S. stock market for the
five years prior to 1929, the crash should not have been com-
pletely unexpected. Rising stock market values prior to the crash
proceeded despite a drop in merchandise sales and construction,
key signals of economic health. After the crash, however, public
confidence diminished and stock prices plummeted, reaching
their lowest point on 13 November 1929. In the two weeks be-
tween Black Tuesday and 13 November, the U.S. economy lost a
total of $30 billion. The social impact of the depression was im-
mediate and widespread. One-third of Americans fell below the
poverty line, homelessness and unemployment became endemic,
high school dropout rates soared, and farmers suffered from the
twin hits of drought and collapsing consumer demand. Although
Events, Trends, and Organizations
157

images of the Great Depression focus on examples of extreme
poverty and desperation, sales of certain commodities such as
cigarettes, gasoline, and movie tickets actually rose, indicating a
desire to escape the dismal circumstances of everyday life at the
time. Other than demonstrating the fickle and vulnerable nature
of the stock market, the Great Depression, and the social depriva-
tions that it caused, contributed to the idea that governments
should intervene, through social spending, to ensure the welfare
of those people most vulnerable to economic swings.
References
Beaud, Michel. 1983. A History of Capitalism. New York: Monthly Review
Press.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1997. The Great Crash 1929. San Francisco:
Mariner Books.
“Great Depression.” 2003. Encyclopædia Britannica. http://www.britannica.
com/eb/article?eu=38610> [30 April 2003].
Rothbard, Murray N. 2000. America’s Great Depression. 5th ed. Auburn,
AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Schultz, Stanley K. 2003. “The Crash and the Great Depression.” 26 Feb-
ruary. http://us.history.wisc.edu/hist102/lectures/lecture18.html [30
April 2003].
The Peacock Revolution (1968)
Just as the peacock displays an ostentatious fan of plumage, the
“peacock revolution” describes a dramatic change in what was
considered acceptable clothing for men. During the 1960s, the
mortality rate was in decline, and for the first time in the century,
there were more boys than girls in the population. One of the re-
sults of such a demographic shift was an increase in pressure on
boys and men to woo, attract, and court females. The peacock
revolution, a term coined by a former Esquire and Boston Globe
columnist George Frazier, was not only a result of demographic
changes, but also, more importantly, reflected changing attitudes
toward fashion, sexuality, and masculinity. On London’s Carnaby
Street, Frazier noticed that the clothing of boys was often more os-
tentatious than that of girls, with styles featuring suits, shirts, and
ties with patterns and bold colors, as well as pointy-toed boots
with Chelsea heels. The feminized clothing worn by boys was
matched by long, styled hair and tall, lean physiques.
158
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

The peacock revolution soon influenced the world of popu-
lar music, which in turn solidified even further the emerging
fashion tastes of youths. For example, members of bands such as
the Rolling Stones and the Who wore hip-hugger pants, bold psy-
chedelic prints, and open silk shirts or vests. Even the Beatles, as-
sociated in their early years with a clean-cut image, began sport-
ing paisley scarves, flowered shirts, and striped bell-bottom pants.
Carnaby Street tailors and designers, such as John Stephen, made
the clothes that would define the peacock revolution and created
a unisex dandy look that allowed males to express their own sex-
uality through flamboyant and spectacular fashion items.
References
Frank, Thomas. 1998. The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Countercul-
ture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Tortora, Phyllis G., and Keith Eubank. 1998. Survey of Historic Costume: A
History of Western Dress. 3d ed. New York: Fairchild. 
Starbucks
Starbucks, the world’s most famous and successful coffee retailer,
opened its first store in Seattle’s Pike Place Market in 1971.
Named after mate Starbuck in Moby Dick, the company initially
roasted and sold whole coffee beans to individual customers in its
retail locations as well as to restaurants and espresso stands
through its wholesale division. In 1982, Howard Schultz joined
the company as director of retail operations and marketing. Five
years later, Schultz bought the company for $3.8 million. From
that time, Starbucks began to open “coffee bars” and offer coffee
by the cup. Although expensive, high-quality coffee had been
slowly growing in popularity for decades, the Starbucks brand
name became synonymous with specialty coffees in the 1980s and
1990s. The current success of Starbucks is both a reflection and
cause of the growing coffee culture found in the United States and
other countries of the world.
With nearly 6,000 stores in twenty-eight countries, Starbucks
remains a highly visible symbol of globalization, not to mention
an influential “cathedral of consumption” that promotes the effi-
ciency, predictability, and calculability associated with the “ra-
tionalization” of consumption (see annotation for George Ritzer’s
Events, Trends, and Organizations
159

book in chapter 8). As a well-known symbol of corporate power,
Western globalization, and consumerism, Starbucks has in recent
years become the target of anticorporate protestors, most notably
during the 1999 WTO meeting in Seattle, which saw the looting
and destruction of the stores of famous multinationals such as
Starbucks.
References
Schultz, Howard, and Dori Jones Yang. 1999. Pour Your Heart into It: How
Starbucks Built a Company One Cup at a Time. Seattle, WA: Hyperion.
Starbucks. 2003. Starbucks’ Timeline and History. http://www.starbucks.
com/aboutus/timeline.asp [30 April 2003].
Volkswagen Beetle
In 1924, while in prison for treason, Adolf Hitler came up with the
idea of state-built special highways (autobahns) and automo-
biles as a way of solving the high unemployment that plagued
Germany between World War I and World War II. The mass-
produced car would be called the Volkswagen, or “people’s car,”
and would, as the name suggested, be available to the average
German citizen. The issue of autobahns and Volkswagens came
up at the very first cabinet meeting of the Nazi regime following
their ascension to power in February 1933. In September of the
same year, construction began on the autobahns, and in 1935, Dr.
Ferdinand Porsche, the grandfather of Volkswagen AG’s current
chairman, designed the first Beetle prototype. Although Porsche’s
design for the car was chosen, Hitler specified that the car must
have a top speed of sixty-two miles per hour, have an air-cooled
engine, achieve forty-two miles per gallon, and have room for ex-
actly two adults and three children. Most importantly, the price of
the Volkswagen was fixed at the modern-day equivalent of $115,
forcing Porsche to design a rear-engine automobile.
The first Beetle was produced in 1938, and by 1939, the fac-
tory was the largest motor factory in Europe, featuring an annual
production capacity of 150,000 cars. By the end of World War II,
the Volkswagen factory was almost completely destroyed by Al-
lied bombing. Immediately following the war, the Allies rebuilt
the factory and began placing orders for the car; the British army,
for example, ordered 20,000 Volkswagens. In 1973, the production
of Beetles surpassed 16.5 million, making it the best-selling car in
the entire world. The next year, however, Volkswagen announced
160
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

that it had recorded its first loss in history, a total that amounted
to $200 million. In 1980, German production of the Volkswagens
ceased, but production elsewhere continued. In the spring of 1998,
Volkswagen released the much-anticipated New Beetle amidst
great fanfare and publicity. Largely the result of a clever market-
ing campaign, initial demand for the New Beetle outstripped
supply, and to this day demand remains high in the North Amer-
ican market.
References
“A Brief History of the Beetle.” 2002. http://www.vwbeetle.org/
briefhistory.php [30 April 2003].
Delorenzo, Matt. 1999. The New Beetle (Enthusiast Color Series). Osceola,
WI: Motorbooks International.
Frank, Thomas. 1998. The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture, Countercul-
ture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Motavalli, Jim. 2002. “Hitler’s ‘People’s Car’: Did Adolf Really ‘Design’
the Beetle?” Eugene Weekly (21 November): C2.
Nelson, Walter Henry. 1998. Small Wonder: The Amazing Story of the Volks-
wagen. Cambridge, MA: Bentley.
Parkinson, Simon. 1996. Volkswagen Beetle: The Rise from the Ashes of War.
Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International.
Shuler, Terry. 1997. Volkswagen, Then, Now and Forever. Munich: Beeman
Jorgensen.
World Trade Organization (WTO)
Established on 1 January 1995 following the conclusion of the
Uruguay Round negotiations (1986–1994), the World Trade Orga-
nization (WTO) defines itself as an international agency that en-
courages trade between member nations, administers global trade
agreements, and resolves disputes when they arise. The WTO
agreements, which are negotiated and then ratified in the parlia-
ments or congresses of member nations, aim to remove barriers to
free trade. Prior to the creation of the WTO, the General Agree-
ment of Tariffs and Trade (GATT) served, since 1947, as the forum
in which states discussed trade and negotiated to reduce customs,
tariffs, and other barriers to trade. After 1995, the GATT became
the key set of rules governing the WTO and its member states.
The WTO resolves trade disputes between member states by
Events, Trends, and Organizations
161

adjudicating in closed tribunals and deciding on appropriate
punitive measures against countries that violate the WTO agree-
ments. Aside from establishing rules related to traditional manu-
factured goods, the WTO also enforces rules related to services
such as insurance, financial services, and intellectual property.
The WTO’s intellectual property agreement regulates trade and
investment related to copyrights, patents, trademarks, and geo-
graphical names used to identify products, integrated circuit lay-
out designs, industrial designs, and undisclosed information such
as trade secrets. By 2003, 145 countries had joined the WTO, with
30 more in the process of negotiating entry.
Critics of the WTO worry about the power of the WTO, an
unelected and unaccountable organization that, in pursuit of free
trade at any cost, nullifies laws passed by democratically elected
governments. For instance, governments that pass laws aimed at
ensuring ethical labor standards or environmentally friendly man-
ufacturing practices can be found guilty, according to WTO rules,
of imposing nontariff barriers to trade. Critics accuse the WTO
of serving the interests of large multinational corporations and
wealthy, industrialized countries. In 1999, large and violent
demonstrations erupted in Seattle during the annual WTO
meeting, sparking an ongoing global movement against what is
termed “corporate globalization.”
References
Krueger, Anne O., and Aturapane Chonira, eds. 1998. The WTO as an In-
ternational Organization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schott, Jeffrey J., C. Fred Bergsten, and Renato Ruggiero. 2000. The WTO
after Seattle. Chicago: Institute for International Economics.
Wallach, Lori, and Michelle Sforza. 1999. Whose Trade Organization? Cor-
porate Globalization and the Erosion of Democracy. Washington, DC: Public
Citizen.
World Trade Organization website. http://www.wto.org/index.htm.
162
People, Events, Trends, and Organizations

7
Organizations,
Associations, and
Government and
International Agencies
Selected Organizations Based in the
United States
ACNielsen
770 Broadway 
New York, NY 10003
Telephone: (646) 654-5000 
Fax: (646) 654-5002
Website: http://www.acnielsen.com/site/about/
ACNielsen is a marketing information company. With 21,000 em-
ployees in more than 100 countries, ACNielsen provides market
research, information, analysis, and insights on the consumer-
product and service industries.
American Council on Consumer Interests (ACCI)
415 South Duff, Suite C 
Ames, IA 50010-6600
Telephone: (515) 956-4666 
Fax: (515) 233-3101
163

E-mail: info@consumerinterests.org
Website: http://www.consumerinterests.org/
Since 1953, the ACCI has been a membership organization for ac-
ademics and other professionals involved in consumer and fam-
ily economics. The ACCI headquarters office is in Ames, Iowa.
The mission of ACCI is to provide a forum for the exchange of in-
formation about consumer issues and family economics to im-
prove the well-being of individuals, households, and families.
Association for Consumer Research (ACR)
James Muncy, executive director
P.O. Box 2310 
Valdosta, GA 31604
Telephone: (229) 244-2380 
Fax: (229) 244-7881 
E-mail: acr@acrweb.org
Website: http://www.acrweb.org/
The ACR is an organization comprised primarily of academic re-
searchers in the field of consumer behavior.
Aveda
4000 Pheasant Ridge Drive 
Blaine, MN 55449
Telephone: (866) 823-1425 (North America only)
Website: http://www.aveda.com/
Founded by Austrian Horst Rechelbacher in 1978, Aveda is a
company specializing in an herbal-based product range as well as
a nationwide network of salons offering massage therapy and
other beauty treatments. The Aveda website provides company
history, guiding principles, and press releases.
Better Business Bureau (BBB)
The Council of Better Business Bureaus
4200 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 800 
Arlington, VA 22203-1838
Telephone: (703) 276-0100
Fax: (703) 525-8277
Website: http://www.bbb.org/
The BBB system in the United States extends to over 98 percent of
the nation, including Hawaii, Alaska, and Puerto Rico. It also has
164
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

a partner BBB system that serves much of Canada. In total, 145
BBBs serve nearly 24 million consumers and businesses each year.
Founded in 1912, the BBB claims that many marketplace problems
can be solved fairly through the use of voluntary self-regulation
and consumer education. The BBB’s core services include business
reliability reports; dispute resolution; truth-in-advertising, con-
sumer and business education; and charity review.
Bureau of Consumer Protection—Federal Trade Commission
(FTC)
Consumer Response Center
Federal Trade Commission
600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20580
Telephone: (202) 326-2222
Website: http://www.ftc.gov/ftc/consumer.htm
The Bureau of Consumer Protection’s mandate is to protect con-
sumers against unfair, deceptive, or fraudulent practices. The bu-
reau enforces a variety of consumer-protection laws enacted by
Congress, as well as trade-regulation rules issued by the FTC. Its
actions include individual company and industry-wide investi-
gations, administrative and federal court litigation, rule-making
proceedings, and consumer and business education. In addition,
the bureau contributes to the FTC’s ongoing efforts to inform
Congress and other government entities of the impact that pro-
posed actions could have on consumers.
Center for Auto Safety (CAS)
1825 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 330
Washington, DC 20009-5708 
Telephone: (202) 328-7700
Website: http://www.autosafety.org/
The CAS provides information on common problems and advice
on how to resolve them for most models of vehicles on the road.
It also produces reports on fuel efficiency and issues pertaining to
vehicle safety.
Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI)
1875 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20009 
Telephone: (202) 332-9110
Selected Organizations Based in the United States
165

Fax: (202) 265-4954 
E-mail: cspi@cspinet.org
Website: http://www.cspinet.org/
The CSPI is a nonprofit education and advocacy organization that
focuses on improving the safety and nutritional quality of the
food supply and on reducing the damage caused by alcoholic
beverages. The CSPI seeks to promote health through educating
the public about nutrition and alcohol. It also represents citizens’
interests before legislative, regulatory, and judicial bodies, while
working to ensure that advances in science are used for the pub-
lic good. The CSPI is supported by more than 800,000 member-
subscribers to its Nutrition Action Healthletter, as well as by foun-
dation grants and sales of educational materials.
The Center for Study of Responsive Law (CSRL)
P.O. Box 19367 
Washington, DC 20036 
Fax: (202) 234-5176
E-mail: csrl@CSRL.org
Website: http://www.csrl.org/index.html
The CSRL is a nonprofit organization founded by Ralph Nader
that supports and conducts a wide variety of research and educa-
tional projects that encourage greater awareness of the needs of
the citizen-consumer among political, economic, and social insti-
tutions of the United States. The center publishes reports on a
number of public-interest issues.
Consumer Action
717 Market Street, Suite 310 
San Francisco, CA 94103-2109
Telephone: (415) 777-9635
E-mail: editor@consumer-action.org
Website: http://www.consumer-action.org/
Consumer Action is a nonprofit, membership-based organization
that was founded in San Francisco in 1971. Since then, Consumer
Action has referred consumers to complaint-handling agencies
through a free hot line; published educational materials in Chi-
nese, English, Korean, Spanish, Vietnamese, and other languages;
advocated for consumers in the media and before lawmakers;
and compared prices on credit cards, bank accounts, and long-
distance services.
166
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Consumer Federation of America (CFA)
1424 16th Street NW, Suite 604
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: (202) 387-6121
E-mail: ajaeger@consumerfed.org
Website: http://www.consumerfed.org/backpage/about.html
The CFA is an advocacy organization that works to advance pro-
consumer policy on a variety of issues before Congress, the White
House, federal and state regulatory agencies, and the courts. Its
staff works with public officials to promote beneficial policies, to
oppose harmful policies, and to ensure a balanced debate on im-
portant issues in which consumers have a stake.
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
4330 East-West Highway 
Bethesda, MD 20814-4408
Telephone: (301) 504-7908
E-mail: info@cpsc.gov
Website: http://www.cpsc.gov/
The CPSC is an independent federal regulatory agency, created in
1972 by Congress under the Consumer Product Safety Act, which
works to save lives and keep families safe by reducing the risk of
injuries and deaths associated with consumer products.
Consumer Union (CU)
101 Truman Avenue 
Yonkers, NY 10703
Telephone: (914) 378-2455
Fax: (914) 378-2928
Website: http://www.consumerreports.org/
Since 1936, the CU’s mission has been to test products, inform the
public, and protect consumers. It claims to provide unbiased ad-
vice about products and services, personal finance, health and nu-
trition, and other consumer concerns. Its income is derived solely
from the sale of Consumer Reports (in print and on-line) and other
services, as well as from nonrestrictive, noncommercial contribu-
tions, grants, and fees. The CU is governed by a board of eighteen
directors, who are elected by CU members and meet three times a
year. CU’s president, James Guest, oversees a staff of more than
450. The CU operates three advocacy offices—in Washington,
D.C.; Austin, Texas; and San Francisco, California—that work on
Selected Organizations Based in the United States
167

consumers’ behalf on such issues as health care, food safety, fi-
nancial services, and product safety. The CU testifies before fed-
eral and state legislative and regulatory bodies, petitions govern-
ment agencies, and files lawsuits on behalf of consumers. The
Consumer Policy Institute, at the CU’s Yonkers, New York, head-
quarters, conducts research and education projects on such issues
as biotechnology, toxic air pollution, community right-to-know
laws, and food safety.
The Cygnus Group
505 Pleasant Street, Suite 404 
Saint Joseph, MI 49085 
Telephone: (269) 982-7860 
Fax: (269) 982-7861
Website: http://cygnus-group.com/
The Cygnus Group website is designed to provide individuals
and organizations with information regarding the most efficient
and effective ways to reduce waste and conserve resources. This
site contains back copies of the bimonthly newsletter Useless Stuff
(ULS) Report and information on packaging, including a new
study on packaging efficiency and other documents pertaining to
packaging and waste reduction. This site also provides numerous
pathways and resources leading to databases on related subjects
as well as Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) data on waste
prevention.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Ariel Rios Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Mail Code 3213A
Washington, DC 20460 
Telephone: (202) 260-2090
Website: http://www.epa.gov/
The EPA’s mission is to protect human health and to safeguard
the natural environment. Established in 1970, the EPA has 18,000
employees in headquarters program offices and in ten regional
offices and seventeen labs across the country. The EPA employs
engineers, scientists, and environmental protection specialists, as
well as a large number of legal, public affairs, financial, and com-
puter specialists. The EPA is led by an administrator who is ap-
pointed by the president of the United States.
168
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Equality Project
185 East 85th Street, Suite 25A
New York, NY 10028-2147
Telephone: (212) 870-2296 
Website: http://www.equalityproject.org/index.htm
The Equality Project was formed in 1992 to monitor the policies of
major corporations that deal with sexual orientation in the work-
place and to pressure companies to implement the policies ex-
pressed in the Equality Principles on Sexual Orientation. The
Equality Principles are currently being updated to include trans-
gender workplace concerns. Members include financial profes-
sionals, investors, writers, academics, lawyers, and artists.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
5600 Fishers Lane 
Rockville, MD 20857
Telephone: 1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
Website: http://www.fda.gov/
The FDA’s mission is to promote and protect the public health by
helping safe and effective products reach the market in a timely
way and by monitoring products for continued safety after they
are in use. Its work is a blending of law and science aimed at pro-
tecting consumers.
Friends of the Earth
1025 Vermont Avenue NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
Telephone: (877) 843-8687 
Fax: (202) 783-0444 
E-mail: foe@foe.org 
Website: http://www.foe.org/
Founded in San Francisco in 1969 by David Brower, Friends of the
Earth is the U.S. voice of an international network of grassroots
groups in seventy countries. Its members were the founders of
what is now the world’s largest federation of environmental
groups, Friends of the Earth International.
Make Trade Fair
Oxfam America 
1112 16th Street NW, Suite 600 
Washington, DC 20036 
Selected Organizations Based in the United States
169

Telephone: (202) 496-1306 
Fax: (202) 496-1190
E-mail: vrateau@oxfamamerica.org
Website: http://www.maketradefair.com/
The Fair Trade movement is a response to the problems facing
commodity producers. It gives consumers an opportunity to use
their purchasing power to assist the poor. The Make Trade Fair
campaign aims to change the unfair rules of world trade so that
they work for small-scale producers as well as rich multination-
als. In the past decade, the Fair Trade movement has grown rap-
idly, as consumer awareness of the treatment of producers in poor
countries has increased. More and more retailers are stocking Fair
Trade goods, and the number of products offered continues to
grow as demand increases.
National Association of Consumer Advocates (NACA)
1730 Rhode Island NW, Suite 805 
Washington, DC 20036 
Telephone: (202) 452-1989 
Fax: (202) 452-0099 
E-mail: info@naca.net
Website: http://www.naca.net/
The NACA is a nationwide association of more than 800 attorneys
and consumer advocates with experience curbing abusive and
predatory business practices and promoting justice for consumers.
National Consumer Law Center (NCLC)
1629 K Street NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 986-6060
Fax: (202) 463-9462
E-mail: nclc@consumerlaw.org
Website: http://www.consumerlaw.org/
The NCLC is the nation’s consumer-law expert resource, helping
consumers, their advocates, and public-policy makers use con-
sumer laws on behalf of low-income and elderly Americans seek-
ing economic justice.
National Consumers League
1701 K Street NW, Suite 1200
Washington, DC 20006
170
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Telephone: (202) 835-3323
Fax: (202) 835-0747
E-mail: info@nclnet.org
Website: http://www.natlconsumersleague.org/programs.htm
The National Consumers League participates in more than fifty
coalitions, advisory committees, and boards. The league provides
a consumer’s perspective on concerns including child labor, pri-
vacy on the Internet, food safety, and medication information.
The league operates the National Fraud Information Center, a toll-
free hot line that offers help and support to victims of telemarket-
ing and Internet fraud. It also monitors cyberspace through Inter-
net Fraud Watch to help consumers distinguish between legitimate
and fraudulent promotions in cyberspace and route reports of sus-
pected fraud to the appropriate law enforcement agencies.
New Internationalist
P.O. Box 1143 
Lewiston, NY 14092 
Telephone: (905) 946-0407 
Fax: (905) 946-0410 
E-mail: magazines@indas.on.ca
Website: http://www.newint.org/
The New Internationalist is a communications cooperative based
in Oxford, with editorial and sales offices in Toronto, Canada;
Adelaide, Australia; Christchurch, New Zealand; and Lewiston,
United States. It reports on issues of world poverty and inequal-
ity, focuses attention on the unjust relationship between the pow-
erful and the powerless in both rich and poor nations, and de-
bates and campaigns for radical changes.
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) Secretariat
NAFTA Secretariat, U.S. Section 
14th Street and Constitution Avenue NW, Room 2061 
Washington, DC 20230
Telephone: (202) 482-5438 
Fax: (202) 482-0148
E-mail: Webmaster@nafta-sec-alena.org
Website: http://www.nafta-sec-alena.org/english/index.htm
The NAFTA Secretariat website contains all documents pertaining
to this trade agreement between the United States, Canada, and
Mexico.
Selected Organizations Based in the United States
171

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OHSA), U.S.
Department of Labor
U.S. Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health
Administration 
200 Constitution Avenue 
Washington, DC 20210
Telephone: 1-800-321-OSHA (6742)
Website: http://www.osha-slc.gov/as/opa/oshafacts.html
The OSHA’s mission is to ensure safe and healthful workplaces in
America. Since the agency was created in 1971, workplace fatali-
ties have been cut in half and occupational injury and illness rates
have declined 40 percent.
Public Citizen
1600 20th Street NW 
Washington, DC 20009
Telephone: (202) 588-1000
E-mail: slittle@citizen.org
Website: http://www.citizen.org/
Public Citizen is a national, nonprofit consumer advocacy organ-
ization founded by Ralph Nader in 1971 to represent consumer
interests in Congress, the executive branch, and the courts. It
fights for openness and democratic accountability in government,
as well as for the following rights: the ability of consumers to seek
redress in the courts; clean, safe, and sustainable energy sources;
social and economic justice in trade policies; strong health, safety,
and environmental protections; and safe, effective, and affordable
prescription drugs and health care.
Purdue University, Consumer Sciences and Retailing
812 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2060
Telephone: (765) 494-8292
Fax: (765) 494-0869
E-mail: csr@cfs.purdue.edu
Website: http://www.cfs.purdue.edu/conscirt/
This is an academic institution with programs in apparel retailing
and planning, retail management, consumer behavior, textile sci-
ence, and consumer economics.
172
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Slow Food
434 Broadway, 7th floor
New York, NY 10013
Telephone: (212) 965-5640
Fax: (212) 226-0672 
E-mail: info@slowfoodusa.org 
Website: http://www.slowfood.com
Slow Food is an international movement that was founded in
Paris in 1989. Its head offices are in Bra, in the Piedmont in north-
ern Italy. Other offices have been opened in Switzerland (1995),
Germany (1998), and New York (2000). Slow Food boasts 65,000
members in 45 countries, organized into 560 local groups. Slow
Food’s manifesto lays out the principles of a movement for the
protection of the “right to taste.” By this the movement means to
convince people that in order to fully appreciate food, it should be
produced, prepared, and eaten in an unhurried, relaxed manner.
Starbucks
Starbucks Customer Relations 
P.O. Box 3717 
Seattle, WA 98124-3717 
Telephone: (206) 447-1575
Website: http://www.starbucks.com/aboutus/timeline.asp
This is the official website of Starbucks, the world’s most famous
coffee company. The website includes the company’s mission
statement, time line, and history of the company’s development,
as well as press releases.
University of Utah, Family and Consumer Studies (FCS)
225 South 1400 East 
Alfred Emery Building 228 
University of Utah 
Salt Lake City, UT 84112 
Telephone: (801) 581-6521 
Fax: (801) 581-5156
Website: http://www.fcs.utah.edu/
FCS is an interdisciplinary department where faculty and students
examine how the social, economic, political, and physical environ-
Selected Organizations Based in the United States
173

ments affect families, individuals, and consumers. The teaching,
research, and service performed in the department focuses on how
the welfare of individuals, and the families in which they live, are
affected by external forces and internal forces. As such, the de-
partment emphasizes applied social science research and teaching
with a strong public-policy orientation. The department offers two
undergraduate majors: Consumer and Community Studies and
Human Development and Family Studies.
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Consumer Science Program
1300 Linden Drive 
Madison WI 53706 
Telephone: (608) 263-5675 
Fax: (608) 265-6048
E-mail: akskram@facstaff.wisc.edu
Website: http://www.sohe.wisc.edu/depts/cs/csmaj.html
The Consumer Science Program at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison offers undergraduate, masters, and doctoral level edu-
cation in consumer science and retailing. The program is interdis-
ciplinary and integrative, focusing on consumers as individuals
and household members, and on their interactions with the mar-
ketplace and the public sector. The Consumer Science Depart-
ment offers an interdisciplinary approach to consumer econom-
ics, consumer behavior, family resource management, retailing,
public-policy issues, and historical consumer issues. The Con-
sumer Science major meets the needs of students interested in
qualifying for employment or graduate study in business, eco-
nomics, finance, consumer law, specialized areas of family and
consumer finance, or family economics.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
Postal Square Building 
2 Massachusetts Avenue NE 
Washington, DC 20212-0001
Telephone: (202) 691-5200 
Fax: (202) 691-6325 
E-mail: blsdata_staff@bls.gov
Website: http://stats.bls.gov/
The BLS is the principal fact-finding agency for the federal gov-
ernment in the broad field of labor economics and statistics. The
BLS is an independent national statistical agency that collects,
174
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

processes, analyzes, and disseminates statistical data to the
American public, the U.S. Congress, other federal agencies, state
and local governments, business, and labor. The BLS also serves
as a statistical resource to the Department of Labor.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)
U.S. Department of Energy 
1000 Independence Avenue SW 
Washington, DC 20585
Telephone: (202) 586-8800
E-mail: infoctr@eia.doe.gov
Website: http://www.eia.doe.gov/
The EIA provides monthly energy statistics from 1992 to the pres-
ent, a summary of greenhouse gas statistics for the United States,
energy models, articles, U.S. and international energy statistics,
and “World Energy,” a database containing statistics on energy
consumption and production for all countries of the world.
U.S. International Trade Commission
500 E Street SW
Washington, DC 20436 
Telephone: (202) 205-2000 
E-mail: webmaster@usitc.gov 
Website: http://www.usitc.gov/default.htm
The U.S. International Trade Commission is an independent, non-
partisan, quasi-judicial federal agency that provides trade expert-
ise to both the legislative and executive branches of government,
determines the impact of imports on U.S. industries, and directs
actions against certain unfair trade practices, such as patent,
trademark, and copyright infringements.
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
Association of European Consumers (AEC)
Rue du Commerce, 70-72
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
Telephone: 32 2 545 9074
Fax: 32 2 545 9076
E-mail: aec@belgacom.net
Website: http://www.consumer-aec.org
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
175

The AEC is a European organization that brings together thirty-
three consumer organizations from seventeen different countries
from the European Union (EU) and Central and Eastern Europe.
The AEC and its members aim to work together in the interest of
strengthening consumer influence in society, particularly on is-
sues related to social and environmental awareness.
Benetton
Villa Minelli
31050 Ponzano 
Treviso, Italy
Telephone: 0039 0422 519036
Fax: 0039 0422 519930
Website: http://www.benetton.com/colors/
The Benetton Group, an Italian clothing company, has stores in
120 countries. It produces 100 million garments per year and gen-
erates an annual turnover of 2 billion Euros of retail sales. Fea-
turing an extensive archive of articles, the Benetton website fea-
tures many links that serve to spark debates about consumption.
Center for Science in the Public Interest, Canada
1 Nicholas Street, Suite 412 
Ottawa, Ontario K1N 7B7
Telephone: (613) 565-2140 
Fax: (613) 565-6520 
E-mail (for policy issues): jefferyb@istar.ca 
Website: http://www.cspinet.org/canada/
The Canadian branch of Center for Science in the Public Interest
(see entry above in “Selected Organizations Based in the United
States” section) supports over 135,000 members in Canada.
Consumer Rights Commission of Pakistan (CRCP)
House Number 270, Street Number 37, G-9/1
P.O. Box 1379
Islamabad, Pakistan
Telephone: 92 51 285 5402
Fax: 92 51 285 5403
E-mail: crcp@comsats.net.pk
Website: http://www.crcp.sdnpk.org/pr_21_september_2002.htm
The CRCP is a rights-based civil initiative registered under the Trust
Act of 1882. Established in 1998, the CRCP is an independent, non-
176
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

profit, and nongovernmental organization. It largely works through
local fund-raising and by attracting volunteers. It is the first national
consumer organization in Pakistan and claims to approach the issue
of consumer protection in comprehensive and holistic terms. Its vi-
sion and strategies are meant to share significant cross-linkages
with both market practices and issues of governance.
Consumers’ Association (CA)
2 Marylebone Road
London NW1 4DF, United Kingdom
Telephone: 44 207 770 7262
Fax: 44 207 770 7666
E-mail: helen.west@which.co.uk
Website: http://www.which.co.uk
The CA produces Which? magazine, Britain’s version of Consumer
Reports. Which? contains product guides, forums, and reports.
Consumers International (CI)
Consumers International Head Office
Julian Edwards, director general
24 Highbury Crescent 
London N5 1RX, United Kingdom
Telephone: 44 207 226 6663
Fax: 44 207 354 0607
E-mail: consint@consint.org
Website: http://www.consumersinternational.org/
CI supports, links, and represents consumer groups and agencies
all over the world. It has a membership of over 250 organizations
in 115 countries. It strives to promote a fairer society by defend-
ing the rights of all consumers, especially the poor, marginalized,
and disadvantaged.
Consumers Protection Center (KEPKA), Greece
54 Tsimiski Street
GR-546 23 Thessaloniki, Greece
Telephone: 30 31 233 333
Fax: 30 31 242 211
E-mail: consumers@kepka.org
Website: http://www.kepka.org/
KEPKA is an independent, nonprofit, and nongovernmental con-
sumer organization. KEPKA is the first recognized consumers’
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
177

association formed in Greece in response to the law 2251/94,
which aims to protect consumers.
Environment Agency (EA), United Kingdom
Rio House Almonsbury 
Bristol BS32 4UD, United Kingdom
Telephone: 08 45 9333111
Website: http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/
The EA tackles flooding and pollution incidents and makes sure
that industry keeps its impacts on air, land, and water quality to
a minimum. The EA cleans up rivers, coastal waters, and con-
taminated land and also looks after fish and wildlife habitats.
Environment Canada
Inquiry Centre 
351 Saint Joseph Boulevard 
Hull, Quebec, Canada K1A 0H3 
Telephone: (819) 997-2800 or 1-800-668-6767 
Fax: (819) 953-2225 
E-mail: enviroinfo@ec.gc.ca
Website: http://www.ec.gc.ca
Environment Canada’s website serves as a resource for weather
and environmental information. The website offers advice for
what one can do around the home to help the environment, as
well as providing tips on how to protect wildlife.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Denmark
Danish EPA
29 Strandgade
DK-1401 København K, Denmark
Telephone: 45 32 66 0100
Fax: 45 32 66 0479
E-mail: mst@mst.dk
Website: http://www.mst.dk/homepage/
The Danish EPA’s spheres of activity center on preventing and
combating water, soil, and air pollution. The agency reports to the
Danish Ministry of the Environment and has approximately 360
employees.
Environmental Protection Agency, Scotland (SEPA)
SEPA Corporate Office 
178
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Erskine Court Castle Business Park 
Stirling FK9 4TR, Scotland
Telephone: 01 786 457 700 
Fax: 01 786 446 885
E-mail: scc@sepa.org.uk
Website: http://www.sepa.org.uk/
SEPA is the public body responsible for environmental protection
in Scotland. Its main aim is to provide an efficient and integrated
environmental protection system for Scotland that will improve
the environment and contribute to the government’s goal of sus-
tainable development. SEPA was established by the Environment
Act of 1995 and became operational on 1 April 1996. The Environ-
ment Act of 1995 also sets out SEPA’s powers and responsibilities.
Environmental Protection Agency, Sweden
Naturvårdsverket 
Blekholmsterrassen 36
SE-106 48 Stockholm, Sweden
Telephone: 46 8 698 1000 
Fax: 46 8 20 29 25
E-mail: natur@naturvardsverket.se
Website: http://www.internat.naturvardsverket.se/ 
The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency is the central en-
vironmental authority under the Swedish government. Its main
tasks are to coordinate and promote environmental work on both
a national and international level.
European Association for the Co-ordination of Consumer
Representation in Standardization (ANEC)
36, avenue de Tervueren 
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
Telephone: 32 2 743 2470 
Fax: 32 2 706 5430 
E-mail: anec@anec.org
Website: http://www.anec.org
ANEC is the European consumer voice in standardization. ANEC
was established in 1995 as an international nonprofit association
under Belgian law. Its mission is to represent consumers on any
matter concerning the standardization of consumer-product reg-
ulations.
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
179

European Bureau of Consumers Union (BEUC)
36/4, avenue de Tervueren
B-1040 Brussels, Belgium
Telephone: 32 2 743 1590
Fax: 32 2 740 2802
E-mail: consumers@beuc.org
The BEUC coordinates consumer policy among the member coun-
tries of the European Union (EU). Thirty-three independent con-
sumer organizations from twenty-three countries are represented.
European Union (EU) Director-General of Consumer Affairs
European Commission Directorate, General Health and
Consumer Protection 
200, rue de la Loi / Wetstraat 200 
B-1049 Brussels, Belgium
Telephone: 32 2 299 1111
E-mail: sanco-mailbox@cec.eu.int
Website: http://europa.eu.int/comm/consumers/index_en.html
The mission of the EU Director-General of Consumer Affairs is to
ensure the proper integration of consumer concerns in all EU
policies and to complement the consumer policy conducted by
member states. Within this general context, the commission sup-
ports consumer organizations and seeks to enhance the role of
consumer representatives in decision making. At the interna-
tional level, the commission aims to ensure the proper application
by candidate countries of the same standards of consumer pro-
tection and consumer safety as exist in the European Community
(EC). The commission also promotes consumer policy and high
consumer safety standards in international forums and in relation
to Third-World countries.
Fairtrade Foundation
16 Baldwin’s Gardens, Suite 204
London EC1N 7RJ, United Kingdom
Telephone: 44 207 405 5942
Fax: 44 207 405 5943
E-mail: mail@fairtrade.org.uk
Website: http://www.fairtrade.org.uk/
The Fairtrade Foundation exists to advocate for a better deal for mar-
ginalized and disadvantaged Third-World producers. The founda-
180
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

tion awards a consumer label, the FAIRTRADE Mark, to products
that meet internationally recognized standards of fair trade.
Foodaware: The Consumer’s Food Group
36 Leyland Avenue
Saint Albans, Herfordshire, AL1 2BE, United Kingdom
Website: http://www.nfcg.org.uk/intro.htm
Foodaware coordinates the UK consumer movement’s work on
food safety, nutrition, and standards. Its mission is to give UK con-
sumers a strong voice on food policy by bringing together the or-
ganizations that represent consumers. Foodaware also consults
and supports the UK consumer representatives on food-related
committees, while furthering the public understanding of science.
Friends of the Earth International, The Netherlands
P.O. Box 19199
1000 GD, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Telephone: 31 20 622 1369
Fax: 31 20 639 2181
Website: http://www.foei.org/
The Dutch branch of Friends International initiated the Sustain-
able Societies Program, which assumes that the earth cannot sup-
port the wasteful production and consumption patterns estab-
lished by the industrialized countries.
Health Action International (HAI), The Netherlands
Health Action International, c/o HAI Europe 
Jacob van Lennepkade 334-T
1053 NJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Telephone: 31 20 683 3684 
Fax: 31 20 685 5002 
E-mail: info@haiweb.org
Website: http://www.haiweb.org/
HAI is a nonprofit, global network of health, development, con-
sumer, and other public-interest groups in more than seventy
countries working for a more rational use of medicinal drugs.
HAI represents the interests of consumers in drug policy and be-
lieves that all drugs marketed should be safe, effective, afford-
able, and necessary. HAI also campaigns for better controls on
drug promotion and for the provision of balanced, independent
information for prescribers and consumers.
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
181

Institute of Consumer Protection (ICP), Mauritius
Main Office Institute for Consumer Protection 
Hansrod Building, Second Floor
Corner Jummah Mosque and Sir Virgil Naz Streets 
Port Louis, Mauritius 
Telephone: (230) 210-4433 
Fax: (230) 211-4436 
E-mail: icpmapbi@intnet.mu
Website: http://icp.intnet.mu/Contact1.htm
The ICP was set up in 1983. Originally, it started as a breast-feeding
promotion group and later evolved into a national consumer-
protection agency. ICP has three distinct departments: the consumer-
protection department, the maternal and child health department
also known as MAPBIN, and the information and education de-
partment.
International Labor Office (ILO)
4 route des Morillons 
CH-1211 Geneva 22, Switzerland 
Telephone: 41 22 799 6111
Fax: 41 22 798 8685
E-mail: ilo@ilo.org
Website: http://www.ilo.org/
The ILO is the UN agency that seeks the promotion of social jus-
tice and internationally recognized human and labor rights. It was
founded in 1919 and is the only surviving creation of the Treaty of
Versailles, which brought the League of Nations into existence.
The ILO became the first specialized agency of the UN in 1946.
The ILO formulates international labor standards in the form of
Conventions and Recommendations, setting minimum standards
for the following labor rights: freedom of association, the right to
organize, collective bargaining, abolition of forced labor, equality
of opportunity and treatment, and other standards regulating con-
ditions across the entire spectrum of work-related issues.
McSpotlight
BM McSpotlight
London WC1N 3XX, United Kingdom
E-mail: info@mcspotlight.org
Website: http://www.mcspotlight.org
182
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

McDonald’s spends over $2 billion a year broadcasting its image
to the world. This organization aims to provide a small space for
alternatives to be heard. McSpotlight was created by the McIn-
formation Network, an independent group of volunteers working
in twenty-two countries on four continents. The McInformation
Network is dedicated to compiling and disseminating factual, ac-
curate, and up-to-date information about the workings, policies,
and practices of the McDonald’s Corporation. The network also
highlights opposition to McDonald’s and other transnational
companies.
Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs (MCCA), Australia
Department of the Treasury 
Langton Cres 
CANBERRA ACT 2600, Australia 
Telephone: 02 6263 3997 
Fax: 02 6263 2830
Website: http://www.consumer.gov.au/html/protection.htm
The MCCA consists of all Australian and New Zealander govern-
ment ministers responsible for fair trade, consumer-protection
laws, and credit laws. The role of the MCCA is to consider con-
sumer affairs and fair trade matters of national significance and,
where possible, to develop a consistent approach to those issues.
National Consumer Council (NCC), United Kingdom
20 Grosvenor Gardens
London SW1W 0DH, United Kingdom
Telephone: 44 207 730 3469
Fax: 44 207 730 0191
E-mail: jj@ncc.org.uk
Website: http://www.ncc.org.uk
The NCC is an independent consumer organization that attempts
to champion the consumer interest in order to bring about change
for the benefit of consumers. It does this by working with gov-
ernments, regulators, businesses, and people and organizations
that speak on behalf of consumers.
National Federation of Consumer Groups (NFCG)
c/o Centre for Consumer and Commercial Law Research
Brunel University
Uxbridge, Middlesex UB8 3PH, United Kingdom
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
183

Telephone: 44 1895 203 069
Fax: 44 1895 203 085
E-mail: office@nfcg.org.uk
Website: http://www.nfcg.org.uk
The NFCG was established in 1963 to bring together local con-
sumer groups that were first set up from 1961 with the encour-
agement of Consumers’ Association (CA), publishers of Which?
magazine. The NFCG individual membership scheme was intro-
duced in 1977 for people who do not live near enough to a group
to make membership feasible.
North American Commission for Environmental Cooperation
(CEC)
Commission for Environmental Cooperation 
393 rue St-Jacques Ouest 
Bureau 200 Montréal, Québec H2Y 1N9, Canada
Telephone: (514) 350-4300 
Fax: (514) 350-4314
E-mail: info@cecmtl.org
Website: http://www.cec.org/home/index.cfm?varlan=english
The CEC is an international organization created by Canada,
Mexico, and the United States under the North American Agree-
ment on Environmental Cooperation (NAAEC). The CEC was es-
tablished to address regional environmental concerns, to help
prevent potential trade and environmental conflicts, and to pro-
mote the effective enforcement of environmental law. The agree-
ment complements the environmental provisions of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP)
United Nations Avenue, Gigiri 
P.O. Box 30552 
Nairobi, Kenya 
Telephone: 254 2 621 234 
Fax: 254 2 624 489 (or 254 2 624 490) 
E-mail: eisinfo@unep.org
Website: http://www.unep.org/
UNEP provides leadership and encourages environmental part-
nerships that inform and enable nations and peoples to improve
their quality of life without compromising that of future genera-
tions.
184
Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

World Trade Organization (WTO)
Centre William Rappard
Rue de Lausanne 154 
CH-1211 Geneva 21, Switzerland
Telephone: 41 22 739 5111 
Fax: 41 22 731 4206
E-mail: enquiries@wto.org
Website: http://www.wto.int/index.htm
The WTO, located in Geneva and established on 1 January 1995,
is the only global international organization dealing with the
rules of trade between nations. At its core are the WTO agree-
ments negotiated, signed, and ratified by most of the world’s
trading nations (144 countries as of January 2002). The goal is to
help producers of goods and services, exporters, and importers
conduct their business. Aside from administering WTO trade
agreements, the WTO handles trade disputes, monitors national
trade policies, and provides technical assistance and training for
developing countries.
Selected Organizations Based Abroad
185


8
Print and Nonprint
Resources
T
he sheer volume of available material addressing the issue of
consumption can be overwhelming at first glance. A search of
the word consumption in many library catalogs will produce a
list of over 2,300 items. In this chapter, we provide a sample of the
available materials that we consider important for a variety of
reasons. Some of the items are considered “classics” in the field
and thus are included in the list. Others contain the most recent
data available on a particular aspect of consumption. Also, when
making the selections for this chapter, care was taken to include a
diverse range of materials; therefore, the reader will find books
and articles focusing on consumption in countries other than the
United States and will also find material addressing the con-
sumption patterns of different segments of American society.
Finally, in this chapter references for publications that focus on
many of the ideas discussed in chapters 1 through 5 are provided.
To better facilitate your reading and research, the chapter is
divided into four sections: books; print articles, book chapters,
and journals; videos; and websites.
Books
Adorno, Theodor W. 1991. The Culture Industry: Selected Essays
on Mass Culture. London: Routledge. 224 pages.
187

This book is a collection of essays by Theodor Adorno (1903–1969),
a leading member of the group of theorists known as the Frankfurt
school. The unifying theme of the essays found in this book is a cri-
tique of the “culture industry” and mass culture. Adorno argues
that consumer culture serves the interests of capitalism by creating
false needs, discouraging political participation, and limiting op-
portunities for critical thinking. Adorno’s writings on consumer-
driven capitalism are difficult, groundbreaking, and indispensable.
Alfino, Mark, John S. Caputo, and Robin Wynyard, eds. 1998. Mc-
Donaldization Revisited: Critical Essays on Consumer Culture.
London: Praeger. 232 pages.
The essays in this book extend the concept of McDonaldization,
first presented by George Ritzer in The McDonaldization of Society
(first edition, 1994). McDonaldization refers to the process by
which the principles associated with fast food restaurants, in-
cluding efficiency, calculability, predictability, and control
through technology, have begun to permeate more and more sec-
tors of American society. In addition to pointing out the limita-
tions of the McDonaldization thesis, the authors in this collection
demonstrate the relevance and applicability of the concept to
such areas as feminist theory, semiotics, the hospitality industry,
and consumer choice.
Antonides, Gerrit, and W. Fred Van Raaij. 1998. Consumer Behav-
iour: A European Perspective. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
642 pages.
This book offers a European perspective on consumer behavior
and situates the discussion within psychological, economic, socio-
logical, and historical contexts. In addition to exploring the deter-
minants and consequences of consumer decision making, the au-
thors examine all aspects of the consumption cycle, from the initial
orientation and purchase to product disposal and its consequences
for the environment. Chapters of particular interest include “Con-
sumption and the Environment” and “Shopping Behaviour.”
Appadurai, Arjun, ed. 1988. The Social Life of Things: Commodi-
ties in Cultural Perspective. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. 352 pages.
This edited collection of essays by anthropologists and historians
examines the process by which “things” come to be seen as com-
188
Print and Nonprint Resources

modities. The contributors point out that desire, taste, and fash-
ion are not inherent or natural, but are instead culturally medi-
ated and socially constructed. Locations such as Europe, the
Solomon Islands, France, and India provide case studies for the
examination of topics such as the process of commoditization, sa-
cred consumption, the politics of value, and notions of authentic-
ity in consumption.
Barber, Benjamin R. 1995. Jihad vs. McWorld: How Globalism
and Tribalism Are Reshaping the World. New York: Random
House. 432 pages.
Barber argues that there are two competing forces in the world
today. First, “McWorld” is the cultural homogenization pro-
duced by economic globalization and a corporate-manufactured
popular culture. Second, “Jihad” is the term used by Barber to
connote racial, ethnic, and religious-based resistance to this Mc-
World. While McWorld is eroding cultural differences around
the world, Jihad is at the same time tearing the world apart. Nev-
ertheless, Barber’s thesis is that McWorld and Jihad are linked
and not really oppositional forces. McWorld needs the racial, eth-
nic, and religious difference produced by Jihad in order to pro-
duce niche products. Although Jihad is a reaction against the en-
tertainment and consumption values promoted by McWorld, it
nevertheless needs the tools produced by McWorld such as cell
phones, the Internet, and satellite news stations. Together these
represent threats to democracy, and thus should concern those
interested in active citizenship and the survival of the inclusive
nation-state.
Belasco, Warren, and Phillip Scranton, eds. 2002. Food Nations:
Selling Taste in Consumer Societies. New York: Routledge. 320
pages.
Warren Belasco is professor of American studies at the Univer-
sity of Maryland and one of the leading scholars in food studies.
Though food is often not associated with larger issues of power,
consumption, and class, the chapters in this book illustrate the
important role played by food in the United States today. The
collection examines an eclectic range of topics, including wine in
France, donuts in Canada, baby food in the United States, and
hybrid cuisines in Mexico.
Books
189

Brower, Michael, and Warren Leon. 1999. The Consumer’s Guide
to Effective Environmental Choices: Practical Advice from the
Union of Concerned Scientists. Pittsburgh, PA: Three Rivers. 304
pages.
This book serves as a resource guide for those concerned about
the environmental impacts of their consumption patterns. The
book identifies consumer-related environmental problems and
statistical data to highlight the environmental consequences of
various commodities and consumer choices. Priority actions and
rules for responsible consumption are also provided.
Campbell, Colin. 1987. The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of
Modern Consumerism. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 301 pages.
Campbell shows how the consumer revolution in eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century England is related to wider cultural develop-
ments. He argues that central features of modern consumer cul-
ture, such as fashion and an addiction to novelty, have their cul-
tural origin in romantic values that evolved from Protestant
religious movements. These religious movements are the source
of our modern pleasure-seeking outlook. Drawing on and enrich-
ing Weber’s argument in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Cap-
italism (1904), Campbell provides an exemplary model for how
important, venerable ideas can be transformed and enriched by a
focus on consumption.
Clammer, John R. 1997. Contemporary Urban Japan: A Sociology
of Consumption. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 256 pages.
This volume examines contemporary Japanese urban lifestyles
and assesses consumption behavior in the Japanese context.
Clammer demonstrates the link between consumption and ur-
banization in Japan and highlights the role played by consump-
tion patterns in the social stratification of Japanese society. He
shows how the apparently individual concerns that drive con-
sumption are related to global changes.
Corrigan, Peter. 1997. The Sociology of Consumption. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage. 197 pages.
This is an introductory primer to the sociology of consumption.
Corrigan traces the history of consumerism in Western capitalist
societies, outlines the ideas of key theorists, and explains some of
190
Print and Nonprint Resources

the more complex concepts. A comprehensive array of topics is
covered including advertising, fashion, tourism, and food.
Cowen, Tyler. In Praise of Commercial Culture. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. 278 pages.
Cowen’s argument in this volume is that the commercialization
of consumption in modern societies can and should be viewed in
a positive light. In the main, capitalism permits and encourages a
wide array of vibrant artistic visions and representations. In
short, Cowen praises commercial culture in all its manifold man-
ifestations including theater, art, and popular music.
Crocker, David A., and Toby Linden, eds. 1997. Ethics of Con-
sumption: The Good Life, Justice, and Global Stewardship. Lan-
ham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 564 pages.
This collection of over twenty-five chapters brings together schol-
ars from many fields to discuss both the practical and philosoph-
ical implications of American consumption patterns. The essays
examine the causes and impacts of contemporary consumption
patterns, touching on issues such as carrying capacity, the con-
sumption of grain-fed meat, alternatives to the consumer society,
global inequality, and religious perspectives on consumption.
Cross, Gary. 1993. Time and Money: The Making of Consumer
Culture. London: Routledge. 294 pages.
In this historical analysis, Cross explains why consumer culture is
biased toward goods and against free time. Drawing on Ameri-
can, British, and French experiences in the 1920s and 1930s, Cross
reveals why hopes that mass production would create a leisure
society proved illusory and why a work-and-spend culture pre-
vailed instead.
de Graaf, John, David Wann, and Thomas H. Naylor. 2002. Af-
fluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic. San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler. 268 pages.
This book is derived from the PBS program of the same name.
According to de Graaf, Wann, and Naylor, affluenza is a socially
transmitted condition of overload, anxiety, debt, and waste that
results from people’s pursuit of an ever-increasing number of
commodities. The book outlines some political, historical, and
Books
191

socioeconomic reasons for affluenza’s prominence in contempo-
rary American society. The authors liken affluenza to a powerful,
contagious virus that hurts people’s financial well-being, health,
and family life. The book draws on the real-life stories of people
who have chosen to fight affluenza by living a simpler life, and
uses such stories to offer practical solutions to the problems
caused by affluenza. (See Affluenza and Escape from Affluenza
below in the “Videos” section.)
De Grazia, Victoria, and Ellen Furlough, eds. 1996. The Sex of
Things: Gender and Consumption in Historical Perspective.
Berkeley: University of California Press. 433 pages.
This collection of essays examines the historical relationships be-
tween gender, politics, and consumerism. Featuring both histori-
cal case studies as well as essays on methodology and social the-
ory, the book integrates material from two centuries and covers
topics such as the gendering of consumer practices in nineteenth-
century France, consumer credit and the debtor family in turn-of-
the-century England, cosmetics and women’s identity, the diffu-
sion of appliances in interwar England, and consumer
nationalism in West Germany.
Deaton, Angus. 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press. 242 pages.
In this book, Deaton presents research from microeconomics,
macroeconomics, and econometrics on the topic of saving and
consumption. As an overview of empirical and theoretical work
on saving and consumption patterns, this book includes a large
amount and wide variety of data.
Douglas, Mary, and Baron Isherwood. 1996. The World of Goods:
Towards an Anthropology of Consumption. Rev. ed. New York:
Routledge. 169 pages.
Written by anthropologist Mary Douglas and economist Baron
Isherwood, this book examines the relationship between material
goods and interpersonal communication. The authors discuss
food, clothing, cars, and homes as some examples of the com-
modities through which people communicate information about
themselves, information that advances their particular interests,
and shared meanings with others. This book is meant as a coun-
terweight to economic approaches to consumption that neglect
192
Print and Nonprint Resources

the cultural dimensions of consumer activity. Few anthropolo-
gists who study consumption have been unaffected by this book.
Edwards, Tim. 1997. Men in the Mirror: Men’s Fashions and Con-
sumer Society. London: Cassell. 150 pages.
The myth that women are interested in fashion while men are not
has been challenged in both the popular press (visible in the pro-
liferation of men’s style magazines such as GQ and Arena) and
academic writings in recent years. In this book, Edwards provides
a sociological analysis of men’s fashion, linking it to notions of
masculinity, effeminacy, and homosexuality. Edwards explores
how masculinity and men’s fashions are constructed in an in-
creasingly commodified society.
Ewen, Stuart. 1976. Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and
the Social Roots of the Consumer Culture. New York: McGraw-
Hill. 261 pages.
Ewen traces the roots of consumer culture in American society to
the 1920s when advertising first began to infiltrate the popular
consciousness of American workers by offering the “good life” to
those who invested in an ever-expanding array of consumer
goods. According to Ewen, the newly developed media became a
tool by which capitalists kept workers passive through both the
creation of an enticing and fantastic visual spectacle and, where
necessary, the co-optation of voices of resistance.
Ewen, Stuart. 1988. All Consuming Images: The Politics of Style
in Contemporary Culture. New York: Basic Books. 306 pages.
Ewen argues that our culture is increasingly dominated by style.
The research reported in this book reveals the diverse and often
contradictory ways that people view and understand style. Al-
though recognizing that interpretations of style are often specific
to a particular person or historical epoch, Ewen notes that among
all of the respondents who provided him with a definition of
style, two overarching themes emerged: First, style is linked to
consumption; and second, the mass media play a central role in
shaping and determining popular notions of style.
Fine, Ben, and E. Leopold. 2002. The World of Consumption: The
Material and the Cultural Revisited. 2d ed. London: Routledge.
313 pages.
Books
193

This book challenges standard economic studies of consumption
that ignore issues of power and inequality. Fine and Leopold pro-
vide an overview of the many studies on consumption and focus
particularly on issues such as economic imperialism, globaliza-
tion, public consumption, systems of provision, and the world of
commodities.
Finkelstein, Joanne. 1996. After a Fashion. Melbourne: Melbourne
University Press. 127 pages.
In this broad and rigorous introduction to the study of fashion,
Finkelstein argues that any analysis of fashion needs to recog-
nize the complex and paradoxical influences that affect fashion,
including economic activity, social context, sexual mores, aes-
thetic trends, and psychological formations. Fashion is looked at
as simultaneously a globalizing and culturally homogenizing
phenomena, as an ever-pervasive arm of big business, as a gim-
mick that sustains vast economic structures such as shopping
malls and trade expositions, and as a principal impetus behind
international advertising.
Finnegan, Margaret. 1999. Selling Suffrage: Consumer Culture
and Votes for Women. New York: Columbia University Press. 222
pages.
Finnegan examines women’s suffrage from the perspective of con-
sumer history and details the various ways in which commodities
and consumer activities were used to win the support of the pub-
lic. In particular, Finnegan points out that commodities such as
sunflower badges and Kewpie dolls, and activities such as pan-
tomimes, pageants, and advertising campaigns, allowed suffra-
gists to associate themselves with consumer culture, and thereby
claim legitimacy in a capitalist society. Finnegan claims that pre-
vailing historical assessments of the suffrage movement overem-
phasize the more radical suffragists and neglect the active role
played by ordinary women in the commercialization of politics.
Fox, Richard W., and T. Jackson Lears, eds. 1983. The Culture of
Consumption: Critical Essays in American History, 1880–1980.
New York: Pantheon. 236 pages.
The thread that unites the essays in this collection is an interest
in the ways in which an emerging consumer culture of the late-
nineteenth-century United States emphasized the ownership of
194
Print and Nonprint Resources

material goods rather than morality, self-control, and individual
accomplishment. It contains a seminal essay by Lears, “From Sal-
vation to Self-Realization: Advertising and the Therapeutic Roots
of the Consumer Culture, 1880–1930,” as well as articles about the
rhetoric of advertising, consumption and Henry James, and early
sociological studies of consumer culture, politics, and commodity
scientism.
Frank, Robert H. 2000. Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to Satisfy
in an Era of Excess. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 326
pages.
This book takes a look at the consequences of the growth of con-
spicuous consumption and makes the point that the behavior of
people’s peers determines one’s spending habits. Frank traces the
history of the “consumption tax” and argues that despite its fail-
ure in the past, it would encourage a much-needed shift in eco-
nomic priorities. Frank also discusses luxury spending and its re-
lationship to economic inequality.
Frank, Thomas. 1998. The Conquest of Cool: Business Culture,
Counterculture, and the Rise of Hip Consumerism. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press. 278 pages.
Frank explores how the youth culture that emerged in the 1960s,
along with its symbols and language, were intertwined from the
start with the advertising industry. The cultural impact of this is
continued in the move toward “hip consumerism.” The book
looks at the relation between advertising leaders and the ideas of
the counterculture and discusses examples such as the 1960s “pea-
cock revolution” in men’s clothing, car advertising, and the cola
wars. Frank provides an overview of how advertising changed
from hard sell to ironic critic and demonstrates how the counter-
culture has become interchangeable with the business culture that
it supposedly opposed.
Frank, Thomas. 2001. One Market under God: Extreme Capital-
ism, Market Populism, and the End of Economic Democracy.
New York: Anchor Books. 436 pages.
This book argues that the free market economy, especially in the
way that it operated in the 1990s, proved destructive for some
people, contrary to the claim that unfettered capitalism benefits
everyone. “Market populism,” the belief that free markets allow
Books
195

more democracy than elected governments, is challenged through
evidence suggesting that corporate America is more interested in
its own growth and profits rather than the well-being of all mem-
bers of society.
Frith, Katherine, ed. 1996. Advertising in Asia: Communication,
Culture, and Consumption. Ames: Iowa State University Press.
313 pages.
Advertising and capitalism are closely intertwined in the newly
emerging economies of Asia. The essays in this book examine the
political, cultural, economic, and social aspects of advertising in
countries such as Japan, Taiwan, Korea, China, India, the Philip-
pines, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore.
Gabriel, Yiannis, and Tim Lang. 1995. The Unmanageable Con-
sumer. London: Sage. 213 pages.
This book discusses the various representations of the consumer:
chooser, communicator, identity seeker, explorer, hedonist, vic-
tim, and rebel. The authors argue that contemporary patterns of
consumption in the West are too complex and dynamic to be
neatly represented by any one image of the consumer. Con-
sumers are unmanageable because rather than consuming in pre-
dictable, consistent, or one-dimensional ways, they often contra-
dict established theoretical models and maintain multifaceted
identities.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1969. The Affluent Society. 2d ed. Lon-
don: Hamish Hamilton. 333 pages.
In this important and influential book, Galbraith examines the so-
cial and political consequences of growing inequality between
rich and poor. Galbraith claims that aside from threatening social
cohesion, the “economics of affluence” also undermine economic
stability and security. This book argues for extensive government
spending on public goods such as education and transportation
in order to combat the inflation and economic downturns that
eventually accompany social inequality.
Goldman, Robert, and Stephen Papson. 1998. Nike Culture: The
Sign of the Swoosh. London: Sage. 194 pages.
196
Print and Nonprint Resources

This book examines the social importance of signs and symbols in
contemporary capitalist societies and uses the Nike “swoosh”
symbol as the prime example of how successful marketing cam-
paigns lead to economic success for image-savvy corporations.
Goldman and Papson take a close look at the advertising efforts
of Nike and demonstrate how certain issues, such as race, com-
munity, and the “spirituality” of sports, are represented and ob-
scured by the images and messages found in Nike advertising.
Goodwin, Neva R., Frank Akerman, and David Kiron. 1997. The
Consumer Society. Washington, DC: Island Press. 385 pages.
This collection includes summaries of close to 100 papers from
economics and sociology on the topic of consumption. The book
is divided into ten sections, including some based on the follow-
ing themes: consumption in the affluent society; family, gender,
and socialization; the history of the consumer society; founda-
tions of economic theories of consumption; media, advertising,
and wants creation; and consumption and the environment.
Goody, Jack. 1982. Cooking, Cuisine and Class: A Study in Com-
parative Sociology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
253 pages.
In this book on culinary practices around the world, Goody ex-
tends and challenges work already done by anthropologists on
the cultural significance of food. In addition to providing an
overview of culinary practices in various historical eras, includ-
ing ancient Egypt, imperial Rome, and early modern Europe,
Goody explores the reasons why haute cuisine is absent in Africa
but not in other parts of the world. This book links the prepara-
tion and consumption of food in different societies to historical
and socioeconomic circumstances.
Gronow, Jukka. 1997. The Sociology of Taste. London: Routledge.
199 pages.
In this book, Gronow discusses the relationship between fashion,
taste, and consumer culture, using historical case studies from
Europe. Gronow integrates the work of social theorists such as
Thorstein Veblen and Georg Simmel in order to discuss the role of
fashion in fostering social cohesion in modern societies.
Books
197

Hebdige, Dick. 1979. Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London:
Methuen. 195 pages.
This book examines the origins and social and cultural importance
of subcultures in the United Kingdom. Hebdige takes a historical
and sociological perspective on youth culture, fashion, and music.
He links the motivations and actions of working-class members of
subcultures—including mods, skinheads, and punks—to various
social movements and trends. Hebdige provides some hope that
consumer culture may provide for the emergence of progressive
social movements based on subcultural styles.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 1985. The Managed Heart: Commer-
cialization of Human Feeling. Berkeley: University of California
Press. 307 pages.
Hochschild examines the changing nature of labor in an economy
that focuses less on production and more on consumption. The
Managed Heart examines the personal price paid by flight atten-
dants and others who must exert “emotional labor,” defined as
labor that requires the constant expression, or suppression, of feel-
ings and emotions. Hochschild argues that rationalization and in-
equality based on gender and class exacerbate the dehumanizing
and alienating effects of emotional labor and cause burnout
among workers who are required to utilize their feelings and emo-
tions as labor skills.
Horowitz, Daniel. The Morality of Spending: Attitudes toward
the Consumer Society in America, 1875–1940. Chicago: Ivan R.
Del. 254 pages.
Horowitz demonstrates that consumption has long been consid-
ered a social problem, although concerns about that nature of its
impact on the moral fiber of society have changed over time. Fo-
cusing on the period between 1875 and 1940, Horowitz shows
that household budget studies from the era contain implicit and
explicit concerns about how the pursuit of affluence affects the
moral “health” of any nation that has an insatiable appetite for
commercial goods and novel experiences.
Howes, David, ed. 1996. Cross-Cultural Consumption: Global
Markets, Local Realities. London: Routledge. 214 pages.
198
Print and Nonprint Resources

The notion of firm cultural borders is challenged in this collection.
The chapters in this book illustrate the increasingly global nature
of consumer culture and demonstrate how the flow of goods and
services around the world has eroded cultural barriers and differ-
ences. The topics covered in this book include perishable goods in
the Pacific islands, contemporary British food cultures, the role of
coffee breaks in Tanzania and Europe, Mayan export products in
American catalogs, and cultural performances by women in the
Ecuadorean tourist market.
Humphrey, Kim. 1998. Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the Changing
Cultures of Consumption. London: Cambridge University Press.
270 pages.
This book provides an analysis of the contemporary Australian
supermarket in its historical and cultural contexts. Humphrey
contrasts the emergence of large supermarkets with the declining
popularity of small counter-service grocery stores. Integrating oral
histories with social theory, Humphrey uses the shoppers’ views
of supermarkets to offer insights into the everyday experience of
living in a consumer society.
James, Jeffrey. 2000. Consumption, Globalization, and Develop-
ment. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 142 pages.
James addresses the relationship between globalization and con-
sumption in the developing world and tackles issues such as con-
spicuous consumption, the “demonstration effect,” preference
changes, and consumer welfare. Approaching the issue of global-
ization as a set of trade-offs, James argues that globalization pro-
duces winners and losers simultaneously and creates new oppor-
tunities for developing countries to address key problems through
social marketing campaigns.
Kaplan, E. Ann. 1987. Rocking around the Clock: Music Televi-
sion, Postmodernism, and Consumer Culture. London: Methuen.
196 pages.
This is a study of Music Television (MTV), the first nonstop, rock-
video channel. In the first part of the book, Kaplan looks at
the similarity between music videos and advertisements. In the
second part of the book, she analyzes a number of rock videos,
Books
199

focusing particularly on gender issues in videos by both male and
female artists. Kaplan concludes that MTV represents a particular
stage in the development of consumer culture, whereby distin-
guishing between reality and fiction becomes extremely difficult.
Klein, Naomi. 2002. No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies.
New York: Picador. 490 pages.
No Logo critiques the omnipresence of brands, the images of
which are increasingly permeating such settings as schools and
other locations that were once free of commercial messages. Klein
also takes exception with the version of democracy and diversity
promoted by multinational corporations in which consumer
choice is likened to free choice and democracy. Klein points out
that such corporations undermine the institutions of democracy
while offering less and less choice due to the merger and acquisi-
tion frenzy that began during the 1990s and continues today un-
abated. In addition to discussing the plight of workers in well-
known multinational retailers, Klein discusses recent efforts—
such as culture jamming, human rights “hacktivism,” and ethical
shareholding—aimed at countering the harmful consequences of
corporate branding.
Kowinski, William Severini. 2002. The Malling of America. Reis-
sued ed. New York: Morrow. 415 pages.
In this book, Kowinski studies the way in which shopping malls
both reflect and perpetuate consumerism in the United States.
Kowinski discusses topics such as the land-appropriation efforts
of malls, the mandatory hours of operation for tenants, the envi-
ronmental impacts of mall construction, the privatization of pub-
lic market spaces, and the move toward consumerism and away
from citizenship and public involvement.
Larson, Erik. 1992. The Naked Consumer: How Our Private Lives
Become Public Commodities. New York: Holt. 275 pages.
The Naked Consumer outlines the ways in which the desires,
habits, and preferences of American consumers have been
tracked and documented through the use of company spies, com-
puters, hidden cameras, and sonar technology. Larson argues that
the privacy rights of individuals around the world are under-
mined by technologies that are purportedly meant only to survey
consumer preferences and behaviors but that, in practice, serve
200
Print and Nonprint Resources

the interests of those in power who wish to monitor and control
large groups of people.
Lasn, Kalle. 2002. Culture Jam: How to Reverse America’s Suici-
dal Consumer Binge—And Why We Must. New York: Quill. 247
pages.
Lasn, the founder of Adbusters magazine, argues in this book that
the United States has become a multimillion-dollar brand and that
it is up to “culture jammers” to disrupt the commercialization pro-
moted by the marketing campaigns of multinational food, fashion,
sports, and music corporations, among others. Lasn claims that by
“uncooling” consumer items, challenging the dominance of tele-
vision marketing, and “demarketing” heavily stylized goods and
even celebrities, people can deconstruct and resist the meanings
and symbols created by the advertising industry.
Leidner, Robin. 1993. Fast Food, Fast Talk: Service Work and the
Routinization of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press. 278 pages.
In this book, Leidner studies the lives of the employees of Mc-
Donald’s and Combined Insurance. Leidner looks at the way in
which the standardization and routinization of service work un-
dermines individual autonomy, social responsibility, and sponta-
neous expression. The effects of this are felt by everyone who par-
ticipates in these scripted, inauthentic performances of service
work whether they are employees or customers.
Mackay, Hugh, ed. 1997. Consumption and Everyday Life. Lon-
don: Routledge. 320 pages.
This book is a collection of closely related chapters that evaluate
contemporary debates about consumption and its role in shaping
everyday life. Countering simplistic accounts of the passive con-
sumer, the chapters in this collection depict the consumer as ac-
tive and critical, capable of making informed and deliberate
choices. Case studies from around the world illustrate the rich va-
riety of local consumption practices throughout the world and
provide empirical context for the theoretical ideas examined by
contributors to the book.
Mamiya, Christin J. 1992. Pop Art and Consumer Culture: Ameri-
can Super Market. Austin: University of Texas Press. 215 pages.
Books
201

This study traces the rise and decline of the pop art era
(1958–1968), exploring the linkages between pop art and the
growth of consumer culture. When pop art first emerged in the
United States in the late 1950s, many art critics predicted that it
would rapidly disappear. In this book, Mamiya shows that pop
art became the principal art movement in the 1960s. The financial
success of American pop art could not have occurred without its
close reliance on images from American consumer culture.
Manning, Robert D. 2001. Credit Card Nation: The Consequences
of America’s Addiction to Credit. New York: Basic Books. 406
pages.
Manning addresses the issue of national and individual credit
card debt. Using data on debt from the past two decades, Manning
identifies an alarming trend toward less savings and a greater
amount of debt for both families and corporations. Manning dis-
cusses various aspects of the “credit card nation,” including the
historical emergence of the current debt problems in U.S. society,
credit card debt among the young, and the predatory practices
and advertising strategies employed by credit card companies.
Marchand, Roland. 1986. Advertising the American Dream: Mak-
ing Way for Modernity, 1920–1940. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press. 445 pages.
This book discusses the modernization of print advertising from
the 1920s to the 1940s and traces the linkages between consumer
culture and the print advertisements of this period. Marchand ar-
gues that advertising is a fairly reliable reflection of the needs and
desires of a culture, even if it is a very poor expression of what
may be needed to fill those needs and desires.
McCracken, Grant. 1990. Culture and Consumption: New Ap-
proaches to the Symbolic Character of Consumer Goods and Ac-
tivities. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 174 pages.
McCracken challenges conventional theories of consumption that
pay little attention to the structural and personal functions played
by consumption in modern capitalist societies. McCracken em-
phasizes the symbolism behind people’s purchasing patterns,
preferences, and tastes, pointing out that the consumerism often
reviled by critics actually serves to create and maintain social co-
hesion and order. The book introduces two ideas that are now
202
Print and Nonprint Resources

standard in studies of consumption. First is the disappearing im-
portance of “patina,” the signs of a commodity’s age. Second is
the idea that buying one new object will lead to the purchase of a
number of related products, which McCracken calls a Diderot ef-
fect, after the French philosopher who described the room he had
to furnish to match his new dressing gown.
McKendrick, Neil, John Brewer, and J. H. Plumb. 1982. The Birth of
a Consumer Society: The Commercialization of Eighteenth-Century
England. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 345 pages.
This is a collection of essays by three historians, which argues that
our consumer culture had its birth in eighteenth-century En-
gland. The thesis of the book is that there was a consumer revo-
lution that predated the advent of industrialization as well as the
advent of mass production. The book focuses on the impact of al-
tered and increased consumption on the emergence of the Indus-
trial Revolution.
Miller, Daniel. 1987. Material Culture and Mass Consumption.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 240 pages.
This book uses the idea of objectification as developed by G. W. F.
Hegel, Karl Marx, and Georg Simmel in order to develop a theory
of the relationship between society and material culture. In objec-
tification, we take an idea in our mind and create it as a material
object. In consumer society, these objectifications are usually pro-
duced by large, abstract institutions such as companies and gov-
ernment agencies. Miller agrees with many that such objectifica-
tions are alienating and isolating, but he argues that these very
consumer objects can be used as the basis of pluralistic, small-
scale communities. Miller thus tries to avoid treating the consumer
as a passive, alienated recipient of the intended messages of those
in control of production.
Miller, Daniel. 1995. Acknowledging Consumption: A Review of
New Studies. London: Routledge. 341 pages.
This book is meant to serve as an interdisciplinary text on con-
sumption for undergraduate students. Scholars from fields such
as anthropology, consumer behavior, economics, geography, his-
tory, media studies, psychology, and sociology contribute chapters
to this collection, bringing together a large variety and quantity of
material on consumption produced in the ten years prior to 1995.
Books
203

Miller, Daniel. 1998. A Theory of Shopping. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press. 180 pages.
In this book, Miller presents the results of a year long ethno-
graphic study of shopping on a North London street. Shopping is
treated as more than just a trivial and meaningless activity, and
this book frames the act of shopping in terms of familial relation-
ships and “sacrificial ritual.” Miller argues that shopping reveals
significant information about how we think of our social rela-
tionships.
Miller, Daniel. 2001. Consumption: Critical Concepts in the So-
cial Sciences. Vols. 1–4. London: Routledge. 2,200 pages.
These expansive volumes range from classic theoretical discus-
sions of consumption to recent work detailing the diversity of
consumption as it is actually practiced. These volumes provide an
exhaustive and extensive guide to past and current research on
the topic of consumption.
Miller, Michael B. 1994. The Bon Marché: Bourgeoisie Culture and
the Department Store, 1869–1920. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. 266 pages.
This book is a social history of Le Bon Marché, the famous
Parisian department store that, prior to 1914, was the world’s
largest store of its kind. The rise of Le Bon Marché reflected the
ambitions and anxieties of Parisian culture at the time, and Miller
illustrates the success of Le Bon Marché’s owners and directors in
accommodating the conflicting forces of modern mass consump-
tion on the one hand and traditional social and cultural values on
the other. The book includes material on not only the business
and organizational aspects of running a store like Le Bon Marché,
but also the techniques used to manipulate consumer desire and
promote mass consumption.
Mintz, Sidney W. 1986. Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar
in Modern History. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin. 274 pages.
Mintz traces the history of sugar production and consumption
and shows how Europeans and Americans transformed sugar
from a rare foreign luxury consumed by the aristocracy to a sta-
ple in the diet of the new industrial workers. Mintz claims that
this transformation from luxury to mass-consumed commodity
204
Print and Nonprint Resources

changed the trajectory of capitalism. Sugar not only reflected pat-
terns of race, class, and gender, but also permanently influenced
eating habits, work patterns, and health.
Nava, Mica, Iain MacRury, Andrew Blake, and Barry Richards,
eds. 1997. Buy This Book: Studies in Advertising and Consump-
tion. London: Routledge. 355 pages.
Buy This Book is an examination of advertising and consumption
since the 1950s. The editors bring together work from many dis-
ciplines, including cultural studies, psychoanalysis, social history,
sociology, politics, art and design history, and business studies.
The twenty chapters cover a large range of topical areas and are
placed into sections based on the following themes: theories and
histories, the advertising industry, case studies, textual strategies,
readers as producers of meaning, and consumption and identity.
Nixon, Sean. 1996. Hard Looks: Masculinities, Spectatorship and
Contemporary Consumption. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 241
pages.
Nixon examines how feminism’s effect on popular consciousness
has influenced new representations of masculinity. The book ad-
dresses assorted aspects of representations of masculinity in con-
sumer culture, including the following issues: the “New Man” as
represented by the retail, advertising, and publishing industries;
the distinctive visual codes of these representations and their im-
pact; and the relationship between this imagery and the institu-
tional practices that underlie a wider representation.
Olney, Martha L. 1991. Buy Now, Pay Later: Advertising, Credit
and Consumer Durables in the 1920s. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press. 424 pages.
Olney examines how advertising and the increasing availability
of credit during and after the 1920s encouraged more and more
people to purchase durable goods that only a century ago were
rare possessions in the average American home. Clever market-
ing, credit, and the possibility of purchasing durable goods on in-
stallment plans facilitated a revolution in consumer spending.
Packard, Vance. 1985. The Hidden Persuaders. New York: Pocket
Books. 288 pages.
Books
205

Packard argues that by the mid-1950s, efficiency and technology
had overcome traditional problems related to the production and
distribution of goods. However, the efficiency of the industrial
production system necessitated the need for consumption to in-
crease in order to absorb excess production of goods. Packard il-
lustrates how advertising at this time switched from a focus on
the attributes and reliability of goods to a focus on psychological
techniques aimed at persuading individuals in both obvious and
subtle ways to purchase commodities. Although he may have
overestimated the power of advertising, this book was very in-
fluential in the public debate around advertising, especially the
idea of subliminal advertising, which it popularized.
Pendergrast, Mark. 2000. For God, Country and Coca-Cola: The
Definitive History of the Great American Soft Drink and the
Company That Makes It. 2d ed. London: Basic Books. 621 pages.
This is an unauthorized history of the product that began as a
patent medicine after the Civil War and eventually became a
dominant consumer beverage in the United States and the rest of
the world. Rather than merely trace the history of the Coca-Cola
Company, Pendergrast links the rise of the soft drink to the de-
velopment of capitalism and the rising global power and influ-
ence of American corporations.
Radin, Margaret Jane. 2001. Contested Commodities. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press. 279 pages.
This book is a philosophical and legal examination of the com-
modification of the human body. Radin looks at what happens
when the values of consumer culture invade such areas as sex,
the sale of human organs, and commercial surrogate motherhood.
Radin argues that controversies surrounding commodification are
better addressed by careful regulation than by unfettered markets
or complete prohibitions.
Ritzer, George. 1995. Expressing America. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Pine Forge. 240 pages.
Ritzer illustrates the ways in which consumers and credit card
companies contribute to an expanding cycle of credit card debt in
the United States and the rest of the world. Ritzer also examines
how credit cards serve as expressions and symbols of American-
style wealth and prosperity. Using sociological concepts to illus-
206
Print and Nonprint Resources

trate the theoretical significance of credit card use, Ritzer argues
that the credit card is transforming social and economic relations
throughout the world.
Ritzer, George. 1999. Enchanting a Disenchanted World. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge. 258 pages.
Ritzer claims that consumption is increasingly rationalized, that
is, it is more predictable, efficient, calculable, and involves at-
tempts to control and manipulate people. This rationalization also
leads to disenchantment, which alienates consumers. To draw
consumers back in, producers have been forced to develop new
means of consumption that employ strategies aimed at reen-
chanting consumers. According to Ritzer, the new means of con-
sumptions—such as theme stores, chain stores, shopping malls,
electronic shopping centers, casinos, discounters, superstores,
cruise ships, and entertainment facilities—urge and manipulate
people into “hyperconsumption.”
Ritzer, George. 2000. The McDonaldization of Society. 3d ed.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge. 278 pages.
This book outlines the ways in which the principles of the fast
food industry, particularly of its most powerful player, McDon-
ald’s, have come to permeate many sectors of society. Though the
process of rationalization—which involves efficiency, predictabil-
ity, calculability, and control though technology—assists and is
logical for businesses, it also ironically carries irrational social,
health, cultural, and environmental consequences for consumers
and communities. Rationalization brings with it some benefits,
and on the surface seems logical and inevitable, but Ritzer argues
that people should rethink the long-term consequences of uncrit-
ically accepting the McDonaldization of society.
Robbins, Richard. 2002. Global Problems and the Culture of Cap-
italism. 2d ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 421 pages.
Robbins traces the roots of problems such as inequality, hunger,
environmental destruction, disease, and global inequality to the
culture of capitalism. Robbins incorporates anthropological, eco-
nomic, and historical perspectives in order to counter the view
that problems in the developing world stem from internal, local
deficiencies rather than from conditions imposed or encouraged
by external forces linked to the global search for profit and
Books
207

the idea that trade and economic growth represent the source of
human well-being.
Robison, Richard, and David S. G. Goodman, eds. 1996. The New
Rich in Asia: Mobile Phones, McDonald’s and Middle-Class Rev-
olution. London: Routledge. 253 pages.
This book examines the ways in which the emergence of new
business and professional classes in East and Southeast Asia are
altering the global economic balance of power, consumption, and
opposition. This book examines whether the rising consumerism
of Asia’s burgeoning middle classes will give rise to political up-
heaval and demands for Western-style, liberal-democratic forms
of governance.
Ryan, John C., and Alan Thein Durning. 1997. Stuff: The Secret
Lives of Everyday Things (New Report, No 4). Seattle: Northwest
Environment Watch. 86 pages.
This book reveals the hidden costs associated with the goods
owned by the average North American consumer. The authors
start with individual acts of consumption and trace the linkages
associated with the production, consumption, distribution, and
disposal of commodities such as sugar, coffee, clothing, automo-
biles, food, and computers. In addition to providing readers with
detailed information on commodity chains, the authors attempt
to encourage people to reflect on the unintended consequences of
their everyday consumption decisions.
Schlosser, Eric. 2001. Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-
American Meal. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 356 pages.
Fast Food Nation documents the damaging effects of America’s
obsession with fast food. Using firsthand observations from
Colorado Springs, Schlosser discusses the following problems
associated with the rising consumption of fast food: the target-
ing of youth by advertisers, obesity and other health concerns
such as food-borne illnesses, urban sprawl, water pollution, the
financial and physical exploitation of immigrant workers, and
the lack of government oversight and regulation over the meat-
packing industry.
Schor, Juliet B. 1999. The Overspent American: Why We Want
What We Don’t Need. New York: HarperCollins. 253 pages.
208
Print and Nonprint Resources

In this book, Schor argues that despite rising prosperity, Ameri-
cans report feeling no better off than in the past. The reason that
Americans want what they do not need is related to what Schor
calls “new consumerism,” a form of “upscale spending” in which
people seek status within a reference group that includes not
neighbors or the stereotypical “Joneses” but rather the wealthiest
part of the population. Through media images and advertising
messages, people are led to believe that the lifestyles and prefer-
ences of the wealthy represent middle-class lifestyles and pref-
erences. The final chapters feature testimonies from “downshift-
ers,” individuals who reject “upscale spending” and instead live
more simply and without concern for achieving status through
conspicuous consumption.
Schor, Juliet B., and Douglas B. Holt, eds. 2000. The Consumer So-
ciety Reader. New York: The New Press. 502 pages.
This collection gathers together key works in the field of consump-
tion and addresses the underlying nature, evolution, and features
of consumerism. The book includes chapters from renowned schol-
ars (many of which are featured in this chapter), including Theodor
Adorno, Max Horkheimer, John Kenneth Galbraith, Betty Friedan,
Stuart Ewen, Jean Baudrillard, Dick Hebdige, Thornstein Veblen,
Pierre Bourdieu, and James Twitchell.
Slater, Don. 1997. Consumer Culture and Modernity. Oxford, UK:
Polity Press. 230 pages.
Slater provides an overview of theories on consumption and ex-
amines the primary issues through which people organize their
approach to consumption and its effects on personal identity and
status in contemporary Western societies. Slater critiques what
he sees as a productivist bias in studies of modernity and argues
instead that demand from the sixteenth century onward linked
consumer culture firmly to modernity. Although useful as an in-
troduction to the study of consumption, Slater also provides a
sustained argument regarding the meaning of consumer objects
and the production and use of that meaning in social practices.
Snow, Nancy. 2002. Propaganda, Inc.: Selling America’s Culture
to the World. 2d ed. New York: Seven Stories Press. 124 pages.
Using insights gained during two years of employment as a cul-
tural affairs specialist in the U.S. Information Agency, Nancy
Books
209

Snow argues that the agency, which is responsible for the dis-
semination of information about the United States overseas,
serves more as a propaganda machine selling consumer culture
for the benefit of corporate interests than as a facilitator of global
intercultural communication.
Strasser, Susan, Charles McGovern, Matthias Judt, and Daniel S.
Mattern, eds. 1998. Getting and Spending: European and Ameri-
can Consumer Societies in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press. 477 pages.
This collection features essays that tackle the history of con-
sumption by examining various aspects of political, social, and
economic life in locations throughout the world. Some of the top-
ics covered include consumption and citizenship in the United
States between 1900 and 1940; the New Deal state and the mak-
ing of citizen-consumers; consumer behavior and economic re-
form in East Germany in the 1960s; gender, generation, and con-
sumption in the United States; housewives and the politics of
consumption in interwar Germany; and modern subjectivity and
consumer culture.
Twitchell, James. 2000. Lead Us into Temptation. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press. 310 pages.
Twitchell argues that instead of being led around by the nose and
manipulated into cultivating false desires, individuals reinforce
their status and derive meaning from consuming material goods.
Thus, even while decrying the negative costs of materialism and
consumerism, individuals living in modern societies also pursue
a consumer lifestyle in order to find the security and comfort that
once came from organized religion. Twitchell refuses to blame
greed or ignorance for the high levels of consumption in the
United States.
Twitchell, James. 2002. Living It Up—Our Love Affair with Lux-
ury. New York: Columbia University Press. 309 pages.
Twitchell defines luxury as a tool with which to judge the taste of
others. In this book on the American interest in all things luxuri-
ous, Twitchell points out that the availability of credit has created
the impression that luxury is available to all members of society.
Twitchell uses the term “opuluxe” to denote universally craved
210
Print and Nonprint Resources

name-brand objects, the image of which often proves more im-
portant than its quality. Regardless of the status seeking inherent
in people’s pursuit of luxury, Twitchell defends luxury in that its
mass consumption could ultimately prove to be an economic equal-
izer for the masses, a positive influence on taste levels, and a fac-
tor in improving standards of living around the world.
Underhill, Paco. 2002. Why We Buy: The Science of Shopping.
New York: Simon and Schuster. 255 pages.
This book is based on field research in shopping malls, depart-
ment stores, and supermarkets across America and illustrates
that marketing, retailing, and purchasing all entail precise com-
plex processes whereby all three parties—marketers, retailers,
and shoppers—are in a perpetual competition to come out the
“winner.”
Veblen, Thorstein. [1899] 2001. The Theory of the Leisure Class.
New York: Penguin Books. 400 pages.
Though this book is over a century old, it still provides a scathing
dissection of consumer culture. Veblen chronicles the ethical and
economic impact of the rise of a new elite whose status stems pri-
marily from monetary wealth. He calls them the leisure class and
describes their tendency toward conspicuous consumption and
idleness. Veblen critiques those individuals who acquire status
through consumption and who link feelings of accomplishment
to the ostentatious display of wealth.
Weber, Max. [1904] 1958. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons. 292 pages.
This book, Max Weber’s best-known work that was first pub-
lished in 1904, traces the roots of capitalism in the West to changes
in religious practice. In particular, the savings, thrift, and sacrifice
encouraged by the emergence of Protestantism facilitated the dis-
cipline of labor, accumulation of capital through savings, and
reinvestment of profits that proved helpful in hastening the tran-
sition from a feudal to a capitalist more of production.
Williams, Rosalind H. 1991. Dream Worlds: Mass Consumption
in Late Nineteenth-Century France. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press. 451 pages.
Books
211

Using the consumer revolution that occurred in France between
1850 and the start of World War I, Williams examines the events
and ideas that were influential in the development of a “proto-
type of consumption” that includes “civilized” manners, fashion,
furniture, and leisure activities, all of which were emulated by
European aristocrats and, subsequently, among the elites in the
American colonies. Having traced the development of consumer
lifestyles in the first half of the book, Williams analyzes, in the lat-
ter half, a number of key theoretical responses to consumption
and offers suggestions for reconciling feelings of guilt and fear
that have been experienced by, and directed toward, consumers
in Western societies.
Articles, Book Chapters,
and Journals
Agnew, Jean-Christophe. 1993. “Coming Up for Air.” In J. Brewer
and R. Porter, eds., Consumption and the World of Goods, 19–39.
New York: Routledge.
Agnew provides an overview of the sea change in historian’s
thinking about consumer culture from utterly critical to more cel-
ebratory. In the conclusion of this article, Agnew suggests that
scholars of consumer culture would benefit from taking some
“breathing space” in order to appreciate important recent devel-
opments in the field. Agnew argues that recent studies that have
integrated historical and political events, as well as reexamining
assumptions of causality, offer more nuanced, complex, and thus
more useful explanatory tools for analyzing patterns of con-
sumption and consumer motivations and behavior.
Allen, Jeanne T. 1980. “The Film Viewer as Consumer.” Quarterly
Review of Film Studies 5, no. 4: 481–499.
Allen outlines the ways in which the goals of the market economy
are present in the practices of those who make and watch films.
In particular, she illustrates how film viewing has become inte-
grated into the sphere of mass consumption, evident in the phys-
ical proximity of movie theaters to shopping malls, and the in-
creasing prevalence of advertisements prior to the start of a film.
212
Print and Nonprint Resources

Anderson, Fiona. 2000. “Museums as Fashion Media.” In S. Bruzzi
and P. Church Gibson, eds., Fashion Cultures: Theories, Explorations
and Analysis, 371–389. London: Routledge.
Using three British museums as case studies, Anderson argues
that fashion has become ever present and popular as museum cu-
rators recognize fashion’s potential to draw young audiences into
new arenas of cultural consumption.
Arnould, Eric J., and Richard Wilk. 1984. “Why Do the Natives
Wear Adidas?” Advances in Consumer Research 11: 748–752.
Arnould and Wilk attempt to answer why and how Western con-
sumer goods penetrate non-Western material cultures. They ex-
plore the roots of consumption of Western objects within primi-
tive ritual behaviors. The authors argue that the concepts of
socially distant reference groups and emerging elites help to ex-
plain this type of consumption.
Belk, Russell. 1988. “Possessions and the Extended Self.” Journal
of Consumer Research 15: 139–168.
The central premise of this article is that possessions function as
an extension of the self. Belk argues that if we examine why cer-
tain items and artifacts are routinely considered critically impor-
tant to the development of personal identity, then we can better
understand consumer behavior and how consumer behavior is in-
dicative of human motivations, needs, and desires.
Bently, Amy. 2002. “Inventing Baby Food: Gerber and the Dis-
course of Infancy in the United States.” In W. Belasco and P.
Scranton, eds., Food Nations: Selling Taste in Consumer Societies,
92–112. London: Routledge.
Bently argues that Gerber and other baby food manufacturers ad-
vocated the early introduction of solid foods for infants less than
four months old with the express goal of expanding the market
share of this new product. Advertising copy and photographs
suggest that manufactured baby food was a mark of technologi-
cal advancement and modernity.
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. “Fashion: From Class Differentiation to
Collective Selection.” Sociological Quarterly 10: 275–291.
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
213

Blumer examines the development, selection, and “success” of
styles and fashions in modern societies. He argues against the
idea that fashions are simply a creation of the elite dutifully
copied by the lower class. In line with his “symbolic interaction-
ist” approach, Blumer analyzes how fashions emerge through so-
cial interaction with like-minded individuals of similar social
standing.
Carter, Erica. 1984. “Alice in the Consumer Wonderland: West
German Case Studies in Gender and Consumer Culture.” In A.
McRobbie and M. Nova, eds., Gender and Generation, 185–215.
London: Macmillan.
Although many studies of female consumers and their patterns
of consumption have suggested that women blindly accept fash-
ion trends, this case study of West German women indicate that
consumption is often used as a means to oppose dominant codes
of social taste. For example, in postwar West Germany, donning
the accoutrements of an American feminine ideal—high heels,
red lipstick, and nylon stockings—was, in part, an effort to reg-
ister a public disavowal of fascist images of femininity: sturdy
childbearing hips, sensible shoes, and a scrubbed-clean, rosy
complexion.
Chaney, David. 1983. “Department Stores as Cultural Form.”
Theory, Culture and Society 1, no. 3: 22–31.
The department store transformed retailing and urban life by facil-
itating impersonal shopping, an ideology of consumerism, and
spectacular developments in urban architecture. Chaney addresses
three main concerns: the economic significance of new forms of re-
tailing, their physical or ecological significance for the late nine-
teenth century, and the cultural significance of opportunities to cre-
ate a personal lifestyle through impersonal consumption.
Clarke, Alison. 1997. “Tupperware in the 1950s: Gender and
Consumption.” In R. Silverstone, ed., Visions of Suburbia, 132–160.
London: Routledge.
Analyzing Tupperware as an icon of suburbia, Clarke considers
the role of mass consumption and material culture as a poten-
tially active rather than passive aspect of the formation of post-
war feminine identity.
214
Print and Nonprint Resources

Cohen, Lizabeth. 2001. “Citizens and Consumers in the United
States in the Century of Mass Consumption.” In M. Daunton
and M. Hilton, eds., The Politics of Consumption: Material Culture
and Citizenship in Europe and America, 203–221. New York: Berg.
This article examines the impact of mass consumption on the po-
litical culture of the United States. Although the roles of “citizen”
and “consumer” are, in many ways, antithetical, Cohen’s exami-
nation of three eras of U.S. history—the Progressive Era of the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the New Deal from the
early 1930s through World War II, and the post–World War II
era—indicate that these two roles have merged into a vision of
citizenship that is primarily concerned with consumption, which
Cohen calls a “citizen-consumer.”
Consumption, Markets & Culture
This is a journal devoted to the analysis of consumption for those
particularly interested in marketing. Its focus is visual interpreta-
tions and representations of material culture and consumption
patterns. Drawing from a range of theoretical traditions including
literary criticism, feminism, media studies, sociology, and anthro-
pology, the journal features submissions by scholars from around
the world.
Creighton, Millie. 1998. “Something More: Japanese Depart-
ment Stores’ Marketing of ‘A Meaningful Life.’ ” In K. L
MacPherson, ed., Asian Department Stores, 206–230. Richmond,
VA: Curzon Press.
Creighton illuminates the intersections between department
stores and personal identity in contemporary Japan. In particular,
she assesses the belief of many department store employees that
they offer “something more” than simply displaying merchan-
dise or selling goods.
Douglas, Mary. 1992. “Why Do People Want Goods?” In S.
Hargeaves Heap and A. Ross, eds., Understanding the Enterprise
Culture: Themes in the Work of Mary Douglas, 19–31. Edinburgh,
UK: Edinburgh University Press.
Criticizing much of the economic analysis of consumption, cen-
tral to which is the concept of “rational choice,” and basing the
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
215

analysis of consumption on rational choice means, according to
Douglas, that society is making moral judgments about con-
sumers who are thus perceived to be either irrational or greedy.
Douglas argues that a much more complex analysis of rationality
is needed if we are to fully understand why people consume. In
particular, she suggests that rather than moralizing about greed
and envy, society should consider the role of exclusion and rejec-
tion, which are central in the advertising and marketing of con-
sumer goods.
Douglas, Mary. 1997. “In Defense of Shopping.” In P. Falk and C.
Campbell, eds., The Shopping Experience, 15–30. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
As the title indicates, Douglas presents a defense of shopping. In
particular, Douglas defends women’s shopping and the demean-
ing and oversimplistic ideas that men have about female shop-
pers. Douglas challenges popular depictions of shopping as triv-
ial and shoppers as vacuous dupes who respond like Pavlovian
dogs to fashion items and consumer durables. Instead, Douglas
presents the female shopper as rational and strategic, making im-
portant political and moral statements as much by what is not
purchased—through the rejection of commodities—as by those
that are procured.
Ehrlich, Paul R., et al. 1997. “No Middle Way on the Environ-
ment.” Atlantic Monthly (December): 98–104.
This article is a response to a 1997 article by Mark Sagoff (see
“Sagoff, Mark” entry later in this section). The authors warn
against assuming that there is a viable middle ground in the de-
bate between those who believe society is consuming too much
and those who think it is not. They argue that the preponderance
of scientific evidence points to the need for restraint both in the
growth of population and in the overconsumption of developed
countries.
Etzioni, Amitai. 1998. “Voluntary Simplicity: Characterization,
Select Psychological Implications, and Societal Consequences.”
Journal of Economic Psychology 19, no. 5: 619–643.
Etzioni describes the concept of voluntary simplicity, exploring
its manifestations and its relationship to competitiveness. Since
216
Print and Nonprint Resources

increased consumption has been shown not to result in increased
contentment, Etzioni argues that voluntary simplicity offers an
opportunity to enhance personal satisfaction, socioeconomic equal-
ity, and environmental responsibility.
Fantasia, Rick. 1995. “Fast Food in France.” Theory and Society 24,
no. 2: 201–243.
Fantasia considers the cultural production of consumer goods, in
this instance how the fast food phenomenon is perceived and re-
ceived in France, a country that features a deep cultural pride in
its national gastronomy.
Featherstone, Mike. 1987. “Lifestyle and Consumer Culture.”
Theory, Culture and Society 4, no. 1: 55–70.
Using theoretical perspectives developed by Pierre Bourdieu,
Featherstone argues that postmodern consumer culture features
the aestheticization of everyday life and encourages social groups
to pursue status through the cultivation of superior taste and
lifestyle. As a system of free-floating signifiers, postmodern cul-
ture emphasizes form over function, attaching symbolic value to
goods through culturally mediated signs and images. The “new
petite bourgeoisie,” a group with poor economic but high cultural
capital, is especially concerned with using lifestyle as a means of
establishing class and status superiority.
Featherstone, Mike. 1991. “The Body in Consumer Culture.” In
M. Featherstone, M. Hepworth, and B. S. Turner, eds., The Body:
Social Processes and Cultural History, 170–196. London: Sage.
In this article, Featherstone argues that consumer culture in capi-
talist society encapsulates two prevailing ideas about the body:
that it should be preserved at any cost and that it is a vehicle of
self-expression and beauty. As a result, taking care of one’s body
is divorced from notions of spiritual salvation that characterized
earlier decades, and, instead, cosmetic benefits of body mainte-
nance are emphasized. The advertising industry is critiqued for
breeding insecurities in people who are constantly fearful of ex-
hibiting bodily imperfections.
Fine, Ben, and Ellen Leopold. 1990. “Consumerism and the In-
dustrial Revolution.” Social History 15: 151–179.
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
217

Fine and Leopold discuss the history of the Industrial Revolu-
tion and argue that contemporary events shape people’s inter-
pretation of the Industrial Revolution. For this reason, studies
of the events associated with the Industrial Revolution have
changed over the years as contemporary circumstances have
changed. In this article, Fine and Leopold critique, and claim as
narrow, the “consumerist approach” to the Industrial Revolu-
tion taken by McKendrick (see entry on McKendrick, Brewer,
and Plumb’s Birth of a Consumer Society in the “Books” section in
this chapter).
Firat, A. Fuat. 1991. “The Consumer in Postmodernity.” Advances
in Consumer Research 18: 70–76.
Firat argues that postmodern culture, a phenomenon rapidly ex-
panding in advanced capitalist countries, is a “new perspective
on life,” largely influenced by the marketing industry and is
characterized by five basic traits: hyperreality, fragmentation,
reversal of production and consumption, juxtaposition of oppo-
sites, and decentering of the subject. Firat concludes that as a re-
sult of the changes evident in postmodern culture, the post-
modern consumer is radically different from consumers in
former epochs.
Fiske, John. 1989. “Shopping for Pleasure.” In J. Fiske, Reading
the Popular, 13–42. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Fiske argues that the religious metaphors, such as the now popu-
lar description of shopping malls as “cathedrals of consumption,”
that have been used to describe consumerism and commodities
ignore the potential of the shopping mall to be a site of resistance
or “terrain of guerilla warfare” for marginalized elements in soci-
ety. In particular, women and unemployed youth often frequent
shopping malls not to purchase items but, in the case of women,
to socialize or exercise (e.g., mall walking) in a safe and unthreat-
ening environment and, in the case of the unemployed, to prevent
boredom by engaging in various tactics aimed at evoking the ire
of security guards.
Foster, Robert J. 1995 “Print Advertisements and Nation Making
in Metropolitan Papua New Guinea.” In R. J. Foster, ed., Nation
Making: Emergent Identities in Postcolonial Melanesia, 151–181. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
218
Print and Nonprint Resources

Foster demonstrates the usefulness of seeing a nation as an imag-
ined community of consumption. He examines the way that par-
ticular advertisements have contributed to the conception of
Papua New Guinea as a nation as well as helping its inhabitants
to view themselves as Papua New Guineans. He shows that our
conception of a nation functions very much like a commodity.
Fox-Genovese, Elizabeth. 1987. “The Empress’s New Clothes:
The Politics of Fashion.” Socialist Review 19, no. 1: 7–32.
Fox-Genovese argues against those theorists who treat fashion as
either a form of political resistance or a system of representation.
Fox-Genovese claims instead that fashion is a market-driven,
multibillion-dollar enterprise that exacerbates social class and
gender inequality.
Frith, James. 1994. “Radical Shopping in Los Angeles: Race,
Media and the Sphere of Consumption.” Media, Culture and So-
ciety 16, no. 3: 469–487.
Frith discusses the cultural dimensions of looting as a kind of rad-
ical shopping and the mass media coverage devoted to its inci-
dence in South Central Los Angeles following the initial Rodney
King verdict.
Gabaccia, Donna R. 2002. “As American as Budweiser and Pick-
les? Nation Building in American Food Industries.” In W. Bel-
asco and P. Scranton, eds., Food Nations: Selling Taste in Consumer
Societies, 175–193. London: Routledge.
Using biographies of seventy business leaders in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries that pioneered the mass production of
food and drink in the United States, Gabaccia explores the link
between industrial production and the notion of “American”
food. She takes into consideration whether these pioneers were
native- or foreign-born and whether or not certain foods became
labeled “American” or “ethnic.”
Galilee, John. 2002. “Class Consumption: Understanding Middle-
Class Young Men and Their Fashion Choices.” Men and Mas-
culinities 5, no. 1: 32–52.
Consumption, especially fashion and shopping, has traditionally
been seen as a feminine practice. Some have argued that since the
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
219

1980s consumption has been “masculinized.” In this article, Gali-
lee presents the results of interviews with thirty-five middle-class
young men about their clothing choices. Assumptions about
young men’s consumer independence and the “masculinization
of consumption” thesis are both challenged by this research.
Gell, Alfred. 1986. “Newcomers to the World of Goods: Con-
sumption among the Muria Gonds.” In A. Appadurai, ed., The
Social Life of Things, 110–140. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
This article argues that consumption is a form of symbolic action,
and the desirability of consumer goods is often dependent on the
role that they play in a particular symbolic system. Gell discusses
observations of consumption behavior among the Muria of Ma-
dhya Pradesh, India. The Muria consider conspicuous consump-
tion as especially threatening and disruptive.
Glennie, Paul, and Nigel Thrift. 1996. “Consumption, Shopping
and Gender.” In E. Wrigley and M. Lowe, eds., Retailing, Con-
sumption and Capital: Towards the New Retail Geography, 221–237.
London: Longman.
The authors take an optimistic look at consumption, claiming that
it offers liberating experiences and provides the opportunity for
individuals to escape the class-centered social constellations of the
past. This chapter examines the behavior of consumers in urban
retail environments and analyzes the interactions of specific
consumers within a group, or “throng.” The gendered practices of
shopping in urban retail centers are also examined in detail.
Goldman, R. 1987. “Marketing Fragrances: Advertising and the
Production of Commodity Signs.” Theory, Culture and Society 4,
no. 4: 691–725.
Goldman examines fragrances as an example of both the power
of advertising in a consumer society and the symbolism, desire,
and emotional connections associated with commodities. Gold-
man focuses on three advertisements in particular in order to
demonstrate the symbolic cultural content, lifestyle associa-
tions, and reification attached to the packaging and marketing
of fragrances.
220
Print and Nonprint Resources

Gottdiener, Mark. 2000. “Approaches to Consumption: Classical
and Contemporary Perspectives.” In M. Gottdiener, ed., New
Forms of Consumption: Consumers, Culture and Commodification,
3–31. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gottdiener traces shifting approaches to the study of consump-
tion, covering both classical and contemporary theorists. The first
half of the chapter outlines the ideas of classical theorists includ-
ing Karl Marx, Max Weber, Émile Durkheim, and Thorstein Veb-
len. The second half addresses key concepts developed by con-
temporary scholars such as George Ritzer, Grant McCracken,
Chandra Mukerji, and Jean Baudrillard. At the end of the chapter,
the author synthesizes this diverse range of scholarly literature by
offering an integrated approach to the symbolic, economic, and
personal aspects of the consumer experience.
Hannerz, Ulf. 1990. “Cosmopolitans and Locals in World Cul-
ture.” Theory, Culture and Society 7, no. 2: 237–251.
Hannerz argues that in a unified global culture, cosmopolitans
and locals are structurally linked, with the former seeking iden-
tity and definition through conceptual difference with the latter.
Among the components of cosmopolitanism identified by Han-
nerz are competence, orientation, types of mobility, and the mean-
ing of home.
Hendrickson, Carol. 1996. “Selling Guatemala: Maya Export
Products in US Mail-Order Catalogues.” In D. Howes, ed., Cross-
Cultural Consumption: Global Markets, Local Realities, 106–124. Lon-
don: Routledge.
Hendrickson analyzes the ways in which Guatemalan products
are marketed to American consumers in mail-order catalogs.
Depictions often discuss “traditional,” “simple,” “remote,” or “au-
thentic” aspects of the artisans and the production process. Al-
though in many cases this does serve as an important opportu-
nity to educate Americans about Guatemala, and while Mayan
artisans do earn money from such transactions, for the most part
product control (design, color, size, etc.) and financial arrange-
ments are not in the hands of local producers. Further, the reality
of the hardships and challenges experienced by the artisans is in-
evitably absent since the primary purpose of the informational
exchange is to sell products.
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
221

Humphrey, Caroline. 1995. “Creating Culture of Disillusion-
ment: Consumption in Moscow: A Chronicle of Changing
Times.” In D. Miller, ed., Worlds Apart: Modernity through the
Prism of the Local, 43–68. London: Routledge.
Humphrey connects the creation of the consumer under the Soviet
regime to present patterns of consumption in Russia. Humphrey
claims that the consumption practices of Russians are determined
largely by values and perceptions shaped by recent historical
events.
Janus, Norene Z. 1981. “Advertising and the Mass Media:
Transnational Link between Production and Consumption.”
Media, Culture and Society 3: 13–23.
Janus argues that transnational advertising is an important compo-
nent of global media flows. The output and organization of mass
media has been greatly influenced by its dependence on advertis-
ing, and Janus demonstrates the vital link between mass media and
advertising, whereby an increase in multinational manufacturing
has encouraged the “transnationalization” of advertising agencies.
This article documents the ways in which global patterns of com-
merce and consumption determine the nature and consequences of
transnational advertising in developing countries.
Journal of Consumer Culture
The Journal of Consumer Culture is devoted to issues of consump-
tion from a social scientific perspective, with a focus on sociolog-
ical themes such as social change, social stratification, and social
disorganization. Its principal goal is to illuminate the central role
of consumer culture in contemporary social interactions both lo-
cally and globally.
Kline, Stephen. 1988. “The Theatre of Consumption: On Com-
paring American and Japanese Advertising.” Canadian Journal of
Political and Social Theory 12, no. 3: 101–120.
This article explores the impacts of the internationalization of
Japan’s economy and pays particular attention to the issue of cul-
tural homogenization in Japanese society. Kline conducts a con-
tent analysis of sixty television commercials from Japan and com-
pares these to an equivalent number of advertisements from the
United States. Television advertising is chosen over other kinds of
222
Print and Nonprint Resources

advertising because it plays an important role in Japan, as else-
where, in depicting and shaping cultural meanings. Kline discov-
ers that rather than representing an external cultural force, con-
sumerism is accommodated and naturalized into Japanese society.
Laermans, Rudi. 1993. “Learning to Consume: Early Department
Stores and the Shaping of the Modern Consumer Culture (1860–
1914).” Theory, Culture and Society 10, no. 4: 79–102.
Laermans examines the rise of consumer culture in France and
the United States from 1860 to 1914 and highlights the central role
played by the department store in encouraging mass consump-
tion. As female leisure centers, department stores at this time en-
couraged passive shopping and strove to attach symbolic mean-
ing and importance to merchandise; these trends, and the growth
of the department store in general, feminized consumption, facil-
itated the expansion of the urban middle class, and permanently
altered the nature of consumer behavior and preferences.
Lamont, Michele, and Virag Molnar. 2001. “How Blacks Use Con-
sumption to Shape Their Collective Identity: Evidence from
Marketing Specialists.” Journal of Consumer Culture 1, no. 1: 31–45.
Drawing on interviews conducted with black marketing experts
working in black advertising agencies in New York and Chicago,
the authors explore the linkages between notions of collective
identity and patterns of consumption. The interview data indi-
cate that black Americans consume in order to express solidarity
and acquire membership in various social niches, to illustrate a
unique cultural identity, and to demonstrate distinctiveness from
mainstream American society. However, the role of marketing
professionals, who frequently link group membership and soli-
darity with conspicuous consumption and thus influence and
shape the consumption patterns of black consumers, cannot be
overlooked.
McGovern, Charles. 1998. “Consumption and Citizenship.” In
S. Strasser, C. McGovern, and M. Judt, eds., Getting and Spending:
European and American Consumer Societies in the Twentieth Century,
37–58. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
McGovern examines how notions of consumption and citizenship
became intertwined in U.S. political discourse. It is argued that the
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
223

Great Depression increased government involvement in the econ-
omy, and thus recognizing an important opportunity to profit
from the government’s commitment to increase consumer spend-
ing, advertising executives promoted the idea that consumption
was the medium by which individuals could achieve indepen-
dence and agency. As a result, consumption was commonly
evoked as a mark of patriotism—the badge of a true American.
McRobbie, Angela. 2000. “Fashion as a Culture Industry.” In
S. Bruzzi and P. Church Gibson, eds., Fashion Cultures: Theories,
Explorations and Analysis, 253–263. London: Routledge.
McRobbie discusses the ways in which governments become in-
volved in industries that are perceived to be important to the “na-
tional” culture. In this instance, McRobbie focuses on the British
fashion industry and how Tony Blair’s commitment to making
over Britain into a “young country” led to photo opportunities be-
tween politicians and representatives from the fashion industry.
Miller, Peter, and Nikolas Rose. 1997. “Mobilizing the Con-
sumer: Assembling the Object of Consumption.” Theory, Culture
and Society 14, no. 1: 1–36.
Miller and Rose analyze the consulting work undertaken by the
Tavistock Institute of Human Relations in England on behalf of
advertising agencies and manufacturers, looking particularly at
the ways in which the agency and creativity of consumers is ac-
knowledged in advertisements. This article demonstrates that in
addition to creating artificial desires and exploiting the emotions
of consumers, advertising also opens up space for consumers to
exert their intelligence, enhance their knowledge, and mobilize
their desires in a deliberate and active manner.
Porter, Roy. 1993. “Consumption: Disease of the Consumer So-
ciety?” In J. Brewer and R. Porter, eds., Consumption and the World
of Goods, 58–81. New York: Routledge.
In this chapter, Porter examines the various ways that food, the
rhetoric of “excessive consumption,” and “waste” have been used
to justify overeating or the withholding of food. For example, the
British gentry justified gluttony as an effective mechanism for
warding off the ever-present threat of “consumption” or tubercu-
losis, whereas in Victorian England, food was withheld from girls
to promote thinness and delicacy. In sum, although we are
224
Print and Nonprint Resources

presently in an era where the overconsumption of food and drink
are condemned as detrimental to one’s health, there are numer-
ous recent examples where the opposite was believed to be true.
Prus, Robert, and Lorne Dawson. 1991. “‘Shop ‘Til You Drop’:
Shopping as Recreational and Laborious Activity.” Canadian
Journal of Sociology 16, no. 2: 145–164.
Based on interviews with ninety-five consumers in Kitchener-
Waterloo, Ontario, Prus and Dawson explore people’s definitions
of shopping and discover that purchasing behaviors stem from
social needs and perceptions. In particular, the degree to which a
person sees shopping as laborious or recreational determines that
person’s enjoyment and interpretation of interpersonal interac-
tions in shopping settings. The authors argue that shopping is not
a static, one-dimensional action, bur rather a dynamic process im-
bued with personal meaning for individual consumers.
Ritzer, George, Douglas Goodman, and Wendy Weidenhoft. 2001.
“Theories of Consumption.” In G. Ritzer and B. Smart, eds.,
Handbook of Social Theory, 410–427. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Compared to an excessive amount of attention devoted to the
process of production as a key human activity, it is argued that
the significance of consumption was, until recently, ignored. Yet,
a recent and growing interest in the study of consumption has be-
come sufficiently established to merit an overview. To this end,
the authors outline the development of contemporary theories of
consumption and mine classical theories for concepts that prove
useful in understanding patterns of consumption. In the conclu-
sion, it is argued that theories of consumption need to be more
balanced in their assessment of the positive and negative impacts
of consumption as well as more broad in scope, for example, in-
cluding analyses of the sites of consumption and the objects that
are consumed.
Sagoff, Mark. 1997. “Do We Consume Too Much?” Atlantic
Monthly (June): 80–96.
Sagoff argues that the expanding world economy will not irrevo-
cably deplete natural resources. He believes that the case against
overconsumption should be made on moral rather than economic
grounds. Sagoff claims that a lost reverence for the natural world
will undermine important cultural values.
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
225

Schudson, Michael. 1988. “Delectable Materialism: Second
Thoughts on Consumer Culture.” In D. A. Crocker and T. Lin-
den, eds., Ethics of Consumption: The Good Life, Justice, and Global
Stewardship, 249–268. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Schudson attempts to present a more positive alternative to the
negative “rational left” view of consumption by noting the com-
plex ways in which people incorporate commodities into their
everyday lives. In effect, such commodities are often used to
serve particular needs, but even when used in standard fashion,
they are used quite pragmatically and are rarely imbued with
spiritual or romantic qualities. Although agreeing with the need
to critique consumer culture, Schudson complains that the judg-
mental tone that often accompanies critiques hinders an accurate
understanding of the reasons why people choose to consume.
Slater, Don. 1996. “Consumer Culture and the Politics of Need.”
In M. Nava, A. Blake, I. MacRury, and B. Richards, eds., Buy This
Book: Studies in Advertising and Consumption, 51–63. New York:
Routledge.
Slater argues that some important questions about consumer cul-
ture remain to be answered and have been marginalized or ig-
nored altogether in current scholarly debates. The questions in-
clude: What constitutes the good life? How can we evaluate
“needs” in the context of achieving the good life? How does con-
sumer culture measure up as a system that produces and medi-
ates these needs? Slater concludes that until these questions are
addressed and answered, theories of consumer culture cannot ad-
equately identify the structural constraints that hinder or facili-
tate participation in consumer culture and the political sphere.
Stevenson, Nick. 2002. “Consumer Culture, Ecology and the Pos-
sibility of Cosmopolitan Citizenship.” Consumption, Markets, Cul-
ture 5, no. 4: 305–319.
In this article, Stevenson argues that current theorizing on citizen-
ship often overlooks the importance of culture, the environment,
and the impact of consumerism in contemporary societies. Chal-
lenging two popular arguments—first, that democracies in the
West are compromised by a “culture of contentment,” and second,
that consumerism offers “ordinary people” the opportunity to
participate in a populist democratic revolution—Stevenson argues
that the benefits and drawbacks of consumerism could be chan-
226
Print and Nonprint Resources

neled into a new mode of thinking about citizenship—“cosmopol-
itan democracy”—in which questions of pleasure are connected to
questions of ethics. By situating environmental questions centrally
in discussions of consumption, and encouraging members of every
nation to imagine themselves as global citizens, a civic solidarity
distinct from the nation-state might be possible.
Wallendorf, Melanie, and Eric J. Arnould. 1988. “My Favorite
Things: A Cross-Cultural Inquiry into Object Attachment.”
Journal of Consumer Research 14: 521–547.
Using cross-cultural data collected from adults in America and
the Niger Republic, the authors examine the attachments people
form to objects they deem “favorite” or “special.” Strong attach-
ments to these kinds of objects are not usually based on monetary
value, and thus these attachments are distinct from the posses-
siveness intrinsic to materialism. It is argued that more attention
needs to be paid to the meanings attributed to favorite objects
such as photos and to the differences in object attachment by gen-
der, age, and culture.
Warde, Alan. 1990. “Introduction to the Sociology of Consump-
tion.” Sociology 24: 104.
Although sociologists have tended to overlook consumption in
their analyses, Warde suggests that there are important social, po-
litical, and cultural reasons for the recent sociological interest in
consumption. Although recent research has focused on two dis-
tinct, and rarely overlapping, areas—the study of consumerism
and consumption patterns, and consumption as a collective en-
deavor—Warde believes that consumer activities are more effec-
tively analyzed as “episodes” and that comprehensive accounts
of single episodes of consumption must examine “not just pro-
duction and access, but also the nature of delivery and the enjoy-
ment of a service.”
Wilk, Richard. 1994. “Consumer Goods as Dialogue about De-
velopment.” Culture and History 7: 79–100.
Wilk argues that the role of consumer goods in Belize is more
complex than has been claimed by those who focus exclusively
on their use in status competition. In fact, consumer goods create
and maintain all kinds of social relationships, and although they
do play a role in the creation of personal identity, they are also
Articles, Book Chapters, and Journals
227

commonly used in the expression of egalitarian ideals rather than
as a means of maintaining hierarchy or exclusion of socially infe-
rior elements of Belizean society.
Willis, Susan. 1994. “I Want the Black One: Is There a Place for
Afro-American Culture in Commodity Culture?” In S. Willis,
ed., A Primer for Daily Life, 108–132. London: Routledge.
Willis looks at the way in which the dominant white culture in-
dustry has produced consumable images of blacks. Her analysis
ranges from the essential “blackness” produced by Toni Morri-
son, to the racial homogeneity produced by fashion marketing, to
the physical transformations of Michael Jackson. She concludes
that in a world that is unified by the commodity, we can only
practice partial resistances.
Yan,Yunxiang. 1997. “McDonald’s in Beijing: The Localization
of Americana.” In J. L. Watson, ed., Golden Arches: McDonald’s in
East Asia, 39–66. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Yan discusses the relationship between McDonald’s and the local
Chinese communities in which it operates. In particular, Yan in-
dicates that while many ordinary Chinese view a meal at Mc-
Donald’s as an opportunity to sample American culture, and
thereby attain social status, others perceive the limited and stan-
dardized menu as a rare opportunity to partake in a moment of
equality.
Videos
The Ad and the Ego
Date: 1997
Length: 57 min.
Source: Parallax Pictures
http://www.parallaxpictures.org/
The Ad and the Ego reedits and restructures thousands of contem-
porary and classic television commercials in order to illustrate the
destructive power of the mass media. The video traces the history
of advertising from its descriptive nineteenth-century roots to the
high-tech manipulation of powerful symbols and imagery com-
mon in advertising today.
228
Print and Nonprint Resources

Advertising and the End of the World
Date: 1998
Length: 47 min.
Source: Media Education Foundation
http://www.mediaed.org/
This video exposes the ways in which advertisers tap into human
needs, desires, and fantasies to sell products. By linking the world
of commodities to the world of social relationships, family, love,
emotions, and fears, advertisers attempt to connect with potential
consumers.
Affluenza
Date: 1997
Length: 56 min.
Source: Bullfrog Films
http://www.bullfrogfilms.com/
Affluenza outlines of the features of the “disease” of materialism
and discusses how the concept of simple living offers one way
around the social and environmental problems caused by af-
fluenza. (See also listing below for sequel film Escape from Af-
fluenza and summary of the book Affluenza under “de Graaf,
John” in the “Books” section of this chapter.)
Beyond Killing Us Softly: The Strength to Resist
Date: 2001
Length: 34 min.
Source: Cambridge Documentary Films
http://www.cambridgedocumentaryfilms.org/beyond.html
Beyond Killing Us Softly is the most recent of four films by Jean
Kilbourne on the image of women in advertising. The views of
girls and young women are complemented by the comments of
women’s studies scholars and advocates of women’s rights. In
addition to giving firsthand accounts of the ways in which indi-
viduals deal with pressures to conform to stereotypical gender
images, the video emphasizes practical solutions for resisting the
dominant gender ideologies that are reproduced through adver-
tising and popular culture.
Escape from Affluenza
Date: 1998
Length: 56 min.
Videos
229

Source: Bullfrog Films
http://www.bullfrogfilms.com/
This sequel to the film Affluenza, which premiered on PBS in Sep-
tember 1997, documents how some Americans have left the pro-
verbial rat race, choosing instead to resist consumer pressure and
live a more simple life. (See summary of the book Affluenza under
“de Graaf, John” in the “Books” section of this chapter.)
The Gleaners and I
Date: 2001
Length: 82 min.
Source: Zeitgeist Films
http://www.zeitgeistfilms.com/current/gleaners/gleaners.html
This film focuses on “gleaners,” people who pick at already har-
vested fields for vegetables that are left behind. More generally,
gleaners seek to find uses for those items deemed useless by the
rest of society. Director Agnes Varda interviews a diverse range of
subjects in settings such as the French countryside and green
markets in Paris.
The Merchants of Cool
Date: 2001
Length: 60 min.
Source: WGBH Educational Foundation
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/
This video, an episode from the PBS Frontline series, explores the
impact of advertising, style, and fashion on the tastes, prefer-
ences, and relationships of contemporary American teenagers.
Sell and Spin: A History of Advertising
Date: 1999
Length: 91 min.
Source: A&E Store
http://www.aetv.com/
This film illustrates the ways in which advertisers promise hap-
piness to consumers and claim that desire can be satisfied as long
as one purchases their particular product or service. The video is
divided into several subsections: advertisements in ancient times,
the dawn of newspaper and magazine advertising, outdoor ad-
vertisements (barns, billboards, electric signs, blimps, and sky-
230
Print and Nonprint Resources

writing), radio and television commercials, political advertising,
the development of the “Yo quiero Taco Bell” advertising cam-
paign, and selling in cyberspace.
Sweating for a T-Shirt
Date: 1998
Length: 23 min.
Source: Global Exchange
http://store.globalexchange.org/sweating.html
Produced by Global Exchange in San Francisco, this film chroni-
cles the difficult conditions under which clothing is manufac-
tured in maquiladora plants in Honduras: excessive work hours,
low wages, harsh labor discipline, illness and fatigue among
workers, and management that is hostile to unionization.
Thirty Second President
Date: 1988
Length: 60 min.
Source: PBS Video
http://www.shop.pbs.org/
Thirty Second President discusses the impact of the media on pres-
idential elections, in particular the role played by advertising in
election campaigns and general perceptions of political candi-
dates. The video includes advertisements used by Dwight Eisen-
hower, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and
Ronald Reagan.
Selected Websites
Adbusters
http://www.adbusters.org
Adbusters is a global network of artists, writers, environmental-
ists, ecological economists, media-literacy teachers, ecofeminists,
and green entrepreneurs. They describe themselves variously as:
“idealists, anarchists, guerilla tacticians, pranksters, campus rabble-
rousers, downshifters, neo-Luddites, poets, philosophers, and
punks.” Their aim is to topple existing power structures and forge
a major rethinking of the way we live in the twentieth century.
They want to change the way information flows; the way institu-
tions wield power; the way television stations are run; and the
Selected Websites
231

ways in which the food, fashion, automobile, sports, music, and
culture industries set their agendas. Above all, they want to
change the way people interact with the mass media and the way
in which meaning is produced in our society.
Business Ethics
http://www.business-ethics.com/100best.htm
Business Ethics has for fifteen years served as a publication of the
movement for greater social responsibility in business.
The Center for a New American Dream
http://www.newdream.org
The Center for the New American Dream is an organization ded-
icated to reducing and shifting American consumption.
Consumer Culture and Modernity
http://homepages.gold.ac.uk/slater/consumer/about.html
This website offers resources and communication links for those
interested in the study of consumer culture and topics such as
leisure and critical investigations of everyday life.
Consumer Culture Bibliography
http://homepages.gold.ac.uk/slater/consumer/biblioa.htm
This bibliography was created by Don Slater (see “Slater, Don”
entry in the “Books” section of this chapter) and contains ap-
proximately 1,500 references pertaining to consumption.
Consumer WebWatch
http://www.consumerwebwatch.com/project/index.html
The Consumer WebWatch mission is to investigate, inform, and im-
prove the quality of information published on the World Wide Web.
Consumer World
http://www.consumerworld.org/
Consumer World is a public service noncommercial guide cata-
loging over 2,000 of the most useful consumer resources. It was
founded in 1995 by Edgar Dworsky, a consumer advocate, edu-
cator, and attorney.
232
Print and Nonprint Resources

Consumers against War
http://www.consumers-against-war.de/caw.htm
This site is the brainchild of a group of young Europeans who
protested the war in Iraq. Their principal goal is to boycott Amer-
ican products and thus the American economy, which they hold
responsible for the war. The war is viewed as a breach of interna-
tional law.
Corporate Predators
http://www.corporatepredators.org
The point of the list contained in this report, “The Top 100 Corpo-
rate Criminals of the Decade” (1990s), is to focus public attention
on a wave of corporate criminality that has swamped prosecutors’
offices around the country. The “Top 100 Corporate Criminals of
the Decade” includes corporations that have pled guilty or no con-
test to crimes and have been criminally fined.
CorpWatch
http://www.corpwatch.org/
CorpWatch critiques corporate-led globalization through educa-
tion and activism. It aims to foster democratic control over cor-
porations by building grassroots globalization, a diverse move-
ment for human rights, labor rights, and environmental justice.
Credit Card Nation
http://www.creditcardnation.com/
This is the inspiration of Dr. Robert D. Manning, a leading expert
on the credit card industry. Manning is the author of Credit Card
Nation: The Consequences of America’s Addiction to Credit (2001), a
study of credit card use and debt in the United States. (See “Man-
ning, Robert D.” entry in the “Books” section of this chapter.)
Essential Information
http://www.essential.org/EI.html
Founded in 1982 by Ralph Nader, Essential Information is a non-
profit, tax-exempt organization. It is involved in a variety of proj-
ects that encourage citizens to become active and engaged in their
communities. It provides information to the public on topics neg-
lected by the mass media and policymakers.
Selected Websites
233

George Ritzer
http://www.bsos.umd.edu/socy/ritzer/
This is the website of George Ritzer (Department of Sociology,
University of Maryland), author of some of the seminal works on
consumer culture (see “Ritzer, George” entries in the “Books” sec-
tion of this chapter).
Global Issues
http://www.globalissues.org/
This website, created and maintained by Anup Shah, examines
the ways in which interrelated global issues affect people. The site
features over 5,000 links to external articles, website reports, and
analyses that are used to provide credence to the arguments made
on this website.
Indymedia
http://www.indymedia.org/
Indymedia is a collective of independent media organizations and
hundreds of journalists offering grassroots, noncorporate cover-
age. Indymedia is a democratic media outlet committed to the cre-
ation of radical, accurate, and passionate truth telling.
Multinational Monitor
http://www.multinationalmonitor.org
Published by Essential Information, the Multinational Monitor
tracks corporate activity, especially in the Third World, and fo-
cuses on the export of hazardous substances, worker health and
safety, labor union issues, and the environment.
No Logo
http://nologo.org/
No Logo is a website born out of an antibranding book entitled
No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies, written by Naomi Klein
between 1995 and 1998 and published in English in January 2002
(see “Klein, Naomi” entry in the “Books” section of this chapter).
The site is a portal to the evolving and expanding movements
chronicled in the book. For the most part, it is a place where read-
ers and researchers can connect with one another and learn about
various campaigns, issues, and organizations.
234
Print and Nonprint Resources

PBS Kids
http://pbskids.org/dontbuyit/
This site aims to expose kids to the seduction and manipulation
behind much of advertising.
Stop SUVs
http://www.stopsuvs.org
This organization feels that each time the choice to purchase a
SUV is made, the quality of life in our society suffers. Claiming
that the sum of consumer choices has great consequences on the
environment, economy, politics, and safety, Stop SUVs aims to
persuade people to consider alternate, more sustainable means of
transportation.
U.S. Department of Energy
http://www.energy.gov/efficiency/index.html
The Department of Energy is a $21-billion-per-annum organiza-
tion that employs more than 115,000 people in thirty-five states.
The site provides information on such topics as gas mileage
(MPG), greenhouse gas emissions, air pollution ratings, and
safety information for new and used cars and trucks.
Worldwatch Institute
http://www.worldwatch.org/
Worldwatch is a nonprofit, public-policy research organization
dedicated to informing policymakers and the public about global
problems and trends, as well as the links between the world econ-
omy and the environment.
Selected Websites
235


Acknowledging Consumption: A
Review of New Studies (Miller),
203
ACNielsen, 163
The Ad and the Ego (video), 228
Advertising
broken promises, 54
of coffee, 117, 123
and control, 39
counterculture, 52–53
and false needs, 38
and hip consumerism, 52–54
and meaning, 36–37
and a product for each of life’s
problems, 40
sells more than a product, 54
transforming criticisms into
reasons to consume, 54
See also Consumer culture;
Consumption; Retailing
Advertising and the End of the
World (video), 229
“Advertising and the Mass
Media: Transnational Link
between Production and
Consumption” (Janus), 222
Advertising in Asia:
Communication, Culture, and
Consumption (Frith), 196
Advertising the American Dream:
Making Way for Modernity,
1920–1940 (Marchand), 202
The Affluent Society (Galbraith), 196
Affluenza (video), 229
Affluenza: The All-Consuming
Epidemic (de Graaf), 191
After a Fashion (Finkelstein), 194
Age inequality, 96–99
“Alice in the Consumer
Wonderland: West German
Case Studies in Gender and
Consumer Culture” (Carter),
214
All Consuming Images: The Politics
of Style in Contemporary
Culture (Ewen), 193
American Council on Consumer
Interests (ACCI), 163
American Skin (Wynter), 75
Animal Farm (Orwell), 75
Anonymous inequality, 76, 106,
124
harm done by, 125, 128
inadvertently supported, 112,
121–122
vs. stigmatizing, 112–116,
113(table)
See also Boycott movements;
Coffee
Anti-Americanization
consumption of, 66–70
moral crusades, 66
Anticonsumption, 54
“Approaches to Consumption:
Classical and Contemporary
Perspectives” (Gottdiener),
221
Aromatherapy, 56–58
Arousal of previously unimagined
desires, 16
“As American as Budweiser and
Pickles? Nation Building in
American Food Industries”
(Gabaccia), 219
237
Index

Association for Consumer
Research (ACR), 164
Association of European
Consumers (AEC), 176
Aveda, 164
Bargaining, 5
Beers, Charlotte, 141
Benetton, 134, 176
Bernbach, William, 142
Better Business Bureau (BBB), 164
Beyond Killing Us Softly: The
Strength to Resist (video), 229
The Birth of a Consumer Society: The
Commercialization of
Eighteenth-Century England
(McKendrick, Brewer, and
Plumb), 203
“The Body in Consumer Culture”
(Featherstone), 217
Bon Marché, 14
The Bon Marché: Bourgeoisie Culture
and the Department Store,
1869–1920 (Miller), 204
Boucicaut, Aristide, 16, 143
Bourdieu, Pierre, 3
Bourgeois culture, 154
Boycott movements, 78, 87,
128–137
African Americans, 132
animal rights, 134
British goods, 129
corporations, 135
cosmetic companies, 135
environmental, 134
farm workers, 131
labor strikes, 129
marketplace boycotts, 133, 134
McDonalds, 134
media boycotts, 133–135
stores, 132
sugar, 129
tactics, 133
things in common, 135–136
time line, 130(table)
uses of, 133
varying effectiveness of, 132
See also Starbucks
Boycott Quarterly, 137
Braudel, 11
British East India Company, 6
Bureau of Consumer Protection—
Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), 165
Buy Now, Pay Later: Advertising,
Credit and Consumer Durables
in the 1920s (Olney), 205
Buy This Book: Studies in
Advertising and Consumption
(Nava, MacRury, Blake, and
Richards), 205
“Buycotts,” 133
Camp
defined, 88–89
inequality, 88–90
Captains of Consciousness:
Advertising and the Social Roots
of the Consumer Culture
(Ewen), 193
“Cathedrals of consumption,” 16,
159
Center for Auto Safety (CAS), 165
Center for Science in the Public
Interest (CSPI), 165
Center for Science in the Public
Interest, Canada, 176
The Center for Study of
Responsive Law (CSRL), 166
Chain stores. See Retailing
Cheesy consumption. See
Consumption
“Citizens and Consumers in the
United States in the Century
of Mass Consumption”
(Cohen), 215
Civil rights boycotts, 155
Civil Rights Movement, 156
“Class Consumption:
Understanding Middle-Class
Young Men and Their Fashion
Choices” (Galilee), 219
238
Index

Class inequality, 90–93
Cocoa imports, 116
Coffee
and economic cosmopolitanism,
120
economic strategies around,
119–120
“Fair Trade,” 123–124
global cartel for, 121
global coffee network, 127(chart)
history in U.S., 117
imports, 8, 116
international commodity,
119–120
production, 116(table)
social and ecological
devastation, 122
and Starbucks, 111–112
trade (explained), 118–122
Coffeehouses, 116, 122
“Coming Up for Air” (Agnew),
212
Comparison of consumer-self to a
standard, 103
Competetive consumption, 7
The Conquest of Cool: Business
Culture, Counterculture, and the
Rise of Hip Consumerism
(Frank), 51, 195
Conspicuous consumption, 87, 91
Consumer Action, 166
Consumer activism, 78
Consumer Behaviour: A European
Perspective (Antonides and
Van Raaij), 188
Consumer culture
advertising’s fix for, 51, 56–57
age, 96–99
ambivalence about, 45
anticonsumption books, 38
antihip, 58–59
beginnings, 4
breaks its own promises, 40, 51
buying the brand not the
product, 38
camp, 88–90
cares about just one thing, 100
changes wrought, 9, 10
cheesy consumerism, 58–59, 77
class, 90–93
consumer as sovereign vs.
dupe, 35–40, 65
contradictions of, 31–45, 58,
64–65, 124
contradictions of (political
system), 27, 41–45
criticizes itself and perpetuates
itself, 51–55
counterculture of the 1960’s
and, 51
disadvantages of, 137
drives economic system, 28–31
ethnic, 80–83
fashion-driven, 7, 10
freedom now means
opportunity to indulge our
impulses, rather than
determine our destiny, 41
gender characterizations, 83–84
global, 64–70
globalizing effect, 9
guilt and loss of spiritual
meaning, 35
harm done by, 128
hip consumerism, 51–54, 65, 76,
77, 79
jaded, 58–59
and Martha Stewart, 94–96
New Age consumption, 55–58,
77
objections, 35
political advertising dollars
spent, 43(table)
the poor, 99–105
prerequisites for, 6
produces meanings, even
identities, 37
psychological emptiness, 40
as restorer of society after Great
Depression, 22–23
search for authentic folk culture,
83
Index
239

Consumer culture (cont.)
sexual orientation, 86–88
social emulation, 12
style, 93–96
successes, 5
“voting with our dollars,” 42, 137
vs. bourgeois culture, 34–35
vs. capitalist production, 32–33
vs. consumer, 35–39
way of life, 4
why we consume, 40, 76
See also Fashion; Imports;
Inequality; Retailing;
Shopping
Consumer Culture and Modernity
(Slater), 209
“Consumer Culture and the
Politics of Need” (Slater), 226
“Consumer Culture, Ecology and
the Possibility of
Cosmopolitan Citizenship”
(Stevenson), 226
Consumer Federation of America
(CFA), 167
Consumer goods, rapid spread of,
8–10
“Consumer Goods as Dialogue
about Development” (Wilk),
227
“The Consumer in
Postmodernity” (Firat), 218
Consumer objects
messages of, 76
sign of integration, 75
in stigmatizing inequality, 76–77
Consumer Product Safety
Commission (CPSC), 167
Consumer Revolution, 8
effect of imports, 8
fashion and marketplace drive,
11
hallmarks of, 11
Consumer Rights Commission of
Pakistan (CRCP), 176
The Consumer Society (Goodwin,
Akerman, and Kiron), 197
The Consumer Society Reader (Schor
and Holt), 209
Consumer Union (CU), 167
Consumerism. See Consumer
culture
“Consumerism and the Industrial
Revolution” (Fine and
Leopold), 217
Consumers’ Association (CA), 177
The Consumer’s Guide to Effective
Environmental Choices:
Practical Advice from the Union
of Concerned Scientists (Brower
and Leon), 190
Consumers International (CI), 177
Consumers Protection Center
(KEPKA), Greece, 177
Consumption
advertising’s fix for, 51
ambience, 123
anti-Americanization, 66–70
antihip, 58–59
attitudes toward, 11, 28
as a central value, 4, 123
changes in, 23–24
changes in how viewed, 28
cheesy, 58–59, 77
conspicuous, 87, 91
consumer culture’s fix for, 52,
56, 69, 70
driving force of the economy,
28–29
economic view of, 28–31
ethnic, 80–83
to express a simple,
environmentally concerned,
or spiritual life, 55–58
to express nonconformity and
rebellion, 51–55
feelings about, 27
a form of leisure, 24
four stages of, 29
global social problem, 59–60
and happiness, 50(table)
hip, 51–54, 65, 77, 79
historical differences of, 3
240
Index

increases can be controlled by
producer, 11–12
New Age, 55–58
not part of early economic
analysis, 28
as patriotic duty, 29
problem becomes the fix, 51
problems of, 1, 2, 49–50
products dictated by fashion, 14
purpose of production, 28
race- and ethnic-based, 78–79
and racial pride, 78–79
reasons to buy, 69
to resist Americanization, 65–69
and respect, 79
roles of, 3
sarcastic, 58–59
self-measurement, 103
simplicity, of New Age
consumerism, 55–58
societal organizing motif, 1
“unwholesome desire,” 28
See also Consumer culture;
Economic system
Consumption: Critical Concepts in
the Social Sciences (Miller), 204
“Consumption: Disease of the
Consumer Society?” (Porter),
224
“Consumption and Citizenship”
(McGovern), 223
Consumption and Everyday Life
(Mackay), 201
Consumption, Globalization, and
Development (James), 199
Consumption, Markets & Culture
(journal), 215
“Consumption, Shopping and
Gender” (Glennie and Thrift),
220
Contemporary Urban Japan: A
Sociology of Consumption
(Clammer), 190
Contested Commodities (Radin), 206
Contradictions. See Consumer
culture
Cooking, Cuisine and Class: A Study
in Comparative Sociology
(Goody), 197
“Corporate globalization,” 162
Cosmetics industry, 85–86
“Cosmopolitans and Locals in
World Culture” (Hannerz),
221
“Creating Culture of
Disillusionment:
Consumption in Moscow: A
Chronicle of Changing Times”
(Humphrey), 222
Credit Card Nation: The
Consequences of America’s
Addiction to Credit (Manning),
202
Credit cards, 104, 105
Cross-Cultural Consumption: Global
Markets, Local Realities
(Howes), 198
The Cultural Contradictions of
Capitalism (Bell), 57
Cultural heterogenization, 60
Cultural homogenization, 60
Culture
around accumulation of capital,
reinvested in production,
32–33
around consumption
(“consumer” culture), 31–32
around intellectual and
aesthetic movements (“high”
culture), 31–32
around religious values and
concepts (most cultures),
31–32
See also Consumer culture
Culture and Consumption: New
Approaches to the Symbolic
Character of Consumer Goods
and Activities (McCracken),
202
The Culture Industry: Selected
Essays on Mass Culture
(Adorno), 187
Index
241

Culture Jam: How to Reverse
America’s Suicidal Consumer
Binge—And Why We Must
(Lasn), 201
The Culture of Consumption: Critical
Essays in American History,
1880–1980 (Fox and Lears),
194
The Cygnus Group, 168
Damage to a producer country,
discovering, 125–128
Debt accumulation, as method of
participating in consumer
culture, 104
“Delectable Materialism: Second
Thoughts on Consumer
Culture” (Schudson), 226
Department stores. See Retailing
“Department Stores as Cultural
Form” (Chaney), 214
Diners Club Card, 156
Displays. See Retailing
Distance, geographical, 126
Distance, producer to consumer,
125–128
chain of agents, 126–128
cultural, 126
geographical, 126
global coffee network,
127(chart)
“Do We Consume Too Much?”
(Sagoff), 225
“Dream worlds,” 16, 96
Dream Worlds: Mass Consumption
in Late Nineteenth-Century
France (Williams), 211
Earth First!, 134
Ecological costs of production,
discovering, 125
Economic cosmopolitanism, 120
Economic costs of production,
discovering, 125
Economic system, 27–31
of Adam Smith, 28
consumer confidence as the It
statistic, 29
consumption ignored in early
analysis, 28
Keynes, John Maynard, 29
Marshall, Alfred, 28
neoclassical approach, 30
sociological approach, 30–31
See also Consumption
“The Empress’s New Clothes: The
Politics of Fashion” (Fox-
Genovese), 219
Emulation, social, 91, 92
Enchanting a Disenchanted World
(Ritzer), 207
Entertainment, 1
Entrée libre, 18
Environment Agency (EA),
United Kingdom, 178
Environment Canada, 178
Environmental damage,
discovering costs, 125
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), 168
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), Denmark, 178
Environmental Protection Agency,
Scotland (SEPA), 178
Environmental Protection Agency,
Sweden, 179
Environmental spiritualism, 56
Equality Project, 169
Escape from Affluenza (video), 229
Ethics of Consumption: The Good Life,
Justice, and Global Stewardship
(Crocker and Linden), 191
Ethnic inequality, 80–83
Ethnic marketing, 82
Ethnic product usage and store
patronage, 81(table)
European Association for the 
Co-ordinaton of Consumer
Representation in
Standardization (ANEC), 179
European Bureau of Consumers
Union (BEUC), 180
242
Index

European Union (EU) Director-
General of Consumer Affairs,
180
Expressing America (Ritzer), 206
“Fair Trade” coffee, 123–124
Fair Trade Labeling Organizations
International, 123
Fair Trade movement, 123
Fairs. See Retailing
Fairtrade Foundation, 180
Fantasy of nostalgic simplicity,
58–59
Fashion
beginnings, 7, 91
commercialization of, 13
conditions for spreading, 12
decorating rooms, 10
defined, 6
in gay and lesbian communities,
87–88
imported goods, 9, 10
dominating our culture, 24
and the marketplace, 11–13
roles played by, 6, 7
trendsetters and followers, 12
See also Middle class; Retailing;
Shopping
“Fashion: From Class
Differentiation to
Collective Selection”
(Blumer), 213
“Fashion as a Culture Industry”
(McRobbie), 224
Fast Food, Fast Talk: Service
Work and the Routinization
of Everyday Life (Leidner),
201
“Fast Food in France” (Fantasia),
217
Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of
the All-American Meal
(Schlosser), 208
Feminine inequality, 83–86
The Feminine Mystique (Friedan),
84–85
“Fetishism” of commodities,
154
“The Film Viewer as Consumer”
(Allen), 212
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 169
Food expenditures annually,
102(table)
Food Nations: Selling Taste in
Consumer Societies (Belasco
and  Scranton), 189
Foodaware: The Consumer’s
Food Group, 181
For God, Country and Coca-Cola:
The Definitive History of the
Great American Soft Drink and
the Company that Makes It
(Pendergrast), 206
Frazier, George, 158
Free choice, 58, 65
Free trade, 111, 121
Freedom, 1
Friends of the Earth, 169
Friends of the Earth International,
The Netherlands, 181
Gender inequality, 83–86
General Agreement of Tariffs and
Trade (GATT), 161
Geneva, 185
Germany, consumer movements
in, 86
Getting and Spending: European and
American Consumer Societies in
the Twentieth Century (Strasser,
McGovern, Judt, and
Mattern), 210
The Gleaners and I (video), 230
Global Problems and the Culture of
Capitalism (Robbins), 207
Global trade, 109–112
Globalization, 9, 59, 62, 67–70,
110–111
of anti-globalism, 67
Glocalization, 60–61
Great Depression, 157
Index
243

Happiness and consumption,
50(table)
Hard Looks: Masculinities,
Spectatorship and Contemporary
Consumption (Nixon), 205
Health Action International
(HAI), The Netherlands, 181
Heterogenization, 60, 62–64, 65
The Hidden Persuaders (Packard),
205
Homogenization, 60, 62, 64, 65, 75
Household indebtedness,
104(table)
“How Blacks Use Consumption to
Shape Their Collective
Identity: Evidence from
Marketing Specialists”
(Lamont and Molnar), 223
Hybridization of cultures, 61
“I Want the Black One: Is There a
Place for Afro-American
Culture in Commodity
Culture?” (Willis), 228
Imports
cloth, 8
significance of, 9
sugar, tea, and coffee, 8, 116
“In Defense of Shopping”
(Douglas), 216
In Praise of Commercial Culture
(Cowen), 191
Indebtedness, household,
104(table)
Industrial Revolution, 10
synergism of consumer
revolution, 10–11
Inequality, 75, 97
age, 96–99
anonymous, 76, 106
camp, 88–90
class, 90–93
comparison, 113(table)
differences, 113–116
ethnic, 80–83
gender, 83–86
and hip consumption, 76
monetary, 99–105
perpetuated and subverted, 77
of the poor, 99–105
racial, 78–80
sexual orientation, 86–88
stigmatizing, 75–77
and style, 93–96
See also Consumer culture
Institute of Consumer Protection
(ICP), Mauritius, 182
International coffee agreement
(ICA), 121
International Labor Office (ILO),
182
International trade meetings, 121
“Introduction to the Sociology of
Consumption” (Warde), 227
“Inventing Baby Food: Gerber and
the Discourse of Infancy in the
United States” (Bently), 213
Jihad vs. McWorld: How Globalism
and Tribalism are Reshaping the
World (Barber), 189
John Wanamaker’s “New Kind of
Store,” 15
Joint Coffee Publicity Committee,
117
Journal of Consumer Culture, 222
“Keeping up with the Joneses,” 103
Kelley, Florence, 132, 144
Keynes, John Maynard, 145
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 155
Kroc, Ray, 146
Lead Us into Temptation (Twitchell),
210
“Learning to Consume: Early
Department Stores and the
Shaping of the Modern
Consumer Culture
(1860–1914)” (Laermans), 223
244
Index

“Lifestyle and Consumer Culture”
(Featherstone), 217
Living It Up—Our Love Affair with
Luxury (Twitchell), 210
Luxury
becomes commonplace, 9–10
democratization of, 18
Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to
Satisfy in an Era of Excess
(Frank), 195
Macy’s, 15
Mail order. See Retailing
Make Trade Fair, 169
The Malling of America (Kowinski),
200
The Managed Heart:
Commercialization of Human
Feeling (Hochschild), 198
Marchand, Roland, 18
Markers of inequality. See
Consumer objects
Marketing, Josiah Wedgwood’s
innovations, 13
“Marketing Fragrances:
Advertising and the
Production of Commodity
Signs” (Goldman), 220
Markets. See Retailing
Marshall Fields, 17
Marx, Karl, 154
Material Culture and Mass
Consumption (Miller), 203
McCracken, Grant, 12
McDonaldization, 62–64, 67–69
reverse incursions, 68
The McDonaldization of Society
(Ritzer), 207
McDonaldization Revisited: Critical
Essays on Consumer Culture
(Alfino, Caputo, and
Wynyard), 188
McDonald’s, four types of
heterogeneity, 63
“McDonald’s in Beijing: The
Localization of Americana”
(Yan), 228
McKendrick, Neil, 10–11
McSpotlight, 182
Meaning, in material goods, 2–3
Men in the Mirror: Men’s Fashions
and Consumer Society
(Edwards), 193
The Merchants of Cool (video), 230
Middle class, 14, 91
beverage of choice, 117
defined by consumption, 20
deliberate targeting of, 16, 18–19
spend on consumption, 14, 18
switch from food to fashion, 18
values and habits translated
into marketable goods, 21
women’s new role, 18
Ministerial Council on Consumer
Affairs (MCCA), Australia,
183
“Mobilizing the Consumer:
Assembling the Object of
Consumption” (Miller and
Rose) 224
Montgomery Ward, 19
comparison with Sears
Roebuck, 20(table)
The Morality of Spending: Attitudes
Toward the Consumer Society in
America, 1875–1940
(Horowitz), 198
“Museums as Fashion Media”
(Anderson), 213
“My Favorite Things: A Cross-
Cultural Inquiry into Object
Attachment” (Wallendorf and
Arnould) 227
Nader, Ralph, 147, 172
The Naked Consumer: How our
Private Lives Become Public
Commodities (Larson), 200
Index
245

National Association of
Consumer Advocates
(NACA), 170
National Association of
Housewives’ Leagues, 132
National Consumer Council
(NCC), United Kingdom, 183
National Consumer Law Center
(NCLC), 170
National Consumer League, 132
National Consumers League, 170
National Federation of Consumer
Groups (NFCG), 183
New Internationalist, 171
The New Rich in Asia: Mobile
Phones, McDonald’s and
Middle-Class Revolution
(Robison and Goodman), 208
“Newcomers to the World of
Goods: Consumption among
the Muria Gonds” (Gell), 220
Nike Culture: The Sign of the Swoosh
(Goldman and Papson), 196
No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand
Bullies (Klein), 200
“No Middle Way on the
Environment” (Ehrlich), 216
North American Commission for
Environmental Cooperation
(CEC), 184
North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA)
Secretariat, 171
Nostalgic simplicity, 55–58, 65,
77, 79
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), U.S.
Department of Labor, 172
One Market Under God: Extreme
Capitalism, Market Populism,
and the End of Economic
Democracy (Frank), 195
The Overspent American: Why We
Want What We Don’t Need
(Schor), 208
Packard, Vance, 148
Paris Exposition of 1855, 16
Parks, Rosa, 155
Peacock Revolution, 158
People for the Ethical Treatment
of Animals (PETA), 134
Pink Flamingos (movie), 89
Pop Art and Consumer Culture:
American Super Market
(Mamiya), 201
“Possessions and the Extended
Self” (Belk), 213
Postal Square Building, 174
Price, discovering damage to
producer in, 125
“Print Advertisements and Nation
Making in Metropolitan
Papua New Guinea” (Foster),
218
Products. See Consumer objects
Profit motive, role in inequalities,
78–79, 86
Propaganda, Inc.: Selling America’s
Culture to the World (Snow),
209
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism (Weber), 211
Public Citizen, 172
Purdue University, Consumer
Sciences and Retailing, 172
Queen Elizabeth I, 7, 149
Racial inequality, 78–80
Racial pride, 78–79
“Radical Shopping in Los
Angeles: Race, Media and the
Sphere of Communication”
(Frith), 219
Rainforest Action Network, 134
Rebellion, 54, 55, 65, 66, 77
Retailing, 14
advertising, 14, 19–21
brand name imaging, 20–21
browsing, 16–17
chain stores, 23
246
Index

changes in aims of, 16
credit cards, 104–105
definer of goals and values, 19
department stores, 15(table)
department stores’ influence,
13–21, 85
display methods, 14–17
downtown department stores,
13–21
“dream worlds” and spectacle,
16
extravagant amenities, 17
extravagant facilities, 16
extravaganza events, 17
first department store, 14–15
mail-order catalog, 19, 151
mail-order houses, 19–21
markets and fairs, 5
Martha Stewart, 94–96
middle-class culture, 19
payment methods, 15, 23, 104
pricing methods, 14, 15, 17
product delivery, 5–6
revolution, 14
self-service, 23
selling techniques, 14
shopping malls, 23
shopping malls effect on
suburbs, 23
shopping malls, facts, 22(table)
shops, 6, 11, 14
social functions of, 16
supermarkets, 23
teaching, 94–96
theory, 16
unique gives way to mass-
produced, 23
See also Consumption;
Shopping
Rocking around the Clock: Music
Television, Postmodernism, and
Consumer Culture (Kaplan),
199
The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of
Modern Consumerism
(Campbell), 190
“Satisfaction guaranteed,” 151
Schultz, Howard, 159
Sears and Roebuck, 19
comparison with Montgomery
Ward, 20(table)
Self
concept changes, 10
definition of, 9
-fulfillment, 1, 9
Sell and Spin: A History of
Advertising (video), 230
“Selling Guatemala: Maya Export
Products in US Mail-Order
Catalogues” (Hendrickson),
221
Selling Suffrage: Consumer Culture
and Votes for Women
(Finnegan), 194
The Sex of Things: Gender and
Consumption in Historical
Perspective (De Grazia and
Furlough), 192
Sexual orientation inequality, 86–88
Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the
Changing Cultures of
Consumption (Humphrey), 199
“‘Shop ’Til You Drop’: Shopping
as Recreational and Laborious
Activity” (Prus and Dawson),
225
Shopping
browsing, 16–17, 102
as cultural event, 17, 18
described, 14
freedom of impersonalism, 17
leisure of, 16
medieval patterns, 5
obligation to buy, 5
obligation to buy repealed, 18
social functions of, 16, 18
urban patterns, 11
See also Retailing
“Shopping for Pleasure” (Fiske),
218
Shops. See Retailing
Slow Food, 173
Index
247

Smith, Adam, 28
Social competition, 7
Social costs of production
(discovering), 125
Social emulation, 12
Social functions of department
stores, 16
Social homogenization, 19
The Social Life of Things:
Commodities in Cultural
Perspective (Appadurai), 188
The Sociology of Consumption
(Corrigan), 190
The Sociology of Taste (Gronow), 197
“Something More: Japanese
Department Stores’ Marketing
of ‘A Meaningful Life’”
(Creighton), 215
Soul market, 79
Spending
by men and women, 85(table)
for food annually, 102(table)
patterns, life cycle stages,
100(table)
Spiritual environmentalism, 56
Standard of living comparison,
101(table)
Starbucks, 111–112, 116, 122–124,
159, 173
boycott of, 112, 124, 129
Stephen, John, 159
Stewart, A. T., and “Marble
Palace,” 15
Stewart, Martha, 94–96
Stigmatizing inequality, 76–78, 96,
105–106, 112–113
messages of consumer objects,
76
six types, 77
vs. anonymous, 113–116,
113(table)
Stores. See Retailing
Streetstyle, authenticity of, 92
Stuff: The Secret Lives of Everyday
Things (New Report, No. 4)
(Ryan and Durning), 208
Style, 19, 94–96
creation of, 94
expressions of, 93
and inequality, 93–96
Subculture: The Meaning of Style
(Hebdige), 198
Sugar
boycott of, 129
history of consumption, 8(table)
imports, 8, 116
Supermarkets. See Retailing
Sweating for a T-Shirt (video), 231
Sweetness and Power: The Place of
Sugar in Modern History
(Mintz), 204
Symbolic ethnicity, 81
Tea imports, 8, 116
for home consumption, 9(table)
Teaching, 19, 96
Television viewing, and increased
consumption, 103
“The Theatre of Consumption: On
Comparing American and
Japanese Advertising” (Kline),
222
“Theories of Consumption”
(Ritzer, Goodman, and
Weidenhoft) 225
A Theory of Shopping (Miller), 204
The Theory of the Leisure Class
(Veblen), 91, 211
Thirty Second President (video), 231
Time and Money: The Making of
Consumer Culture (Cross), 191
Trickle down theory, 91, 92
Trickle up effect, 92
T-shirts, 92
“Tupperware in the 1950s: Gender
and Consumption” (Clarke),
214
Understanding Consumption
(Deaton), 192
United Nations Environmental
Program (UNEP), 184
248
Index

U.S. Energy Information
Administration (EIA), 175
U.S. International Trade
Commission, 175
University of Utah, Family and
Consumer Studies (FCS), 173
University of Wisconsin,
Consumer Science Program,
174
The Unmanageable Consumer
(Gabriel and Lang), 196
Value, consumption as a, 4, 123
Veblen, Thorstein, 149
“Visions of excess,” 16
Volkswagen Beetle, 160–161
“Voluntary Simplicity:
Characterization, Select
Psychological Implications,
and Societal Consequences”
(Etzioni), 216
Voting with dollars, 42, 137
Ward, Aaron Montgomery, 20,
150–151
Wedgwood, Josiah, 12–13, 152
Whole Earth Catalog, 55–56
“Why Do People Want Goods?”
(Douglas), 215
“Why Do the Natives Wear
Adidas?” (Arnould and Wilk)
213
Why We Buy: The Science of
Shopping (Underhill), 211
Willful nostalgia, 65
Wish Book, 151
Women
and consumer culture, 84–86
expenditures of, 84(table)
as sexualized commodity for
advertising, 84–85
Woodward, Helen Rosen, 153
The World in the Evening
(Isherwood), 89
The World of Consumption: The
Material and the Cultural
Revisited (Fine and  Leopold),
193
The World of Goods: Towards an
Anthropology of Consumption
(Douglas and  Isherwood),
192
World Trade Organization (WTO),
109–110, 161–162, 185
demonstration against, 109–110
Youth
important in three ways, 97
marketing to, 97–99
susceptible to advertising, 97
Index
249


About the Authors
Douglas J. Goodman is an assistant professor of comparative so-
ciology at the University of Puget Sound. He is the coauthor (with
G. Ritzer) of three textbooks: Sociological Theory (6th ed.), Modern
Sociological Theory (6th ed.), and Classical Sociological Theory (4th
ed.). He has also published numerous articles on social theory,
consumer culture, and social problems.
Mirelle Cohen is an assistant professor of comparative sociology
at the University of Puget Sound. Her interests include the soci-
ology of religion, race relations, gender and sexuality, and de-
viance. Her current work explores the challenges experienced by
female juvenile offenders in Tacoma, Washington.
251


